NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ROBIN HOOD AND HIS NOT-SO-MERRY PLAN:
CAPITALIZATION AND THE SELF-DESTRUCTION OF TEXAS’
SCHOOL FINANCE EQUALIZATION PLAN
Caroline M. Hoxby
Ilyana Kuziemko
Working Paper 10722
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10722
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

All errors are the authors' own. Nevertheless, they gratefully thank the Russell Sage Foundation's Special
Project on Social Inequality for generous support and also thank the MacArthur Foundation's Inequality
Network for support. The authors gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Douglas Bernheim,
Michael Boskin, Edward Glaeser, Joseph Gyourko, Jonathan Gruber, Robert Inman, Brigitte Madrien,
Thomas Nechyba, James Poterba, Antonio Rangel, Todd Sinai, seminar participants at Harvard University,
MIT, Stanford University, The University of California - Berkeley, Wharton, and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. For help with data, the authors are especially grateful to Doug Smith of the Texas
Education Agency, Division of State Funding. In addition, the authors gratefully acknowledge the many
helpful conversations they have had with Texans, who have helped them to appreciate the state's special
circumstances. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Caroline M. Hoxby and Ilyana Kuziemko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Robin Hood and His No-So-Merry Plan: Capitalization and the Self-Destruction of Texas’
School Finance Equalization Plan
Caroline M. Hoxby and Ilyana Kuziemko
NBER Working Paper No. 10722
August 2004
JEL No. H2, H24, H7, H71, H72, I2, K11, R5
ABSTRACT
School finance schemes control the allocation of $370 billion a year in the United States, but their
economics are poorly understood. We examine an illuminating example: Texas' "Robin Hood"
scheme, which was enacted in 1994, allocates about $30 billion a year, and is currently collapsing
and likely to be abandoned. We show that the collapse was predictable. Robin Hood's design causes
substantial negative capitalization, shrinking its own tax base. It relies only slightly on relatively
efficient (pseudo lump sum) redistibution and heavily on high marginal tax rates. Although Robin
Hood reduced the spending gap between Texas' property-poor and property-rich districts by $500
per pupil, it destroyed about $27,000 per pupil in property wealth. The magnitude of this loss is
important: if the state had efficiently confiscated the same wealth and invested it, it would generate
sufficient annual income to make all Texas schools spend at a high level. The Robin Hood scheme
is stringent but not bizarre: other states' systems share its features to some degree. We provide
estimates of the effects of school finance system parameters, which policy makers could use to
design systems that are more efficient and stable.
Caroline M. Hoxby
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
choxby@harvard.edu
Ilyana Kuziemko
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
kuziemko@nber.org

1

I. Introduction
School finance is one of the most important public policies in the United States. It can determine
whether cities or suburbs grow; it can create or destroy investment in education. School finance
programs govern the allocation of approximately 370 billion dollars a year in the United States and 30
billion dollars a year in Texas alone. Despite their importance, these programs are poorly understood by
economists. Every good public economist knows the income tax code and how social security works, but
he probably knows little about school finance. Even more worrisome is the fact that the creators of
school finance formulas often lack economic expertise. They rarely foresee capitalization (the response
of property prices to the burdens and rewards created by the formula). Indeed, they sometimes set up
systems that maximize property wealth destruction, given the tax revenue collected and the redistribution
achieved. Often, they do not foresee that school districts may respond to perverse incentives that the
formula creates. For instance, a formula might create incentives for districts to maximize the number of
children who are classified as disabled.
In this paper, we show how a school finance program derailed itself. We examine Texas' socalled "Robin Hood" formula, first implemented in 1993-94. Robin Hood is not odd: most other states'
systems share its features to some degree. We focus on Robin Hood because it strongly exhibits all of
the problems listed above. In less than a decade, the system is approaching collapse: it has exhausted its
own capacity. We show that the collapse was predictable: Robin Hood's design maximizes the negative
capitalization it causes, shrinking its own tax base. It relies only slightly on relatively efficient (pseudo
lump sum) redistibution and heavily on high marginal tax rates.
We wish to state at the outset that we believe that school finance is an important and legitimate
problem for state governments. However, it is essentially a tax problem and, like other tax problems, can
be solved more or less well. The scale of the mistakes can be massive, simply because school finance
operates on a massive scale. We estimate that the Robin Hood plan destroyed about 81 billion dollars of

2

property wealth in Texas ($27,000 of property wealth per pupil). To get a sense of the magnitude of this
number, suppose that the state had somehow confiscated this wealth, instead of destroying it. The state
would have been able to endow a permanent fund that would generate sufficient annual income (about
$1,350 per pupil) to let every one of its districts spend what the top 5 percent of its districts currently
spend.
Our goal is not to criticize all efforts to provide equal educational opportunities, but to use Robin
Hood to illustrate some problems of school finance and estimate the effects of school finance parameters.
We do not attempt to be prescriptive, but we do refer to more efficient systems than Texas' .1 Good
intentions about redistribution are not enough in school finance: understanding the economics is
important too.

II. A Brief Primer on American School Finance
In the United States, education is primarily the responsibility of state governments and local
school districts. Districts are the entities that spend money on schools. Their main way to raise revenue
by themselves is a proportional tax on the value of local property.2 Districts also spend revenue that they
receive from their states as aid.3 Aid may be negative –that is, a tax on districts' revenues from local
property taxes. Roughly speaking, the goal of school finance is to allocate state aid so that districts'
choice of the appropriate level of school spending is (up to a point) independent of the permanent income

1

Results from Hoxby (2001) can used to compare different school finance systems. She estimates effects
using all 50 states over 30 years.
2

Some districts also get revenue from fees and local sales taxes, but local property taxes account for over
95 percent of districts' revenue. Property tax systems are often slightly progressive because they exempt the first
$10,000 to $25,000 of a house's value (a "homestead exemption") and allow exemptions for the elderly, disabled,
veterans, and so on.
3

In addition, districts may receive some federal aid, but it is too small (only 7 percent of public school
spending) and too simply categorical (grants for the disabled, limited English proficient, and so on) to concern us
here. The major goals of school finance can be achieved only through state school finance, given the allocation of
responsibility for schools in the American federalist system.

3

of the district's own residents and depends only on students' returns to human capital investment and the
permanent income of the state's residents. We say "up to a point" because the goals of school finance are
articulated in state supreme court opinions, and these opinions nearly always recognize a distinction
between school spending that represents human capital investment and spending that represents
consumption. School finance need only concern itself with the investment part.4 An efficient system of
school finance creates minimum deadweight loss, given the progress its makes toward the goal.
People sometimes wonder why school finance is not simply conducted at the state level, with no
role for local districts or local property taxes. Many experts in local public finance think that property
taxation is uniquely efficient for funding local spending. When used for spending on local schools,
property taxes arguably have attributes that make them approximate user fees, which impose minimal
deadweight loss and improve local governance.5 (The good attributes of property taxes do not apply
when they are used to fund a state-level public good, such as investing in the education of poor children
in non-local districts.) Thus, it is probably efficient for a system of school finance to start with a
fundament of local property taxation and layer state aid on top of it. Nearly every American state has a
system with this two-part character. In any case, the funding and allocation of state aid are the key
sources of difference between more and less efficient systems of school finance.

4

In other words, the well-off may provide luxuries for their children in school and out of school, and if the
distribution of consumption needs to be altered, school finance is not the appropriate mechanism to do it. Income
redistribution can most efficiently be done through the income tax and transfer systems, not through state aid to
school districts.
5
The essence of Tiebout's insight is that local property taxes are user fees when people are mobile enough
for property prices in a jurisdiction to reflect their assessment of the net value of local public goods (such as schools)
and local property taxes. Property has two special features as a tax base. It is inherently attached to a particular
jurisdiction so it regulates use of the local public good (schools). Its value depends on the assessment of current
property buyers and sellers, so that the entire tax base reflects current circumstances even though only a minority of
people are mobile at any time. This last feature makes it a semi-automatic mechanism for setting the user fee and
regulating the productivity of local good producers. A school district that sets property taxes too high given the
actual services it is providing will drive down property prices in the district. Property taxes will fall in an automatic
manner until they reach the appropriate user fee. Along the way, district leaders have an incentive to eliminate
unproductive programs that were providing too little service for the money spent. A reverse story holds for a
program that is unusually productive. See Hoxby (1996) for a formal model and references to the Tiebout literature.

4

III. A Useful Analogy
Before describing a detailed system of school finance, it may be useful to illustrate the issues in
the more familiar world of firms. Because we are going to draw an analogy between firms and school
districts, suppose that firms cannot pay dividends.6
Suppose that government wanted to redistribute income among firms for some reason. A
straightforward scheme might take income from firms with high return on capital and transfer it to firms
with low return on capital. This system of redistribution would naturally generate some dead weight
loss, as firms were discouraged from engaging in business activities that generated returns. However, in
its essential character, this tax be like other taxes on income.
Instead of the tax scheme just described, the government might implement a peculiar scheme: it
could take income from firms with high market capitalization per unit of book capital and transfer it to
firms with low market capitalization per unit of book capital. What would this scheme do? First, like
redistribution based on return to capital, the scheme would discourage business activities that generated
returns and generate the usual deadweight loss.
The effects would not stop there, however. The present value of a firm's expected tax burden
would be capitalized into its share price, so that firms with initially high market capitalization would see
their share prices and market capitalization fall. Thus, if the government initially picked a tax rate that
would raise the desired revenue given the initial distribution of firms' market capitalization, it would find
itself unable to raise that revenue with that tax rate because the tax base would shrink not just as
businesses cut back on real activity but in order to capitalize the tax burden itself. (This is an important
point: the change in the tax based due to decreased real activity would be small relative to the change
produced by capitalization.) The government might raise the tax rate in hopes of getting the level of
revenue it initially desired. But, this would merely set off another round of share price changes, as new

6

For our analogy, shareholders do benefit from capital gains and firms can repurchase shares.

5

expectations were capitalized.
At first glance, one might suppose that the negative capitalization among the initially high market
capitalization firms would be fully offset by an equal amount of positive capitalization among low market
capitalization firms. But, this is very unlikely because the cash would be less valuable in the hands of the
recipient firms than it was in the hands of the donor firms. If the cash were equally valuable, the
recipient firms would have had it from shareholders in the first place. In short, a redistribution scheme
based on market capitalization is unlikely to generate a stable stream of revenue and is likely to generate
a series of increases in the tax rate.7
A third consequence of the peculiar scheme would be firms' altering their accounting and other
practices to maximize the value of book capital relative to true productive capital. The higher a firm's
book capital, the lower its tax.
Suppose that the peculiar scheme has a refinement: the government puts the entire tax burden on
market-capitalization-per-dollar-of-book-capital above some threshold. This refinement would give some
firms negligible incentive to be productive with their marginal investments since these returns would be
disproportionately taxed away. Essentially, the refinement raises marginal tax rates, given the average
tax rate, thereby heightening distortions.
In summary, the government's peculiar redistribution scheme would not only generate the usual
deadweight loss associated with discouraging income-producing business activity, it would also likely be
(i) an unstable scheme with rising tax rates, (ii) a scheme that generated rising ratios of book to true
productive capital, and (iii) a scheme with high marginal tax rates, given its average tax rates.

7

Of course, if a government understood all of the mechanisms described in this paper and knew all of the
relevant elasticities, it could determine whether there was a suitable fixed point: a tax rate at which the desired tax
revenue was generated, given the capitalization that the tax rate would cause. The government could then jump to
the fixed point. In school finance, this hypothetical situation seems merely to be a pleasing possibility, and not only
because governments tend not to foresee capitalization. The Texas data show no sign that a fixed point is being
approached.

6

IV. Understanding Robin Hood
The scheme just described sounds so problematic as to be unlikely. Yet, such schemes account
for much of the $370 billion that is redistributed among school districts each year. The "peculiar
scheme" is a strict analogy of Texas' Robin Hood scheme. Most school finance systems in the United
States (including Robin Hood) do the equivalent of redistributing on the basis of market capitalization. A
good many school finance systems, including Robin Hood, do the equivalent of redistributing based on
book values that can be manipulated. Several schemes, including Robin Hood, use systems that
maximize marginal tax rates, given their average tax rates.
In reading the description of Robin Hood below, keep the following parallels in mind. A districts'
property tax base is analogous to a firm's market capitalization. The relationship between weighted and
actual students is analogous to the relationship between book capital and true productive capital.8
A. The Origins of Robin Hood
Texas' Robin Hood formula came about in a fairly typical way. A 1984, a group of school
districts sued the state, charging that the then-current system of school finance was unconstitutional. The
Supreme Court of Texas found the system to be unconstitutional in 1989, and the Texas legislature then
proceeded to enact new systems of school finance. The first two systems took effect in the 1990-91 and
1992-93 school years, respectively, and were also found to be unconstitutional. The third system was
Robin Hood. It was implemented in the 1993-1994 school year and found constitutional in 1994. Such
back and forth between courts and legislatures is not unusual.9
Robin Hood's structure is fairly common. Texas' school finance system is based on local
property taxes, on top of which are layered three "tiers" of state aid: a foundation aid system, a

8

More accurately, the relationship between weighted students and true student educational needs is
analogous to the relationship between book capital and true productive capital.
9

In some states, however, dramatic changes in school finance are made purely through legislature effort,
with no court rulings (see Hoxby 2001).

7

guaranteed revenue system, and a recapture system. All three tiers are based on a district's property value
per "weighted pupil." A weighted pupil is not an actual pupil. Students' disabilities, limited English
proficiency, need for compensatory education, and other conditions are converted into weights, so that a
student may count as multiple students. Hereafter, we use the word "pupil" to refer to an actual pupil,
and we use the abbreviation WADA (weighted pupil in average daily attendance) to refer to a weighted
pupil.10 A district with a high property value per WADA is commonly described as "property-rich;" a
district with low property value per WADA is "property-poor."
B. The Recapture System
In describing Texas' system, it is best to start with the recapture system.11 Under this system, a
district's property tax base per weighted pupil is divided into two pieces: that below and that above the
recapture threshold. The threshold was initially set at $280,000 per WADA in 1994. When a district
enacts a property tax rate, the taxes paid on the below-threshold part go into the district's own coffers.
The taxes paid on the above-threshold part go into the state's coffers and are then used to fund aid to
other districts. The state has "captured" the property tax base above the threshold, although the district
continues to be able to set the property tax rate (up to limit, as we shall see).
Figure 1 illustrates the budget constraint and spending choice for a property-rich district that is
operating under purely local school finance. It is a standard figure (created by Epple, Filimon, and
Romer, 1984), displayed simply to acquaint the reader with its elements. On the horizontal axis in the
right-hand quadrant is school spending per pupil (g). On the horizontal axis in the left-hand quadrant is
units of fully-taxed property in the district (H).12 On the vertical axis is the price per unit of property

10

We are scrupulous about this distinction. If we use the word "pupil," we refer to an actual pupil.

11

In Texas, the recapture system is formally known as the Chapter 41system.

12

Typically, the supply of property is assumed to have some elasticity even though jurisdictions'
boundaries do not change. The idea is that there is usually some property that is undeveloped or in a low-value use
that can be developed as, say, residential property.

8

(

) and the gross-of-tax cost of a unit of property (

). The difference between

and

is

–put another way, it is a measure of the loss in non-housing

the tax paid per unit of property

consumption that a person experiences when he pays property taxes. For the purposes of the graph, the
property tax rate

is defined in such a way that it generates per pupil revenue from tax payments. Note

that the property tax rate can be deduced from the figure by examining the ratio of the length of the
segment labeled "tax per unit of housing" to the length of the segment from the origin to
labeled

. The line

is the district's per-pupil budget constraint, given by the equation:
.

The slope of the budget constraint is the marginal tax price of a dollar of per-pupil spending. For
graphical exposition, we treat the amount of property consumed under pure local finance (

) as one

unit. This makes the budget constraint have a 45 degree slope under local finance, which should help to
remind us that the marginal tax price of a dollar of per-pupil spending is one under local finance. Finally,
note that the scales used in the figure are not realistic: they are designed to allow readers to see the
differences among curves.
Figure 1 illustrates an initial equilibrium. The indifference curve of the deterministic voter in the
district is tangent to the budget constraint at a point such that the district spends
household pay taxes of

per unit of housing it consumes. The price of a unit of property,

generates a supply of housing equal to
demand for housing equal to

per pupil and each

; and the gross-of-tax cost of a unit of property,

,

, generates a

.

Figure 2 shows what the state projects the property-rich district will do after the recapture system
is enacted. State projections assume that property-rich districts do not cut their local spending in
response to increases in the marginal tax price, do not cut their consumption of housing in response to an
increase in its gross-of-tax cost; and do not see the tax burden capitalized into their property prices. That
is, the state projects that property-rich districts will simply raise their tax rate to keep their spending the

9

same in the face of recapture and that nothing else will change. In Figure 2, this "hoped-for" response is
shown by the budget constraint labeled "

" and labeled, hoped-for tax payments to the local

district and state. Of course, what the state projects is not an equilibrium. The indifference curve of the
deterministic voter is not tangent to

at the initial level of school spending,

, and the supply

of housing in the district outstrips the demand, which has fallen because of the higher gross-of-tax cost of
housing in the district. Observe that the slope of

will be steeper the higher is the marginal tax

price or, equivalently, the larger is the share of property tax wealth that is confiscated. This is because,
with recapture, the district pays a dollar of property taxes, but only get to spend a fraction of that dollar,
so its marginal tax price is ratio of the district's property wealth per pupil (v) to the recapture threshold
per pupil (l). Finally, note that

turns vertical at some point: this is caused by a limit on the

property tax rate that was imposed in coordination with the recapture scheme. We will have more to say
about the limit later.
Figure 2 has already shown that property prices must fall in the property-rich district: its existing
residents want to consume less property than is supplied at current prices. This response is akin to the
usual response of consumption when it is taxed. But, property prices will also capitalize the tax burden
because of the new equilibrium among districts. That is, people will be deterred from residing in the
property-rich district at all, and property prices will fall commensurately. Figure 3 shows how this
happens.
Figure 3 shows the pre-recapture and hoped-for tax and spending choices of the property-rich
district. It also shows the choices of an intermediate district that is insufficiently property-rich to
experience recapture but is also insufficiently property-poor to get state aid. An initial inter-district
equilibrium is defined by the existence of an equilibrium within each district (as shown in Figure 1) and
"boundary" individuals like the one whose indifference curve is illustrated in Figure 3. Initially, the
boundary individual is just indifferent between living in the property-rich district, where he will

10

experience more school spending and pay more tax than he would most prefer, and living in the
intermediate district, where he will experience lower school spending than pay less tax than he would
most prefer. After the recapture scheme is enacted, the boundary individual is no longer indifferent: he
strictly prefers the intermediate district. Indeed, the figure is drawn in such a way that the intermediate
district is strictly preferred by all of the residents of the property-rich district who preferred school
spending less than its former deterministic voter. (To see that the initial deterministic voter would
become the new boundary individual if the hoped-for budget constraint prevailed in the property-rich
district, mentally extend his top indifference curve –which is tangent to

– and see that it runs

right through the choice of the intermediate district.)
The point of Figure 3 is that property prices fall in the property-rich district, not just because
property consumption is taxed but also because of capitalization. The result is that the hoped-for budget
constraint and choices do not prevail. Instead, there is a new equilibrium like that shown in Figure 4. In
Figure 4, the property-rich district has lower property prices, which have re-equilibriated the housing
market and limited the outflow of residents to the intermediate district. With lower property prices, the
district has less property tax revenue confiscated, faces a lower marginal tax price, and has a budget
constraint with a lower intercept and slope (

). At the new equilibrium, the district is spending a little

less per-pupil than it did at the initial equilibrium, owing to standard income and substitution effects of a
rise in the price of school spending. The dramatic difference is, however, between what the state hoped
to collect in tax payments and what it does collect (see labeled lengths in figure). The reason that these
amounts are so different is that, under a recapture system, the property wealth that is lost through
capitalization affects only the part of district's property tax base that now effectively belongs to the state.
Going forward, keep in mind the shortfall between the state's hoped-for revenue and its actual
revenue from the property-rich district.
C. The Foundation Aid System

11

Foundation aid systems are easiest to understand them if we think of the state as having
converted some local property taxes into a state property tax, which it collects and uses to make a lumpsum grant to each district. The part of the local property tax rate that is converted into a state property
tax is known as the foundation tax rate. For instance, in Texas, the foundation tax rate is the first 8.6
mils of each district's property tax rate.13 In return for paying 8.6 mils to the state, each district receives a
lump sum grant per WADA, called the foundation grant.14 A foundation aid system can redistribute a
good deal of revenue because districts that are property-poor on a weighted pupil basis will contribute far
less than they get in grants. In many states, the foundation aid tax rate is set so that the system is selfsupporting: the property-rich districts' payments fund all of the aid to the property-poor districts.
In Texas, the foundation aid system is not self-supporting because the property-rich districts do
not participate in it. Districts that would be net contributors to the foundation system are already
contributing much of their property tax revenue through the recapture system. In other words, the state
cannot take 8.6 mils of their property tax revenue because it has already captured 100 percent of the
property tax revenue associated with the base that makes property-rich districts rich. The recapture from
a property-rich district is, in practice, larger than the amount it would have contributed under a selfsupporting foundation aid system.
We shall see below that a self-supporting foundation aid system would be substantially more
efficient than Texas' peculiar combination of a recapture system and foundation aid system in which
property-rich districts do not participate. So, why does Texas use this peculiar combination?
The answer is that lawyers, not economists, designed the system. Texas has a constitutional ban

13

The foundation system is called "Tier 1" in Texas. Property tax rates are usually expressed in mils or
thousandths. Thus, a 10 mil rate is a 1 percent tax on property. In Texas, property tax rates are usually expressed as
cents per hundred dollars of property value (8.6 mils equals 86 cents per hundred). To make the Texas system easy
to compare with those of other states, we express everything in mils in this paper.
14

Districts do not actually send checks to the state and then receive checks in return. The state computes
the district's net receipt and only that amount is transferred.

12

on statewide property taxes, and self-supporting foundation aid system would obviously impose one.
Although Texans regularly change their constitution through referenda, lawyers thought they had devised
a work-around that would effectively impose a statewide property tax without their having to write
supporting legislation. If one looks only at the letter and not the spirit of the law, Texas' recapture system
appears to be constitutional because it rests on a bizarre fiction. Legally, a property-rich district does not
have to allow its above-threshold revenue to be captured. It is simply the case that, if it refuses to
voluntarily contribute this revenue, the state can redraw districts until the property-rich district has
property wealth below the threshold. Districts can be redrawn without regard to geographic contiguity so
that a poor inner-city neighborhood could, in theory, become part of an affluent suburban district halfway
across the state. Similarly, part of an property-rich district could, in theory, be detached and re-attached
to a poor district hundreds of miles away. Naturally, to avoid the problems that the redrawing of district
boundaries would generate, property-rich districts "voluntarily" contribute revenue. Many people find
Texas' pseudo-voluntary scheme confusing, and this is not surprising because it was designed to disguise
the effective imposition of a statewide property tax.
Figure 5 shows a property-poor district under purely local finance. Compared to the propertyrich district under local finance (Figure 1), the property-poor district has less pricey property and spends
less on schools. Its budget constraint,

, is such that if the district raises one dollar of property tax

revenue, it spends one dollar on its local schools.
Figure 6 shows the property-poor district with a foundation aid system (and a guaranteed revenue
system, which we have not yet described). In order to focus on the foundation aid system, notice the
length labeled "foundation grant from the state" and connect it visually to the dashed line: this is the
budget constraint that would prevail under a foundation system if property prices stayed the same when
the system was enacted. The property-poor district's initial budget constraint (

) has its bottom end

lopped off because the district's per-property unit contribution to the foundation aid system is given by

13

the foundation tax rate (

) times its property price (

). In return, the district receives the foundation

grant per pupil ( ). Because the foundation grant is larger than what the property-poor district has paid
in foundation taxes, the with-foundation-aid budget constraint is shifted out relative to the purely local
budget constraint. Nevertheless, over much of its length, the with-foundation-aid budget constraint has
the same slope as the no-state-intervention budget constraint. Thus, at least at first glance, foundation aid
systems do not distort a district's marginal incentives to spend on schools. (This is not quite true, owing
to the fact that a positive foundation grant will raise the demand for housing in the district. However, it
is a reasonable first approximation.) By a parallel logic, a property-rich district does not have marginal
incentives that are much distorted, under a self-supporting foundation system. In general, foundation
systems are closer to being lump sum and have smaller deadweight loss than recapture systems.
D. The Guaranteed Revenue System
Like many other states, Texas has a guaranteed revenue system that lies on top of its foundation
system. Beyond the 8.6 mils that districts contribute to the foundation system, districts may choose
another property tax rate (called the "Tier II rate"). Each mil of a district's Tier II property tax rate is
guaranteed to produce at least a certain revenue per weighted pupil, regardless of the district's own
property tax base. The state fulfils this guarantee by contributing revenue when a district's own property
tax base would generate insufficient revenue. If a district's property tax base generates as much or more
revenue than the guaranteed level, it is left alone, neither contributing to nor receiving Tier II aid. (Keep
in mind that property-rich districts do not get all the revenue associated with their Tier II rates because
the part associated with their above-threshold property wealth is confiscated.)
Under the guaranteed revenue system, a property-poor district might pay only five cents in
property taxes for every dollar of revenue it receives. This is such an attractive price for school spending
that property-poor districts might be tempted to spend with abandon because nearly all of the money is
coming from elsewhere. To prevent such overspending, every guaranteed revenue system has an upper

14

limit on the property tax rate for which state will fulfil the guarantee. In Texas, a district's Tier II rate is
capped at 6.4 mils and its total property tax rate is capped at 15 mils (8.6 mils for the foundation system
and up to 6.4 mils for Tier II). Although it is necessary to have a cap on the rate that is guaranteed, an
overall cap is unnecessary –most states simply make a district revert to pure local finance once it gets
over the guaranteed rate. Texas' overall 15 mil cap is politically motivated.15
Figure 6 illustrates how the guaranteed revenue system fits on top of the foundation system. The
budget constraint labeled "

" shows that the property-poor district first receives its

foundation grant and then faces a marginal tax price for school spending that is well below one.
Specifically, the slope of the with-guaranteed-revenue budget constraint is given by the ratio of the perWADA revenue guarantee to the district's per-WADA property tax base times one mil:
.

(The one mil in the denominator is there because the guarantee is defined on a per mil basis.) The budget
constraint turns vertical where the district reaches the property tax rate cap.
Figure 6 illustrates what the state would like to have happen to a poor district getting foundation
and guaranteed revenue aid. The district is paying just a bit more property tax than it was paying under
purely local finance, yet its schools are spending much more per pupil. The district is getting not only
the foundation grant but also guaranteed revenue payments from the state (see labeled length). Figure 6
assumes, however, that the district's property prices do not change when it receives such aid. This is
unlikely.

15

Apparently, the 15 mil cap appeals to the property-poor districts because they want to ensure that
property-rich districts cannot spend much more than they can. This desire is poorly thought out. Property-poor
districts should not try to prevent property-rich districts from spending their own money on inputs that are
educationally productive, such as new technology. If the property-poor districts want to make a case for some input
being so necessary that it must be included in the foundation grant, they need to have evidence that property-rich
districts are uniformly buying it with their own money.

15

Figure 7 shows why property prices change. The figures compares the property-poor district
with district that is more intermediate (less poor, but still poor enough to receive some state aid).
Initially, both districts are in internal equilibrium under local finance, and the indifference of their
"boundary" individuals shows that they are also in inter-district equilibrium. With the new state aid
programs, there will be a new boundary individual. Looking closely, it will be seen that the new
boundary individual has a greater preference for school spending than the old boundary individual (the
indifference curve is less flat). Put another way, the property-poor district can now attract an individual
with more taste for schooling because the district gets to spend more per pupil. If the property-poor
district is more attractive, it must be the case that its property prices rise to re-equilibriate the housing
market –that is, to capitalize the benefit it has received.
Actually, the situation is slightly more complicated than this because new residents are not
attracted by additional school spending per se; they are attracted by schools that are more valuable. With
the property-rich districts, it is reasonable to assume that every dollar of tax payments is converted into a
dollar of value in the schools. The assumption is reasonable because local taxpayers are choosing to
spend their own money on schools. If their dollar of tax payments is not converted into a dollar of value,
they can keep their dollar. Property-poor districts are in a different situation because they pay only a
fraction of each additional dollar of school spending. For instance, a district that pays only 10 cents for
every dollar of school spending should logically support additional spending so long as the marginal
dollar is converted into at least 10 cents of value. Because prospective residents are attracted by schools'
value, not their spending per se, property prices in the property-poor district need not rise dollar for
dollar with the fiscal benefit conferred by state aid. We should not be surprised to find an asymmetry
between the property value lost and gained when a dollar is redistributed. Later, we return to this point
in some detail.
Figure 8 shows the property-poor district's equilibrium with state aid, taking into account the rise

16

in its property prices. Because its property prices have risen to capitalize the aid, the district makes
greater tax payments than the state expected, it gets less guaranteed revenue aid than the state expected,
and it spends less on schools than the state expected. However, the differences between the state's
expectations and what actually occurs is likely to be rather small. Finally, notice how easy it would be for
the district to locate at the kink where the budget constraint (

) turns vertical –even a small change in

the slope of the deterministic voter's indifference curve would put the district at the kink. That is,
property-poor districts are likely to set their property tax rate at or near the cap, owing to the fact that
they pay only a fraction of the marginal dollar.
E. The Weighted Average Daily Attendance (WADA) System
The parts of the Texas' school finance system described so far are all based on WADA, not
actual pupils. There are, of course, many details to the construction of the pupil weights. For the
purposes of this paper, however, we can focus on two aspects of the system.
First, districts can face strong incentives to increase their ratio of WADA to actual pupils. By
raising WADA/pupils, property-rich districts can reduce their measured wealth, and thereby reduce
recapture. Property-poor districts can increase both their foundation and guaranteed revenue aid by
raising WADA/pupils. Intermediate districts can increase the probability that they receive foundation or
guaranteed revenue aid and decrease the probability that they experience recapture.
Second, although some weights are for conditions that require little or no local judgement
(blindness, deafness), other weights are for conditions that do require local judgement. In practice, these
are conditions in which there is a spectrum of difficulty, where a low level of difficulty is considered to
be part of the normal variation among children and a high level of difficulty is considered to be a
disability that requires special treatment: limited English proficiency, speech impairment, learning
disability, emotional disturbance. The procedures for classifying students into these disabilities make it

17

clear that significant local discretion is used.16 In addition, the judgement-sensitive disabilities receive
non-trivial weights. One full-time equivalent pupil in speech therapy is 5 WADAs. One full-time
equivalent resource room pupil is 3 WADAS (resource rooms are typically assigned to learning disabled
students). In Dallas, more than 98 percent of the students who have weights greater than one are students
in judgement-sensitive categories. Students in judgement-sensitive categories account for 95 percent of
the difference between WADA and pupils.17 Cullen (2003) shows that these percentages are typical for
Texas.
In short, the easiest way for a district to increase its revenue is to get the maximum out of the
WADA system, given the schooling it means to give students. The weights are designed to help cover
the costs of the average student who is in a category. Therefore, a district will gain if it can put students
into categories where they are marginal candidates for classification. Because classification requires
local judgement, it may be quite possible for districts to gain via such accounting practices. Indeed, there
are now WADA consultants, whom districts employ to help them get the most out of the system.
WADA accounting may make few people happy. Parents with infra-marginal disabled children
may feel that staff devote too much effort to classifying marginal children and too little effort to serving
seriously disabled students. Parents with children who are just at the margin of being classified may
worry that their child is overclassified and would be better off without a label. Parents with children who
have no disability may feel that the school administration is unduly concerned with disability-related
paperwork and too little concerned with educating "regular" students.

16

See Texas Education Agency, Division of Special Education (2002).

17

Authors' calculations using Summary of Finances, 2003.

18

V. Robin Hood in Toto 18
Summing up, under the Robin Hood system, property-rich districts are likely to experience
falling property prices and contribute less revenue to the system than the state hoped they would.
Property-poor districts receive aid, may experience a rise in property prices, and are likely to set their tax
rate near or at the cap. Both property-rich and property-poor districts are likely to raise their WADA
relative to their number of actual pupils. We have focused on districts at the two extremes because they
are most interesting, but of course there are intermediate districts that have intermediate outcomes.
Our summary cannot stop here, however, because the system we have outlined is unlikely to be
stable.19 Because of capitalization, the state is getting significantly less revenue than it expected, yet it
still has to make the promised foundation grants and fulfil its revenue guarantees. The state may be
tempted to lower the threshold at which recapture occurs.20 The lower threshold will capture more of the
property tax revenue of the incumbent property-rich and it will also redefine as property-rich some
intermediate districts that previously had too little property wealth to experience recapture. Lowering the
recapture threshold sounds like a good solution, but we now know that lowering the threshold will set off
another round of capitalization, so that the state will get some extra revenue, but is again likely to be
disappointed. Notice, as well, that every time the state lowers the recapture threshold, the property-rich

18

For what it is worth, the following equation summarizes per-pupil spending under the Robin Hood

formula:

The equation above is not particularly elucidating except that, by showing how the systems interact, it demonstrates
that neither the foundation aid nor guaranteed revenue systems is at all self-supporting. The recapture system
generates revenue that supports the other two systems. People who are familiar with formulas from other states often
get confused over this issue.
19

W e have previously described the possibility of a "fixed point" tax rate and why states are unlikely to be
able to choose one. See footnote 7.
20

In practice, the state can do this by allowing the threshold to be eroded by inflation.

19

districts will raise their tax rates. They will gradually but inevitably move toward the property rate cap.
In short, what is the experience of the Robin Hood system likely to be, over several years? From
the state's point of view, the system is always disappointingly short of funds and requires greater
infusions from the state's general revenue than it expected to need. From the point of view of a resident
of a property-rich district, the system is not only burdensome (he loses wealth) but grows more
burdensome with each passing year. Moreover, if he has children in schools, he is worried about his
district losing all its discretion as it approaches the property rate cap. From the point of view of the
resident of an intermediate district, the system probably seemed harmless enough at its inception. But, he
may have been surprised to find that, after several years, he has been declared to be property-rich and
subjected to recapture. From point of view of a childless (elderly, say) resident of a property-poor
district, the system is problematic: although his housing consumption and income are unchanged, he now
owes more property tax, mainly because his district has increased its property tax rate but also because
his house is worth more. A resident of a property-poor district who has school-aged children probably
has the rosiest view: he pays more property tax but his children also attend a school that spends
substantially more. Yet, he is likely to be anxious: his district is at or near the property tax rate cap so it
has almost no discretion: it depends entirely on the foundation grant and guaranteed revenue level,
which are set by the state. The state perennially complains that the system's funding is below
expectations and he must fight an ongoing political battle to ensure that the state once again reduces the
recapture threshold in its perennial quest for funds. Many parents are likely to be dissatisfied with the
WADA system because it may produce decisions that are more oriented toward revenue than toward the
proper treatment of disabled and near-disabled children.
Perhaps because of the Robin Hood name or perhaps because property wealth is likely to
disappear under Texas' scheme, we are often asked whether Robin Hood is a system of efficient wealth
confiscation. Efficient wealth confiscation systems receive high marks from economists because they

20

cause few distortions. In them, the state takes assets from the wealthy and either uses them to endow a
state fund for ongoing redistribution or redistributes the assets immediately in such a way that the
formerly poor have no ongoing need of redistribution. If it is to be efficient, confiscation must be done in
a fell swoop so that it becomes a sunk cost for formerly wealthy, who get on with their lives and do not
distort their ongoing behavior. Robin Hood has none of this character. We will see that the state
imposes high marginal tax rates on school spending and wealth, returns repeatedly to tax wealth this
period that it left untaxed last period, and cannot show, for its efforts, either an endowment nor a set of
formerly poor districts that now have the wealth to manage school spending on their own.21
In short, after several years, a system like Robin Hood is unlikely to enjoy the widespread
popularity enjoyed by the man after whom it is named. Many people will feel that property taxes are
rising too fast; school superintendents and parents are likely to feel unduly constrained; state legislators
are likely to be tired of the perennial problems. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge, Texas is the only
state that has been sued over its school finance system by property-rich and property-poor districts at the
same time.
A curious feature of the Texas Supreme Court opinion in favor of the Robin Hood system is that
the Court stated that if all districts were to reach the 15 cap, it would be obvious that they had no
discretion and that the 15 mil tax was a statewide tax.22 The Court's statement created a widelyrecognized automatic trigger for the system's demise. Currently, more than 80 percent of Texas pupils

21

Some states, including Texas, actually do have endowments that support school aid. Typically, these
were created in the early days of the state from sales of government land. Because they were set up long ago, when
real per-pupil spending and state populations were smaller, most endowments are insufficiently large to fund
significant aid today. However, they demonstrate that endowments can be practical.
22

This is a curious standard from an economist's point of view because it is evident that the combination of
the foundation aid system and recapture system already constitute a statewide property tax (mentally assign the first
8.6 mils of recaptured revenue to the foundation aid system and there you are). Nevertheless, this is the standard set
by the Court.

21

are in districts within half a mil of the cap.23 The system is about to become unconstitutional and few
people seem motivated to resuscitate it in anything like its current form.

VI. An Empirical Strategy for Testing Hypotheses about Robin Hood
We hypothesize that:
(i) All else equal, capitalization of Robin Hood drove down property prices in recapture districts.
(ii) Owing to capitalization, the revenues contributed by property-rich districts to the Robin Hood
system were insufficient to fund the intended aid. As a result, the state reduced the recapture threshold in
real terms.
(iii) As a result of the recapture threshold falling in real terms, an increasing number of districts
were subjected to recapture.
(iv) As a result of capitalization, districts that faced recapture could not keep up with the
demand for school spending without raising their property tax rates. Such districts were gradually
pushed toward the 15 mil cap on property taxes.
(v) Low marginal tax prices induced property-poor districts to set their property tax rates at or
near the cap.
(vi) Districts will have increased their WADA/ADA ratio depending on their financial incentives
to do so (where they are in the school finance system).
A. Parameters that Describe the School Finance System
Systems of school finance can be described by a few parameters that characterize the budget
constraints illustrated in Figures 1 through 8:
(i) a district's marginal tax price (
(ii) a district's virtual grant (

23

)–that is, the slope of its budget constraint;
)–that is, the difference between the intercept of pure local

The source is Texas Education Agency, Summary of Finances 2003-04.

22

finance budget constraint and the intercept of the projection of the with-aid budget constraint;24
(iii) the property tax rate cap;
(iv) the effect of a change in WADA/pupil on a district's revenue;
(v) the share of the change in property tax revenue that a district keeps when its property values change
and affect its local revenue (

).

The first four parameters listed above are self-evident. The fifth parameter, however, requires a
little explanation.

affects the inter-district equilibrium illustrated in Figures 3 and 7.

Essentially, when a school finance reform makes households shift from one district to another, they
change house prices which change local property tax revenues which change districts' budgets according
to

. Because districts' budgets affect households' demand to live in them,

is

important for establishing how far property prices move.
An additional virtue of

is that it indicates the power of the incentives facing a

district's staff. Suppose staff make extra efforts that raise property values and, consequently, local
property tax revenues in their district. The larger is the share of these extra dollars that their district
keeps, the more likely is their schools' budget to rise. If staff like larger budgets, then their incentives are

24

Figure 8 has nice geometry that shows that the virtual grant is equal to net foundation aid for a district
that receives foundation aid only (no guaranteed revenue aid). Project the dashed budget constraint (the one at a 45
degree angle) to the horizontal dotted line labeled
. The length of the
line that remains is the intercept or
virtual grant. Its length is given by the foundation grant minus one side of the right triangle created by the projection
of the dashed line. The length of that triangle's side is exactly equal to the vertical distance between the
line and
the horizontal part of
. That vertical distance is what the district pays into the foundation aid system. Subtract
the district's payments into the foundation aid system from its foundation grant to obtain the virtual grant.
For a district that receives guaranteed revenue aid, the virtual grant is not merely net foundation aid because
its budget constraint is not at a 45 degree angle. Project the sloped part of
onto the
line, making a
right-angle triangle. The short vertical side of this triangle has length equal to the district's payment into the
foundation program. The long horizontal side of the triangle has length equal to: (district's payment into the
foundation program) * (guaranteed level per cent of property tax rate)/(amount district raises per cent of property tax
rate). The virtual grant is the foundation grant minus the length of the long horizontal side of the triangle.

23

higher powered when

is higher.25

B. Our Empirical Strategy
Our empirical strategy is straightforward because, at heart, we are analyzing one big policy
change in school finance. Of course, the Robin Hood formula affected different districts differently, but
the differences are not random but related to districts' initial characteristics. Therefore, it is best to think
of the timing of Robin Hood as the main source of exogenous variation: we will look for districts to
deviate from their prior behavior with timing that makes it appear that they are reacting to Robin Hood.
Because we want the Robin Hood parameters that a district faces to reflect only the impact of the law,
not the district's endogenous response to it, we use simulated parameters. That is, for each year, we take
observations on each district before Robin Hood, use them to predict what property values would have
been in the absence of Robin Hood, and run the predicted value through the contemporary school finance
laws to determine what marginal tax price, foundation tax, et cetera would have been with Robin Hood
but no other change. We use the simulated parameters as instrumental variables, instrumenting for each
actual parameter with the simulated parameter that the district would face if the law had changed but its
own behavior had not. This now-standard technique is usually called simulated instrumental variables
estimation. Simulated parameters are powerful instruments and valid (if they are valid) by construction.
That is, a reader who knows how they are constructed should be able to judge their validity. We also
estimate reduced-form equations, which generate "intention-to-treat" estimates of the Robin Hood
system.26

25

Of course, if district staff maximize property values, then
is a measure of the power of their
incentives. Districts' maximizing property values is a popular assumption among local public economists, but it is
presumably just a convenient shorthand for the ways in which staff benefit from higher property values. No one
claims that they literally have contracts that depend on their raising property values.
26

W e are concerned about differentiating between changes in the parameters that are exogenous (caused
purely by the law change) and endogenous to the districts' reactions to the law changes. W e address this problem
using simulated instrumental variables, which do not share some of the features of typical instrumental variables.
For instance, with simulated instruments, it is obvious where the variation in the instruments comes from: the law
change. Also, the case for the instruments fulfilling the second instrumental variables condition (lack of correlation

24

Because we predict that some responses will play out over time, we graphically show districts'
responses for the years after the law change, up to the 2001-02 school year. We treat several variables as
simultaneously determined dependent variables: property prices, property tax rates, school spending, and
the WADA/pupil ratio. We also show how the recapture threshold evolved from the beginning of Robin
Hood to the present.
C. Obstacles for Our Empirical Strategy
As in most studies of tax reforms, the primary empirical obstacle is determining what would have
happened in the absence of the reform. That is, what is the correct counterfactual? This issue is much
discussed in studies of income tax reforms, but less discussed for school finance.27
Overall, we believe that constructing a counterfactual is less problematic for Texas school
finance than it is for an analysis of an income tax reform. First, the timing of the reform was more
arbitrary than is a typical income tax reform. Income tax reforms typically begin in a legislature that is
sensitive to the business cycle, but the timing of school finance reforms is dictated by an erratic
interaction of plaintiffs, courts, and legislatures. Even if the initiation of the Edgewood case (1984) were
endogenous to the business cycle, the school finance system was not affected at all until 1989-90 and
Robin Hood was not implemented until 1993-94. Second, in tax reform analysis, it is often difficult to
follow individuals. We do not have this problem: a district is a district and the data form a complete
panel. Third, unlike individuals who have many idiosyncracies in their lives that are unobserved by the
econometrician, a district's menu of choices and its actions are entirely public. As a result, the estimates
we use for making predictions are precise. Fourth, there were no other major school or tax reforms in

between the instruments and unobserved determinants of the dependent variable) is straightforward: the instruments
are constructed to fulfil this condition as much as possible. Because each simulated parameter has exactly the same
structure as the parameter it mimics, the reduced form equation produces "intention to treat" estimates of Robin
Hood, while the simulated instrumental variables estimates are "treatment on the treated" effects of Robin Hood.
27

See, for instance, Feldstein (1995) on the importance of using panel data and Goolsbee (2000) on the
difficulty in constructing a counterfactual for high income people. Gordon (forthcoming) discusses this issue when
constructing a counterfactual for a major change in federal Title I spending on schools.

25

Texas over the same period that are likely to confound our results.28
D. Constructing a Counterfactual
We need to construct a counterfactual both in order to construct the simulated parameters and in
order to control for what would likely have happened in Robin Hood's absence.
We use data from 1980 to 1990 to estimate how each district's property tax base is affected by
natural gas and oil prices; personal income in its metropolitan area (or county, for non-metropolitan
districts); employment by industry in its metropolitan area (county); population in its metropolitan area
(county); state-level employment in the oil, gas and mining industry; and gross state product. We
estimate a district-level regression with most variables at the county or metropolitan area level in order to
ensure that the covariates are strong predictors of property values but also plausibly exogenous to the
conduct of the individual school district.29 In order to allow property prices to vary more with oil and
natural gas prices in districts that depend heavily on that industry, we interact the oil and gas prices with
indicators for a district's decile when districts are categorized by the percentage of their property in oil
and gas land. We also interact oil and gas prices with indicators for a district's quartile when districts are
categorized by the percentage of their employment in the oil and gas industry.30 In order to allow

28

Texas implemented an accountability program for schools in the 1990s, but the financial consequences
of the program were negligible, given the scale of revenues and spending that we examine.
Texas increased aid for building school facilities in property poor districts in 1997 and for all districts in
2001. W e therefore look at the property tax and school spending that is not for facilities, but is for "maintenance and
operations." Maintenance and operations taxes and spending are more than 95 percent of the total in Texas.
Texas raised the homestead exemption from $5,000 to $10,000 in 1998. Using the comptroller's data on
what assessed property values would have been with and without exemptions, we eliminate the confounding impact
of the exemptions from our data.
29

In other words, we deliberately do not use a district's own values for most variables. This is because it is
plausible that a metropolitan area's socioeconomics and demographics change in a way that is exogenous to a
district's own conduct and circumstances, but it is not plausible that a district's socioeconomics and demographics are
exogenous to its conduct and circumstances (especially the impact of Robin Hood itself). W e have performed all of
the analysis using only state level variables (as opposed to metropolitan and county) and get similar but less precise
predictions, as we would expect.
30

To get these percentages, we used 1987, a year in which the average price of a barrel of oil was typical
for the 1980s: $18.1.

26

property prices to vary more with personal income in districts that depend on residential property values,
we interact metropolitan (county) per capita personal income with indicators for a district's decile when
districts are categorized by the percentage of their property that is residential. Finally, because income
growth in the 1980s and 1990s was not experienced equally by low wage and high wage earners, we
interact metropolitan (county) per capita personal income with indicators for a district's quartile when
districts are categorized by their initial median household income.
Specifically, our equation is:
(1)

where i indexes districts, j indexes the metropolitan area or county, t indexes time, and the vector

is

the set of metropolitan-, county-, and state-level variables described above. Notice that equation (1)
includes a fixed effect for each district and has a log-log specification. The equation explains the data
from the 1980s extremely well: the F-statistic is 74.2 for the test of the hypothesis that the coefficients
on the explanatory variables, not including the district fixed effects, are jointly equal to zero. With the
district fixed effects, the equation explains 99.4 percent of the variation. We believe that the resulting
predictions for the 1990s are reliable because most of the variation in property values in Texas is driven
by household incomes or by oil and gas prices, which affect property values in systematic ways.31

31

The elasticity of property values to oil prices rises with a district's dependence on oil and gas land and is
equal to 0.10 for the top decile of dependence. The elasticity of property values to natural gas prices rises with a
district's dependence on oil and gas land and is equal to 0.24 for the top decile of dependence. The elasticity of
property values to metropolitan (county) per capita personal income is 0.07 for districts with initial median
household income in the bottom quartile, 0.13 for districts in the second quartile, 0.17 for districts in the third
quartile, and 0.03 for districts with initial median household income in the top quartile. A full set of coefficients is
available from the authors, but these are the most interesting ones.
Texas assessors value oil and gas land using a discounting method, published oil and gas price forecasts
(which tend strongly to reflect current prices), and information about which wells would be economic at which price.
For a given parcel of oil or gas land, nearly all of the year-to-year variation is driven by current oil and natural gas

27

In order to predict district's number of pupils, we regress pupils on district indicators,
metropolitan (county) population, and employment by industry.32 We use 1980s data and a log-log
specification. Not surprisingly, population and employment strongly predict pupils: the F-statistic is
109.5 for the test of the hypothesis that the coefficients on the explanatory variables, not including the
district fixed effects, are jointly equal to zero. With the district fixed effects, the equation explains 99.8
percent of the variation. We then apply each district's initial WADA/pupil ratio to its predicted number
of pupils to get a predicted WADA for each district.33
E. The Estimating Equations
We estimate the effects of Robin Hood's parameters using straightforward regressions of
districts' property values and spending on the parameters listed above, district indicators, and districts'
predicted property values (which summarize all of the other influences on property values). We use a
log-log specification, except that we do not log

because it is a share.34 The estimating

equations for property values and school spending are:
(2)

(3)

prices. It is important to associate oil and gas prices with the correct year of property valuation because there is a lag
between actual price changes and their use by assessors.
32

W e found that employment in agriculture and low-skill industries were less noisy indicators of recent
immigrants than was survey data on immigrants by metropolitan area (county) or data on legal immigrants' intended
destination.
33

W e hold constant each district's ratio of WADA/pupils at its 1991 value because this was the first year in
each W ADA was measured and districts would have had little time to react to the law by reclassifying students.
34

W e use a log-log specification because it is implied by common specifications for demand for school
spending, such as those derived from Cobb-Douglas utility. As a check, however, we estimated a levels
specification. It generated comparable estimates but fit the data less well.

28

where

is the predicted property value based on equation (1). We let the coefficient on the

marginal tax price depend on whether a district's revenues are being confiscated (
(

) by the state. We expect the coefficients on both

) or matched

interactions to be negative, but, for the

reasons we noted above, we expect the coefficient to be larger in absolute value if revenues are being
confiscated.35 We expect positive coefficients on the virtual grants. In the property value equation, we
expect a positive coefficient on

because, intuitively, it indicates the return to investments that

raise property value. We do not, however, have a clear prediction for the sign on
spending equation. A low value of

in the

insulates a district's spending from variation in its

property values, but the effect of such insulation on a district's level of spending is not obvious.
Below, we will see that simple figures establish the basic consequences of Robin Hood. What,
then, is the additional value of regression analysis? Regression estimates reveal detail in a way that
figures cannot. Moreover, they generally show the trade-offs inherent in school finance systems and
could be used to predict the effects of other states' schemes. Although we do not claim to estimate a fully
structural model, the parameters that describe the budget constraints imposed by Robin Hood are derived
from theory, our measures of them are very accurate, and our specifications are reasonable if the demand
for school spending has a Cobb-Douglas or similar form. Our simulated instrumental variables estimates
represent treatment-on-the-treated effects of the parameters. Our reduced-form estimates are also useful.
If another state were to design a school finance plan under the naive belief that no capitalization would
occur, we would get the most accurate predictions of the plan's effect if we combined our reduced-form
estimates with the state's naive projections of its plans' parameters.

35

In fact, we tested the hypothesis that the coefficients on the two
rejected it at the 0.0001 level.

interactions were the same and

29

VII. Data
All of our data are either administrative or census data. Most data are from the Texas Education
Agency's Summary of Finances files (Texas Education Agency, Division of State Funding, 2003). These
are the data used to generate each district's actual aid. The files contain the information we use on
assessed property values, pupils, WADA, property tax rates, foundation grants, recapture, and so on. In
addition, we use districts expenditure data from the Academic Excellence Indicator System files (Texas
Education Agency, Division of Performance Reporting, 2004). We use data from the Texas
Comptroller's annual Property Value Study to determine whether assessed and market property values
correspond (Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts, various years).36 Finally, we make minor use of
census data and energy price data: United States Department of Commerce (1983, 2003, 2003, 2004),
United States Department of Education (1994), United States Department of Energy (2003).
On the whole, data are not an issue in this study. The administrative data are comprehensive, and
errors in the data are unlikely because they would have been costly to some party. In any case, because
we are using the actual data that were used to generate aid, it is likely that the state and districts would
have responded to erroneous data as though they were correct.

VIII. Districts' Budget Constraints: Before and After Robin Hood
In this section, we show the before-after differences in Texas' school finance parameters for two
exemplary districts and districts categorized by their property-richness. Texas has 1031 conventional
school districts –too many to show individually. The ideal "before" year is the 1988-89 school year
because it precedes any attempt by the state to respond to the Edgewood case. It does not matter much

36

W e also have data on a very large sample of individual house sale transactions covering the late 1980s
through today. So far, we have merely used the data to confirm that assessed values reflect market values. W e could
also use the data to see whether house consumption reacts in predictable ways. Are people less likely to build onto a
house in a district that faces recapture, for instance?

30

whether we choose 1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97, or 1997-98 as an "after" year. In the years between 1988
and 1994, the structure of the foundation grant and guaranteed revenue system were in place, but the
level of aid was considerably lower than they were after recapture began.37
First consider Edgewood Independent School District and Alamo Heights Independent School
District in Bexar County. They are geographically neighboring districts. The former was property-poor
(bottom 5 percent of property wealth per pupil) and the latter was property-rich (top 5 percent of property
wealth per pupil). In 1989, as shown in the top panel of Table 1, Alamo Heights families had a
significantly higher median income ($53,078) than Edgewood families ($22,945).38 In 1988-99, Alamo
Heights had a property tax rate of 12.4 mils, and Edgewood had a property tax rate of 9.8 mils. By 1997,
both districts' property tax rates had hit the cap of 15 mils. 15 mils may not sound like a high tax rate,
but this is because it is expressed as a share of an asset price. It we convert it into a tax on annualized
property services , we can compare its magnitude to that of other taxes. A 15 mil tax on property is
approximately a 19 percent tax on annualized housing services.39 A 19 percent tax rate is not low relative
to taxes on other goods and services.
Now examine the bottom panel of Table 1, which shows school finance parameters for
Edgewood and Alamo Heights, with both the intended "after Robin Hood" parameters and the ones that
actually evolved. Any differences between the intended and actual parameters are due to capitalization.

37
During the 1992-93 and 1993-94 school years, a peculiar formula was used that was quickly found
unconstitutional. The formula involved grouping Texas school districts in County Education Districts and
redistributing some funds within the groups. From our point of view, this formula is an unnecessary detour between
the old formula and the Robin Hood formula. Robin Hood is an adaptation of the old formula, not the County
Education District formula, which was wholly discarded after its short "life." Because the County Education District
formula was found to be unconstitutional quite quickly, it would not have changed expectations much or generated
much capitalization.
38

In this and the following paragraphs, money amounts are in 2002 dollars, adjusted using Bureau of Labor
Statistics, Consumer Price Index.
39

See Calabreze and Epple (2004) for an explanation of why 0.08 is a reasonable factor for converting
property values into annualized property services.

31

Edgewood's marginal tax price fell from 1 in 1988-89 to 0.11 in 1997-98 (that is, the district only paid 11
cents on the dollar for marginal spending). Its intended and actual marginal tax price were the same in
1997-98, implying that little capitalization occurred (a fact we demonstrate shortly). The lump sum
transfer to Edgewood was $3,187 before Robin Hood and about $3,732 after Robin Hood (intended and
actual are similar). Notice that Robin Hood raised Edgewood's lump sum transfer by a relatively small
amount (17 percent), but reduced Edgewood's marginal tax price ninefold. The

variable

shows that, even before Robin Hood, Edgewood's staff could not raise their school budget much if their
efforts raised property values in the district. For every dollar of extra tax revenue generated by higher
property values, Edgewood kept 33 cents.40 After Robin Hood, Edgewood kept zero cents of extra tax
revenue generated by higher property values.
Before Robin Hood, Alamo Heights had an marginal tax price of 1, meaning that it paid a dollar
in taxes to spend a dollar. If no capitalization had occurred, Robin Hood would have raised Alamo
Heights's marginal tax price to 2.56. Because of substantial negative capitalization (a fact we
demonstrate shortly), its marginal tax price increased to 1.39 (the district paid $1.39 in taxes to spend a
dollar). Alamo Heights got no lump sum transfer before Robin Hood, but in 1997-98 it could maintain
its pre-Robin Hood per-pupil spending only by putting $3,573 per student into the state's recapture
system. If capitalization had not occurred, much more ($15,041 per student) would have been
confiscated. Finally, before Robin Hood, Alamo Heights staff could raise their schools' budget by a
dollar that if their efforts raised an extra dollar of tax revenue through higher property values. After
Robin Hood, Alamo Heights kept zero cents of every extra tax dollar from changing property values.
Having looked at two specific districts, we now show, in Table 2, parameters of the school

40

Of course, the reverse was equally true. If the staff engaged in some activity that caused property values
and thus property tax revenues to fall, the district only experienced 33 cents on the dollar of the consequences.

32

finance system for 20 property-wealth-per-WADA quantiles.41 We show only the actual "after Robin
Hood" parameters. We do not show the intended parameters simply because they would force us to
discuss capitalization prematurely: we prefer to show the facts on capitalization first. The most
noteworthy changes in budget constraints occur at the two ends of the property wealth spectrum. The
property-poorest quantiles experience very large negative changes in their marginal tax prices and
relatively small positive changes in their lump sum transfers. The property-richest quantiles experience
positive changes in their marginal tax prices and substantial recapture. In short, Edgewood and Alamo
Heights are fairly typical of the bottom and top quantiles, respectively.
Table 3 shows how the recapture threshold fell over time in real terms, from about $340,000 in
1994 to $305,000 in 2002. Because the threshold fell, more districts were swept into the recapture group.
In 1994, recapture districts accounted for only 5.1 percent of students. By 2002, 10.3 percent of students
were enrolled in recapture districts. Moreover, the predicted enrollment numbers suggest that 22.3
percent of all Texas students would now be in recapture districts if they had not been deterred from living
in them by the Robin Hood scheme. Table 3 demonstrates that Texas has been changing the parameters
of the system in an apparent effort to fill a perennial shortage of revenue. Below, we show that
capitalization did likely cause such a revenue shortage.

VIII. Robin Hood and Capitalization
We now turn to the capitalization consequences of Robin Hood, using figures to illustrate the
evidence before presenting regression results.
A. Capitalization of Robin Hood into Property Values: A Graphical View
Figures 9 through 11 show the predicted and actual property tax bases for the property-poorest

41

The quantiles and statistics in Table 2 are pupil-weighted. That is, each of the 20 quantiles contains
approximately five percent of the Texas pupil population. Quantiles 15 and 16 cannot be separated because Houston,
a district with very large enrollment, straddles them.

33

districts (quantile 1), intermediate (quantile 10), and property-richest (quantile 20) districts in Texas.
Observe that the three figures all have the same scale: the vertical distance on the figures represents
$300,000 per pupil. Figure 9 shows that, in the property-poorest districts, the actual property tax base
roughly kept pace with the predicted base, suggesting that little or no capitalization occurred. Figure 10
shows that intermediate districts like those in quantile 10 experienced a small amount of negative
capitalization –about $12,500 per pupil– after Robin Hood. The negative capitalization begins in about
1990 and grows through 1994, after which the negative capitalization holds steady. This time pattern
makes sense because school finance laws began affecting intermediate districts in 1989 and had
increasing effects on them through 1994, when Robin Hood was enacted and the law became stable so far
as they were concerned. Note that the appearance of negative capitalization does not depend on our
having generated an overly optimistic forecast: their actual property value per pupil fell. Keep in mind
that this decline occurred during a decade of robust economic growth in Texas and the United States.
Figure 11 shows that property-rich districts like those in quantile 20 experienced very substantial
negative capitalization, beginning in 1993-94 and growing thereafter, with no signs of slowing down.
This timing makes sense. Recapture began in 1993-94, although Robin Hood was not declared
constitutional until 1994. The real recapture threshold fell in nearly every subsequent year, raising the
recapture burden for districts already in the recapture system and sweeping new districts into the
recapture system. Admittedly, some of the appearance of negative capitalization in Figure 11 depends on
our prediction that property values should have risen over the 1990s, but it is well known that the 1990s
were a period of unusually rapid income growth for the wealthy. The median income of households in
the top quantile districts grew by 20 percent between the 1990 and 2000 Censuses of Population.42

42

Authors' calculations based on United States Department of Education, 1994 and United States
Department of Commerce, School District Demographics, 2003.

34

Moreover, oil and natural gas prices rose substantially in the late 1990s.43 Nevertheless, Figure 11 shows
that actual property value per pupil fell in nominal dollars in quantile 20 districts. Even if one thought
that our prediction of property values in quantile 20 districts is overly optimistic (and we do not think
that it is, given that it is growing no faster than household income and more slowly than oil and gas
prices), it would be hard not to conclude that Robin Hood had caused substantial negative capitalization.
Readers may be interested to note that Figures 9 through 11 would look much the same if we had
shown aggregate property values, rather than aggregate property values per pupil.44 In other words, it is
changes in property values, not changes in pupils, that dictate the shape of each line.
B. Capitalization of Robin Hood into Property Values: Regression Analysis
Table 4 shows how Robin Hood's parameters generated capitalization, displaying the coefficients
of interest from equation (2).45 Before examining the coefficients of interest, however, observe that they
explain the data very well. Figures 12 and 13 repeats the comparison of actual and predicted property
values without Robin Hood that we previously showed in Figures 9 through 11. We also add lines
showing the predicted property values with Robin Hood. Figures 12 and 13 are produced using,
respectively, the simulated instrumental variables and reduced-form estimates in Table 4. Even in
quantile 20, which has dramatic changes in capitalization, the estimates do a good job of explaining why
actual property values diverged from the path they were predicted to take in the absence of Robin Hood.
Table 4 shows that, in property-rich districts that experience an increase in their marginal tax
prices, property values fall by 24.8 percent for every doubling of marginal tax prices. For instance, the

43

Oil prices were rather steady through 1995, but had risen by more than 30 percent by 2001. Natural gas
prices were steady through 1998, but had nearly doubled by 2001. See United States Department of Energy.
44

45

These figures are available from the authors.

For reasons of space, we do not show individual districts' fixed effects or the coefficient on the predicted
property tax base, which (by construction) functions as a sufficient statistic for factors that systemically affect a
district's tax base and generates a coefficient very close to one. Indeed, we can restrict it to be equal to one and the
other coefficients hardly change.

35

marginal tax prices of districts in quantile 20 rose from 1 to 1.75 (0.56 natural log points), implying a
decline in property values of about 13.9 percent from this parameter's effect. The next coefficient
suggests that, in property-poor districts that experience a decrease in their marginal tax prices, property
values rise by 5.36 percent for every halving of their marginal tax prices. The typical property-poor
(quantile 1) district saw its marginal tax price fall from 1 to 0.14 (1.97 natural log points), implying a
rise in property values of 11.8 percent. The coefficient on the virtual lump sum grant suggests that
doubling it would raise property values by only 0.6 percent. While a small capitalization effect of
foundation grants is consistent with evidence in Hoxby (2001), it must also be admitted that Robin Hood
generated such modest variation in foundation grants that it is not a good application for estimating their
effects.46 The coefficient on

is 0.1489.

fell by 0.33 for property-poor districts in

quantile 1, implying a 5 percent decrease in property values. It fell by 0.67 for property-rich districts in
quantile 20, implying a 10 percent decrease in property values.
Comparing the columns of Table 4, we see that the reduced-form estimates are generally
attenuated versions of the simulated instrumented variables estimates. This is exactly what we expect.
The intention-to-treat estimates suggest that parameters are less efficacious because they include the fact
that capitalization waters down the intended effect of the school finance scheme.
Summing up, we expect property-rich (quantile 20) districts' property values to have fallen by 24
percent (about $246,000 per pupil), expect the property-poorest (quantile 1) districts' property values to
rise by about 6.8 percent (about $4,700 per pupil), and expect intermediate outcomes for intermediate
districts. For instance, we expect a 4.6 percent decline in property values for quantile 10 districts (about
$12,600 per pupil). Considering that the estimates are for an average "after Robin Hood" year, while the

46

That is, we need variation in the virtual lump sum grants that driven by changes in foundation grants, not
driven by changes in the slope of the budget constraints shown in Figures 1 through 8. Changes in the slope are
changes associated with marginal tax prices, and we need to have variation in the virtual grants that is independent of
variation in marginal tax prices if we are to distinguish the roles of the parameters.

36

figures show changing dynamics, the estimates very correspond well to the graphs, except that Figure 9
evidently masks a small amount of positive capitalization in the property-poorest districts.47
Aggregating over all districts' gains and losses in property values, our estimates suggest that
Robin Hood caused Texas to lose a net of $27,000 per pupil in property wealth. The best estimate would
actually vary by year and is between $20,728 and $33,495 in property wealth per pupil, with later years
generally associated with higher losses.
C. Understanding the Capitalization that Occurred
We have seen that negative capitalization of approximately $290,000 per pupil apparently
occurred in quantile 20 districts. This may seem like a large number, but recall the numbers for Alamo
Heights to see that it is reasonable, given the intended recapture. Robin Hood intended that Alamo
Heights should pay $15,041 per student every year. If the district were to endow permanent $15,041
scholarships, it would cost the district at least $300,000 per pupil.48 Robin Hood essentially attached the
obligation to fund just such scholarships to every property in Alamo Heights. Thus, we should not be
surprised to find that properties which were worth $X per pupil before Robin Hood were worth about
$X-290,000 after it.
Such losses of property wealth had serious consequences for the stability of Robin Hood because
quantile 20 districts were disproportionately responsible for putting dollars into the state aid system. It is
no wonder that, with their property tax bases falling in response to Robin Hood, the state would find
itself perennially disappointed about the revenue captured from these districts.
We are not surprised by substantial negative capitalization of Robin Hood in property-rich
districts, but why is there so little positive capitalization in property-poor districts that Texas had a net

47

In particular, the property-rich districts have lost about $246,000 per pupil in an average "after" year but
about $290,000 per pupil by the last "after" year we show.
48

If the payout rate were five percent real or about eight percent nominal, the amount would be $300,820.

37

loss $27,000 in property wealth per pupil?
There are two possible explanations, which are not mutually exclusive. We have already argued
that capitalization can be highly asymmetric because property-poor districts have incentives to spend
money even if their residents value it at much less than a dollar per dollar spent. Put another way, Robin
Hood may have made much more revenue available to property-poor districts, but the value they created
with the revenue may have been insufficient to substantially increase household demand to live in the
districts. It is demand, not school spending per se that bids up property prices. Second, it is possible
that, even if demand increased substantially, the supply of vacant or low-use agricultural land was so
great in property-poor districts that prices were bid up only slightly. In other words, their supply curve
for residential land is rather flat.
We cannot directly test the first explanation (if feasible, it would require a separate study), so we
leave it as the residual explanation. However, we should be able to see clear signs of the second
explanation. Property-poor districts should disproportionately convert land to residential use and should
have disproportionate growth of housing units. (We say "disproportionate" because there will be some
land conversion and new housing in all districts, simply because Texas' overall population grew in the
1990s.) In Appendix Figures 1 through 3, we examine property use in the 1990s. We see a small
percentage of land converted to residential use in all districts, but see no sign that property-poor districts
converted land any faster than intermediate or property-rich districts.
We also regressed the decadal changes in districts' housing units on the decadal changes in the
populations of their metropolitan area (county for non-metropolitan districts), indicators for the decade,
indicators for their property wealth quantile, and, most importantly, indicators for their property wealth
quantile interacted with the indicator the decade being the 1990s (the Robin Hood period). Specifically,
the regression is:
,

38

where if t is 1990, then t-1 is 1980; and if t 2000, then t-1 is 1990. If property-poor districts added
housing units disproportionately after Robin Hood, then the coefficients on their interaction terms will be
positive and statistically significantly different from zero. In fact, Appendix Table 1 shows that none of
the interaction terms has a coefficient that is statistically significantly different from zero, except that
quantile 19 has a positive coefficient that is marginally significant at the 10 percent level. In other
words, disproportionately high growth in housing units in the 1990s occurred only in the second
property-richest group of districts –probably because most of these districts that were unaffected by
Robin Hood for much of the 1990s (too property-rich to participate in the guaranteed revenue system and
too property-poor to experience recapture until the late 1990s).49
In short, neither the land conversion evidence nor the housing units evidence supports the
hypothesis that demand for homes in the property-poor districts grew substantially. Demand for these
districts apparently failed to increase; it is not merely that the supply of residential property in these
districts was highly elastic. We conclude that Robin Hood generated only a little positive capitalization
in property-poor districts because their value to residents rose only by a little.
The capitalization result that surprised us was the consistent pattern of small negative
capitalization in intermediate districts like those in quantile 10 (quantiles 7 through 13 look similar).
These intermediate districts experienced a negligible change in their net foundation aid, lower marginal
tax prices, and no recapture because they were insufficiently property-rich to hit the recapture threshold.
The one parameter that significantly worsened for such districts was

. That is, after Robin

Hood, if staff effort raised property values, the district simply paid more property taxes: the school

49

In other words, until the recapture threshold fell significantly and swept them into recapture in the late
1990s, a fair number of districts in quantile 19 were unaffected by Robin Hood. Not surprisingly, households that
might otherwise have moved into quantile 20 districts (all of which experienced recapture) may have built homes in
quantile 19 districts, generating the result we see in Appendix Table 1.
In Appendix Table 1, the coefficient for the property-poorest districts (quantile 1) is a positive 0.11, but
we cannot make much of this since it is not significant at any conventional statistical level and the coefficients for all
the other property-poor quantiles are negative.

39

budget did not benefit at all. We hypothesize that, by eliminating an incentive device, Robin Hood may
have decreased the value of schools, thereby generating a small amount of negative capitalization in
intermediate districts.
D. Assessed or Market Property Values?
So far, we have examined assessed property values, but it is possible that the capitalization is
more fictional than real. That is, it is possible that only the assessed or book values of property fell in
Texas, not the market values. On the other hand, the state has an incentive to prevent variation in
assessment practices, which could undermine its system of aid, causing it to give disproportionate aid to
districts with underassessed property values. In an effort to monitor its county-based assessors, Texas'
Comptroller annually computes a ratio of assessed to market value for each school district, basing its
computation on a sample of all property sales that occurred during the year.50
In Figures 14 through 17, we use the ratios of assessed-to-market value from the Comptroller's
annual studies to investigate whether Robin Hood affected market property values, or merely assessed
values. Figure 14 shows average assessment ratios from 1988 to 2001 for all of the major types of
property in Texas: single family homes, multiple family homes, vacant property, commercial property,
utilities property, and minerals property (which includes oil and gas property). We see no trend over
time toward underassessment. Instead, we see assessment ratios trending toward one, for all categories
of property, suggesting the Comptroller's monitoring has succeeded in bringing assessed values into line
with market values. It is not surprising to see evidence of increased scrutiny during a period when the
state's level of intervention in school finance has increased.
In Figures 15 through 17 (which are all on the same scale as Figure 14), we show assessment

50

The technical descriptions of the computations suggest to us that they are highly reliable. The sampling
is too detailed to describe here, but suffice it to say that the comptroller collects a value-stratified sample that is
sufficiently large to produce a 95 percent confidence interval of length 0.1 in each school district. That is, a typical
95 percent confidence interval is 0.95-1.05 around a mean assessment ratio of 1.

40

ratios by property wealth quantile for single family homes, commercial property, and minerals property.
These figures would allow us to spot a trend toward underassessment in, say, property-rich (quantile 20)
school districts, even if assessment ratios in other districts were close to one. We see no evidence of
trends toward underassessment in any quantile. Indeed, assessed values of all types, in all quantiles, are
increasingly in line with market values.

IX. Robin Hood's Other Consequences
We now briefly investigate how Robin Hood affected property tax rates, disability classification
in Texas, and school spending.
A. The Consequences of Robin Hood for Property Tax Rates
We predicted above that Robin Hood would affect property tax rates. The property-poor
districts had incentives to raise their tax rates because each dollar they raised allowed them to spend
multiple dollars. Indeed, property-poor districts had to raise their property tax rates in order to get much
aid from Robin Hood because the scheme gave them only modest increases in their foundation aid and
made it impossible for their budgets to rise with their property values. Figure 18 shows that the tax rates
of property-poor districts did rise. We see that the property-poorest districts (quantile 1) raised their tax
rates from about 12 mils to 14.2 mils following the full implementation of Robin Hood in 1994-95.
Figure 18 shows that intermediate districts (quantile 10) also experienced rising property tax
rates. Recall that, with Robin Hood, these districts experienced lower marginal tax prices and a small
amount of negative capitalization. The predictable consequence was that they chose higher property tax
rates. In 1991, their average tax rate was 12.6 mils. After 1994, it hovered between 14 and 14.7 mils.
However, it is the property-rich districts that experienced the steepest rise in property tax rates.
Figure 18 shows that, immediately after the recapture system started, their tax rates rose
from 12.5 mils to 14 mils. However, because the state kept reducing the recapture threshold in its

41

perennial search for funds, property-rich districts had to raise their tax rate every year just to maintain
spending (setting off yet another round of capitalization!). They are now at the 15 mil cap, and we
cannot say how high their rates might be in the absence of the cap. In anything, Figure 18 suggests that
their rates would still be rising. These districts literally cannot spend anything more per WADA: they
cannot raise their tax rates; they cannot derive higher budgets from rising property values because all
marginal revenue from that source is captured. Raising the ratio of their WADA to pupils is their sole
means of obtaining additional spending.
B. The Consequences of Robin Hood for Disability and Other Student Classification
The Robin Hood system is based on property wealth per WADA. Thus, every district has an
incentive to raise its ratio of WADA to pupils to minimize its "book" wealth. As just seen, however,
raising WADA is the sole means by which property-rich districts at the cap can raise spending. A
property-poor district has incentives to raise WADA because it makes both foundation aid and
guaranteed revenue aid more generous. A small number of "gap" districts have only very mild incentives
to raise WADA because they are too property-rich to receive guaranteed revenue aid and too propertypoor to experience recapture. In such districts, the costs associated with reclassifying a student might
easily offset the only benefit of higher WADA: a higher foundation grant.51
Figure 19 shows that the WADA/pupil ratio of quantile 1 (property-poor) districts rose from 1.36
to 1.42. The WADA/pupil ratios of quantile 20 (property-rich) districts rose much more: from 1.3 to
1.62. If it were not for Robin Hood's incentives, such WADA/pupil ratios would be very surprising in
relatively affluent districts. The WADA/pupil ratios of districts with only mild incentives to raise
51

Raising W ADA raises a district's foundation grant because the same pupil classifications that raise
W ADA raise the multipliers that generate a district's foundation grant.
W e classify a district as having mild incentives to raise the W ADA/pupil ratio if its only benefit from
raising W ADA is getting greater foundation aid. W e use the following rule to find such districts: a district must not
not receive guaranteed revenue aid; must not be able to get guaranteed revenue aid by raising its W ADA by 5
percent; must not experience recapture; and must not be put into recapture status by an 5 percent decrease in its
W ADA. That is, we find districts that are not only in the gap between the guaranteed revenue and recapture system,
but also a little distance from the thresholds for those systems.

42

WADA did not change much over the period: they hovered in the range around 1.27.
This evidence strongly suggests that districts responded to Robin Hood's incentives to raise
WADA. It confirms Cullen's (2003) study of disability classification in Texas. The main consequence
of WADA "inflation" is probably distortions in how students are taught. Although WADA inflation has
consequences for the stability of school finance in Texas, they are less than one might think because
nearly all districts are simultaneously inflating WADA: the average WADA to pupil ratio in Texas
districts rose from 1.27 in 1991 to 1.36 in 2002. As a result, the property-rich districts are paying less per
actual student than they were intended to pay, but –offsetting this– the property-poor districts are getting
more per actual student than they were intended to get.
C. The Effects of Robin Hood on the Average Level and Equality of Per-Pupil Spending
People often ask whether a school finance program leveled-up or leveled-down. That is, did it
cause average per-pupil spending in the state to rise faster or slower than it otherwise would have?
Figure 20, which shows Texas' average per-pupil spending and that of a few comparison states, provides
one indicator of the answer. We chose comparison states with care. Oklahoma and Louisiana are not
only Texas' neighbors, but also share its dependence on the oil and gas industry. California also has an
oil and gas industry, experiences much of the same immigration as Texas, and had metropolitan areas
(like Austin, Texas) affected by the high technology boom in the 1990s. First, note that in the pre-Robin
Hood period (1980 to 1989), Texas had the highest rate of growth in per-pupil spending among the four
states. Over the subsequent decade, under the influence of school finance reform (1989 to 1999), Texas'
average per-pupil spending grew at much the same pace as spending in the comparison states.52 Over the
briefer period of full Robin Hood implementation, from 1994 to 1999, Texas' average per-pupil spending
grew at the same pace as Louisiana's, very slightly faster than that of California, and faster than that of

52

Data on the comparison states' per-pupil spending are not yet available for years after the 1999-2000
school year.

43

Oklahoma.
Figure 21 presents two more indicators of whether Robin Hood leveled up or down: Texas'
average per-pupil spending as a percentage of per-capita personal income and as a percentage of percapita gross state product. Both of these percentages rose throughout the 1980s and then remained stable
throughout the 1990s. There is no sign of an increase in the percentages after Robin Hood's full
implementation in 1994. In summary, Figures 20 and 21 suggest that Robin Hood neither leveled-up nor
leveled-down. It probably had little effect on the average level of school spending in the state.
Of course, the primary aim of school finance schemes is reallocation of school spending.
Changing average spending is a secondary goal, if it is a goal at all. In Figure 22, we show per-pupil
spending from 1991 to 2001 for property wealth quantiles 1, 5, 10, 15, 19, and 20.53 There has been
narrowing of the spending gap, especially among the first through the 95th percentiles of the property
wealth distribution. Over the decade, the coefficient of variation in per-pupil spending fell from 0.22 to
0.12. The spending gap between the lowest and highest spending quantiles narrowed from about $2,200
to about $1,800. Note that the property-poorest quantile typically does not spend the least per pupil in
Texas: the lowest spending districts tend to have per-pupil property wealth between the 25th and 50th
percentile.
In Table 5, we show regression estimates of the effects of the school finance parameters on perpupil spending. We are less interested in the individual coefficients than in their implications for the
dispersion of school spending. Nevertheless, examine the coefficients briefly. The increased marginal
tax prices have little effect on property-rich districts' per-pupil spending (the point estimates are negative
but statistically insignificant). However, for every halving of the marginal tax price in property-poor
districts, per-pupil spending rises by 13.56 percent. The coefficient on the virtual lump sum grant

53

W e cannot include the 1980s in this figure because the only district-level data on per-pupil spending for
the 1980s are from a different source, the 1981-82 and 1986-87 Censuses of Governments. We found these data
insufficiently comparable to be useful for Figure 16.

44

suggests that doubling it would raise spending by 0.9 percent, but we acknowledge that this coefficient
may understate the true effect because Robin Hood generated such modest variation in foundation grants.
We are not surprised to see a negative coefficient on

(see discussion above), but we have no

especially good interpretation of its small but statistically significant effect.

fell by 0.33 for

property-poor districts in quantile 1, implying an 0.8 percent increase in their spending. It fell by 0.67 for
property-rich districts in quantile 20, implying a 1.8 percent increase in their spending.
Using the results shown in Table 5, we estimate that Robin Hood reduced the coefficient of
variation in per-pupil spending in Texas by 0.11 and reduced the gap between the lowest spending
quantile and highest spending quantile from about $2000 to $1500 (the exact number depends on the
"after Robin Hood" year).54 These summary statistics accord well with our graphical view of the
dispersion of per-pupil spending, shown in Figure 22.

X. Did Robin Hood Efficiently Take from the Rich to Give to the Poor?
Table 6 contains summary statistics to help us see the big picture –how has Robin Hood worked
as a school finance scheme designed to equalize school spending? We use statistics based on the
coefficient estimates in Tables 4 and 5, but there is nothing mysterious about them. They could almost
be read off graphs like Figures 9 through 22.
The left-hand columns show the benefits of Robin Hood: it caused the coefficient of variation in
per pupil spending to fall by 0.11 and caused the spending gap between the highest-spending and lowestspending quantile to fall by about $500. These are not insignificant gains in school spending equality,
but school spending was not equalized in Texas. The middle column shows that $1,482 per pupil would
be needed to give all schools in Texas spending equal to the highest quantile's spending.
The right-columns in Table 6 show the costs of Robin Hood, which –interestingly– are indicated

54

Both numbers are in 2002 dollars, adjusted using the CPI.

45

by aggregate capitalization. Why is this? Robin Hood distorts households' choices about homes,
schools, and other consumption. Some households undoubtedly liked their pre-Robin Hood packages
better; some liked their post-Robin Hood packages better. To the extent that value is merely changing
hands, the scheme is not costly. Robin Hood is costly only when some households lose consumption or
schooling they valued and other households do not get offsetting gains. Because property values
capitalize the value of services bought with taxes, aggregate capitalization automatically nets out the
benefits of the Robin Hood program and is an accurate measure of its costs. (We are often asked whether
people who move to Texas in the future will somehow benefit from today's net negative capitalization
because they will pay less for homes. The answer is no. Property values capitalize the costs and benefits
of districts' schools. Movers to Texas will pay less for their homes on average because the school
systems and homes will be, on average, worth less to them. They will not be getting especially good
deals.)
Net losses of property wealth in Texas were about $27,000 per pupil (more in the later years).
We cannot directly compare the losses to, say, the amount we need to fill to the spending gap, which is
shown in the middle column. This is because the loss is a stock and the gap is a flow (an amount needed
every year). Nevertheless, if we multiply the losses in the right hand column by a return on investment
such as 5 percent, we get $1,350 per pupil. In other words, if we could somehow invest the lost property
wealth and use its proceeds for redistribution, we could eliminate nearly all inequality of per pupil
spending in Texas and raise the average level of spending to the level of the highest spending quantile.
Was Robin Hood efficient at taking from the rich and giving to the poor? Certainly not if the
alternative was efficient confiscation of wealth. If the state had simply confiscated $27,000 per pupil in
assets from the wealthy, it could have endowed a fund to nearly equalize school spending (as described
above). Efficient wealth confiscation is not a realistic policy option in the United States, but an income
or payroll tax might be a realistic alternative to the recapture system. Since Texas currently has neither

46

tax and a tax rate of less than 2% would be necessary to replace recapture, Robin Hood could almost
certainly have been funded without generating much deadweight loss.
Why is Robin Hood so inefficient? There are two reasons. First, by relying on property as the
basis of the tax and the aid, the system invites capitalization. Capitalization makes the tax base shrink
much faster than we are used to seeing with a typical tax. As a result, tax rates have to rise. Because
deadweight loss is approximately proportional to the square of the tax rate, the high tax rates induced by
Robin Hood (most Texans now pay a 19 percent rate on housing services) are inefficient. It should be
emphasized that there is no reason why Robin Hood had to be based on property values. Other states
fund aid with taxes on income or sales and distributed aid on the basis of household incomes.55
Second, Robin Hood is inefficient because the scheme does not make good use of the foundation
system, which is more lump-sum in nature than the guaranteed revenue or recapture systems. That is, a
self-supporting foundation system takes a lump of revenue from each rich district, gives a lump of
revenue to each poor district, and then sets all districts' marginal tax prices to one. Indeed, it is quite
possible to have a foundation aid system based on income and not property values, so that it induces
almost no capitalization.56 The foundation component of Robin Hood is minor –the law hardly raised
most districts' foundation grants. It is Robin Hood's guaranteed revenue system that generates most of
the aid for poor districts. Moreover, the rich districts do not contribute through the foundation system at
all –their marginal property value is taxed instead.. In short, Robin Hood minimizes reliance on lump
sum redistribution and maximizes reliance on high marginal tax rates. This is unnecessary: numerous
states rely largely or wholly on foundation systems, which can be generous.

55

In Texas, it would probably be necessary to base both on household incomes and income from oil and
gas property. The state already measures the implied income of oil and gas producers in order to compute their
property value assessments.
56

A foundation aid system based on property values generates more capitalization than one based on
incomes because (a) the foundation grant varies with property values and (b) foundation aid reduces
which affects property values, as we have seen.

47

Texas' Robin Hood scheme unintentionally contained the seeds of its own self-destruction. A
better understanding of how school finance works might lead to the adoption of schemes that are more
efficient, more stable, more equalizing, less burdensome to taxpayers, and –in the long run– more likely
to achieve the goals of school finance.

References
Cullen, Julie Berry, 2003. "The Impact of Fiscal Incentives on Student Disability Rates," Journal of
Public Economics, 87(7-8):1557-89.
Calabreze, Stephen, and Dennis Epple, 2004. "On the Political Economy of Tax Limits," CarnegieMellon typescript.
Epple, Dennis, R. Filimon, and Thomas Romer, 1984. "Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions: Toward
an Integrated Treatment of Voting and Residential Choice," Journal of Public Economics, 24
(August): 281-308.
Feldstein, Martin, 1995. “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the
1986 Tax Reform Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 103 (June), 551-572.
Goolsbee, Austin, 2000. "It's Not About the Money: Why Natural Experiments Don't Work on the Rich,"
in J. Slemrod, ed., Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Hoxby, Caroline M., 1999. "The Productivity of Schools and Other Local Public Goods Producers,"
Journal of Public Economics, 74, No. 1 (November), 1-30.
Hoxby, Caroline M., 2001. "All School Finance Equalizations Are Not Created Equal," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 116, No. 4 (November), 1189-1231.
Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts, various years. School and Appraisal Districts' Property Value
Study, Final Reports for years 1989 through 2002, Preliminary Report for 2003.

48

Texas Education Agency, Division of Performance Reporting, 2004. Academic Excellence Indicator
System, 1993-94 through 2002-03. Electronic files.
Texas Education Agency, Division of State Funding, 2004. Summary of Finances, 1984-85 through
2002-03. Electronic files.
Texas Education Agency, Division of Special Education, 2002. A Guide to the Admission, Review, and
Dismissal Process. Austin, TX: Texas Education Agency.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1983. Census of Population and
Housing, 1980: Summary Tape File 3f, School Districts. Electronic file. Washington, DC:
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census [producer]. Ann Arbor, MI:
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2003. School District Demographics.
Electronic files. Washington, DC: United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the
Census.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 2004. Intercensal Estimates of the
Resident Population of States and Counties. 1980 to 1999. Electronic files. Washington, DC:
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Analysis
Division, 2003. Gross State Product by Industry. 1980 to 2002. Electronic files. Washington,
DC: United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis.
United States Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics. School District Data
Book: 1990 Census School District Special Tabulation. Arlington, VA: The MESA Group,
1994.
United States Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, 2003. Annual Energy Review
2002.

49

Figure 1

Figure 2

50

Figure 3

Figure 4

51

Figure 5

Figure 6

52

Figure 7

Figure 8

53

Figure 9

Figure 10

54

Figure 11

55

Figure 12

56

Figure 13

57

Figure 14

Figure 15

58

Figure 16

Figure 17

59

Figure 18

Figure 19

60

Figure 20

Figure 21

61

Figure 22

62
Table 1
Parameters of Texas' School Finance System, Before and After Robin Hood
for Exemplary Property-Poor and Property-Rich Districts

Median Family Income in 1989 a

District
Edgewood
(Bexar County)
Alamo Heights
(Bexar County)
Marginal Tax Price

District

Edgewood
(Bexar County)
Alamo Heights
(Bexar County)

Before
Robin
Hood

After
Robin
Hood
Intended
Actual
(no effects of
(includes
endogenous
effects of
capitalization) capitalization)

Tax Rate
(mils)
Before Robin Hood

After Robin Hood

$22,945

9.8

15.0

$53,078

12.4

15.0

Lump Sum Transfer:
Foundation Aid Per Pupil
Minus
Effective Lump Sum Confiscated Per Pupila
Before
After
Robin
Robin
Hood
Hood
Intended
Actual
(no effects of
(includes
endogenous
effects of
capitalization) capitalization)

District Keeps This Share of the Change in
Property Taxes W hen Its Property Values
Change (
)
Before
Robin
Hood

After
Robin
Hood
Intended
Actual
(no effects of
(includes
endogenous
effects of
capitalization) capitalization)

1.00

0.11

0.11

$3,187

$3,740

$3,732

0.33

0.00

0.00

1.00

2.56

1.39

0

-15,041

-3,573

1.00

0.00

0.00

a. 2002 dollars, adjusted using Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index.
Notes: Edgewood is a property-poor district that was in the lowest 5 percent of property value per student before Robin Hood. Alamo Heights is a property-rich
district that was in the highest 5 percent of property value per student before Robin Hood. 1988-89 is the"before" year for Robin Hood. It is best because it
predates all changes in school finance legislation. 1997 is a fairly typical year "after" the full implementation of Robin Hood: we could substitute 1994 through
1996 without changing the substance of the table. The source is authors' calculations based on United States Department of Education (1994), Texas Education
Agency, Summary of Finances (various years).

63
Table 2
Parameters of Texas' School Finance System, Before and After Robin Hood, for 20 Quantiles of the Property W ealth Distribution
Marginal Tax Price
Lump Sum Transfer:
District Keeps This Share of the Change in
Foundation Aid Per Pupil Minus
Property Taxes W hen Its Property Values
Effective Lump Sum Confiscation Per Pupila
Change (
)
Quantile (of property
Before Robin
After Robin
Before Robin
After Robin
Before Robin
After Robin
wealth per pupil)
Hood
Hood (Actualb)
Hood
Hood (Actualb)
Hood
Hood (Actualb)
1=bottom 5%
1.00
0.14
$3,010
$3,676
0.33
0.00
2
1.00
0.19
2,842
3,396
0.36
0.00
3
1.00
0.27
2,727
3,196
0.39
0.00
4
1.00
0.31
2,654
3,082
0.45
0.00
5
1.00
0.39
2,549
2,803
0.47
0.00
6
1.00
0.39
2,529
2,813
0.56
0.00
7
1.00
0.48
2,314
2,440
0.53
0.00
8
1.00
0.52
2,231
2,318
0.55
0.00
9
1.00
0.52
2,159
2,298
0.52
0.00
10
1.00
0.53
2,236
2,331
0.54
0.00
11
1.00
0.56
2,111
2,241
0.56
0.00
12
1.00
0.61
1,968
2,080
0.53
0.01
13
1.00
0.66
1,929
1,917
0.50
0.00
14
1.00
0.73
1,761
1,680
0.59
0.01
15-16 c
1.00
0.85
1,784
22
0.53
0.07
17
1.00
0.95
1,494
-32
0.56
0.09
18
1.00
1.00
1,470
-723
0.60
0.30
19
1.00
1.25
1,082
-873
0.58
0.01
20=top 5%
1.00
1.75
501
-3,350
0.70
0.03
a. 2002 dollars, adjusted using Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index.
b. Actual parameter, meaning that the parameter may reflect capitalization endogenous to Robin Hood.
c. Quantiles 15 and 16 cannot be separated because Houston, a district with very large enrollment, is on the margin between them. Each quantile represents
about 5 percent of the students in Texas (about 150,000 students before Robin Hood). The precise number of students varies slightly from quantile to quantile
because of districts with large enrollment.
Notes: 1988-89 is the"before" year for Robin Hood. It is best because it predates all school finance legislation. 1997 is a fairly typical year "after" the full
implementation of Robin Hood: we could substitute 1994 through 1996 without changing the substance of the table. The column showing the net foundation
aid minus the lump sum captured subtracts the amount captured if the recapture districts are to maintain their per pupil spending. The quantiles are based on
1991 property values and pupils. The table source is authors' calculations based on Texas Education Agency, Summary of Finances (various years).

64
Table 3
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002

Confiscation Threshold
(dollars of day)
$280,000
280,000
280,000
280,000
280,000
295,000
295,000
300,000
305,000

Confiscation Threshold
(2002 dollars)
$339,892
330,525
321,045
313,844
309,031
318,550
308,191
304,743
305,000

Texas Students in Confiscation Districts
5.1
5.2%
6.0
5.8
6.5
6.5
8.3
9.0
10.3

Predicted (in absence of Robin Hood)
Texas Students in Confiscation Districts
11.6
12.8%
13.7
12.8
13.2
17.5
17.3
19.2
22.1

a. 2002 dollars, adjusted using Bureau of Labor Statistics, Consumer Price Index.
The source is authors' calculations based on Texas Education Agency, Summary of Finances (various years), Texas Education Agency, Academic Excellence
Indicator System (various years).

65
Table 4
Effects of "Robin Hood" School Finance Scheme on Property Values

ln(marginal tax price)
if marginal tax price is $1 a

dependent variable: ln(actual property tax base of district)
Simulated Instrumental Variables
Estimates
(Treatment on the Treated Effects)
-0.2483
(0.0211)

Reduced Form Estimates
(Intention to Treat Effects)
-0.1662
(0.0109)

ln(marginal tax price)
if marginal tax price is <1 a

-0.0536
(0.0054)

-0.0448
(0.0045)

ln(virtual lump sum grant)

0.0060
(0.0008)

0.0056
(0.0007)

share of the change in property taxes that district keeps when its property values
change (
)

0.1489
(0.0113)

0.1092
(0.0082)

yes
yes

yes
yes

predicted ln(property tax base of district)
district fixed effects

a. Because a property-rich district facing an marginal tax price below 1 is losing its own money, which it would otherwise have spent, it may value the money
more highly than a property-poor district that pays only a fraction of a dollar for every dollar it receives.
Note: 17,241 observations on 1,013 Texas school districts from 1984 to 2001. Standard errors are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the natural log of
the actual property tax base of a district and has mean 21.5 and standard deviation 1.82. Simulated parameters apply the school finance laws to predicted
property values and thus do not allow endogenous capitalization to affect the results. Predicted property values come from estimates of equation (1) in the text.

66
Table 5
Effects of "Robin Hood" School Finance Scheme on Per Pupil Spending

ln(marginal tax price)
if marginal tax price is $1 a

dependent variable: ln(per pupil spending of district)
Simulated Instrumental Variables
Estimates
(Treatment on the Treated Effects)
-0.0500
(0.0300)

Reduced Form Estimates
(Intention to Treat Effects)
-0.0002
(0.0164)

ln(marginal tax price)
if marginal tax price is <1 a

-0.1356
(0.0093)

-0.1514
(0.0076)

ln(virtual lump sum grant)

0.0090
(0.0010)

0.0094
(0.0010)

share of the change in property taxes that district keeps when its property values
change (
)

-0.0273
(0.0021)

-0.0244
(0.0014)

yes
yes

yes
yes

predicted ln(property tax base of district)
district fixed effects

a. Because a property-rich district facing an marginal tax price below 1 is losing its own money, which it would otherwise have spent on something it valued in
schools, the marginal tax price may have a greater effect on a property-rich district than on a property-poor district, which pays for only a fraction of every dollar
it spends.
Note: 17,241 observations on 1,013 Texas school districts from 1984 to 2001. Standard errors are in parentheses. The dependent variable is the natural log of
the actual property tax base of a district and has mean 21.5 and standard deviation 1.82. Simulated parameters apply the school finance laws to predicted
property values and thus do not allow endogenous capitalization to affect the results. Predicted property values come from estimates of equation (1) in the text.

67
Table 6
Cost - Benefit Indicators for the Robin Hood School Finance Scheme

Benefits of Robin Hood

Remaining School
Spending Gap

0.11 decline in the
$500 decline in the
coefficient of
spending gap between
variation in per-pupil the highest and lowest
spending
quantile a districts

$1,482 per pupil
needed to let every
Texas district at
spending level of top
quantile a districts

a. 20 quantiles are defined based on property value per pupil.
b. Assuming the stock is invested indefinitely with an annual return of 5 percent.

Costs of Robin Hood

as a stock:
$27,000
per pupil

as a flow: b
$1,350
per pupil

68
Appendix Figure 1

Appendix Figure 2

Appendix Figure 3

69
Appendix Table 1
Regression Results: Determinants of the Number of Housing Units in Texas School Districts
Dependent Variable: decadal change in ln(housing units) in district
Coefficient
Standard Error
decadal change in ln(population) in metro area/county
0.927**
0.049
indicator: change is over the 1990s decade
-0.423**
0.063
indicator: district in lowest quantile of property wealth per pupil
0.349**
0.062
indicator: district in quantile 2 of property wealth per pupil
0.616**
0.042
indicator: district in quantile 3 of property wealth per pupil
0.537**
0.034
indicator: district in quantile 4 of property wealth per pupil
0.491**
0.028
indicator: district in quantile 5 of property wealth per pupil
0.462**
0.032
indicator: district in quantile 6 of property wealth per pupil
0.424**
0.042
indicator: district in quantile 7 of property wealth per pupil
0.503**
0.043
indicator: district in quantile 8 of property wealth per pupil
0.393**
0.050
indicator: district in quantile 9 of property wealth per pupil
0.445**
0.045
indicator: district in quantile 10 of property wealth per pupil
0.476**
0.040
indicator: district in quantile 11 of property wealth per pupil
0.524**
0.037
indicator: district in quantile 12 of property wealth per pupil
0.582**
0.044
indicator: district in quantile 13 of property wealth per pupil
0.497**
0.069
indicator: district in quantile 14 of property wealth per pupil
0.527**
0.063
indicator: district in quantiles 15-16 of property wealth per pupil
0.492**
0.040
indicator: district in quantile 17 of property wealth per pupil
0.508**
0.050
indicator: district in quantile 18 of property wealth per pupil
0.632**
0.045
indicator: district in quantile 19 of property wealth per pupil
0.336**
0.071
indicator: district in highest quantile of property wealth per pupil
0.539**
0.029
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 1
0.114
0.107
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 2
-0.048
0.087
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 3
-0.097
0.079
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 4
-0.034
0.075
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 5
-0.036
0.077
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 6
-0.002
0.086
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 7
-0.043
0.088
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 8
0.071
0.095
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 10
-0.055
0.084
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 11
-0.076
0.082
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 12
-0.102
0.088
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 13
-0.024
0.114
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 14
-0.004
0.109
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantiles 15-16
-0.061
0.084
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 17
-0.036
0.094
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 18
-0.156
0.090
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 19
0.211*
0.116
interaction: 1990s decade @ quantile 20
-0.079
0.075
Notes: The observations are at the district level. The decadal changes are 2000 minus 1990 or 1990 minus 1980.
See regression equation in text. ** (*) Coefficient is statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% (10%)
level. The quantiles are based on 1991 property values and pupils. Quantile 9 is the omitted category for the
interaction terms. Quantiles 15 and 16 cannot be separated because Houston, a district with very large enrollment, is
on the margin between them. Each quantile represents about 5 percent of the students in Texas (about 150,000
students before Robin Hood). The precise number of students varies slightly from quantile to quantile because of
districts with large enrollment. The number of housing units comes from census data aggregated to the school
district level: United States Department of Commerce (1983, 2003), United States Department of Education (1994).
The other data sources are Texas Education Agency, Summary of Finances (various years) and United States
Department of Commerce (2004).

