                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  DETERMINANTS OF BUSINESS CYCLE COMOVEMENT:
                              A ROBUST ANALYSIS

                                           Marianne Baxter
                                          Michael Kouparitsas

                                         Working Paper 10725
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10725


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Chicago or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Carrie Jankowski and Faisal Ahmed for excellent
research assistance. We thank an anonymous referee, Dan Aaronson, Eric French, Ayhan Kose and Dan
Sullivan for helpful comments and suggestions. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Marianne Baxter and Michael Kouparitsas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Determinants of Business Cycle Comovement: A Robust Analysis
Marianne Baxter and Michael Kouparitsas
NBER Working Paper No. 10725
August 2004
JEL No. F33, F41

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the determinants of business cycle comovement between countries. Our

dataset includes over 100 countries, both developed and developing. We search for variables that

are “robust” in explaining comovement, using the approach of Leamer (1983). Variables considered

are (i) bilateral trade between countries; (ii) total trade in each country; (iii) sectoral structure; (iv)

similarity in export and import baskets; (v) factor endowments; and (vi) gravity variables. We find

that bilateral trade is robust. However, two variables that the literature has argued are important for

business cycles – industrial structure and currency unions – are found not to be robust.

Marianne Baxter
Department of Economics Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
mbaxter@bu.edu

Michael A. Kouparitsas
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
230 South LaSalle Street
Chicago, IL 60604
mkoup@frbchi.org
1. Introduction

         There is longstanding interest in the channels through which business fluctuations in one
country are transmitted to other countries. It is often said that “When America sneezes, Europe
catches a cold.” But despite the theoretical and empirical analyses to date, it seems fair to say
that there is no consensus on the important determinants of business-cycle comovement. The
difficulty is that there are many potential candidate explanations.

         One leading candidate is trade. Frankel and Rose (1998) present empirical evidence that
higher bilateral trade between two countries is associated with more-correlated business cycles.
Another explanation for business-cycle comovement is similarity in industrial structure. This
linkage has been stressed in a series of papers by Jean Imbs (1998,1999, 2003). A third variable
studied by Rose and Engel (2002) is currency unions. Other variables that may be important for
business-cycle comovement are the following: (i) the extent of total trade in each country; (ii)
factor endowments and (iii) gravity variables such as distance between countries, common
language, adjacency, and so on.1

         Our paper uses a dataset that includes over 100 countries, both developed and
developing. We have collected data for each country on each of the variables described above.
To say something definite about the important determinants of comovement, we use the
“robustness” approach advocated by Leamer (1983), and used so effectively by Levine and
Renelt (1992) in their analysis of growth regressions. With this approach, a variable is said to
be a robust determinant of business-cycle comovement if the variable has a significant
coefficient in a regression when all other potential explanatory variables have had a chance to
“knock the variable out of the equation.”

         Our results are as follows. Nearly all of the variables considered are significant
determinants of trade when considered in isolation. However, there are only a few robust
variables. Bilateral trade is robust: countries that trade more with each other have more-
correlated business cycles. Further, our results indicate that bilateral trade is robust to the

1
  See also papers by Calderon, et al. (2002), Fidrmuc (2002), Kose, et al. (2003), Otto, et al. (2003) and Shin and
Wang (2003). These authors study the determinants of business-cycle synchronization using a variety of country
samples and economic variables. Recent contributions by Kose and Yi (2001,2004) explore the ability of dynamic,
stochastic general equilibrium models to explore various theoretical explanations for the finding that stronger trade
linkages are associated with more-correlated business cycles.


                                                                                                                        2
inclusion of gravity variables, suggesting an independent role for trade in transmitting business
cycles.

          Other variables that are robustly, positively related to business-cycle comovement are (i)
an indicator variable that indicates that both countries are industrialized countries; (ii) an
indicator variable that indicates that both countries are developing countries; (iii) a variable
measuring the distance between the two countries. Variables that are not robust include (i)
measures of industrial similarity; (ii) currency union; (iii) total trade undertaken by the two
countries; (iv) measures of similarity in export and import baskets; and (v) measures of factor
intensity.

          Our finding that sectoral similarity is not robust stands in contrast to recent research by
Imbs (1998,1998, 2003) in which he argues that sectoral similarity is strongly positively related
to business-cycle correlations. Our finding on currency unions challenges much recent research,
initiated by the contribution of Rose and Engel (2002), in which currency union is found to be
related to business cycle comovement. Our results show that this relationship is not robust.




2. Econometric Methodology

          This section describes the econometric methodology used in this paper. Briefly, the
approach is Leamer’s (1983) “Extreme Bounds Analysis” applied to band-pass-filtered data.
The band-pass filter is designed to isolate business-cycle components of the data. We include
country-specific indicator variables to remedy problems associated with using an estimated
variable (the business-cycle correlation) as the dependent variable in our regressions. Readers
may go directly to section 3 if they prefer to skip the econometric details.

2.1 Extreme-Bounds Analysis

          Our analysis will involve regressions of a dependent variable, Y, on various sets of
independent variables. Specifically, Y is a vector of business-cycle GDP correlations Yij

between a pairs of countries i and j. We measure the business-cycle component of quarterly real
GDP using the BP(6,32) filter described by Baxter and King (1999). Other researchers, such as
Frankel and Rose (1998) and Rose and Engel (2002), have employed a variety of filters in their


                                                                                                        3
related investigations. Frequently, the filter used does not matter importantly for the results. We
confine our attention to just one filter because this filter was designed to measure business cycle
correlations, which is the focus of this paper. The other filters, such as the first-difference filter,
do not provide a good measure of the business-cycle frequencies. See Baxter and King (1999)
for more detail.

        The econometric approach that we use is the extreme-bounds analysis (EBA) suggested
by Leamer (1983). The general form of the regression used for the EBA is as follows:

                                    Y = I βi + M β m + Z β z + u                                     (1)

        The independent variables are of three types, as follows. I denotes a set of “always-
included” variables. This set may be empty. The M-variable is the variable which is being
tested for robustness. The Z-variables contain other variables that prior studies have suggested
may be important for business-cycle correlations. The EBA is performed by varying the set of
Z-variables included in the regression for a particular M-variable. From these regressions, the
EBA determined the highest and lowest values of confidence intervals constructed from the
estimated β m . We will say that an M-variable is robust if these highest and lowest values are of
the same sign (that is: this range does not include the value zero which would indicate that the
variable is not significantly related to Y).

2.2 Econometric Issues

        An important econometric problem results from the fact that the econometrician does not
observe the true cross-country business cycle correlations Yij , but instead must use estimated

correlations Yl ij , which may contain measurement error. To make progress on this problem, it is
necessary to make an assumption about the specific form of the measurement error.

        We follow the approach taken by many cross-section analyses of large samples in
specifying a fixed-effects model:

                                           Yl ij = Yij + Vi + V j ,
                                           E(Vi ) = αi ,



                                                                                                          4
where Vi is the fixed effect for country i.2 Substituting this into the EBA model above yields the

following regression model with a typical equation for correlation pair i and j:

                                Yl ij = I ij β i + M ij β m + Z ij β z + Vi + V j + U ij ,
                                E (Vi ) = α i ,
                                    i ij ) = E (V jU ij ) = 0,
                                E (VU
                                E (U ijU kl ) = σ 2 if i = k and j = l , 0 otherwise

This model can be estimated by OLS where indicator variables are used to capture the country
fixed effects.




3. Theory, Measurement and Results

         The goal of this paper is to determine which economic and geographic variables are
robustly correlated with business-cycle comovement. In order to interpret the results, it is useful
to consider the findings in light of existing theory. At the heart of the issue lie two basic
questions. First, why are there business cycles? Second, why are business cycles correlated
across countries?
         The generally accepted answer to the first question is that business cycles occur because
something—random or deliberate--disturbs the steady evolution of an economy along its long-
run path. The disturbances may be fiscal policies, monetary policies, changes in technological
‘know-how,’ or even the weather. Stockman (1988) found that sectoral shocks and national
shocks were both important impulses to business cycles. Subsequently, a large literature
developed seeking to determine the sources of shocks to national business cycles.3 On the
theoretical side, there is a large literature of open economy models which study the business-
cycle effects of various shocks. Many of these are cited in the survey by Baxter (1995).


2
  An alternative approach, utilized by Clark and van Wincoop (2001) and Imbs (2003), assumes a random effects
model. There are two advantages to assuming a fixed effects model. First, unlike the random effects model the fixed
effects model is robust to measurement error that is correlated with the dependent variables, which is likely to be the
case in our EBA analysis. Second, given the large sample size of our EBA regressions random effects is
computationally burdensome and from a time perspective not feasible given the large number of regressions we
must run.
3
  Contributions include papers by Norrbin and Schlagenhauf (1996), Gregory, Head and Reynauld (1997), Gregory
and Head (1999), Clark and Shin (2000), Lumsdaine and Prasad (2003), and Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2003).


                                                                                                                     5
       The second question—what causes cross-country correlation between business cycles—
has also received substantial attention. The correlation and transmission of business cycles
depends on the sources of the disturbances: are the shocks industry-specific or nation-specific?
Further, the degree of interconnectedness of the two countries matters. Countries with open
capital markets will respond similarly to disturbances which change the world interest rate.
Countries that are willing and able to use monetary and fiscal policies may be able to insulate
their countries against particular types of shocks, as originally suggested by Mundell (1961).
       At present, however, there is no single model that can be said to successfully explain why
some countries experience business-cycle comovement while others do not. Similarly, there is
no consensus on the predominant sources of shocks to national and international business cycles.
This is precisely why we are conducting the present, primarily empirical exercise. Our goal is to
isolate those factors that appear to be robustly related to business-cycle correlation.

       This section describes in detail the measurement of variables used in our investigation.
We have grouped these variables into several sub-groups, according to the economic
phenomenon that the variable is intended to measure. The details of the data sources and
variable definitions are presented in Appendix A. We will consider measures of international
trade, industrial structure, factor endowments, and currency union. We will also consider the so-
called “gravity variables”—exogenous characteristics of country pairs that have been shown to
explain a great deal of bilateral trade. The results reported in the text of the paper have all been
estimated with country fixed effects. For the interested reader, we have reported complete
results without country fixed effects in Appendix B. The results are quite insensitive to the
removal of the country fixed effects.

       Table 1 presents the correlation coefficients among all the variables used in our study.
The first column of the table contains the correlations between the business-cycle correlation and
the other variables. The variables are grouped according to the phenomenon they capture:
bilateral trade intensity, total trade intensity, etc. The details of the construction of each variable
are explained in the subsections below, and we will refer back to this table frequently. The
within-group correlations are shaded for ease of reference. We turn now to a detailed
consideration of each group of variables.

3.1 Gravity variables


                                                                                                       6
           In the existing literature, there is abundant evidence that the gravity variables can explain
bilateral trade.4 Further, several recent papers have shown that bilateral trade is trade is related
to business-cycle comovement.5 We begin the empirical analysis by studying the relationship
between business-cycle comovement and the exogenous gravity variables: adjacency, distance,
common language, population variables, total land, and indicator variables for two industrialized
countries and two developing countries.

           Table 2-A presents a regression of the business-cycle correlation on a typical set of
gravity variables, ignoring country fixed effects. Variables significant at the 10% level include
adjacency, distance, minimum population, the land variables and dummies indicating both
industrial and both developing countries.

           For comparison with our later results, Table 2-B presents results that combine the gravity
variables with country fixed effects. Including the country fixed effects leads to collinearity
between pairs of gravity variables that measure maximum and minimum values of a particular
variable. Thus Table 2-B includes only one variable from each pair of this type—we choose the
“minimum” value. We find that adjacency, common language, distance, minimum population
and industrial country indicator are all significant.

           In our analysis of the other variables, we use the gravity variables in two ways. First, we
allow the gravity variables to act as Z-variables in the EBA regressions. Second, we use the set
of gravity variables as I-variables (always-included variables) in the EBA regressions. The point
of including gravity variables as I-variables is to control for that part of business-cycle
comovement that is strictly exogenous to the country pair. Overall, our results are affected very
little by whether the gravity variables are Z-variables or I-variables.




3.2 Bilateral trade

           The relationship between trade and business cycles has received a great deal of attention,
both in theoretical and empirical work. At the heart of this lies the question of why countries


4
    See Frankel and Rose (1998).
5
    See Frankel and Rose (1998), Imbs (1998, 1999, 2003), and Clark and van Wincoop (2001).


                                                                                                       7
trade in the first place. The secondary question, which cannot be addressed until the first
question is answered, is “how does trade affect business cycles?”
        Classical Ricardian theory explains trade as resulting from the fact that trade permits
exploitation of gains from greater specialization. Modern theories that have a strongly Ricardian
flavor include those by Baxter (1992), Eaton and Kortum (2002), and Alvarez and Lucas (2004).
Models in which the gains from trade arise from increasing returns to scale are summarized in
Helpman and Krugman (1985). In all these theories, increased trade results in increased sectoral
specialization.
        What are the implications of increases in trade and specialization for international
business cycles? If the primary disturbances are sector-specific, then specialization should lead
to decreased business-cycle correlation. On the other hand, trade may act as a conduit for the
transmission of shocks that affect all industries. In this case, increased trade would lead to
increased business cycle correlation.
        The empirical relationship between trade and business cycles has been studied by several
authors, beginning with work by Canova and Dellas (1993). Frankel and Rose (1998) found that
bilateral trade was positively related to business-cycle comovement. Clark and van Wincoop
(2001) also find that higher trade is related to more-highly-correlated business cycles. Gruben, et
al. (2002) explore alternative econometric procedures and also include variables measuring the
structure of trade. All these studies all conclude that trade is strongly, positively correlated with
business cycle comovement.6

        We construct four measures of bilateral trade intensity. The measures differ from one
another in two ways: (i) the date at which the measure is calculated; we use both the beginning
date and the ending date; and (ii) the scale variable used to normalize the bilateral trade measure:
we use total trade and also aggregate GDP across the two countries.

        The measure BT1 is defined as


                                             xij + mij + x ji + m ji
                                  BT 1ij =
                                              xi + mi + x j + m j

6
 Frankel and Rose also study an instrumental-variables version of the regression in which gravity variables are used
as instruments for bilateral trade. They find that the coefficient estimates are larger with instrumental-variables
estimation.


                                                                                                                   8
where xij is the 1970 (beginning of sample) value of exports from country i to country j, mij is the

1970 value of imports from country i to country j, xi is the 1970 value of country i’s exports to

all countries and mi is the 1970 value of country i’s imports from all countries. The measure
BT3 uses the same formula as BT1, except that 1995 (end of sample) values are used. Measures
BT1 and BT3 are very similar to the “preferred measure” used by Frankel and Rose (1998).

       The measures BT2 and BT4 are constructed according to the following formula, where
BT2 uses 1970 values and BT4 uses 1995 values, and where yi is the value of country i’s GDP:

                                                 xij + mij + x ji + m ji
                             BT 2ij , BT 4ij =                             .
                                                        yi + y j
In summary, BT1 and BT3 express bilateral trade as a fraction of total trade, at the beginning and
end of the sample period, respectively. The variables BT2 and BT4 express bilateral trade as a
fraction of aggregate GDP in the two countries, at the beginning and end of the sample period.

       3.2.1 A First Look

       The measure BT1 is our preferred measure of bilateral trade, for two reasons. First, it
measures trade at the beginning of the sample, which we will compare to business-cycle
correlation over the subsequent sample period. Thus the direction of causality is clear. Second,
we prefer the measure that uses total trade as the scale variable, rather than total GDP.

       Figure 1 is a scatter plot showing the extent of bilateral trade at the beginning of the
sample (measure BT1) on the horizontal axis, and the corresponding business-cycle correlation
on the vertical axis. Each country-pair is a point on this plot. The univariate regression line of
the business-cycle correlation, denoted y, on the BT1 measure of bilateral trade, denoted x, is
indicated by the heavy solid line on the graph. The details of this univariate regression are also
given. The slope is positive and significant, although the R-square is only 0.034. Some of the
outliers are labeled.. For the most part, those country pairs that have both high bilateral trade and
high business-cycle correlation are ones where this relationship might be expected. For example,
the US and Canada have the highest bilateral trade measure, and also have highly correlated
business cycles. Other country pairs of this type include Singapore/Malaysia, US/Japan and


                                                                                                     9
France/Germany. One might worry that the outliers are responsible for the positive estimated
slope coefficient. However, there are over 5000 observations plotted on this graph. If we
remove the 20 observations for which BT1 exceeds 0.10, the slope coefficient actually rises and
is still significant. Thus the positive relationship is not due to a few extreme observations.

        3.2.2 Testing for Robustness

        Table 3 presents the results of the base regressions for each of the four bilateral trade
variables, together with the extreme bounds analysis for these variables. The top panel of the
table conducts the analysis with no “always-included” variables. For each bilateral trade
variable, we report the coefficients ( β m ' s ) with the highest and lowest confidence intervals. We

also present the standard error of β m in each case, the t-statistic for the null hypothesis that

β m = 0 , the number of observations, and the R-square of the regression. In the second-to-last
column we report the other variables (the Z-variables) in the regression that yielded the high/low
estimates. The final column reports on the robustness of the M-variable. The variable is said to
be robustly correlated with cyclic comovement if the high and low values of all confidence
intervals for the estimated β m ' s are of the same sign.

        The bottom panel of the table contains results for which the gravity variables are
“always-included” I-variables. The gravity variables are: adjacency, distance, common
language, population variables, total land, and indicator variables for two industrialized countries
and two developing countries. The purpose of having the gravity variables always-included is to
control for that part of business-cycle correlation which can be viewed as exogenous.

        The reason for including the gravity variables is as follows. In the existing literature,
there is abundant evidence that the gravity variables can explain bilateral trade, and that trade is
related to business-cycle comovement. This raises a natural question of whether there is anything
left for variables such as bilateral trade, industrial structure, or monetary union to explain, once
the exogenous gravity variables are included in the regression.

        Looking first at the base regressions with no always-included variables, we find
that all four measures of bilateral trade intensity have positive coefficients which are




                                                                                                    10
statistically significant.7 These variables continue to be significant in the base
regressions even when the gravity variables are included (bottom panel of Table 3). This
is somewhat surprising, as the gravity variables have long been known to be very good at
explaining the extent of bilateral trade. We expected that including the gravity variables
might eliminate the statistical significance of the bilateral trade variables, but this is not
the case.

        We turn now to the “robustness” tests—the extreme bounds analysis (EBA).
Throughout, we use a 10% critical value. All four measures of bilateral trade intensity
are robust when there are no always-included variables. When the gravity variables are
included, only one of the four measures continues to be robust. The robust measure is
BT1, which is our preferred measure for reasons given above. In all cases, the sign of the
coefficient on bilateral trade is positive, indicating that higher levels of bilateral trade are
associated with higher business-cycle correlation. Comparing the coefficients on the
trade variables with and without the gravity variables included, we find that including the
gravity variables reduces the size of the estimated coefficient in all cases, by
approximately 30-50%.




3.3 Extent of Total Trade

        The next variable we consider is the extent of total trade carried out by the pair of
countries. In contrast to the bilateral trade measure, the total trade measure is intended to capture
the general “openness” of the two countries.8 Just “openness” may matter; it may not be
important how much bilateral trade there is, rather, the total amount of trade may be important.
This variable may capture the flow of technological transmission that occurs through trade in
general, not with a specific trading partner. Another possibility is that the extent of total trade is a
good measure of the extent to which the country is exposed to global shocks. Thus it is possible
that higher trade, in the aggregate, leads to more-highly-correlated business cycles.


7
  The base regressions include country fixed effects, while the regressions in the scatter plots do not. Thus the
coefficient estimates differ between the two specifications.
8
  Many empirical investigations that wish to measure the openness of an economy use the amount of total trade as a
proxy for openness.


                                                                                                                11
        3.3.1 A first look

        Figure 2 presents a scatter plot of total trade against business-cycle correlation. The
specific measure of total trade plotted here is TT1, defined as


                                             xi + mi + x j + m j
                                   TT1ij =
                                                  yi + y j

where xi and mi denote total exports and imports, respectively, for country i, measured at the
beginning of the sample in 1970. We also construct an end-of-sample measure, TT2, using 1995
data.

        Figure 2 shows that there is a positive, significant relationship between total trade and
business-cycle correlation. For most countries, total trade is a very small fraction of GDP, and
this is reflected in the “cloud” of observations clustered between 0.00 and 0.25 on the TT1 axis.
Further, the R-square of 0.0042 is extremely small.

        3.3.2 Testing for robustness

        Table 4 presents the detailed results for the two measures of total trade. In the base
regressions, the coefficient is always negative, and also significant. Considered in isolation,
higher total trade is associated with lower business-cycle correlation. It is difficult to think of a
good economic reason why this ought to be the case. However, the EBA shows that the total
trade variables are fragile, whether or not the gravity variables are included. Once other
variables are considered, there is no independent role for total trade in explaining business-cycle
correlation.




3.4 Similarity of Industrial Structure

        If the primary business-cycle shocks are sector-specific, then countries with
greater similarity in sectoral structure would tend to have more-correlated business
cycles, other things equal. Stockman (1988) showed that sectoral shocks were one
important impulse to business cycles. In a sequence of empirical papers, Imbs (1998,


                                                                                                    12
1999, 2003) has presented results showing that similarity of industrial structure is
significantly, positively related to business-cycle correlations. In his 1998 paper, using
quarterly data for 21 OECD countries, Imbs finds that bilateral trade is not important for
business cycles once country fixed effects are included.

       We will study six measures of industrial similarity. These measures have been
chosen for comparability with existing research. We have also tried to include several
alternative, reasonable methods for defining industrial similarity. Our first measure of
industrial similarity, suggested by Shea (1996) and used by Imbs (1998, 1999), is the
correlation of sectoral shares:


                                                     N

                                                  ∑s             s
                                                              in jn
                              ISC1ij =            n =1
                                                                                      .
                                              N                      N

                                              ∑s ∑s
                                              n =1
                                                         2
                                                         in
                                                                     n =1
                                                                                 2
                                                                                 jn




where ‘sectors’ are defined as one of seven sub-sectors of aggregate GDP

The variable ISC1 takes on values in the interval [0,1]. Greater similarity in sectoral structure
leads to larger values of ISC1. If sin = s jn so that sectoral shares of each industry are the same

across countries, ISC1 is equal to 1.
       Some studies look only at the structure of manufacturing, so we define a comparable
measure for manufacturing alone. Our manufacturing index ISC2 uses 3-digit-level
manufacturing data for 30 industries, defined as:
                                                            N

                                                         ∑s              s
                                                                     in jn
                                  ISC 2ij =              n =1
                                                                                           .
                                                     N                       N

                                                  ∑s ∑s
                                                     n =1
                                                                2
                                                                in
                                                                            n =1
                                                                                      2
                                                                                      jn




where the industry subscripts, n, now refer to manufacturing industries.
       The next measure of industrial similarity is:

                                      ISS1ij = 1 − ∑ ( sin − s jn )
                                                                 N
                                                                                               2

                                                                n =1




                                                                                                    13
where sin is the sector-n fraction of GDP of country i. If sin = s jn so that sectoral shares of

each industry are the same across countries, ISS1 is equal to one. More generally, higher levels
of sectoral similarity result in higher values of ISS1. We also construct ISS2, which is the
corresponding measure using manufacturing data.
       Finally, we construct a third pair of measures similar to those used by Clark and van
Wincoop (2001) and Imbs (2003). This measure of sectoral similarity uses absolute values of
differences in sectoral shares:
                                                   N
                                      ISA1ij = 1 − ∑ sin − s jn
                                                  n =1




If sin = s jn so that sectoral shares of each industry are the same across countries, ISA1 is equal

to one. ISA2 uses the same definition applied to manufacturing data. As with all our measures,
higher values of ISA1 and ISA2 indicate greater similarity in industrial structure.
       We refer back to Table 1 to look at the correlations among these variables. This table
shows that there is low correlation between a particular measure constructed from GDP data and
the same measure constructed from manufacturing data. Specifically, the correlation between
ISS1 and ISS2 is 0.29; the correlation between ISA1 and ISA2 is 0.30, and the correlation
between ISC1 and ISC2 is 0.23. Since these correlations are low, we will allow the
manufacturing measures as Z-variables in regressions where a corresponding GDP measure is
the M-variable, and vice-versa (e.g., ISS1 and ISS2; ISA1 and ISA2; and ISC1 and ISC2).
However, the correlations among all the GDP measures is high (in absolute value), as are the
correlations among the manufacturing measures. Thus, if one GDP measure, (e.g., ISC1) is an
M-variable, then other GDP measures (e.g., ISS1 or ISA1) will not be included as Z-variables.

       3.4.1 A first look

       Figure 3 presents a scatter plot of ISC1 and business-cycle correlation. There is
considerable dispersion in the scatter plot. A glance at the points themselves does not obviously
imply any relationship between these variables. The solid line is the estimated regression line
from a regression of the business-cycle correlation on ISC1. The details of the estimate are
shown on the graph. The estimate of the slope coefficient is 0.17, with a standard error of 0.03.



                                                                                                   14
The R-square of the regression is 0.013. Thus, industrial structure is indeed significantly,
positively related to business-cycle correlation when considered in isolation.

         3.4.2 Testing for robustness

        Table 5 presents the results of the EBA for the industrial similarity variables. The “base”
regressions show that each of the six measures of industrial similarity has a positive and
significant coefficient when considered alone. This is true whether the gravity variables are
included or not. The coefficient estimates in these base regressions range from 0.11 to 0.36.
Thus, taking the high estimate of 0.36, an increase in sectoral correlation from, say, 0.30 to 0.50
would be accompanied by an increase in the business-cycle correlation of 0.20*0.36=0.072.
This is not a large increase, but still of economic interest if it is robust.
        However, the EBA finds that all the industrial structure variables are fragile, independent
of whether the gravity variables are included as I-variables. Although most of the point
estimates of the coefficients are always positive, the confidence intervals for the “low” estimates
include negative numbers.
        To try to understand what may be leading to the fragility, we look at the “other
variables”—the Z-variables—included in the “low” regressions. In the top panel, with no
always-included variables, we find that bilateral trade variables appear in 5 of the 6 “low”
regressions in which the industrial structure variable is not statistically significant. Trade
similarity variables appear in 3 regressions, while a factor endowment variable (one or more of
MAXK, MINK, MINED, MAXED, described in detail in the next section) appears in all 6. The
indicator for developing countries appears twice, while the indicator for the developed countries
appears once.
        When we look at the regressions with the gravity variables always-included, we find that
the bilateral trade variables do not appear in any of the extreme-value regressions (neither “high”
nor “low”). Factor endowment variables measuring labor and capital again appear in all six
regressions, as do trade similarity measures. Total trade variables appear in two regressions.
The developing/industrialized indicators are included in the I-variables and therefore were not
considered as Z-variables.
        What can we infer from this pattern of Z-variables in the regressions that lead to the
result of fragility? Broadly, it appears that inclusion of factor-endowment variables, especially



                                                                                                    15
endowments of labor and capital, reduce the influence of industrial structure to insignificant
levels. Traditional Heckscher-Ohlin theory predicts a strong relationship between factor
endowments and the sectoral structure of production. Other trade theories, notably modern
Ricardian theories in which factor accumulation is endogenous, predict a strong relationship
between the production structure and the relative supplies of factors in the economy.9 Thus it
may not be surprising that including factor endowments leads to fragility of the industrial
structure variables. Bilateral trade and the structure of trade also appear frequently in regressions
with insignificant coefficient estimates for industrial structure. Again, all trade theories predict a
tight relationship between factor endowments, production, and the extent and type of trade.
Nevertheless, we found (in Section 3.2 above) that bilateral trade was robustly related to
business-cycle correlation, even when the Z-variables included industrial structure, factor
endowments, trade structure, etc. The results of this section are that industrial structure is not
similarly robust.


3.5 Similarity in Baskets of Traded Goods
           We considered similarity in baskets of traded goods as one possible economic variable
that could be related to business-cycle comovement across countries. For example, if countries
export and/or import similar baskets of goods, then they would be affected similarly by shocks to
the world prices of their import and export goods. In addition, countries with similar baskets of
traded goods would be affected similarly in the event of sector-specific shocks hitting their
export and/or import sectors.
           For completeness, we define nine measures of trade similarity: three groups of three
measures each. The three groups parallel the three groups used for the industrial similarity
measures. The first group uses a correlation coefficient, identified by the mnemonic TSC. The
second group uses square of differences in sectoral shares, identified by the mnemonic TSS. The
third group uses the absolute values of differences in sectoral shares, identified by the mnemonic
TSA. Within each group, we construct a measure comparing (i) total export shares using 2-digit
SITC data for all country pairs , denoted by “1” as the last digit of the variable name; (ii) total
import shares using 2-digit SITC data for all country pairs, denoted by “2” as the last digit of the
variable name; and (iii) bilateral export shares using 2 digit SITC data for all country pairs,

9
    See Baxter (1992).


                                                                                                      16
denoted by “3” as the last digit. Thus, TSC3 refers to the correlation coefficient measure of trade
similarity (TSC), using data bilateral export shares (“3”).

       The correlation matrix reported in Table 1 shows that there is high correlation between
(i) TSS1, TSA1 and TSC1; (ii) TSS2, TSA2 and TSC2; and (iii) TSS3, TSA3 and TSC3.
Correlation (in absolute value) is small among other pairs of the trade similarity variables. To
avoid multicollinearity we select variables for the regressions as follows. When the M-variable
is TSS1 trade similarity variables from the same group are permitted as Z-variables (i.e, TSS2
and TSS3), while the highly-collinear variables TSA1, TSC1 are excluded from the set of Z-
variables. A similar rule is used for the other variable groups.


       3.5.1 A first look
       Figure 4 presents a scatter plot of TSC3 and the business-cycle correlation. A glance at
the highly dispersed scatter gives a general impression that there is no relationship between these
variables. However, there is a weak, but significant, negative relationship between the similarity
of the structure of bilateral trade (TSC3) and the business-cycle correlation.


       3.5.2 Robustness analysis
       As described above, we constructed nine measures of similarity in traded goods,
comprising three sets of three different measures. The three sets are distinguished by the basket
of goods considered. The first uses total exports, the second uses total imports, and the third uses
bilateral exports. Within each set, there are three measures which are constructed in a manner
analogous to the three measures of industrial similarity.
       Table 6 presents the robustness analysis for the trade-similarity variables. Looking first
at the “base” regressions, we find that most of the trade-similarity variables are not significant,
even without the addition of Z-variables. All the coefficients but one are positive, but very
small. Less than half are significant.

       The EBA analysis finds that none of the trade-similarity variables is robust. This finding
is independent of whether the gravity variables are included as Z-variables. The Z-variables that
appear in the “low” regressions include industrial similarity variables and bilateral trade
variables. Apparently, given observations on industrial similarity and bilateral trade, there is



                                                                                                      17
nothing to be added by including trade similarity as an explanatory variable for business cycle
correlation. Given the tight link between these three variables that is implied by trade theory,
this finding is perhaps not very surprising.




3.6 Factor Endowments

        Most theories of interacting economies predict a significant relationship among
factor endowments, trade, and business-cycle comovement. This would be true of
standard Heckscher-Ohlin theory, and would also be true of Ricardian theories. Hybrid
models that combine elements of monopolistic competition in manufacturing with
competitive markets in other goods would also imply a relationship among these
variables. We consider three factors of production: human capital (measured as log of
years of education); log of physical capital per worker, and log of arable land per worker.
In each case, we consider variables measuring the minimum value of the variable
between the two countries, as well as the maximum value of the variable.10

        3.6.1 A first look

        We begin by taking a closer look at one particular measure of factor endowments:
a variable measuring the log of the minimum education level between the two countries,
MINED. Figure 5 presents a scatter plot of this variable against the business-cycle
correlation. The scatter plot reflects the fact that MINED takes on several discrete
values. The estimated univariate regression line shows a positive and significant
relationship. The higher is the minimum education level between the two countries, the
higher is the business-cycle correlation between the two countries. However, the scatter
is highly dispersed, and the R-square of the regression is only about 0.04. Clearly,


10
  As noted earlier, the inclusion of country fixed effects leads to collinearity between maximum and
minimum measures of a given economic variable. For completeness we report the results for all variables.
However, it will be apparent that the coefficients on the minimum M-variables have equal and opposite
signs from the corresponding maximum variables.




                                                                                                           18
MINED does not explain a great deal of the cross-sectional variance in the business-cycle
correlation.

       3.6.2 Robustness analysis

       Table 7 presents the complete results for the factor endowment variables. We
begin by looking at the top panel which summarizes results with no Z-variables.
Education and capital variables are all significant in the base regressions

       The minimum-education variable (MINED) has a positive and significant
coefficient, while the maximum-education variable (MAXED) has a negative and
significant coefficient. Similarly, the minimum-capital variable (MINK) is positive and
significant, while the maximum-capital variable (MAXK) is negative and significant. By
contrast, the land variables are not significant, although they show the same pattern in the
signs of the coefficients: positive for minimum-land (MINL) and negative for maximum
land (MAXL).

       In the bottom panel, showing results for which the gravity variables are Z-
variables, we find the same pattern of signs of the coefficients. However, the magnitudes
of the coefficients are reduced by half or more, and the variables are no longer
significant, except for the two capital variables.

       The EBA reveals that none of the factor-endowment variables is robust,
independently of the inclusion of Z-variables. Variables that appear in the “high” and
“low” regressions include total trade, industrial similarity, other factor intensity variables
(notably capital and education), bilateral trade, and trade similarity. There is thus no
clear pattern that can explain why the factor endowment variables fail to be robust.




3.7 Currency Union

       Since Mundell (1961), economists and policymakers have been interested in the
economic requirements for, and effects of, currency union. More recently, the formation of the
European Monetary Union in 1999 has led to abundant research on the effects that currency



                                                                                                 19
unions have on trade and business-cycle characteristics of member countries. Frankel and Rose
(1998) point out that countries with more-similar business cycles are more natural candidates for
membership in a common-currency area. Further, the currency union itself might change the
nature of bilateral business cycles. Theories of the way in which this might happen are
summarized in more detail in papers by Frankel and Rose (1998, 2002). Most theories predict
that a common currency will reduce intra-union barriers to trade and will thereby lead to greater
intra-union trade in goods and capital. However, the theories differ in their predictions for the
effect of this increased trade on business-cycle comovement. Increased trade will lead to
reduced comovement if the result of increased trade is greater specialization in a setting with
shocks that are predominantly industry-specific. Increased trade will lead to increased
comovement if the main source of shocks are demand shocks that are common across countries.
One source of shocks might be the common monetary policy.

       Most recent empirical evidence suggests that currency union leads to increased business-
cycle correlation among member countries. Kim (1995) shows that the industrial structure of the
50 U.S. states has become much more alike in the 90 years following the formation of the U.S.
common currency area (U.S. Federal Reserve System), which suggests regions do not specialize
in the production of goods under a currency union. Rose and Engel (2002) estimate the effect of
currency unions on between business cycle comovement. They find that the coefficient on the
currency unions is positive. However, significance of this coefficient is not robust to the changes
in the set of additional explanatory variables.

       Table 8 presents the robustness analysis for the currency union variable. Because the
currency union variable is a binary (dummy) variable, we do not present a scatter plot of this
variable against the business-cycle correlation (as we did for all other variables). Table 8 shows
that the currency union variable carries a significant coefficient in the base regression when the
gravity variables are not included. The estimated coefficient in the base coefficient is 0.08,
implying that membership in a currency union increases the business-cycle correlation by 0.08.
The coefficient on the currency union variable is not significant in the base regression that
includes the gravity variables as Z-variables. The point estimate has dropped to 0.03, and the
standard error is also 0.03.




                                                                                                    20
       Currency union is found to be fragile in the extreme-bounds analysis. The “high” and
“low” values of the confidence intervals are similar whether or not the gravity variables are
included as Z-variables. The Z-variables that lead to the “high” estimates are industrial
similarity (ISC1, ISC2); and trade similarity, TSC3. The Z-variables found in the “low”
regressions are total trade (TT1), industrial similarity (ISA1), and the minimum-education
variables (MINED).

       In summary, we find that currency union is not a robust predictor of business-cycle
correlation. Currency union is only a significant predictor of business cycle correlation if other
variables are not included in the regression.




3.8 A Return to the Gravity Variables

       It is well-known that a large fraction of bilateral trade can be explained, in a statistical
sense, by a set of “gravity variables” which include distance between countries, indicator
variables for common language and adjacency, and variables which measure the difference the
countries levels of GDP. To this point, the gravity variables have been included in the analysis
as a set of “always-included” variables, the results of which are shown in the bottom panel of
Tables 3-8. It is notable that the robustness results obtained for the other variables have been
largely invariant to whether the gravity variables were included or not. In this section, we
investigate whether the any of the gravity variables is a robust explanatory variable for business-
cycle correlation.

       3.8.1 A first look

       The distance between two countries is one variable that is routinely included in “gravity
regressions” for which bilateral trade is the dependent variable. Many of our gravity variables
are binary (dummy) variables, but distance is not. Thus it is a good candidate for graphing in a
scatter plot. Figure 6 plots the log of distance against the business-cycle correlation. As in all of
our graphs, the scatter is very diffuse. The estimated regression equation shows that there is a
significant negative relationship between distance and business-cycle correlation. Countries that
are located closer to each other have, other things equal, more-highly-correlated business cycles.



                                                                                                      21
There are many reasons to expect that this would be the case. For example, regional shocks to
weather would affect countries similarly if they are located near each other. Countries trade
more if they are located closer together (this is why the gravity equations work so well in the first
place), and if shocks are transmitted through trade, then we would expect distance to be related
to business-cycle comovement. However, we might also wonder whether there is anything left
for distance to explain, once bilateral trade is taken into account. The EBA allows us to answer
precisely these types of questions.

       3.8.2 Robustness analysis

       Table 9 presents the EBA of the gravity variables. We have included maximum-GDP
and minimum-GDP variables as potential Z-variables, since these are frequently used in gravity
regressions. We have not included them previously as I-variables since they cannot be viewed as
exogenous with respect to the various M-variables.

       Our findings are as follows. The log of distance is found to be robustly, negatively
related to business-cycle correlation. Since the coefficient on distance is negative, it is the
“high” regression for which the confidence interval comes closest to including the value of zero.
In this regression, we find bilateral trade (BT3) as one of the Z-variables. This is in line with
our intuition that distance may affect business-cycle correlation through its effect on bilateral
trade. But, we also find that distance is significant even after bilateral trade is taken into account.

       There are only two other robust gravity variables: these are the indicator variables for (i)
two industrialized countries; and (ii) two developing countries. The coefficient is positive in
each case. This means that the business-cycle correlation is higher if the countries are of similar
“types”—both developing or both industrialized. The business-cycle correlation is lower if one
country is developing and one is developed. To the extent that intra-industry trade drives trade
between industrialized countries, and to the extent that sectoral shocks predominate, we might
expect the finding for industrialized countries. However, we view the finding for developing
countries as surprising and worth further thought and analysis.

       The other gravity variables are all fragile. These include adjacency; common language;
minimum and maximum log population variables, and minimum and maximum log total land
variables. Adjacency and common-language were both significant in the base regressions, but


                                                                                                    22
were found to be fragile once Z-variables were considered. The population and total-land
variables were not significant even in the base regressions.




4. Conclusion

        This paper has investigated the robustness of correlations between business-cycle
comovement and a host of economics variables. Our key findings are as follows.

(i) Higher bilateral trade between two countries is robustly correlated with a higher business-
cycle correlation between the countries. The finding that trade is robust emerges both with and
without the gravity variables playing the role of “always-included” I- variables. The fact that
bilateral trade is robust even when the gravity variables are included indicates that bilateral trade
matters for business-cycle comovement separately from the effects on trade occurring through
the gravity variables.

(ii) Greater similarity in industrial structure is not robustly correlated with business-cycle
correlations. Although industrial structure variables are significant in the base regressions (with
no other explanatory variables), the significance disappears when the full set of Z-variables is
considered. This finding occurs with and without the gravity variables as I-variables. This
finding indicates that the findings of Imbs (1998, 1999, 2003) which stress the importance of
industrial structure, are fragile.

(iii) Countries belonging to a currency union do not have significantly more highly correlated
business cycles than countries that do not share a common currency. This finding calls into
question the prior empirical findings of Rose and Engel (2002).

(iv) Two indicator variables were found to be robust. The first indicates that both countries in
the pair are industrialized countries; the second indicates that both are developing countries. In
both cases, the variables are positively related to business-cycle correlation.

(v) Only one “gravity” variable was found to be robust: this variable is the distance between the
two countries. Distance is negatively related to business-cycle correlation, as one would expect.




                                                                                                   23
        Our other findings are negative, in the sense that we found many variables not to be
robust. Specifically, total trade measures are fragile, as are the measures of the similarity of total
and bilateral trade. Factor endowment variables, including measures of education, capital, and
arable land, were all found to be fragile. All gravity variables except for distance were found to
be fragile.

        In conclusion, our goal in writing this paper was to clarify the relationship between
business-cycle comovement and other economic variables. In doing so, we hope to provide
guidance for future theoretical and empirical investigations into the sources and propagation
mechanisms of international business cycles.




                                                                                                   24
                           APPENDIX A: Data Sources and Definitions


Variable                        Definition and Source
Bilateral Trade
BT1                             Ratio of bilateral trade to total trade in 1970 (Source:
                                Feenstra, Lipsey and Bowen, 1997, World Trade
                                Flows CD-ROM, 1970-1992)
BT2                             Ratio of bilateral trade to GDP in 1970 (Sources:
                                Feenstra, Lipsey and Bowen, 1997, World Trade
                                Flows CD-ROM, 1970-1992, and Penn World Tables
                                version 5.6)
BT3                             Ratio of bilateral trade to total trade in 1995 (Source:
                                Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-ROM, 1980-
                                1997)
BT4                             Ratio of bilateral trade to GDP in 1995 (Sources:
                                Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-ROM, 1980-
                                1997, and Penn World Tables version 5.6)
Total Trade
TT1                             Ratio of total trade to GDP in 1970 (Sources:
                                Feenstra, Lipsey and Bowen, 1997, World Trade
                                Flows CD-ROM, 1970-1992, and Penn World Tables
                                version 5.6)
TT2                             Ratio of total trade to GDP in 1995 (Sources:
                                Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-ROM, 1980-
                                1997, and Penn World Tables version 5.6)
Similarity of Industrial
Structure
ISS1                            Broad industry similarity, squared difference in 1980
                                (Source: United Nations Statistical Yearbook 46th
                                Issue on CD-ROM)
ISS2                            Manufacturing sector similarity, squared difference in
                                1980 (Source: United Nations Industrial Development
                                Organization, 2000, Industrial Statistics Database on
                                CD-ROM)
ISA1                            Broad industry similarity, absolute difference in 1980
                                (Source: United Nations Statistical Yearbook 46th
                                Issue on CD-ROM)
ISA2                            Manufacturing sector similarity, absolute difference
                                in 1980 (Source: United Nations Industrial
                                Development Organization, 2000, Industrial Statistics
                                Database on CD-ROM)
ISC1                            Broad industry similarity, sector share correlation in
                                1980 (Source: United Nations Statistical Yearbook
                                46th Issue on CD-ROM)
ISC2                            Manufacturing sector similarity, sector share


                                                                                           25
                    correlation in 1980 (Source: United Nations Industrial
                    Development Organization, 2000, Industrial Statistics
                    Database on CD-ROM)
Trade Similarity
TSS1                Export similarity, squared difference in 1980
                    (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-
                    ROM, 1980-1997)
TSS2                Import similarity, squared difference in 1980
                    (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-
                    ROM, 1980-1997)
TSS3                Similarity of bilateral trade flows, squared difference
                    in 1980 (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows
                    CD-ROM, 1980-1997)
TSA1                Export similarity, absolute difference in 1980
                    (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-
                    ROM, 1980-1997)
TSA2                Import similarity, absolute difference in 1980
                    (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-
                    ROM, 1980-1997)
TSA3                Similarity of bilateral trade flows, absolute difference
                    in 1980 (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows
                    CD-ROM, 1980-1997)
TSC1                Export similarity, goods share correlation in 1980
                    (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-
                    ROM, 1980-1997)
TSC2                Import similarity, goods share correlation in 1980
                    (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World Trade Flows CD-
                    ROM, 1980-1997)
TSC3                Similarity of bilateral trade flows, goods share
                    correlation in 1980 (Sources: Feenstra, 2000, World
                    Trade Flows CD-ROM, 1980-1997)
Factor Endowments
MINED               Log of minimum bilateral average years of schooling
                    for total population 15 years and older (Source: Barro
                    and Lee, 199?)
MAXED               Log of maximum bilateral average years of schooling
                    for total population 15 years and older (Source: Barro
                    and Lee, 199?)
MINK                Log of minimum bilateral capital per worker using
                    aggregate investment in 1980 (Source: Easterly and
                    Levine, 2002)
MAXK                Log of maximum bilateral capital per worker using
                    aggregate investment in 1980 (Source: Easterly and
                    Levine, 2002)
MINL                Log of minimum bilateral arable land (1000s of
                    hectares) per worker in 1980 (Source: World Bank


                                                                               26
                    Development Indicators on CD-ROM)
MAXL                Log of maximum bilateral arable land (1000s of
                    hectares) per worker in 1980 (Source: World Bank
                    Development Indicators on CD-ROM)
Currency Unions
CU                  Dummy variable indicating country pair is in
                    currency union (Source: Frankel and Rose, 2002)
CB                  Dummy variable indicating one country maintains a
                    currency board with other currency (Source: Frankel
                    and Rose, 2002)
CUB                 Dummy variable indicating country pair is part of a
                    currency union or currency board (Source: Frankel
                    and Rose, 2002)
Gravity variables
ADJ(1)              Dummy variable indicating common border (Source:
                    Macalester University, International Trade Database)
LANG (2)            Dummy variable indicating common language
                    (Source: Macalester University, International Trade
                    Database)
DIST (3)            Log of distance in kilometers (Source: Macalester
                    University, International Trade Database)
MINPOP(4)           Log of minimum bilateral population (Source: Penn
                    World Tables version 5.6)
MAXPOP(5)           Log of maximum bilateral population (Source: Penn
                    World Tables version 5.6)
MINTL(6)            Log of minimum bilateral total land area (1000s of
                    hectares) (Source: United Nations Statistical
                    Yearbook 46th Issue on CR-ROM)
MAXTL(7)            Log of maximum bilateral total land area (1000s of
                    hectares) (Source: United Nations Statistical
                    Yearbook 46th Issue on CR-ROM)
MINGDP (8)          Log of minimum bilateral GDP (Source: Penn World
                    Tables version 5.6)
MAXGDP (9)          Log of maximum bilateral GDP (Source: Penn World
                    Tables version 5.6)
IND(10)             Dummy variable indicating both countries are
                    developed/industrial (Source: IMF World Economic
                    Outlook 2002)
DEV(11)             Dummy variable indicating both countries are
                    developing (Source: IMF World Economic Outlook
                    2002)




                                                                           27
Notes:

                                                                             xij + mij + x ji + m ji
   1. Bilateral trade intensity: TB1, TB3 =                                                                 , where xij is the value of exports
                                                                              xi + mi + x j + m j
         from country i to country j, mij is the value of imports from country i to country j, xi is the
      value of country i’s exports to all countries and mi is the value of country i’s imports from
                                       x + mij + x ji + m ji
      all countries; and TB 2, TB 4 = ij                     , where yi is the value of country i’s
                                            yi + y j
      GDP.
                                          x + mi + x j + m j
   2. Total trade intensity: TT 1, TT 2 = i                     , where yi is the value of country i’s
                                               yi + y j
      GDP.
   3. Broad industry similarity: ISS1 = ∑ ( sin − s jn ) , where sin is the fraction of GDP
                                           1 N                2

                                          N n =1
                                                                                                                          N

                                     1                        N                                                           ∑s       in jns
         devoted to sector n; ISA2 =
                                     N
                                                            ∑s          in   − s jn ; and ISC1 =
                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                          n =1
                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                  ∑s ∑s
                                                              n =1                                                            2                         2
                                                                                                                              in                        jn
                                                                                                                  n =1                    n =1


                                                                                             ∑(s          − s jn ) , where sin is the fraction of
                                                                                             N
                                                                                         1                        2
   4. Manufacturing industry similarity: ISS 2 =                                                     in
                                                                                         N   n =1
                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                 1
         manufacturing devoted to sub-sector n; ISA2 =
                                                                                                 N
                                                                                                     ∑s
                                                                                                     n =1
                                                                                                            in   − s jn ; and
                           N

                        ∑s           s
                                    in jn
         ISC 2 =        n =1
                                                  .
                    N                    N

                   ∑s ∑s
                    n =1
                               2
                               in
                                      n =1
                                             2
                                             jn



                                                          ∑(s              − s jn ) , where sin is good n’s share of country i’s total
                                                          N
                                                      1                              2
   5. Export similarity: TSS 2 =                                      in
                                                      N   n =1
                                                                                                                                 N

                                          1                       N                                                            ∑s               s
                                                                                                                                            in jn
         exports, sin = xin / xi ; TSA2 =
                                          N
                                                                 ∑s          in   − s jn ; and TSC 2 =
                                                                                                                           N
                                                                                                                                 n =1
                                                                                                                                                    N
                                                                                                                                                                  .
                                                                                                                          ∑s ∑s
                                                                 n =1                                                                2                       2
                                                                                                                                     in                      jn
                                                                                                                          n =1                   n =1




                                                                                                                                                                      28
                                                    ∑(s         − s jn ) , where sin is good n’s share of country i’s total
                                                    N
                              1                                           2
6. Import similarity: TSS 2 =                              in
                              N                     n =1
                                                                                                           N

                                    1                      N                                             ∑s          s
                                                                                                                    in jn
   imports, sin = min / mi ; TSA2 =
                                    N
                                                           ∑s       in   − s jn ; and TSC 2 =
                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                         n =1
                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                    ∑s ∑s
                                                           n =1                                                2              2
                                                                                                               in             jn
                                                                                                    n =1              n =1


                                                                  ∑(s           − s jin ) , where sijn is good n’s share of
                                                                  N
                                                           1                          2
7. Bilateral trade similarity: TSS 3 =                                    ijn
                                                           N      n =1
                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                               1
   country i’s exports to country j, sijn = xijn / xij = m jin / m ji ; TSA3 =
                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                    ∑s
                                                                                                                    n =1
                                                                                                                             ijn   − s jin ; and
                      N

                   ∑s             s
                                ijn jin
    TSC 2 =        n =1
                                                .
               N                      N

               ∑s ∑s
               n =1
                          2
                          ijn
                                   n =1
                                          2
                                          jin




                                                                                                                                                   29
                    Appendix B: Estimation without Country Fixed Effects

Tables A-1 and A-2 present results of the EBA without country fixed effects. The main findings
of the paper are not changed by removal of the country fixed effects.




                                                                                            30
                             Table A-1: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                              Gravity Variables Not Included as I-variables

                                  Std.                                                              Robust/
    Variable     Bound   β       Error     t       # Obs.   R-sq            Z-Variables             Fragile
Bilateral Trade
      BT1       High      3.94     0.29   13.77      4748    0.04    CU       LANG         MINTL   robust
      BT1       Base      3.50     0.27   13.20      4948    0.03
      BT1       Low       1.69     0.38    4.43      1107    0.14   ISA2       TSA3         IND

     BT2        High     16.79     2.01    8.35      2623    0.04   ISC1      MAXL          ADJ    robust
     BT2        Base     13.49     1.07   12.57      4948    0.03
     BT2        Low       5.41     1.25    4.33      3736    0.11   MINED      ADJ          IND

     BT3        High      4.13     0.40   10.30      3155    0.05   ISC1       ADJ        MINPOP robust
     BT3        Base      4.30     0.28   15.37      5884    0.04
     BT3        Low       1.76     0.33    5.31      2696    0.14   ISA2      MINED         IND

     BT4        High      7.78     0.82    9.54      3076    0.04   ISC1      MAXL        MINPOP robust
     BT4        Base      7.09     0.47   15.05      5884    0.04
     BT4        Low       3.71     0.71    5.21      2551    0.11   ISA2      MINED         IND

Total Trade
      TT1       High      0.18     0.05     3.52     1107    0.08   ISA2       TSA3       MAXGDP fragile
      TT1       Base      0.11     0.02     4.58     4948    0.00
      TT1       Low      -0.06     0.05    -1.07     1687    0.02   TSS3      MAXED        MINL

     TT2        High      0.13     0.02     7.55     1516    0.10   ISC2       TSC3       MAXGDP fragile
     TT2        Base      0.05     0.01     5.68     5884    0.01
     TT2        Low      -0.03     0.02    -1.40     1989    0.11   TSS3      MINL          IND

Industrial Similarity
     ISC1        High     0.47     0.05     9.18     1060    0.10   TSC3      MAXED MAXGDP fragile
     ISC1        Base     0.17     0.03     6.52     3238    0.01
     ISC1        Low     -0.01     0.06    -0.24      957    0.16   ISC2       TSC3        MINK

     ISC2       High      0.47     0.04   11.77      1516    0.10    TT2       TSC3       MAXGDP fragile
     ISC2       Base      0.23     0.02    9.16      3401    0.02
     ISC2       Low       0.05     0.05    1.05      1296    0.17   TSC3      MINED         IND

     ISS1       High      0.06     0.04     1.36     2011    0.11    BT1       ISS2        MINK    fragile
     ISS1       Base     -0.24     0.03    -7.43     3238    0.02
     ISS1       Low      -0.61     0.06    -9.43      992    0.10   TSS3      MAXED        MAXL

     ISS2       High     -0.05     0.06    -0.96     1296    0.17   TSS3      MINED         IND    fragile
     ISS2       Base     -0.30     0.03   -10.47     3401    0.03
     ISS2       Low      -0.53     0.05   -11.28     1516    0.10    TT2       TSS3       MAXGDP
                             Table A-1: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                              Gravity Variables Not Included as I-variables

                                Std.                                                             Robust/
   Variable      Bound   β     Error       t    # Obs.   R-sq             Z-Variables            Fragile
    ISA1        High      0.03    0.02     1.13   2011     0.11   BT1        ISA2     MINK     fragile
    ISA1        Base     -0.14    0.02    -7.63   3238     0.02
    ISA1        Low      -0.34    0.03   -10.20   1060     0.11   TSA2         TSA3   MAXED

     ISA2       High     -0.05    0.03    -1.55   1296     0.17   TSA3        MINED     IND    fragile
     ISA2       Base     -0.18    0.02   -11.35   3401     0.04
     ISA2       Low      -0.30    0.03   -11.65   1518     0.09   TSA3        MAXGDP MINPOP

Trade Similarity
     TSC1        High     0.20    0.02     7.85   1828     0.05   TSC3        MAXED    MAXK    fragile
     TSC1        Base    -0.02    0.01    -1.54   3817     0.00
     TSC1        Low     -0.09    0.02    -4.57   1641     0.06   ISC1         ISC2   MINPOP

     TSC2       High      0.17    0.05     3.35   1828     0.03   TSC3        MAXED MAXGDP fragile
     TSC2       Base     -0.06    0.03    -2.08   3895     0.00
     TSC2       Low      -0.18    0.05    -3.95   1678     0.05   ISC1         ISC2   MINPOP

     TSC3       High      0.04    0.02     1.81   1296     0.12   ISC2        MINED   MAXGDP fragile
     TSC3       Base     -0.06    0.02    -3.55   2174     0.01
     TSC3       Low      -0.08    0.02    -3.86   1107     0.05   TT1          ISC1    TSC1

     TSS1       High      0.13    0.03     4.58   1641     0.07   ISS1         ISS2    MINTL   fragile
     TSS1       Base      0.00    0.02     0.06   3817     0.00
     TSS1       Low      -0.20    0.03    -6.00   1828     0.04   TSS3        MAXED MAXGDP

     TSS2       High      0.51    0.08     6.48   1678     0.07   ISS1         ISS2   MINPOP fragile
     TSS2       Base      0.19    0.05     3.87   3895     0.00
     TSS2       Low      -0.31    0.09    -3.49   1828     0.03   TSS3        MAXED MAXGDP

     TSS3       High      0.07    0.03     2.19    891     0.11   BT2          ISS1     ISS2   fragile
     TSS3       Base     -0.03    0.02    -1.51   2174     0.00
     TSS3       Low      -0.06    0.02    -2.61   1769     0.03   TT1         MAXED MAXGDP

     TSA1       High      0.09    0.01     6.90   1641     0.09   ISA1         ISA2   MINPOP fragile
     TSA1       Base      0.04    0.01     4.66   3817     0.01
     TSA1       Low      -0.09    0.02    -5.29   1828     0.04   TSA3        MAXED MAXGDP

     TSA2       High      0.23    0.03     8.35   1678     0.09   ISA1         ISA2   MINPOP fragile
     TSA2       Base      0.14    0.02     7.35   3895     0.01
     TSA2       Low      -0.10    0.04    -2.63   1828     0.03   TSA3        MAXED MAXGDP

     TSA3       High      0.07    0.02     4.08   1038     0.06   TT1          ISA1    MAXL    fragile
     TSA3       Base      0.06    0.01     4.69   2174     0.01
     TSA3       Low      -0.02    0.02    -1.06   1296     0.12   ISA2        MINED   MAXGDP
                             Table A-1: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                              Gravity Variables Not Included as I-variables

                                  Std.                                                           Robust/
   Variable      Bound   β       Error    t       # Obs.   R-sq           Z-Variables            Fragile

Factor Endowments
     MINED    High        0.17     0.02    7.96     1013    0.12   TT1         ISC1      TSC3   fragile
     MINED    Base        0.09     0.01   13.02     4093    0.04
     MINED    Low        -0.03     0.02   -1.68     1769    0.13   BT2        TSA3      MINK

     MAXED      High      0.20     0.03    6.96     1227    0.09   ISA2       TSA3      MAXL    fragile
     MAXED      Base      0.08     0.01    7.55     4093    0.01
     MAXED      Low      -0.02     0.02   -0.96     2551    0.07   ISC1       MINED      DEV

     MINK       High     0.08      0.01   11.62     1296    0.16   ISC2       TSC3      MAXED fragile
     MINK       Base     0.04      0.00   16.81     5776    0.05
     MINK       Low      0.01      0.01    1.79     2551    0.10   ISS1       MINED      IND

     MAXK       High      0.05     0.01    3.91     1518    0.08   ISC2       TSC3       DEV    fragile
     MAXK       Base      0.03     0.00    9.76     5776    0.02
     MAXK       Low      -0.01     0.01   -1.32     2163    0.08   TSA3       MINK       DEV

     MINL       High      0.00     0.00    1.08     3155    0.03   TT2         ISC2     MAXL    fragile
     MINL       Base     -0.01     0.00   -1.90     5563    0.00
     MINL       Low      -0.02     0.01   -3.01     1985    0.01   TSS3       DIST      MINTL

     MAXL       High      0.00     0.01    0.45     1985    0.01   TSC3       MINL       DIST   fragile
     MAXL       Base      0.00     0.00   -0.81     5563    0.00
     MAXL       Low      -0.03     0.01   -4.28     1991    0.12   TSS3       MAXTL      IND

Currency Union
     CU        High       0.15     0.07    2.29     1192    0.11   ISC1       TSC3      MINK    fragile
     CU        Base      -0.02     0.03   -0.95     5993    0.00
     CU        Low       -0.28     0.12   -2.37     2273    0.08   TT1         ISA1     MINED

Gravity Variables
     ADJ         High     0.25     0.04    6.71     1828    0.04   TSA3       MAXED      DEV    fragile
                 Base     0.19     0.03    6.98     5776    0.01
                 Low     -0.03     0.05   -0.50     2011    0.06   BT2         ISA1      ISA2

     LANG       High      0.02     0.02    1.31     1192    0.07   ISS1       TSS3       DEV    fragile
                Base      0.01     0.01    1.35     5776    0.00
                Low      -0.05     0.02   -2.90     1439    0.08   BT1         ISC2      TSC3

     DIST       High     0.00      0.00    0.98     1516    0.10   BT3         ISC2      TSC3   fragile
                Base     0.00      0.00   -4.41     5776    0.00
                Low      0.00      0.00   -4.48     1060    0.12   ISS1       TSS3      MAXED
                        Table A-1: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                         Gravity Variables Not Included as I-variables

                           Std.                                                              Robust/
Variable    Bound   β     Error       t    # Obs.   R-sq             Z-Variables             Fragile
 MINPOP    High      0.02    0.01     3.32   2036     0.08   TT1        TSC3     MINK      fragile
           Base      0.01    0.00     2.71   5993     0.00
           Low      -0.06    0.01    -7.26   1828     0.05   TSA3        MAXED    MINGDP

 MAXPOP High         0.03    0.01     3.07   1107     0.06   TT1           ISS1    TSS3    fragile
        Base         0.00    0.00     1.50   5993     0.00
        Low         -0.07    0.01    -9.55   1518     0.12   ISC2         TSC3    MAXGDP

 MINTL     High      0.00    0.01     0.89   1991     0.01   TSA3         MINL    MINPOP fragile
           Base      0.00    0.00     0.23   5776     0.00
           Low      -0.02    0.00    -5.98   1464     0.09   ISS2         TSS3    MAXGDP

 MAXTL     High      0.02    0.01     2.48   1991     0.01   TSA3         MAXL    MAXPOP fragile
           Base      0.00    0.00     1.54   5776     0.00
           Low      -0.03    0.00    -7.35   2441     0.07   ISS2         TSS2    MAXGDP

 IND       High     0.32     0.02   20.13    5773     0.07 MAXPOP        MINTL    MAXTL robust
           Base     0.32     0.02   19.69    5993     0.06
           Low      0.19     0.03    6.82    1192     0.15  ISA2          TSA3     MINK

 DEV       High      0.03    0.02     1.54   2171     0.03   TSC3        MAXGDP MAXPOP fragile
           Base     -0.07    0.01   -10.83   5993     0.02
           Low      -0.09    0.02    -5.43   1389     0.07   ISC2         TSC3     MINL

 MINGDP High         0.07    0.01   10.76    2163     0.05   TSS3         DIST    MINPOP fragile
        Base         0.02    0.00    9.43    5993     0.01
        Low         -0.01    0.01   -1.45    3398     0.10   ISA2         MINK    MINPOP

 MAXGDP High        0.08     0.01   10.77    1518     0.12   ISC2         TSC3    MAXPOP fragile
        Base        0.02     0.00    8.43    5993     0.01
        Low         0.00     0.00   -0.18    2192     0.09   ISA1         TSA2      IND
                         Table A-2: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                            Gravity Variables Included as I-variables

                                  Std.                                                  Robust/
Variable         Bound   β       Error    t       R-sq           Z-Variables            Fragile
Bilateral Trade
      BT1       High     1.62      0.40   4.04     0.09   TT1       ISC1         CU    robust
                Base     1.70      0.33   5.20     0.09
                Low      1.09      0.45   2.40     0.15   ISA1     TSA3         MINL

     BT2        High     6.15      2.27   2.71     0.07   ISC1     MINL          CU    fragile
                Base     5.87      1.23   4.77     0.09
                Low      3.99      2.32   1.72     0.11   ISA1    MINED        MAXL

     BT3        High     2.32      0.45   5.11     0.10   TT2       ISC1       MAXED robust
                Base     2.00      0.34   5.96     0.08
                Low      1.35      0.40   3.35     0.19   ISC2     TSC3        MINK

     BT4        High     3.88      0.95   4.10     0.07   ISC1     MINL          CU    robust
                Base     3.33      0.54   6.17     0.09
                Low      2.72      1.01   2.70     0.11   ISA1      ISA2       MAXL

Total Trade
      TT1       High     -0.02     0.08   -0.28    0.17   ISA1      ISA2        TSA3   fragile
                Base      0.03     0.03    1.08    0.09
                Low      -0.18     0.07   -2.60    0.15   TSA3    MAXED         MINL

     TT2        High      0.05     0.02    2.71    0.12   ISC1      ISC2       MAXED fragile
                Base      0.01     0.01    1.31    0.08
                Low      -0.06     0.03   -2.31    0.15   TSA3    MAXED         MINL

Industrial Similarity
     ISC1       High      0.34     0.06    6.11    0.17   TSC3    MAXED        MAXL    fragile
                Base      0.11     0.03    4.34    0.07
                Low      -0.06     0.03   -1.60    0.13   BT1       ISC2       MINK

     ISC2       High      0.27     0.06    4.73    0.16   TT2       ISC1        TSC3   fragile
                Base      0.18     0.03    6.65    0.11
                Low      -0.03     0.05   -0.52    0.20   TSC3    MINED        MINK

     ISS1       High      0.07     0.05    1.55    0.13   BT1       ISS2       MINK    fragile
                Base     -0.16     0.03   -4.91    0.08
                Low      -0.31     0.05   -6.33    0.12   TSS2    MAXED        MAXL

     ISS2       High      0.01     0.06    0.14    0.20   TSS3    MINED        MINK    fragile
                Base     -0.22     0.03   -6.98    0.11
                Low      -0.35     0.07   -5.04    0.17   ISS1      TSS1        TSS3

     ISA1       High     0.04      0.02   1.43     0.13   BT1       ISA2       MINK    fragile
                       Table A-2: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                          Gravity Variables Included as I-variables

                              Std.                                                    Robust/
Variable       Bound   β     Error      t      R-sq            Z-Variables            Fragile
              Base     -0.09    0.02   -4.86     0.08
              Low      -0.25    0.04   -6.47     0.17   TSA3    MAXED        MAXL

     ISA2     High     -0.01    0.04   -0.28     0.20   TSA3    MINED        MINK    fragile
              Base     -0.14    0.02   -7.93     0.12
              Low      -0.21    0.04   -5.44     0.17   ISA1     TSA1        TSA3

Trade Similarity
     TSC1      High     0.10    0.03    4.18     0.16   TSC3    MAXED        MAXL    fragile
               Base    -0.01    0.01   -0.59     0.10
               Low     -0.04    0.02   -2.06     0.14   BT3       ISC1        ISC2

     TSC2     High      0.13    0.05    2.60     0.15   TSC3    MAXED        MINL    fragile
              Base     -0.01    0.03   -0.44     0.10
              Low      -0.10    0.07   -1.47     0.17   ISC1      ISC2       TSC3

     TSC3     High      0.03    0.02    1.32     0.20   ISC2    MINED        MINK    fragile
              Base     -0.02    0.02   -1.52     0.13
              Low      -0.02    0.02   -0.86     0.18   BT3      TSC1        MAXED

     TSS1     High      0.12    0.04    2.65     0.17   ISS1      ISS2       TSS3    fragile
              Base      0.00    0.02   -0.25     0.10
              Low      -0.11    0.03   -3.17     0.15   TSS3    MAXED        MAXL

     TSS2     High      0.23    0.11    2.07     0.17   ISS1      ISS2       TSS3    fragile
              Base      0.05    0.05    0.90     0.10
              Low      -0.22    0.08   -2.64     0.18   TSS3    MINED        MINK

     TSS3     High     0.08     0.03   2.55      0.17   BT2       ISS1        ISS2   fragile
              Base     0.02     0.02   1.09      0.13
              Low      0.01     0.03   0.37      0.18   TT2       ISS2       MINED

     TSA1     High      0.04    0.02    1.50     0.17   ISA1      ISA2       TSA3    fragile
              Base      0.01    0.01    1.08     0.10
              Low      -0.04    0.02   -2.50     0.15   TSA3    MAXED        MINL

     TSA2     High      0.08    0.05    1.77     0.17   ISA1      ISA2       MAXK    fragile
              Base      0.05    0.02    2.30     0.10
              Low      -0.09    0.04   -2.54     0.15   TSA3    MAXED        MINL

     TSA3     High      0.03    0.02    1.75     0.16   ISA1      ISA2       MINL    fragile
              Base      0.02    0.01    1.82     0.14
              Low      -0.01    0.02   -0.83     0.20   ISA2    MINED        MINK
                      Table A-2: EBA Without Country Fixed Effects
                         Gravity Variables Included as I-variables

                               Std.                                                  Robust/
Variable      Bound   β       Error    t       R-sq           Z-Variables            Fragile
Factor Endowments
     MINED High        0.13     0.02    5.17    0.20   ISC1      ISC2        TSC3   fragile
             Base      0.05     0.01    6.50    0.11
             Low      -0.05     0.02   -2.42    0.18   BT2      TSA3        MINK

    MAXED High         0.13     0.04    3.17    0.17   ISS1      TSS3       MAXL    fragile
          Base         0.02     0.01    1.19    0.10
          Low         -0.01     0.03   -0.22    0.16   TSA3    MINED        MAXK

    MINK    High      0.06      0.01   7.09     0.20   ISC2     TSC3        MAXED fragile
            Base      0.02      0.00   7.95     0.09
            Low       0.01      0.01   0.95     0.10   ISA1    MINED         MINL

    MAXK    High       0.01     0.02    0.59    0.18   ISS2      TSS3       MAXED fragile
            Base       0.01     0.00    2.74    0.08
            Low       -0.04     0.02   -2.10    0.16   ISC1     TSC3        MINK

    MINL    High      -0.01     0.01   -0.99    0.16   BT4       ISC2        TSC3   fragile
            Base      -0.01     0.00   -3.07    0.07
            Low       -0.03     0.01   -3.91    0.15   TT2       TSS3       MAXED

    MAXL    High      -0.02     0.01   -2.23    0.10   ISA1     TSA2         MINL   robust
            Base      -0.03     0.01   -4.41    0.07
            Low       -0.05     0.01   -4.13    0.17   ISA2     TSA3        MAXED

Currency Union
     CU      High     -0.10     0.10   -1.01    0.17   ISC1     TSC3        MINK    fragile
             Base     -0.03     0.03   -0.97    0.08
             Low      -0.30     0.12   -2.54    0.10   TT1       ISS1       MAXED
                                           References
Alvarez, F. and R. E. Lucas, Jr., 2004, General equilibrium analysis of the Eaton-Kortum Model
       of international trade, manuscript, University of Chicago, April 2004.

Baxter, M., 1992, Fiscal policy, specialization, and trade in the two-sector model: The return of
       Ricardo? Journal of Political Economy 100, 713-744.

_________________, 1995, International trade and business cycles, in: G. Grossman and K.
       Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3 (North-Holland, Amsterdam)
       1801-1864.

Baxter, M. and R. King, 1999, Measuring business cycles: Approximate band-pass filters for
       economic time series, Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 585-593.

Calderon, C., A. Chong, and E. Stein, 2002, Trade intensity and business cycle synchronization:
       Are developing countries any different? Manuscript, Inter-American Development Bank,
       March 2002.

Canova, F. and H. Dellas, 1993, Trade interdependence and the international business cycle,
       Journal of International Economics 34, 23-47.

Clark, T. and K. Shin, 2000, The Sources of Fluctuations Within and Across Countries, in: G.
       Hess and E. van Wincoop, eds., Intranational Macroeconomics (Cambridge University
       Press, Boston, MA) 189-220.

Clark, T. and E. van Wincoop, 2001, Borders and business cycles, Journal of International
       Economics 55, 59-85.

Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, 2002, Technology, geography and trade, Econometrica 70, 1741-1779.

Fidrmuc, J., 2002, The endogeneity of the optimum currency area criteria, intra-industry trade,
       and EMU enlargement, manuscript, Austria National Bank, 2002.

Frankel, J. and A. Rose, 1998, The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria,
       Economic Journal 108, 1009-1025.




                                                                                                  31
Frankel, J. and A. Rose, 2002, An estimate of the effect of common currencies on trade and
       income, Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 437-466.

Gregory, A.and A. Head, 1999, Common and country-specific fluctuations in productivity,
       investment, and the current account, Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 423-451.

Gregory, A.and A. Head, and J. Raynauld, 1997, Measuring world business cycles, International
       Economic Review 38, 677-701.

Gruben, W., J. Koo and E. Millis, 2002, How much does international trade affect business cycle
       synchronization?, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Research Department Working Paper
       0203, August 2002.

Helpman, E. and P. Krugman, 1985, Market structure and foreign trade. (MIT Press,
       Cambridge MA) 1985.

Imbs, J., 1998, Fluctuations, bilateral trade and exchange rate regime, University of
       Lausanne, Working Paper.

__________, 1999, Co-fluctuations, manuscript, London Business School, June 1999.

__________, 2003, Trade, finance, specialization and synchronization, forthcoming, Review of
       Economics and Statistics.

Kim, S., 1995, Expansion of markets and the geographic distribution of economic activities: The
       trends in U.S. regional manufacturing structure, 1860-1987, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 110, 881-908.

Kose, M., C. Otrok and C. Whiteman, 2003, International businses cycles: World, region and
       country-specific factors, American Economic Review 93, 1216-1239.

Kose, M., E. Prasad, and M. Terrones, 2003, How does globalization affect the synchronization
       of business cycles? American Economic Review 93, 57–62.

Kose, M. and Yi, K., 2001, International trade and business ccles: Is vertical specialization the
       missing link? American Economic Review 91, 371-375.




                                                                                                32
Kose, M. and Yi, K., 2004, The Trade-Comovement Problem in International Macroeconomics,
       Working Paper, International Monetary Fund.


Leamer, E., 1983, Let’s Take the Con Out of Econometrics, American Economic Review 73,
       31-43.


Levine, R. and D., 1992, A sensitivity analysis of cross-country growth regressions, American
       Economic Review 82, 942-963.


Lumsdaine, R. and E. Prasad, 2003, Identifying the common component in international
       economic fluctuations, Economic Journal 113, 101-127.


Mundell, R., 1961, A theory of optimum currency areas, American Economic Review 51, 657-
       665.


Norrbin, S. and D. Schlagenhauf, 1996, The role of international factors in the business cycle: A
       multicountry study, Journal of International Economics 40, 85-104.


Otto, G., G. Voss and L. Willard, 2003, A cross section study of the international transmission of
       business cycles, manuscript, University of New South Wales, June 2003.


Rose, A. and C. Engel, 2002, Currency unions and international integration, Journal of Money,
       Credit and Banking 34, 1067-1089.


Shea, J., 1996, Comovements in cities, Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
       44, 169-206.


Shin, K. and Y. Wang, 2003, Trade integration and business cycle synchronization in East Asia,
       Working Paper, Korea University.




                                                                                                33
Stockman, Alan, 1988, Sectoral and aggregate national disturbances to industrial output in seven
       European countries, Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 387-409.




                                                                                             34
                                                                                                Table 1: Variable Correlation Matrix

                 Business
Variable          Cycle         BT1       BT2       BT3       BT4       TT1       TT2       ISS1       ISA1       ISC1       ISS2       ISA2       ISC2       TSS1     TSA1     TSC1     TSS2     TSA2     TSC2     TSS3     TSA3     TSC3
Bilateral Trade Intensity
        BT1             0.18          1    0.81      0.76      0.64      0.00      0.03      0.12       0.14       0.11       0.18       0.19       0.16       -0.02    -0.10    0.01     -0.14    -0.19    -0.08    0.12     -0.07    -0.04
        BT2             0.18     0.81           1    0.64      0.87      0.12      0.12      0.11       0.12       0.09       0.14       0.15       0.13       -0.01    -0.08    0.00     -0.09    -0.13    -0.05    0.12     -0.04    -0.02
        BT3             0.20     0.76      0.64           1    0.76     -0.01      0.03      0.15       0.16       0.13       0.22       0.23       0.19       0.01     -0.09    0.01     -0.16    -0.23    -0.10    0.13     -0.11    -0.07
        BT4             0.19     0.64      0.87      0.76           1    0.12      0.14      0.14       0.15       0.12       0.15       0.16       0.14       0.03     -0.07    0.01     -0.09    -0.15    -0.05    0.12     -0.07    -0.04
Total Trade Intensity
        TT1             0.06     0.00      0.12     -0.01      0.12           1    0.86      -0.11      -0.11      -0.11      -0.24      -0.23      -0.25      -0.11    -0.15    -0.20    -0.02    -0.05    0.01     -0.04    0.00     0.07
        TT2             0.07     0.03      0.12      0.03      0.14      0.86           1    -0.10      -0.10      -0.10      -0.24      -0.24      -0.28      -0.12    -0.21    -0.23    -0.08    -0.14    -0.05    -0.04    -0.01    0.05
Similarity of Industrial Structure
       ISS1             0.13     0.12      0.11      0.15      0.14     -0.11     -0.10            1    0.98       0.97       0.29       0.29       0.26       0.23     0.14     0.21     0.04     0.03     0.05     0.08     -0.06    -0.03
       ISA1             0.13     0.14      0.12      0.16      0.15     -0.11     -0.10      0.98             1    0.96       0.29       0.30       0.27       0.22     0.13     0.22     0.05     0.03     0.06     0.08     -0.07    -0.03
       ISC1             0.11     0.11      0.09      0.13      0.12     -0.11     -0.10      0.97       0.96             1    0.24       0.25       0.23       0.22     0.13     0.21     0.03     0.02     0.05     0.07     -0.07    -0.04
       ISS2             0.18     0.18      0.14      0.22      0.15     -0.24     -0.24      0.29       0.29       0.24             1    0.97       0.95       0.23     0.15     0.25     0.07     0.01     0.08     0.24     -0.04    -0.09
       ISA2             0.19     0.19      0.15      0.23      0.16     -0.23     -0.24      0.29       0.30       0.25       0.97             1    0.94       0.21     0.14     0.26     0.06     0.01     0.08     0.23     -0.06    -0.10
       ISC2             0.16     0.16      0.13      0.19      0.14     -0.25     -0.28      0.26       0.27       0.23       0.95       0.94             1    0.24     0.20     0.31     0.11     0.07     0.11     0.24     -0.04    -0.08
Similarity of Trade Structure
       TSS1             0.00    -0.02     -0.01      0.01      0.03     -0.11     -0.12      0.23       0.22       0.22       0.23       0.21       0.24          1     0.85     0.61     0.43     0.46     0.37     0.11     0.01     0.11
       TSA1             -0.08   -0.10     -0.08     -0.09     -0.07     -0.15     -0.21      0.14       0.13       0.13       0.15       0.14       0.20       0.85        1     0.71     0.57     0.71     0.43     0.12     0.23     0.38
       TSC1             -0.02    0.01      0.00      0.01      0.01     -0.20     -0.23      0.21       0.22       0.21       0.25       0.26       0.31       0.61     0.71        1     0.47     0.53     0.42     0.14     0.07     0.20
       TSS2             -0.06   -0.14     -0.09     -0.16     -0.09     -0.02     -0.08      0.04       0.05       0.03       0.07       0.06       0.11       0.43     0.57     0.47        1     0.92     0.79     0.03     0.11     0.20
       TSA2             -0.12   -0.19     -0.13     -0.23     -0.15     -0.05     -0.14      0.03       0.03       0.02       0.01       0.01       0.07       0.46     0.71     0.53     0.92        1     0.71     0.05     0.27     0.36
       TSC2             -0.03   -0.08     -0.05     -0.10     -0.05      0.01     -0.05      0.05       0.06       0.05       0.08       0.08       0.11       0.37     0.43     0.42     0.79     0.71        1     0.03     0.07     0.12
       TSS3             0.03     0.12      0.12      0.13      0.12     -0.04     -0.04      0.08       0.08       0.07       0.24       0.23       0.24       0.11     0.12     0.14     0.03     0.05     0.03        1     0.71     0.29
       TSA3             -0.10   -0.07     -0.04     -0.11     -0.07      0.00     -0.01      -0.06      -0.07      -0.07      -0.04      -0.06      -0.04      0.01     0.23     0.07     0.11     0.27     0.07     0.71        1     0.66
       TSC3             -0.08   -0.04     -0.02     -0.07     -0.04      0.07      0.05      -0.03      -0.03      -0.04      -0.09      -0.10      -0.08      0.11     0.38     0.20     0.20     0.36     0.12     0.29     0.66        1
                                                                             Table 1: Variable Correlation Matrix, cont'd.
Variable                    BT1     BT2     BT3     BT4     TT1     TT2     ISS1     ISA1     ISC1     ISS2     ISA2     ISC2     TSS1     TSA1     TSC1     TSS2     TSA2     TSC2     TSS3     TSA3     TSC3
Factor Endowments
     MINED          0.20     0.19    0.17    0.22    0.21    0.12    0.19    0.35     0.37     0.32     0.25     0.28     0.21     0.01     -0.17    -0.05    -0.09    -0.21    -0.05    0.06     -0.22    -0.21
     MAXED          0.12     0.12    0.10    0.13    0.12    0.28    0.35    -0.04    -0.03    -0.05    -0.04    -0.05    -0.12    -0.15    -0.33    -0.26    -0.19    -0.31    -0.13    -0.02    -0.18    -0.15
      MINK          0.22     0.20    0.19    0.26    0.24    0.17    0.20    0.40     0.39     0.34     0.33     0.32     0.24     0.05     -0.17    -0.08    -0.17    -0.27    -0.12    0.09     -0.21    -0.24
      MAXK          0.13     0.11    0.11    0.14    0.13    0.34    0.40    -0.11    -0.12    -0.15    -0.05    -0.07    -0.17    -0.22    -0.41    -0.35    -0.26    -0.36    -0.16    0.00     -0.20    -0.22
      MINL          -0.03   -0.02   -0.07   -0.06   -0.13   -0.42   -0.56    0.05     0.06     0.04     0.20     0.21     0.18     0.02     0.10     0.11     0.11     0.16     0.13     0.03     0.06     0.01
      MAXL          -0.01    0.01   -0.03   -0.02   -0.09   -0.11   -0.14    0.08     0.08     0.06     0.10     0.08     0.07     0.01     0.03     0.04     0.01     0.03     0.06     0.03     0.00     0.00
Gravity variables
       ADJ          0.09     0.34    0.31    0.38    0.30   -0.03   -0.03    0.07     0.07     0.06     0.09     0.10     0.08     0.00     -0.01    0.02     -0.07    -0.08    -0.04    0.09     0.02     0.01
      LANG          0.02     0.12    0.10    0.08    0.05   -0.04   -0.08    0.02     0.02     0.02     0.03     0.04     0.05     -0.05    -0.02    0.00     -0.06    -0.06    -0.02    0.02     0.00     0.01
       DIST         -0.06   -0.19   -0.18   -0.20   -0.17   -0.02    0.06    0.04     0.03     0.03     -0.11    -0.11    -0.10    0.12     0.10     0.04     0.08     0.10     0.06     -0.12    -0.01    0.02
     MINPOP         0.04     0.17    0.10    0.20    0.11   -0.17   -0.06    0.02     0.04     0.02     0.31     0.33     0.23     -0.11    -0.21    -0.10    -0.17    -0.24    -0.07    0.01     -0.19    -0.24
    MAXPOP          0.02     0.11    0.02    0.16    0.05   -0.48   -0.29    0.00     0.00     -0.01    0.09     0.08     0.00     -0.10    -0.21    -0.10    -0.28    -0.35    -0.23    -0.05    -0.19    -0.23
     MINTL          0.00     0.06   -0.01    0.05   -0.04   -0.39   -0.38    0.05     0.06     0.04     0.30     0.28     0.22     -0.05    -0.03    -0.02    -0.04    -0.03    0.02     0.02     -0.03    -0.11
     MAXTL          0.02     0.06   -0.03    0.07   -0.04   -0.42   -0.35    0.00     0.00     -0.03    0.16     0.13     0.09     -0.03    -0.06    -0.03    -0.21    -0.21    -0.13    -0.02    -0.10    -0.14
       IND          0.25     0.34    0.32    0.37    0.35    0.07    0.09    0.23     0.26     0.20     0.28     0.29     0.24     0.05     -0.07    0.04     -0.06    -0.14    -0.02    0.14     -0.13    -0.09
       DEV          -0.14   -0.13   -0.11   -0.14   -0.13   -0.23   -0.31    0.01     0.01     0.01     0.00     0.02     0.10     0.27     0.45     0.33     0.25     0.37     0.14     -0.01    0.18     0.21
Currency Union
        CU          -0.01    0.04    0.03    0.00   -0.01    0.00   -0.06    0.00     0.01     0.00     0.05     0.05     0.07     0.01     0.04     -0.01    -0.02    0.01     0.01     0.02     0.05     0.03
                                                                   Table 1: Variable Correlation Matrix, cont'd.


Variable         MINEDMAXED MINK MAXK MINL MAXL                        ADJ     LANG     DIST MINPOP
                                                                                                  MAXPOPMINTL MINTL              IND     DEV     CU
Bilateral Trade Intensity
           BT1       0.19       0.12   0.20    0.11    -0.02   0.01     0.34    0.12     -0.19   0.17    0.11    0.06    0.06     0.34   -0.13   0.04
           BT2       0.17       0.10   0.19    0.11    -0.07   -0.03    0.31    0.10     -0.18   0.10    0.02    -0.01   -0.03    0.32   -0.11   0.03
           BT3       0.22       0.13   0.26    0.14    -0.06   -0.02    0.38    0.08     -0.20   0.20    0.16    0.05    0.07     0.37   -0.14   0.00
           BT4       0.21       0.12   0.24    0.13    -0.13   -0.09    0.30    0.05     -0.17   0.11    0.05    -0.04   -0.04    0.35   -0.13   -0.01
Total Trade Intensity
           TT1       0.12       0.28   0.17    0.34    -0.42   -0.11   -0.03    -0.04    -0.02   -0.17   -0.48   -0.39   -0.42    0.07   -0.23   0.00
           TT2       0.19       0.35   0.20    0.40    -0.56   -0.14   -0.03    -0.08    0.06    -0.06   -0.29   -0.38   -0.35    0.09   -0.31   -0.06
Similarity of Industrial Structure
        ISS1         0.35    -0.04     0.40    -0.11   0.05    0.08     0.07    0.02     0.04    0.02    0.00    0.05    0.00     0.23    0.01   0.00
        ISA1         0.37    -0.03     0.39    -0.12   0.06    0.08     0.07    0.02     0.03    0.04    0.00    0.06    0.00     0.26    0.01   0.01
        ISC1         0.32    -0.05     0.34    -0.15   0.04    0.06     0.06    0.02     0.03    0.02    -0.01   0.04    -0.03    0.20    0.01   0.00
        ISS2         0.25    -0.04     0.33    -0.05   0.20    0.10     0.09    0.03     -0.11   0.31    0.09    0.30    0.16     0.28    0.00   0.05
        ISA2         0.28    -0.05     0.32    -0.07   0.21    0.08     0.10    0.04     -0.11   0.33    0.08    0.28    0.13     0.29    0.02   0.05
        ISC2         0.21    -0.12     0.24    -0.17   0.18    0.07     0.08    0.05     -0.10   0.23    0.00    0.22    0.09     0.24    0.10   0.07
Similarity of Trade Structure
        TSS1         0.01    -0.15     0.05    -0.22   0.02    0.01     0.00    -0.05    0.12    -0.11   -0.10   -0.05   -0.03    0.05    0.27   0.01
        TSA1        -0.17    -0.33     -0.17   -0.41   0.10    0.03    -0.01    -0.02    0.10    -0.21   -0.21   -0.03   -0.06   -0.07    0.45   0.04
        TSC1        -0.05    -0.26     -0.08   -0.35   0.11    0.04     0.02    0.00     0.04    -0.10   -0.10   -0.02   -0.03    0.04    0.33   -0.01
        TSS2        -0.09    -0.19     -0.17   -0.26   0.11    0.01    -0.07    -0.06    0.08    -0.17   -0.28   -0.04   -0.21   -0.06    0.25   -0.02
        TSA2        -0.21    -0.31     -0.27   -0.36   0.16    0.03    -0.08    -0.06    0.10    -0.24   -0.35   -0.03   -0.21   -0.14    0.37   0.01
        TSC2        -0.05    -0.13     -0.12   -0.16   0.13    0.06    -0.04    -0.02    0.06    -0.07   -0.23   0.02    -0.13   -0.02    0.14   0.01
        TSS3         0.06    -0.02     0.09    0.00    0.03    0.03     0.09    0.02     -0.12   0.01    -0.05   0.02    -0.02    0.14   -0.01   0.02
        TSA3        -0.22    -0.18     -0.21   -0.20   0.06    0.00     0.02    0.00     -0.01   -0.19   -0.19   -0.03   -0.10   -0.13    0.18   0.05
        TSC3        -0.21    -0.15     -0.24   -0.22   0.01    0.00     0.01    0.01     0.02    -0.24   -0.23   -0.11   -0.14   -0.09    0.21   0.03
                                                      Table 1: Variable Correlation Matrix, cont'd.
    Variable        MINEDMAXED MINK MAXK MINL MAXL                   ADJ       LANG     DIST MINPOP
                                                                                                  MAXPOPMINTL MINTL              IND       DEV       CU
Factor Endowments
      MINED             1    0.48    0.78    0.45    -0.11   0.00     0.04      0.03     0.05    0.02    0.12    -0.11   -0.02    0.33     -0.33     -0.11
      MAXED           0.48      1    0.45    0.76    -0.09   0.14    -0.02      -0.03    0.07    0.01    0.05    -0.10   0.02     0.23     -0.59     -0.16
       MINK           0.78   0.45       1    0.49    -0.11   0.06     0.07      0.00     0.08    0.00    0.07    -0.08   0.01     0.39     -0.35     -0.10
       MAXK           0.45   0.76    0.49       1    -0.06   0.11    -0.03      -0.11    0.12    0.05    0.07    -0.03   0.03     0.22     -0.71     -0.21
       MINL          -0.11   -0.09   -0.11   -0.06      1    0.39     0.04      0.01     -0.21   0.18    0.07    0.54    0.24     0.03     -0.05     0.09
       MAXL           0.00   0.14    0.06    0.11    0.39       1     0.00      0.04     0.01    0.11    -0.02   0.31    0.41     0.09     -0.14     0.07
Gravity variables
        ADJ           0.04   -0.02   0.07    -0.03   0.04    0.00          1    0.07     -0.19   0.06    0.03    0.06    0.03     0.13      0.02     0.09
       LANG           0.03   -0.03   0.00    -0.11   0.01    0.04     0.07         1     -0.16   -0.03   -0.04   -0.02   0.00    -0.01      0.05     0.21
       DIST           0.05   0.07    0.08    0.12    -0.21   0.01    -0.19      -0.16       1    -0.02   0.08    -0.05   0.08    -0.12      0.04     -0.17
     MINPOP           0.02   0.01    0.00    0.05    0.18    0.11     0.06      -0.03    -0.02      1    0.44    0.63    0.37     0.09     -0.13     -0.06
     MAXPOP           0.12   0.05    0.07    0.07    0.07    -0.02    0.03      -0.04    0.08    0.44       1    0.36    0.60     0.07     -0.12     -0.12
      MINTL          -0.11   -0.10   -0.08   -0.03   0.54    0.31     0.06      -0.02    -0.05   0.63    0.36       1    0.44     0.06     -0.09     0.02
      MAXTL          -0.02   0.02    0.01    0.03    0.24    0.41     0.03      0.00     0.08    0.37    0.60    0.44       1     0.02     -0.04     -0.01
        IND           0.33   0.23    0.39    0.22    0.03    0.09     0.13      -0.01    -0.12   0.09    0.07    0.06    0.02          1   -0.27     -0.02
        DEV          -0.33   -0.59   -0.35   -0.71   -0.05   -0.14    0.02      0.05     0.04    -0.13   -0.12   -0.09   -0.04   -0.27           1   0.09
Currency Union
        CU           -0.11   -0.16   -0.10   -0.21   0.09    0.07     0.09      0.21     -0.17   -0.06   -0.12   0.02    -0.01   -0.02      0.09          1
    Table 2: Regression of business-cycle correlation on gravity variables
                      A. Without country fixed effects

Independent variables               β      Std. Error       t        pr > |t|
constant                             0.045      0.042        2.07      0.2853
Adjacency                            0.131      0.027        4.77      <.0001
Common Language                      0.014      0.009        1.52      0.1289
Distance                           -1.2E-6   7.5E-07        -1.59      0.1111
Minimum log(Population)              0.005      0.003        1.66      0.0967
Maximum log(Population)             -0.003      0.003       -1.12      0.2622
Minimum log(Total land area)        -0.006      0.002       -2.82      0.0049
Maximum log(Total land area)         0.006      0.003        2.07      0.0383
Two industrialized countries         0.284      0.017       16.85      <.0001
Two developing countries            -0.040      0.007       -5.86      <.0001

Adjusted R-Square: 0.076
Number of observations: 5670 country pairs

                        B. With country fixed effects

Independent variables              β      Std. Error        t        pr > |t|
Adjacency                           0.121      0.026         4.59         0.00
Common Language                     0.017      0.009         1.79         0.07
Distance                         -3.3E-06   9.2E-07         -3.61         0.00
Minimum log(Population)            -0.011      0.007        -1.63         0.10
Minimum log(Total land area)       -0.002      0.005        -0.42         0.68
Two industrialized countries        0.240      0.019        12.85         0.00

Adjusted R-Square: 0.2113
                                         Table 3
                      Extreme Bounds Analysis of Bilateral Trade
                Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                         Std.                                                    Robust/
M-Var.            β     Error        t     R-sq            Z-Variables           Fragile
                 Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

BT1      High       2.82     0.28    10.00     0.19 CU        MAXPOP MINTL       robust
         Base       2.42     0.26     9.34     0.20
         Low        1.42     0.38     3.70     0.21 ISA1      ADJ       DEV

BT2      High      11.89     1.93     6.16     0.18 ISC1      MAXL      MINPOP   robust
         Base       9.27     1.04     8.90     0.20
         Low        5.64     1.62     3.48     0.20 ISA1      ADJ       DEV

BT3      High       2.85     0.31     9.17     0.19 CB        ADJ       MINPOP   robust
         Base       3.13     0.28    11.14     0.19
         Low        1.31     0.32     4.13     0.41 TSA3      DIST      IND

BT4      High       5.47     0.86     6.39     0.16 ISC1      MAXL      MINPOP   robust
         Base       5.07     0.47    10.76     0.19
         Low        2.67     0.75     3.56     0.38 ISA1      TSA3      DIST

                 Robustness Tests with Gravity Variables Always Included

BT1      High       1.21     0.39     3.10     0.21 ISC1      MAXK      CU       robust
         Base       1.34     0.32     4.24     0.22
         Low        0.67     0.40     1.67     0.31 ISA1      TSA1      MAXED

BT2      High       4.84     2.23     2.17     0.20 ISC1      MAXL      CU       fragile
         Base       4.57     1.19     3.84     0.22
         Low        2.69     2.25     1.20     0.27 ISA1      TSA1      MAXL

BT3      High       1.65     0.44     3.77     0.20 ISC1      MAXK      CU       fragile
         Base       1.48     0.33     4.45     0.20
         Low        0.57     0.48     1.18     0.40 TT2       ISA1      TSA3

BT4      High       2.65     0.95     2.79     0.18 ISC1      MAXK      MINL     fragile
         Base       2.46     0.53     4.62     0.20
         Low        0.94     1.04     0.91     0.38 ISA1      TSA3      MINL
                                         Table 4
                        Extreme Bounds Analysis of Total Trade
                Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                          Std.                                                       Robust/
M-Var.            β      Error       t      R-sq           Z-Variables               Fragile
                 Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

TT1      High       0.02     0.08     0.28     0.24   ISC1       ISC2      MAXPOP    fragile
         Base      -0.26     0.05    -5.48     0.19
         Low       -0.46     0.09    -5.22     0.37   TSA3     MINPOP MAXTL

TT2      High      -0.01     0.03    -0.44     0.42   ISC1       ISC2        TSC3    fragile
         Base      -0.14     0.02    -8.07     0.18
         Low       -0.16     0.03    -5.54     0.36   TSA3     MINPOP        MINTL

                 Robustness Tests with Gravity Variables Always Included

TT1      High       0.06     0.08     0.79     0.27    BT2       ISC1        ISC2    fragile
         Base      -0.14     0.05    -2.61     0.22
         Low       -0.32     0.12    -2.68     0.40   ISC1      TSC3         MINL

TT2      High      -0.03     0.04    -0.64     0.44   ISS1       ISS2        TSS3    fragile
         Base      -0.08     0.02    -4.32     0.20
         Low       -0.11     0.04    -2.70     0.39   ISS1      TSS3         MINL
                                         Table 5
                     Extreme Bounds Analysis of Industrial Structure
                Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                         Std.                                                       Robust/
M-Var.            β     Error        t     R-sq            Z-Variables              Fragile
                 Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

ISC1     High       0.47     0.07     6.58     0.35   TSC1      TSC3       MINTL    fragile
         Base       0.25     0.03     7.59     0.16
         Low        0.04     0.10     0.36     0.39   BT2       TSC3         MAXK

ISC2     High       0.28     0.05     5.47     0.42   ISC2      TSC1         TSC3   fragile
         Base       0.22     0.03     7.92     0.25
         Low        0.03     0.04     0.87     0.30   BT1     MAXED          DEV

ISS1     High       0.68     0.08     8.23     0.35   TSS1      TSS3       MAXTL    fragile
         Base       0.36     0.04     8.55     0.17
         Low        0.11     0.12     0.92     0.39   BT2       TSS3         MAXK

ISS2     High       0.51     0.09     5.95     0.42   ISS1      TSS1         TSS3   fragile
         Base       0.27     0.03     7.75     0.25
         Low        0.04     0.05     0.78     0.30   BT3      MINED         IND

ISA1     High       0.36     0.04     8.54     0.35   TSA2      TSA3       MAXTL    fragile
         Base       0.19     0.02     8.17     0.16
         Low        0.05     0.07     0.72     0.43   ISA2      TSA3         MINK

ISA2     High       0.27     0.04     6.13     0.42   ISA1      TSA1         TSA3   fragile
         Base       0.15     0.02     8.40     0.26
         Low        0.03     0.02     1.09     0.30   BT1     MAXED          DEV

                 Robustness Tests with Gravity Variables Always Included

ISC1     High       0.26     0.10     2.70     0.40   TSC3    MAXED          MINL   fragile
         Base       0.15     0.03     4.31     0.19
         Low        0.04     0.11     0.42     0.41   TT1       TSC3         MINK

ISC2     High       0.22     0.07     3.16     0.43   ISC1      TSC3         MAXL   fragile
         Base       0.11     0.03     3.46     0.27
         Low       -0.02     0.07    -0.36     0.48   TSC1      TSC3       MINED

ISS1     High       0.36     0.09     3.78     0.38   TSS1      TSS3         MINL   fragile
         Base       0.22     0.04     4.84     0.19
         Low        0.09     0.12     0.73     0.41   TT1       TSS3         MINK

ISS2     High       0.33     0.09     3.51     0.44   ISS1      TSS1         TSS3   fragile
         Base       0.13     0.04     3.38     0.27
         Low       -0.01     0.08    -0.06     0.48   TSS1      TSS3       MINED

ISA1     High       0.16     0.05     3.21     0.38   TSA1      TSA3         MINL   fragile
         Base       0.11     0.02     4.36     0.19
         Low        0.03     0.06     0.45     0.41   TT1       TSA3         MINK

ISA2     High       0.18     0.05     3.54     0.44   ISA1      TSA1         TSA3   fragile
         Base       0.08     0.02     3.89     0.27
         Low    -2.8E-03     0.04    -0.06     0.48   TSA1      TSA3       MINED
                                        Table 6
                 Extreme Bounds Analysis of Structure of Bilateral Trade
                Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                         Std.                                                        Robust/
M-Var.            β     Error       t      R-sq             Z-Variables              Fragile
                 Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

TSC1     High      0.16     0.03     6.31     0.38    TSC3     MAXED MINPOP          fragile
         Base      0.06     0.01     4.72     0.26
         Low       0.00     0.04     0.02     0.42     ISC1      ISC2        TSC3

TSC2     High      0.16     0.06     2.71     0.39    TSC3     MAXED          DIST   fragile
         Base      0.03     0.03     0.96     0.26
         Low      -0.06     0.08    -0.81     0.42     ISC1      ISC2        TSC3

TSC3     High      0.06     0.02     3.48     0.39   MAXED      LANG          DIST   fragile
         Base      0.02     0.02     1.58     0.35
         Low      -0.04     0.02    -1.83     0.38     BT2       ISC1        TSC1

         Base      0.08     0.02     4.54     0.26
         Low      -0.07     0.05    -1.37     0.42     ISS1      ISS2        TSS3

TSS2     High      0.32     0.10     3.31     0.39     TSS3    MAXED          DIST   fragile
         Base      0.07     0.06     1.16     0.26
         Low      -0.26     0.13    -2.02     0.43     ISS1      ISS2        TSS3

TSS3     High      0.04     0.02     2.11     0.36   MAXED MAXPOP MAXTL              fragile
         Base      0.04     0.02     2.10     0.35
         Low      -0.06     0.03    -1.96     0.44     BT2       ISS1         ISS2

TSA1     High      0.12     0.02     5.80     0.38    TSA2       TSA3        MAXED   fragile
         Base      0.05     0.01     5.36     0.26
         Low      -0.02     0.02    -1.02     0.42     ISA1      ISA2        TSA3

TSA2     High      0.15     0.04     3.76     0.39    TSA3       MF1          DIST   fragile
         Base      0.02     0.02     0.79     0.26
         Low      -0.10     0.05    -1.78     0.42     ISA1      ISA2        TSA3

TSA3     High      0.05     0.01     3.65     0.39   MAXED      LANG          DIST   fragile
         Base      0.02     0.01     1.26     0.35
         Low      -0.02     0.02    -1.37     0.43     BT4       ISA1        MISA3
                                    Table 6, cont'd.
                  Extreme Bounds Analysis of Structure of Bilateral Trade
                      Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                         Std.                                                      Robust/
       M-Var.     β     Error        t     R-sq              Z-Variables           Fragile
                 Robustness Tests with Gravity Variables Always Included

TSC1   High         0.11    0.03     3.54     0.48     ISC2      TSC3      MAXED   fragile
       Base         0.02    0.01     1.16     0.29
       Low      -3.1E-03    0.04    -0.09     0.44     ISC1      ISC2      TSC3

TSC2   High         0.13    0.06     2.35     0.43    TSC3     MAXED        CB     fragile
       Base         0.02    0.03     0.76     0.29
       Low         -0.06    0.08    -0.73     0.44     ISC1      ISC2      TSC3

TSC3   High         0.02    0.02     1.19     0.48     ISC2    MAXED       MINK    fragile
       Base         0.02    0.01     1.12     0.41
       Low         -0.03    0.02    -1.18     0.45     BT2       ISC1       ISC2

TSS1   High         0.13    0.05     2.76     0.48     ISS2      TSS3      MAXED   fragile
       Base         0.04    0.02     2.07     0.29
       Low         -0.05    0.05    -1.00     0.44     ISS1      ISS2      TSS3

TSS2   High         0.25    0.10     2.58     0.41    TSS3      MINED      MINL    fragile
       Base         0.05    0.06     0.80     0.29
       Low         -0.20    0.13    -1.58     0.44     ISS1      ISS2      TSS3

TSS3   High         0.01    0.02     0.29     0.47     ISS2     MINED      MAXK    fragile
       Base        -0.01    0.02    -0.29     0.41
       Low         -0.06    0.03    -2.04     0.45     BT2       ISS1       ISS2

TSA1   High         0.06    0.02     2.94     0.48     ISA2      TSA3      MAXED   fragile
       Base         0.03    0.01     2.90     0.29
       Low         -0.02    0.02    -0.63     0.44     ISA1      ISA2      TSA3

TSA2   High         0.12    0.04     2.98     0.41    TSA3     MAXED       MINL    fragile
       Base         0.03    0.03     1.25     0.29
       Low         -0.05    0.05    -0.97     0.44     ISA1      ISA2      TSA3

TSA3   High         0.04    0.02     2.50     0.48     ISA2     MINED      MINK    fragile
       Base         0.02    0.01     1.61     0.41
       Low         -0.01    0.02    -0.74     0.44     BT4       ISA1       ISA2
                                        Table 7
                 Extreme Bounds Analysis of Factor EndowmentVariables
                Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                          Std.                                                       Robust/
M-Var.             β     Error       t      R-sq             Z-Variables             Fragile
                  Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

MINED    High       0.21    0.06     3.30     0.38      TT1       ISC1       TSC3    fragile
         Base       0.12    0.02     6.27     0.20
         Low       -0.14    0.06    -2.56     0.45      ISC2      TSC3       MAXK

MAXED High          0.14    0.06     2.56     0.45      ISC2      TSC3       MINK    fragile
      Base         -0.12    0.02    -6.27     0.20
      Low          -0.21    0.06    -3.30     0.38      TT1       ISC1       TSC3

MINK     High       0.14    0.01     9.38     0.39     TSA3     MAXED         CU     fragile
         Base       0.05    0.01    10.00     0.18
         Low        0.02    0.01     1.33     0.21      ISS1     MINED        DEV

MAXK     High      -0.02    0.01    -1.33     0.21      ISS1    MAXED         DEV    fragile
         Base      -0.05    0.01   -10.00     0.18
         Low       -0.14    0.01    -9.38     0.39     TSA3      MINED        CU

MINL     High       0.05    0.02     3.33     0.41      TT1       ISC2       TSC3    fragile
         Base       0.02    0.01     1.73     0.15
         Low        0.00    0.02     0.17     0.37      BT4       TSS3       MINED

MAXL     High      0.00     0.02     -0.17    0.37      BT4       TSS3   MAXED       fragile
         Base     -0.02     0.01     -1.73    0.15
         Low      -0.05     0.02     -3.33    0.41      TT1       ISC2    TSC3
                 Robustness Tests with Gravity Variables Always Included

MINED    High       0.05    0.07     0.73     0.42      BT2       ISA1       TSA3    fragile
         Base       0.03    0.02     1.64     0.24
         Low       -0.13    0.06    -2.39     0.48      ISC2      TSC3       MAXK

MAXED High          0.13    0.06     2.39     0.48      ISC2      TSC3       MAXK    fragile
      Base         -0.03    0.02    -1.64     0.24
      Low          -0.05    0.07    -0.73     0.42      BT2       ISA1       TSA3

MINK     High       0.06    0.03     2.05     0.44      ISC1      ISC2       TSC3    fragile
         Base       0.02    0.01     2.91     0.20
         Low    -1.2E-03    0.02    -0.08     0.23      TT1       ISA1       MINED

MAXK     High       0.00    0.02     0.08     0.23      TT1       ISA1       MAXED   fragile
         Base      -0.02    0.01    -2.91     0.20
         Low       -0.06    0.03    -2.05     0.44      ISC1      ISC2       TSC3

MINL     High      0.04     0.02     1.92     0.43      ISC1      ISC2       TSC3    fragile
         Base      0.01     0.01     1.24     0.19
         Low    2.8E-03     0.02     0.18     0.41      BT4       TSS3       MAXED

MAXL     High   -2.8E-03    0.02    -0.18     0.41      BT4       TSS3       MAXED   fragile
         Base       -0.01   0.01    -1.24     0.19
         Low        -0.04   0.02    -1.92     0.43      ISC1      ISC2       TSC3
                                          Table 8
                Extreme Bounds Analysis of Currency Union/Currency Board
                 Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                          Std.                                                      Robust/
M-Var.             b     Error        t     R-sq            Z-Variables             Fragile
                  Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

CU       High        0.32    0.07     4.45     0.37   ISC1      TSC3          ADJ   fragile
         Base        0.08    0.03     2.90     0.17
         Low        -0.20    0.12    -1.77     0.20    TT1      ISA1        MINED

                  Robustness Tests with Gravity Variables Always Included

CU       High        0.32    0.08     4.17     0.45   ISC1      ISC2        TSC3    fragile
         Base        0.03    0.03     1.13     0.20
         Low        -0.21    0.11    -1.82     0.23    TT1      ISA1        MINED
                                        Table 9
                Extreme Bounds Analysis of Structure of Gravity Variables
                Dependent Variable: Bilateral Correlation of Cyclic Output

                           Std.                                                       Robust/
M-Var.             β      Error       t     R-sq            Z-Variables               Fragile
                 Robustness Tests with No "Always-Included" Variables

DIST     High    -2.3E-06 1.1E-06     -2.03     0.28    BT3       ISC2       MAXK     robust
         Base    -5.9E-06 8.6E-07     -6.87     0.17
         Low     -1.3E-05 1.4E-06     -9.24     0.37   TSA2      TSA3        MINTL

ADJ      High        0.23     0.03     7.58     0.37   TSA1      TSA3        MAXPOP   fragile
         Base        0.19     0.03     7.36     0.17
         Low         0.05     0.05     1.02     0.26    BT2       ISA1        ISA2

LANG     High        0.07     0.02     4.15     0.36   ISC1      TSC3        MAXTL    fragile
         Base        0.03     0.01     3.58     0.17
         Low        -0.01     0.01    -0.58     0.29    BT2       ISA2        DIST

MINPOP   High        0.05     0.02     2.94     0.37    TT1       ISC1        TSC3    fragile
         Base       -0.01     0.01    -1.15     0.17
         Low        -0.04     0.01    -2.79     0.35   TSC3     MINGDP       MINTL

MAXPOP High          0.04     0.01     2.79     0.35   TSC3    MAXGDP MAXTL           fragile
       Base          0.01     0.01     1.15     0.17
       Low          -0.05     0.02    -2.94     0.37    TT1       ISC1        TSC3

MINTL    High         0.02    0.01     1.87     0.36    TT1       ISC1        TSC3    fragile
         Base    -3.5E-03     0.01    -0.68     0.16
         Low         -0.02    0.01    -1.70     0.40   ISA2      TSA3         MINL

MAXTL    High         0.02    0.01     1.70     0.40   ISA2      TSA3        MAXL     fragile
         Base     3.5E-03     0.01     0.68     0.16
         Low         -0.02    0.01    -1.87     0.36    TT1       ISC1        TSC3

IND      High        0.29     0.03    11.56     0.41   TSS3     MINED        MINGDP   robust
         Base        0.25     0.02    13.65     0.20
         Low         0.10     0.04     2.75     0.43   ISA1       ISA2        TSA3

DEV      High        0.29     0.03    11.56     0.41   TSS3     MINED MAXGDP          robust
         Base        0.25     0.02    13.65     0.20
         Low         0.10     0.04     2.75     0.43   ISA1       ISA2        TSA3
                                                  Figure 1: Bilateral Trade and Business Cycle Correlation

                             1.00
                                          Netherlands & Belgium/Luxembourg        Germany &
                                                                                  Netherlands
                             0.80
                                                   France & Bel-Lux                                                            US & Canada
                                                                                             Singapore & Malaysia
                             0.60                                                Portugal & Angola

                                                                      France &      US & Japan
Business Cycle Correlation




                             0.40                                     Germany

                                                                                                                       Taiwan & Iran
                             0.20


                             0.00
                                                                  Guatemala &                    Zimbabwe
                             -0.20                                El Salvador                    & Malawi


                                                                                                                    y = 3.4991x + 0.0515
                             -0.40
                                                                                                                        (0.2651) (0.0036)

                             -0.60                                                                                       R2 = 0.034

                             -0.80


                             -1.00
                                  0.00   0.05          0.10             0.15          0.20             0.25             0.30           0.35   0.40
                                                                       Extent of Bilateral Trade: BT1
                                           Figure 2: Total Trade and Business Cycle Correlation

                             1.00


                             0.80


                             0.60
Business Cycle Correlation




                             0.40


                             0.20


                             0.00


                             -0.20


                             -0.40

                                                                                             y = 0.1136x + 0.0395
                             -0.60                                                              (0.0248) (0.0060)

                             -0.80                                                               R2 = 0.0042

                             -1.00
                                  0.00   0.25               0.50                      0.75             1.00         1.25
                                                                   Total Trade: TT1
                                                         Figure 3: Industrial Similarity and Business Cycle Correlation


                             1.00


                             0.80


                             0.60
Business Cycle Correlation




                             0.40


                             0.20
                                                                                                                           y = 0.1683x - 0.0841
                                                                                                                               R2 = 0.0129
                             0.00


                             -0.20


                             -0.40


                             -0.60       y = 0.1683x - 0.0841
                                            (0.0258) (0.0210)

                             -0.80           r2=0.0129


                             -1.00
                                  0.20          0.30            0.40         0.50           0.60         0.70       0.80      0.90            1.00

                                                                              Industrial   Similarity: ISC1
                                                Figure 4: Similarity of Bilateral Trade and Business Cycle Correlation

                             1.00


                             0.80


                             0.60
Business Cycle Correlation




                             0.40


                             0.20


                             0.00


                             -0.20


                             -0.40


                             -0.60                                                                                 y = -0.0557x + 0.1290
                                                                                                                       (0.0157) (0.0104)
                             -0.80
                                                                                                                       R2 = 0.0058

                             -1.00
                                  0.00   0.10        0.20      0.30        0.40      0.50       0.60        0.70      0.80      0.90       1.00
                                                                      Similarity of Bilateral Trade: TSC3
                                                  Figure 5: Minimum Education Level and Business Cycle Correlation

                             1.00


                             0.80


                             0.60
Business Cycle Correlation




                             0.40


                             0.20


                             0.00


                             -0.20


                             -0.40


                             -0.60   y = 0.0905x - 0.0543
                                        (0.0070) (0.0095)
                             -0.80
                                         R2 = 0.0398
                             -1.00
                                 -0.50    -0.25   0.00      0.25   0.50   0.75   1.00   1.25   1.50    1.75   2.00   2.25   2.50   2.75
                                                                    Minimum level of Human Capital: MINED
                                         Figure 6: Distance and Business Cycle Correlation

                             1.00


                             0.80


                             0.60
Business Cycle Correlation




                             0.40


                             0.20


                             0.00


                             -0.20


                             -0.40


                             -0.60
                                                                                             y = -3.28E-06x + 0.0777
                                                                                                  (7.43E-07) (0.0068)
                             -0.80
                                                                                                   R2 = 0.0034
                             -1.00
                                  0.00   5000.00                10000.00                15000.00                        20000.00
                                                      Distance Between Countries
