NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EMERGING MARKET BUSINESS CYCLES:
THE CYCLE IS THE TREND
Mark Aguiar
Gita Gopinath
Working Paper 10734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10734
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2004

We thank Seung Jung Lee for excellent research assistance. We thank Andy Atkeson, V.V.Chari, Steve
Davis, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Anil Kashyap, Patrick Kehoe, Ayhan Kose and Fabrizio Perri for
comments. We also thank workshop participants at Chicago, UCLA, Minneapolis Fed., Fuqua, Houston,
Oregon, Indian School of Business, and the NBER IASE/IFM summer institute for comments. The authors
thank Chicago GSB for research support and Gopinath thanks as well the James S. Kemper Foundation. The
views expressed do not necessarily reflect the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston or the Federal Reserve
System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Mark Aguiar and Gita Gopinath. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend
Mark Aguiar and Gita Gopinath
NBER Working Paper No. 10734
August 2004
JEL No. F4

ABSTRACT
Business Cycles in emerging markets are characterized by strongly counter-cyclical current
accounts, consumption volatility that exceeds income volatility and dramatic "sudden stops" in
capital inflows. These features contrast with developed small open economies and highlight the
uniqueness of emerging markets. Nevertheless, we show that both qualitatively and quantitatively
a standard dynamic stochastic small open economy model can account for the behavior of both types
of markets. Motivated by the observed frequent policy regime switches in emerging markets, our
underlying premise is that these economies are subject to substantial volatility in the trend growth
rate relative to developed markets. Consequently, shocks to trend growth are the primary source of
fluctuations in these markets rather than transitory fluctuations around a stable trend. When the
parameters of the income process are structurally estimated using GMM for each type of economy,
we find that the observed predominance of permanent shocks relative to transitory shocks for
emerging markets and the reverse for developed markets explains differences in key features of their
business cycles. Lastly, employing a VAR methodology to identify permanent shocks we find
further support for the notion that the "cycle is the trend" for emerging economies.
Mark Aguiar
Research Department, T-8
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02210
mark.aguiar@bos.frb.org

Gita Gopinath
University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
gita.gopinath@gsb.uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

While business cycle fluctuations in developed markets may have moderated in recent
decades,1 business cycles in emerging markets are characterized increasingly by their large
volatility and dramatic current account reversals, the so called “sudden stop” phenomenon.
The question we explore here is whether a standard real business cycle model can qualitatively and quantitatively explain business cycle features of both emerging and developed
small open economies (SOE). Our underlying premise is that emerging markets, unlike developed markets, are characterized by frequent regime switches, a premise motivated by
the dramatic reversals in fiscal, monetary and trade policies observed in these economies.
Consequently, shocks to trend growth are the primary source of fluctuations in these markets as opposed to transitory fluctuations around the trend. On the other hand, developed
markets are characterized by a relatively stable trend. We show that this simple distinction,
without recourse to additional frictions, takes us quite far in explaining diﬀerences in the
two types of economies. In a standard framework with empirically estimated parameters,
we generate strongly countercyclical current accounts, consumption volatility that exceeds
income volatility and sudden stops, all defining characteristics of emerging markets.
In Section 2 we document several features of economic fluctuations in emerging and
developed small open economies (SOE) for the period 1980-2003. A striking feature that
distinguishes the business cycle in the two is the strongly countercyclical nature of the trade
balance for emerging markets as compared to developed markets. A second regularity is
that consumption is forty percent more volatile than income at business cycle frequencies
for emerging markets, as compared to a ratio of little less than one for developed markets.
In addition, income growth and net exports are twice as volatile in emerging markets.
We then show how a standard RBC model reproduces to a large extent the business
cycle features of both emerging and developed economies. The stochastic dynamic general
equilibrium model we specify has two productivity processes - a transitory shock around
the trend growth rate of productivity and a stochastic trend growth rate. The intuition
for the model’s dynamics is straightforward. As agents observe the economy entering a
period of high growth, they optimally increase consumption and investment. The fact that
1

See Stock and Watson (2003).

2

a shock to the growth rate implies a boost to current output, but an even larger boost to
future output, implies that consumption responds more than income, reducing savings and
generating a current account deficit. If growth shocks dominate transitory income shocks,
the economy resembles a typical emerging market with its volatile consumption process and
countercyclical current account. Conversely, an economy with a relatively stable growth
process will be dominated by standard, transitory productivity shocks. That is, a positive
shock will generate an increased incentive to save that will oﬀset any increase in investment,
resulting in limited cyclicality of the current account and stable consumption. The main
aim of this paper is to explore quantitatively the extent to which the behavior of the trend
explains the diﬀerences between emerging and developed markets.
We estimate the parameters of the stochastic process using GMM and data from a
prototypical emerging market, Mexico, and a benchmark developed small open economy,
Canada. The estimated process for productivity in Mexico implies a trend volatility that
is over twice that of the transitory shock. In the case of Canada, this ratio is roughly one
half. The model calibrated to Mexico generates a correlation between output and the trade
balance that is -0.6, which is roughly the same as the -0.7 observed in the data. The model
fitted to Canadian data generates an acyclical current account, similar to the low cyclicality
suggested in the data of -0.2. The model fitted to Mexico predicts a consumption volatility
in excess of income volatility of 10 to 15 percent, while the data suggests a diﬀerence closer
to 25 percent. Conversely, and also consistent with the data, the model fitted to Canada
predicts consumption that is roughly twenty percent less volatile than income.
Using the Kalman filter and the estimated parameters, we decompose the observed
Solow residual series for Mexico into trend and transitory components. When we feed the
decomposed Solow residuals for Mexico through the model we generate a sharp sudden
stop in 1994-95, including an abrupt and sizeable reversal in the trade balance combined
with contractions in output, consumption and investment. The model predicts that the
trade balance as a ratio of GDP should reverse by 8.5 percentage points between the last
quarter of 1994 and the second quarter of 1995, which is similar to the 8.7 percentage point
reversal observed in the data. It is not just the magnitude of the shock, but additionally
the association of the negative productivity shock with a change in trend that lies behind
the large sudden stop.
3

Lastly, using VAR analysis we explore the premise that the “cycle is the trend” for
emerging markets. Specifically, we use the methodology of King, Plosser, Stock and Watson
(1991) to perform a variance decomposition of output into permanent and transitory shocks.
This methodology rests on relatively plausible balanced growth assumptions regarding the
cointegration of income with consumption and investment. We find that roughly 50% of
income volatility in Canada at business cycle frequencies can be attributed to shocks to the
stochastic trend. This ratio is on par with what King et. al. (1991) find for the United
States. In contrast, the percentage of output volatility due to permanent shocks at business
cycle frequencies is 82% in the case of Mexico.
There exists a long and growing literature that seeks to explain the countercyclicality
of current accounts and sudden stops. Standard RBC models of open economies featuring
only transitory productivity shocks typically have a diﬃcult time capturing the behavior of
the current account and consumption. With forward looking agents and transitory shocks,
consumption should be “smooth” relative to income and this dampens the countercyclicality of the current account and volatility of consumption.2 As income approaches a random
walk, the incentive to smooth consumption in response to an income shock diminishes and
investment becomes more responsive. Both these elements promote a countercyclical current account. However, explanations of the diﬀerences in current account and consumption
behavior that rely solely on a more persistent AR(1) process face an empirical challenge:
In the data, (HP-filtered) log GDP in emerging markets exhibit roughly the same autocorrelation as in developed small open economies, a fact documented in the next section.
However, the correlation of net exports to output is three times the correlation observed in
developed economies.
Another aspect of previous RBC studies is a reliance on a particular set of preferences.
It has been argued that to obtain significantly countercyclical net exports in a standard
SOE model, it is helpful to rely on a specific preference structure, the so-called GreenwoodHercowitz-Huﬀman (GHH) preferences (Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Huﬀman (1988)).3 In
our framework, we show that the countercyclicality of the current account and the higher
volatility of consumption are predictions that follow even from a model with standard Cobb2
3

A benchmark SOE RBC model is Mendoza (1991).
For instance, see Correia, Neves and Rebelo (1995).

4

Douglas preferences.
A second approach in the literature relies on market imperfections to explain countercyclical current accounts. An important early paper is Atkeson (1991), in which capital
markets are subject to an asymmetry of information. A more recent paper by Neumeyer
and Perri (2002) also addresses business cycles in emerging markets, emphasizing movements exogenous movements in interest rates.and GHH preferences. Arellano and Mendoza
(2002) survey several credit frictions approaches to explaining sudden stops and conclude
that the ability of these models to quantitatively match the facts is still limited.
Our reading of the literature suggests that this paper is relatively unique in its ability
to match several aspects of business cycles in emerging markets, both qualitatively and
quantitatively. Our approach has been to take standard elements typically used to characterize developed market fluctuations and show that an empirically driven modification
to the underlying productivity process explains key features of emerging market cycles as
well. While we model a frictionless economy in the paper, this is not to say that market
imperfections are unimportant.4 The important question of what drives the trend remains,
and the answer may involve frictions. Shocks to trend output in emerging markets are often
associated with clearly defined changes in government policy, including dramatic changes
in monetary, fiscal, and trade policies.5 For instance, Restuccia and Schmitz (2004) provide
evidence of a 50% drop in productivity in the petroleum industry in Venezuela within five
years of its nationalization in 1975. Similarly, Schmitz and Teixeira (2004) document almost
a doubling of productivity in the Brazilian Iron-Ore Industry following its privatization in
1991. We view such dramatic changes in productivity following reforms and the undoing
of reforms as important characteristics of emerging markets. Why emerging markets are
subject to such policy swings is an important topic that we leave for future research.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 of the paper we document key
business cycle facts for emerging markets and developed small open economies. Section 3
4

In some cases, such frictions can be replicated by a model subject only to productivity shocks (see Chari,

Kehoe, and McGrattan 2004 for a discussion).
5
There is a large literature on the political economy of emerging markets in general, and the tensions
behind the sporadic appearances of pro-growth regimes in particular, that support our emphasis on trend
volatility (see, for example, Dornbusch and Edwards(1992)).

5

presents a standard SOE model augmented to include growth shocks, discusses parameter
estimation using GMM, and employs impulse responses to distinguish the impact of a
standard productivity shock versus a growth shock on consumption, investment, and the
current account. In Section 4 we discuss the model’s performance in matching several
key business cycle moments, Solow residuals and sudden stops in emerging and developed
markets. Lastly, Section 5 uses VAR methodology to explore the relative importance of
shocks to the stochastic trend at business cycle frequencies in Canada and Mexico through a
variance decomposition that rests on long-run identifying assumptions. Section 6 concludes.

2

Empirical Regularities of Emerging Market Business Cycles

In this section we document key aspects of SOE business cycles with emphasis on the
distinction between emerging and developed economies. Table 2 lists the countries included
in the analysis. The sample consists of middle income and developed economies that have at
least 40 quarters of data. To focus on “small” economies, we exclude all G-7 countries other
than Canada. This leaves us with 26 economies, 13 of which are classified as “emerging
markets”. We use the classification system used by Standard and Poors (2000) and the
International Finance Corporation to categorize a country as an emerging market.6 The
Appendix provides details on the source of data for each economy in the sample.
Table 2 reports key moments of the business cycle for each economy in our sample. After
deseasonalizing the series when a significant seasonal component was discovered,7 we filtered
the series to derive business cycle movements. We filtered each series using the HodrickPrescott (HP) filter with smoothing parameter 1600 and verified our results using the Band
Pass (BP) filter at frequencies between 6 and 32 quarters. Moments were calculated using
GMM and standard errors are reported in parentheses. The averages for each group are
reported in Table 1 for the alternative specifications of HP and BP filtering. The main
6

The two criteria used in defining a country as an emerging market is that (i) It is located in a low or

middle income country as defined by the World Bank and (ii) Its ‘investable’ market capitalization is low
relative to its most recent GNP figures. ‘Investable’ is defined as the share of market cap that is accessible
to foreign investors.
7
Deseasonalization is performed using the Census Bureau’s X-12 ARIMA program.

6

conclusions are insensitive to the choice of filtering methodology. We present details from
the HP filtering exercise.
Table 2A reports the volatility and autocorrelation of filtered log output and the first
diﬀerence of output. Emerging market economies on average have a business cycle two
times as volatile as their developed counterparts. The second column reveals that this
diﬀerence in volatility is also present in first-diﬀerences. The next two columns document
the first order autocorrelation of output and output growth. Note that filtered output
in emerging markets, on average, displays roughly the same autocorrelation as that of
developed economies. Explanations of strongly countercyclical current accounts in emerging
markets that rely on the relative persistence of shocks must confront this pattern as well.
In our quantitative model discussed in the next section we will constrain our analysis to
match the autocorrelation of both the level and the first diﬀerence of income.
Table 2B reports the volatility of consumption, investment, and the ratio of net exports to GDP, expressed as a percentage of output volatility. Unfortunately, due to data
limitations, we are unable to analyze the behavior of hours worked over the business cycle. Perhaps the most striking fact of Panel B is the volatility of consumption in emerging
markets. At business cycle frequencies, consumption is roughly forty percent more volatile
than income in emerging markets. Conversely, in developed economies the ratio is sightly
less than one on average. While individual economies show exceptions to the average, the
data suggest that emerging markets experience relatively volatile consumption at business
cycle frequencies even controlling for the already high income volatility. There is a large
literature on the excessive “smoothness” of consumption in the U.S. data (see e.g. Deaton
1992). Of course, whether consumption is excessively smooth in developed economies or excessively volatile in emerging markets depends on the underlying process for income. Once
we parameterize and calibrate the income processes for developed and emerging markets
in the next section, we can revisit the question of whether consumption is too volatile in
emerging markets. Contrary to the evidence on consumption, investment volatility (as a ratio of income volatility) is not dramatically diﬀerent in emerging markets than in developed
economies. This is perhaps surprising given the pattern of consumption and the relative
underdevelopment of financial markets in emerging markets.
Table 2C documents the correlation of consumption, investment, and net exports with
7

income at business cycle frequencies. A distinguishing feature of emerging market business
cycles is the large, negative correlation of net exports and output. The average correlation
for emerging markets is -0.51, with several countries approaching -0.8. Conversely, developed
economies exhibit weakly countercyclical trade balances, with an average correlation of 0.17. As noted in the introduction, an innovation of the paper is to link the volatility of
growth with the countercyclicality of the current account. Figure 1 reveals that there is
striking relationship between the countercyclicality of the trade balance and the volatility
of growth rates. In particular, the horizontal axis represents the standard deviation of GDP
growth for our sample of economies. The vertical axis represents the correlations between
net exports and GDP. The figure represents a significant negative relationship between the
two. In the next section, we document that this relationship is a prediction of a standard
business cycle model augmented to account for shocks to growth.
One concern with the empirical regularities documented in Tables 1 and 2 is the measurement error associated with emerging market data, particularly at the quarterly frequency.
We calculated the same set of moments reported in Table 1 using annual data over the same
time frame and found the patterns are robust to this particular concern. For both quarterly
and annual data, we found that the 1980s and 1990s separately exhibited similar patterns as
that observed from pooling both decades. However, using annual data, for which a longer
time series is available, we found that several of the distinguishing features of emerging
market business cycles documented using the more recent data are weaker or not present
at all in the 1960s or 1970s.8 This lack of stationarity is perhaps to be expected given the
dramatic transformation of these economies over the longer period. Specifically, many of
our emerging market economies were essentially closed economies during the earlier period.
We therefore confine our analysis to the patterns observed over the last 20 years. While the
length of the quarterly time series for some of our emerging market countries is quite short,
extending the series back in time would not be particularly useful as it is only in the most
recent decades that the phenomenon of “emerging market economies” is observed.
The “sudden stop” phenomenon has been described in detail in Calvo and Reinhart
8

Specifically, the volatility of consumption is greater than that of income for the emerging market group

in both the pre- and post-1980 period. However, the negative correlation between the trade balance and
GDP is larger for the developed sample (-0.34) than for the emerging market sample (-0.18) in the pre-1980
period. This is reversed in the post-1980 period, for which the corrlation is -0.32 and -0.54, respectively.

8

(2000) and Arellano and Mendoza (2002), among others. It is specifically associated with
an abrupt and large reversal in net capital inflows and the current account. An instance of
the sudden stop phenomenon is the Mexican Tequila crisis when there was an 8.7 percentage
point reversal in the ratio of trade balance to GDP, from a deficit of 4.45% to a surplus of
4 2%, between the fourth quarter of 1994 and the second quarter of 1995. Over the same
period, output fell by 12%, private consumption by 11% and investment by 40%.
In the next sections, we provide a simple explanation for the observed diﬀerences between
emerging and developed market fluctuations that relies on the diﬀerences in the underlying
income process for these countries. We argue that for emerging markets “the cycle is
the trend”. A well recognized fact about emerging markets is that they experience fairly
volatile cycles. A perhaps less appreciated fact is that emerging markets are subject to
extremely volatile shocks to the stochastic trend. This is evident in Figure 2. In Figure 2
we plot log GDP for three small open economies (SOE) – Canada, Mexico, and Argentina.
The plot for each economy includes the log level of GDP (where we have extracted any
significant seasonal component) and the stochastic trend. The latter was calculated using
the methodology of King, Plosser, Stock and Watson (1991), discussed in detail in section 5
and Appendix B, and represents fluctuations due to “permanent” shocks. To be precise, the
trend is obtained by setting the transitory shocks to zero and feeding only the permanent
shock through the system. This should not be confused with equating the trend to the
random walk component a la Beveridge and Nelson (1981). Casual observation of the
plots suggests that Canada, our benchmark developed SOE, experiences relatively small
fluctuations around a stable trend. On the other hand, Mexico and particularly Argentina
display a volatile trend that mirrors movements in GDP at high frequencies. Figure 3 plots
the Solow residual for Canada and Mexico, the calculation of which is discussed in section
4 and Appendix A. The movement in these series is clearly diﬀerent. The remainder of
this paper will be devoted to exploring this impression rigorously — both empirically and
theoretically — and linking it to the observed behavior of consumption, investment and net
exports over the business cycle.

9

3

Stochastic Growth Model

3.1

Model

Motivated by the above facts, in this section we construct a quantitative model of business cycles for a small open economy. The goal of this exercise is to replicate the key
characteristics of SOE business cycles, including the diﬀerences between emerging markets
and developed economies, in a simple, optimizing framework. The model is a standard,
single-good, single-asset small open economy model augmented to include transitory and
trend shocks to productivity. Specifically, technology is characterized by a Cobb-Douglas
production function that uses capital, Kt , and labor, Lt , as inputs
Yt = ezt Kt1−α (Γt Lt )α ,

(1)

where α ∈ (0, 1) represents labor’s share of output. The parameters zt and Γt represent productivity processes. The two productivity processes are characterized by diﬀerent stochastic
properties. Specifically, zt follows an AR(1) process

zt = ρz zt−1 + εzt

(2)

with |ρz | < 1, and εzt represents iid draws from a normal distribution with zero mean and
standard deviation σ z .
The parameter Γt represents the cumulative product of “growth” shocks. In particular,
Γt = gt Γt−1 =

t
Y

gs

s=0

ln(gt ) = (1 − ρg ) log(µg ) + ρg ln(gt−1 ) + εgt ,

¯ ¯
where ¯ρg ¯ < 1 and εgt represents iid draws from a normal distribution with zero mean

and standard deviation σ g . The term µg represents productivity’s long run mean growth
rate. We loosely refer to the realizations of g as the “growth” shocks as they constitute the
stochastic trend of productivity. We use separate notation for shocks to the “level” of productivity (zt ) and the “growth” of productivity (gt ) to simplify exposition and calibration.9
9

Of course, given the nature of the production function, we could designate a single productivity shock

(equal to the product of ez and Γα ) which would have a corresponding, more complicated dynamic process,
that would be isomorphic to our approach.

10

Given that a realization of g permanently influences Γ, output is nonstationary with a
stochastic trend. For any variable x, we introduce a hat to denote its detrended counterpart:

x
bt ≡

xt
.
Γt−1

Note that we normalize by trend productivity through period t − 1. This insures that if
xt is in the agent’s information set as of time t − 1, so is x
bt . The solution to the model is
invariant to the choice of normalization.

We consider two alternative specifications of the representative agents preferences over
consumption and leisure. The first is the so-called GHH preferences (introduced by Greenwood et al. (1988)) and the second is the standard Cobb-Douglas preferences. The reason
we consider both these specifications is to highlight the fact that our results are not sensitive
to the choice of preferences.
GHH preferences take the form
ut =

(Ct − τ Γt−1 Lυt )1−σ
,
1−σ

(3)

1
where υ > 1 and τ > 0. The elasticity of labor supply is given by ( υ−1
), and the intertem-

poral elasticity of substitution is given by

1
σ.

To insure that labor supply remains bounded

along the growth path, we include cumulative growth in the disutility of labor. This can
be motivated in a model of home production by assuming productivity in the home sector
grows at the same rate (with a lag) as in the market sector. Absent this term, the substitution eﬀect will always dominate the income eﬀect along the growth path, leading to
unbounded growth in hours worked.10 To ensure that utility is well defined we assume that
βµ1−σ
< 1. For detrended consumption to be well behaved in steady state we require that
g
1

β(1 + r∗ ) σ = µg , where r∗ is the world interest rate.

10

In the Cobb-Douglas case, period utility is
´1−σ
³
Ctγ (1 − Lt )1−γ
ut =
1−σ

(4)

The presence of Γt−1 in the utility function is not simply a renormalization, but rather a direct assump-

tion regarding preferences/home production.

11

where 0 < γ < 1. All other equations remain unchanged. For well-behaved consumption in
1−γ(1−σ)

steady state we now require β(1 + r∗ ) = µg

. In section 5, we will report results for

both preference specifications.
The equilibrium is characterized by maximizing the present discounted value of utility
subject to the production function (1) and per-period resource constraint:
Ct + Kt+1

φ
= Yt + (1 − δ)Kt −
2

µ

Kt+1
− µg
Kt

¶2

Kt − Bt + qt Bt+1 .

(5)

Capital depreciates at the rate δ and changes to the capital stock entail a quadratic adjust³
´2
−
µ
Kt . We assume international financial transactions are restricted
ment cost φ2 KKt+1
g
t
to one-period, risk-free bonds. The level of debt due in period t is denoted Bt and qt is

the time t price of debt due in period t + 1. The price of debt is sensitive to the level of
outstanding debt, taking the form used in Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2001)11
∙ B
¸
t+1
1
−b
∗
Γ
= 1 + rt = 1 + r + ψ e t
−1 ,
qt

(6)

where r∗ is the world interest rate, b represents the steady state level of debt, and ψ > 0
governs the elasticity of the interest rate to changes in indebtedness. In choosing the
optimal amount of debt, the representative agent does not internalize the fact that she
faces an upward sloping supply of loans.
In normalized form, the representative agent’s problem can be stated recursively:

bt , zt , gt ) =
bt, B
V (K
where u(Ĉt , Lt ) is

max

bt ,Lt ,K
b t+1 ,B
bt+1 }
{C

1−σ
(Cbt −τ Lυt )
1−σ

n
o
b t+1 , B
bt+1 , zt+1 , gt+1 )
u(Ĉt , Lt ) + f (β, gt )Et V (K

(7)

in the case of GHH preferences and

1−σ
Ĉtγ (1−Lt )1−γ

(

)

1−σ

in the

case of Cobb-Douglas preferences. f (β, gt ) is βgt1−σ in the case of GHH preferences and
γ(1−σ)

βgt

in the case of Cobb-Douglas preferences. The optimization is subject to the budget

constraint:
11

This is needed for the level of bond holdings to be determined in the steady state equilibrium. Otherwise,

bond holdings will not be a stationary variable. In the parameterizations, ψ is set at 0.001, implying a
negligible elasticity.

12

bt + gt K
b t+1
C

bt − φ
= Ybt + (1 − δ)K
2

Ã

b t+1
K
− µg
gt
bt
K

!2

The evolution of the capital stock is given by,

φ
= (1 − δ) K̂t + X̂t −
2

gt K̂t+1

Ã

K̂t+1
K̂t

bt + gt qt B
bt − B
bt+1 .
K

gt − µg

!2

K̂t

(8)

(9)

The first order conditions are
b t+1 :
K
bt+1 :
B

Ã

Ã

b t+1
K
uc (Ĉt , Lt ) gt + φ gt
− µg
bt
K

! !
gt

uc (Ĉt , Lt )gt qt + f (β, gt )Et

Lt :
uL (Ĉt, Lt ) + uc (Ĉt, Lt )

= f (β, gt )Et

∂V
=0
bt+1
∂B

∂ Ŷt
=0
∂Lt

∂V
b t+1
∂K

(10)

(11)

(12)

The key distinction between GHH and Cobb-Douglas preference is the income eﬀect
governing labor supply decisions in response to a productivity shock. In the case of GHH
preferences, (12) reduces to
=α
τ υLυ−1
t

Ŷt
.
Lt

(13)

Accordingly, the labor supply response in the case of GHH preferences is unmitigated by
consumption’s response. Hours worked therefore displays strong cyclicality. (Recall that
the disutility of labor is governed by trend growth, preserving an oﬀsetting income eﬀect
along the growth path.) The ease of substitution between leisure and consumption in the
GHH specification induces a procyclicality in consumption as well. That is, the incentive
to forgo some consumption in response to a positive transitory shock is minimized by the
sharp drop in leisure. Conversely, in the case of Cobb-Douglas preferences, the income eﬀect
mitigates labor’s response to productivity shocks as evident from the first order condition
for leisure:
(1 − γ) Ĉt
Ŷt
=α
γ (1 − Lt )
Lt
13

(14)

Labor supply now varies with consumption, with a higher level of consumption reducing
the incentive to work. Moreover, compared to the case of GHH preferences, leisure and
consumption are not easily substituted. Both eﬀects preserve the incentive to smooth
consumption over the business cycle by saving in response to a positive shock.
Existing data suggests that the correlation of hours with output is much lower in emerging markets (e.g. 0.52 for Argentina and 0.57 for Mexico compared to 0.86 for Canada),
suggesting room for a stronger income eﬀect on labor supply over the cycle. However, the
income eﬀect implicit in Cobb-Douglas preferences may still be too strong, potentially generating an initial decline in labor supply in response to a positive shock to trend growth.
With GHH preferences the initial response of labor supply is always positive. However, a
shock to trend will begin to reduce labor supply after one period due to our assumption regarding the disutility of labor. In the GHH framework, the persistence of the labor supply
response to trend shocks—and by extension the cyclicality of employment in an environment
dominated by shocks to trend — depends on how quickly trend productivity impacts the
disutility of labor (or the home sector). Given the measurement issues surrounding the
data on employment in emerging markets, we do not attempt to estimate this parameter
and therefore make no claims of matching the observed pattern for hours.
Given an initial capital stock, K̂0 and debt level, B̂0 , the behavior of the economy is
characterized by the first order conditions (10-12), the technology (1) and budget constraint
(8) and transversality conditions.

3.2

Parameter Estimation

We solve the normalized model numerically by log-linearizing the first order conditions and
resource constraints around the deterministic steady state. Given a solution to the normalized equations, we can recover the path of the non-normalized equilibrium by multiplying
through by Γt−1 .
We study two parameterizations of the model — the “Emerging Market” and “Developed”
parameterizations, estimated using data from Mexico and Canada, respectively. We use the
data to estimate parameters governing productivity and capital adjustment costs. All other
parameters are kept constant across the two parameterizations. In this way, we can isolate
14

how diﬀerences in the income process that characterize emerging markets and developed
economies translate into dynamics in consumption, investment, and the trade balance.
The non-estimated baseline parameters are detailed in Table 3. We follow the existing
literature in choosing the preference parameter values. We take a period in the model to
represent a quarter. The quarterly discount rate β is set to 0.98 and the risk-free world
1

interest rate is set to satisfy the condition that β(1 + r∗ ) σ = µg in the case of GHH
1−γ(1−σ)

preferences and β(1 + r∗ ) = µg

in the case of Cobb-Douglas preferences. Labor

supply elasticity is set to 2.5, implying that υ = 1.6. This is very similar to the 1.45 used by
Mendoza (1991), the 1.66 used by Neumeyer and Perri (2002), and the 1.7 used by Correia
et al (1995). We calibrate τ = 1.4 to achieve a steady state supply of labor equal to 0.28.
In the Cobb-Douglas case γ = 0.36. The labor share in production is standard and set at
0.68. The parameter for risk aversion is set at 2 and the depreciation rate to 0.03.
The coeﬃcient on the interest rate premium term is set at 0.001 which is the number
used in the literature (Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2001)), Neumeyer-Perri (2002). The
steady state level of debt to GDP is set at 0.1 for both specifications. We maintain a
common long run level of debt to isolate diﬀerences that arise from the income process.
The results are insensitive to alternate levels of steady state debt to GDP.
This leaves the following parameters to be estimated: (µg , σ z , ρz , σ g , ρg , φ). We estimate
these parameters using GM M. Specifically, given a parameter vector θ = (µg , σ z , ρz , σ g , ρg , φ),
we can solve the model and calculate the implied variances and cross-correlations of any
variables of interest (see Burnside (1999) for a description of how this is implemented
in practice). Based on the patterns described in Table 2, we select the following moments to be calculated: the standard deviations of log (filtered) income, investment, consumption, net exports to GDP, as well as the correlations of the latter three with output. We also calculate the mean and standard deviation of (unfiltered) income growth
and the autocorrelation of (filtered) income and (unfiltered) income growth. Letting m(θ)
be the vector of model moments for a given parameter vector θ, we then have m(θ) =
(σ(y), σ(∆y), σ(I), σ(c), σ(nx), ρ(yt , yt−1 ), ρ(∆yt , ∆yt−1 ), ρ(y, nx), ρ(y, c), ρ(y, I), E(∆y))0 , where
y, ∆y, c, I, nx represent filtered output, unfiltered income growth, filtered consumption,
filtered investment and filtered (net exports/GDP), respectively. Letting mi (θ) stand for

15

the ith element of m(θ), we have the following moment conditions:
©
ª
E m1 (θ)2 − yt2
©
ª
E m2 (θ)2 − (∆yt − m11 (θ))2
ª
©
E m3 (θ)2 − It2
©
ª
E m4 (θ)2 − c2t
©
ª
E m5 (θ)2 − nx2t
¾
½
yt yt−1
E m6 (θ) −
m1 (θ)2
¾
½
(∆yt − µg )(∆yt−1 − µg )
E m7 (θ) −
m2 (θ)2
½
¾
nxt yt
E m8 (θ) −
m1 (θ)m5 (θ)
½
¾
ct yt
E m9 (θ) −
m1 (θ)m4 (θ)
¾
½
It yt
E m10 (θ) −
m1 (θ)m3 (θ)
E {m11 (θ) − ∆yt }

= 0

(15)

= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0
= 0

Given these eleven moment conditions, we can estimate the six parameters using GM M.12 ,
The estimated parameters along with their standard errors are reported in Table 4.
The first two columns are estimates using Canadian data and GHH and Cobb-Douglas
preferences, respectively. These estimated parameters will be the basis of our “Developed”
model. The last two columns are the estimates using Mexican data under the two alternative
preference specifications, which will form the basis of our “Emerging Market” model. To
gauge the relative importance of shocks to trend, consider the ratio of σ g to σ z . In the
case of Canada, this ratio is 0.25 and 0.61, depending on preferences. The corresponding
ratios for Mexico are 2.5 and 5.4. That is, the relative importance of trend shocks is an
order of magnitude larger in Mexico than for Canada. Note as well that the autocorrelation
of transitory shocks are roughly equal in Canada and Mexico. This parameter plays an
important role in governing current account dynamics in standard models. However, the
12

In practice, we follow standard procedure by using the two step GM M procedure. We first use the

identity matrix as the weighting matrix to find consistent estimates of the parameters. We use these first
stage parameters to form the Newey-West variance-covariance matrix of the moment conditions. This matrix
is used in the second stage to estimate the reported parameters.

16

estimates downplay this parameter as a source behind the diﬀerent current account behavior
in emerging markets and developed economies. Our results instead rest on the data’s
implication that shocks to trend constitute a disproportionate share of total volatility in
emerging markets.
We allow the capital adjustment cost parameter, φ, to vary between Canada and Mexico.
However, the estimates do not diﬀer substantially across the two economies. Moreover, the
standard error is large. We have estimated the model treating this parameter as known a
priori and constant across the two economies with little diﬀerence in the model’s predictions.
Finally, the last line of Table 4 reports the test of the model’s overidentifying restrictions
as suggested by Hansen (1982). Hansen showed that the value of the GM M objective
function (i.e. the optimally weighted sum of squared residuals) evaluated at the minimum
is distributed Chi-square with n − k degrees of freedom, where n is the number of moment
conditions and k the number of parameters. The last line of Table 4 reports the P-value of
this test. In all cases, the model cannot be rejected at standard confidence intervals.13

3.3

Impulse Responses

To gain insight into why consumption and the trade balance behave diﬀerently over the
cycle in emerging markets, we first study the impulse responses to our two productivity
shocks. Figure 4 contrasts the impulse responses following from a 1% shock to the level of
technology (i.e. εz1 = .01) with the impulse responses to a 1% growth shock (i.e. εg1 = .01).
The figure depicts the response under the Emerging Market parameterization using GHH
preferences. In response to a transitory productivity shock, the trade-balance (as a fraction
of output) deteriorates by a small magnitude and very quickly overshoots the initial steadystate level. The magnitude of this initial deficit is two tenths of one percent of GDP. Given
that output remains above trend throughout the transition, a shock to z tends to produce
a positive relationship between output and the current account.
The response of the economy to a shock to trend growth is markedly diﬀerent. Following
a 1% growth shock , the trade balance deficit is 1.3% of GDP on impact and the deficit
13

As discussed by Newey (1985), failure to reject must be viewed cautiously given the limited power of

this test.

17

persists for 16 quarters following the shock. The magnitude of the initial deficit is six times
larger than was the case for a transitory shock. The source of this diﬀerence can be seen
in panel 2 of Figure 4. A growth shock induces a drop in savings in anticipation of even
higher income in the future so that consumption responds more than output. On the other
hand, the transitory shock induces saving in anticipation of lower income in the future,
resulting in a decline in

C
Y

on impact. The large consumption response is reminiscent of the

large consumption booms that frequently accompany current account deficits in emerging
markets. It also explains why consumption is more volatile than income in economies
primarily subject to growth shocks. The initial response of investment is larger in response
to a trend shock. Moreover, intuitively the permanent shock induces more persistence in
the investment response. In response to a trend shock, the relatively large and persistent
response of consumption and investment combine to push the trade balance into deficit and
keep it there along most of its transition back to the steady state growth path.
In Figure 5, we compare the impulse responses of the trade-balance to a transitory shock
(first panel) and growth shock (second panel) for varying levels of ρz and ρg . Naturally, the
biggest eﬀects on the trade-balance in both cases are when the shocks are most persistent.
However, there is an important distinction between persistence in levels and persistence
in first diﬀerences. The possibility that a growth process with little persistence can still
generate a counter-cyclical trade balance is evident in the impulse responses. On the other
hand, a positive transitory shock with limited persistence generates a trade surplus.

4
4.1

Emerging Vs. Developed Markets
Business Cycles

The impulse responses discussed in the previous section indicate that the response of the
trade balance and consumption to a productivity shock depends sensitively on whether the
shock is mean-reverting or represents a change in trend. The question then is whether quantitatively the diﬀerences observed between developed and emerging small open economies
can be attributed to the relative magnitudes of the two types of shocks. To answer this
question, we use the parameters reported in Table 3 and Table 4 and explore the stationary
distribution of the model economies In particular, recall that our “Developed” model econ-

18

omy estimated the productivity process parameters (µg , ρz , ρg , σ z , σ g ) using Canadian data
and the moments reported in Table 5. Similarly, our “Emerging Market” model matches
the same moments for Mexico.
Tables 5a and 5b report the key moments of our theoretical business cycles for the case
of Emerging Markets and Developed parameterizations, respectively. Standard errors were
obtained from the standard errors of the underlying estimated parameters using the Delta
method. For comparison, the table also reports the empirical moments for Mexico and
Canada originally presented in Table 2.
The models do a fairly good job of replicating the volatility of income and the growth
rate of income. The diﬀerence with the data lies in the fact that the model underpredicts
the volatility of the level of output and overpredicts the volatility of the first diﬀerence
of log income. This ability to match the moments for income and growth may not be
surprising given the estimation strategy. The fact that our productivity parameters have
a tight relationship with the moments for income suggest these moments will be weighted
heavily in the estimation.
The data in Table 2 strongly suggested that the volatility of consumption relative to
income was much higher in emerging markets. This feature is reflected in the model. The
ratio σ (c) /σ (y) is 0.77 in the Canadian data. The model generates a ratio of 0.82 for
GHH preferences and 0.77 for Cobb-Douglas preferences. As predicted by standard theory
in which transitory shocks predominate, consumers smooth consumption relative to income
in the Developed model. The model fitted to Mexican data predicts a ratio of 1.10 and 1.17,
depending on preferences. While this is less than the data’s ratio of 1.25, it clearly supports
the notion that consumption volatility should exceed income volatility in emerging markets.
Such“excess” volatility is perfectly consistent with optimizing consumers given the nature
of the underlying income process. Moreover, it is consistent with Cobb-Douglas preferences,
which typically have diﬃculty in generating suﬃcient consumption volatility.
In regard to net exports, the Emerging Market parameterization yields a strongly negative correlation with income that is essentially the same as that observed in the data.
Regardless of preferences, the emerging market model yields a correlation between net exports (as a percentage of GDP) and output that is roughly 85% of the observed correlation
19

of -0.74.The Developed parameterization predicts an acyclical trade balance, while the data
suggest that Canada experiences relative weak countercyclicality.

4.2

Solow Residuals

We have relied on the structure of the model and the response of key aggregates to identify
the parameters of the underlying productivity process. This approach has the virtue that
it uses the information implicit in the decisions made by agents. An associated risk is that
incorrect modelling choices will bias the estimates. An alternative would be to estimate the
parameters directly from the time series of Solow residuals. There are several problems with
this approach. Firstly, estimating quarterly Solow residuals for most countries, especially
developing countries, is limited by data availability for capacity utilization, materials used,
reliable measure of hours worked, etc. In the presence of terms of trade shocks and noncompetitive pricing, measuring Solow residuals is also problematic. Moreover, the short time
series available from emerging markets makes it impossible to reliably separate permanent
from transitory shocks. This is why we feel a structural model is necessary.
Nevertheless, we can check our results using what data is available on Solow residuals.
We have constructed a Solow residual series using the available data on hours, employment
and capital stock for Mexico and Canada. The Appendix contains the details of our calculations. For Mexico, we can construct a quarterly series for the Solow residual only starting
in 1987, while for Canada we calculate the series starting in 1981. As a test of our structural
model estimation, we compare the volatility and autocorrelation of the log empirical Solow
residuals (in diﬀerences and HP-filtered) with that implied by the estimated parameters.
Recall that in the model, the Solow residual SR = z + αΓ. The implied moments for the
Solow residual can therefore be calculated directly from the estimated parameters of the
process for z and Γ.
The comparison of the implied moments with those calculated from the observed sample
is reported in Table 6. The predictions of the model compare quite favorably with the data.
In the data, the growth rate of the Solow residual in Mexico has a volatility between 1.3 and
1.4, depending on the employment series used. The model parameters predict a volatilty
between 1.2 and 1.8. Moreover, the data suggest that Mexico is roughly twice as volatile as
20

Canada, a ratio similar to that suggested by the estimated parameters. The autocorrelations
of the observed Solow residual, both filtered and first diﬀerenced, are similar in Canada
and Mexico. The parameters estimated from the Cobb Douglas model generates a similar
persistence across countries, while the GHH specification generates higher persistence for
Mexico.

4.3

Sudden Stops

A major challenge to models of emerging markets is explaining the large current account
reversals observed in the data, the so-called “sudden stops”. We can explore how well
our model does in replicating such phenomena by asking whether the observed process for
Solow residuals generates a sudden stop when fed into the model. To do this, we first
use the Kalman filter and the estimated parameters (GHH specification) to decompose
the Solow residuals calculated using Mexican data into permanent (g) and transitory (z)
processes.14 We then feed these shocks through our model and calculate the predicted path
of net exports for the period surrounding the 1994-1995 Tequila crisis in Mexico. We plot
the predicted and actual path of net exports as a percentage of GDP in Figure 6, where we
have normalized both series to zero for the first quarter of 1991.. As the plot indicates, the
model generates a clear sudden stop during the Tequila crisis of late 1994. In the data, the
ratio of the trade balance to GDP reversed 8.7 percentage points between the last quarter of
1994 and the second quarter of 1995. The model predicts a reversal of 8.5 percentage points
over this same period. Similarly and also consistent with the data, the model predicts large
contractions in output, consumption and investment during the crisis. Figure 6, however,
also reveals that the model predicts a quicker resumption of trade deficits after the crisis
than is found in the data. The model’s prediction of a sudden stop in 1994 stems from the
fact that much of the observed drop in the Solow residual can be attributed to a shock to
trend. One should keep in mind that this attribution is a product of both the observed
path of Solow residuals and the parameters used in constructing the Kalman filter.
14

Specifically, we calculate E{gt |SR1 , ..., SRT , θ} and E{zt |SR1 , ..., SRT , θ} for each t. SR denotes the

observed Solow residuals and θ = {σz , ρz , σg , ρg , µg ). Note that we use the entire path of Solow residuals for
each point in time (the Kalman filter with “smoothing”).

21

5

Variance Decomposition

To match the distinguishing features of SOE business cycles, we emphasized the need for
relative volatility in trend growth rates for emerging markets and transitory shocks for
developed economies. To generate the results of the previous section, we calibrated the
relative volatilities to match the observed moments. In this sense, we ensured our simulated
productivity process was empirically valid. In this section, we provide additional evidence
that emerging market business cycle are predominantly driven by trend shocks relative to
the cycles of more developed economies. To do this, we utilize the methodology of King,
Plosser, Stock and Watson (1991), which we henceforth refer to as KP SW .
Specifically, we consider a three variable system consisting of (log) real output, private
consumption, and investment. Let y denote log output, c log consumption, and i investment
and x = (y, c, i)0 . We assume these variables are I(1) and the first diﬀerence of x can be
represented in reduced form as
∆xt = C(L)εt
where C(L) is a polynomial in the lag operator and εt is iid over time with a within
period 3 × 3 covariance matrix Σε . The KP SW methodology rests on two identifying
assumptions. The first is that log consumption and log investment are both cointegrated
with log income. That is, the “great ratios” of consumption to income and investment
to income are stationary. This is an implication of balanced growth. Consequently, we
represent the system as a vector error correction model:.

∆xt = α0 + BA0 xt−1 + α1 ∆xt−1 + ... + αk ∆xt−k + εt .
The columns of A are the cointegrating vectors
⎛
−1
⎜
⎜
A=⎜ 1
⎝
0

relating y to c and i, respectively. That is,
⎞
−1
⎟
⎟
0 ⎟.
⎠
1

Let η = (η 1 , η 2 , η 3 ) denote the “structural” shocks to the system such that η 1 denotes the

permanent shock. Given the two cointegrating vectors in our three variable system, there is

22

a single permanent shock. The second identification assumption in the KP SW methodology
is that the permanent shock is orthogonal to the transitory shocks: η 1 ⊥ η 2 , η 3 .15
These two assumptions are suﬃcient to extract the permanent shock η 1 from the observed reduced form shock process ε. The details of this translation are provided in Appendix
B. To provide a sense of the economy’s response to a permanent shock, we plot in figure 7
the impulse response of consumption, investment, and output to a one standard deviation
permanent shock using the parameters estimated with Mexican data. Similar to the theoretical impulse response presented in figure 4, log consumption responds essentially one for
one to a permanent shock. This implies that there is little change in the savings rate at the
onset of a permanent shock. Investment responds dramatically to a permanent shock. We
also plot the implied response of net exports to GDP. To obtain this impulse response, note
that N X/Y = 1 − C/Y − I/Y, recalling that Y is net of government expenditures. Then
d(N X/Y ) = (dY /Y − dC/C) ∗ C/Y + (dY /Y − dI/I) ∗ I/Y. Using the sample average of
C/Y and I/Y, we translate the impulse responses of y, c, and i, into d(NX/Y ). As predicted
by the previous section’s model, net exports responds strongly and negatively to a positive
permanent shock.
Having identified our permanent shock, we can decompose the variance of output, consumption, and investment at various horizons into that due to the permanent shock and
that due to transitory shocks. We report this decomposition for Canada and Mexico in Tables 9A-9B . At horizons of 12 quarters, roughly 50% of Canadian output volatility is due to
permanent shocks. While 50% may represent a sizeable percentage of variance, permanent
shocks account for roughly 82% of business cycle volatility in Mexico.
As was the case with income, the fraction of investment volatility at the 12 quarter
horizon due to permanent shocks is greater in Mexico than is the case for Canada, though
the numbers for investment in Canada seem implausibly low. The numbers are similar for
Mexico and Canada for consumption. Although we do not report variance decompositions
15

An additional, implicit assumption of KP SW is that the short run dynamics are adequately modelled

by a low order V AR. Given the length of data series increasing lag length severely eﬀect the degrees of
freedom. We use lag lengths of 8 for Canada and Mexico (KP SW use lag lengths of 8). The main finding
that permanent shocks explain a larger fraction of the variance in Mexico is unchanged when we increase
lag lengths to 12.

23

for our simulated models, it is the case that the model implies that almost all movements
in consumption are driven by permanent shocks. This is not surprising given the fact
that consumers are rational, infinitely lived, and can self insure in the model. At business
cycle frequencies, therefore, consumption in practice seems to exhibit a sluggish response
to permanent shocks even in emerging markets. The dichotomy between the data and the
model on this point is consistent with the notion that consumption is “excessively smooth”
relative to permanent income shocks (see Campbell and Deaton (1989)). It may be the case
that consumers face a signal extraction problem regarding whether a shock is permanent
or transitory, and therefore under react to a permanent shock.
Inevitably with any study of permanent shocks using a finite amount of data, standard
errors are large. In this regard, we take the results in the spirit of Cochrane (1988)’s
statement : “The most promising direct use for the point estimates of the size of a random
walk component...may be the calibration of a given model rather than a test that can
distinguish competing classes of models”. In that paper, Cochrane proposed an alternative
methodology for estimating the random walk component of a series using the variance of
long horizon diﬀerences. This approach is impractical in the emerging market context given
the absence of historical data. In part, we gain additional insight from the data we have by
exploiting the assumption that the series are cointegrated.16 Given the weak power of tests
of cointegration, we must rely on theory as a justification for this assumption.

6

Conclusion

In this paper we document several business cycle characteristics that distinguish emerging
markets from developed small open economies. We demonstrate that a standard business cycle model can explain important diﬀerences between emerging markets and developed economies, once we appropriately model the composition of shocks that eﬀect these
economies. In particular, we show that a model that appropriately accounts for the predominance of shocks to trend growth relative to transitory shocks characteristic of emerging
markets reproduces the behavior of the current account and consumption observed at business cycle frequencies. Moreover, when calibrated to the much stabler growth process of
16

See Faust and Leeper (1997) for a general critique of structural VARs identified through long-run re-

strictions.

24

developed small open economies, the same model generates weaker cyclicality of the current
account and lower volatility of consumption, consistent with the data. We do not assume
diﬀerent market frictions for the two types of economies. However, this is not to say that
market imperfections are not important in emerging markets. In particular, these features
may be necessary in understanding why what we term productivity is so volatile in emerging markets. Our goal has been to evaluate the extent to which the composition of shocks
within a standard model can explain the facts, without recourse to additional frictions, and
we find that the standard model does surprisingly well.

25

Appendix A: Data
The data sources and sample lengths are listed in Table A1. Consumption is “household
consumption” and excludes government consumption. When household consumption is
unavailable, we use “private consumption”, which combines household and non-profit institution consumption. Investment is gross fixed capital formation. Net exports is constructed
as the diﬀerence between exports and imports. The GDP deflator was used to convert all
series into real values. In the case of Argentina, private consumption data start in 1993
and accordingly this is the sample we use for Tables 2A-2C. To compute the plot of the
stochastic trend in Figure 2, however, we use the longer sample period starting in 1980
for which consumption includes government consumption. For Canada we use the longer
data series, starting in 1959, while performing the variance decomposition. The results are
unchanged if we start the sample in 1980.
To obtain Solow residuals, we calculate a series for capital stock (K) and both hours and
employment (L) for Canada and Mexico. The residual is defined as ln(Yt ) − α ln(Lt ) − (1 −
α) ln(Kt ). We use α = 0.68 for both countries. For Canada, employment is the Canadian
Civilian Employment series. To calculate total hours, we use hours per worker in manufacturing as a proxy for average hours per worker and scale the employment series accordingly.
For Mexico, the employment series was calculated as (1-unemployment rate)*(rate of activity of pop over 12 years of age)*(fraction of pop over 12 years of age)*(total pop). All series
were obtained from the Mexican Government Statistical database (through Datastream)
with the exception of total population series, which is from the World Development Indicators. The series was extended back to 1987 using Neumeyer and Perri (2004). For Mexico,
quarterly hours per worker in manufacturing was calculated from OECD data as (total
hours in Manuf)/(total employment in manuf). This ratio was then used to calculate total
hours from total employment. The capital stock series was calculated using the perpetual
inventory method. The Penn World Tables report gross fixed capital formation starting in
1950. As in Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2002), we assume that capital and output grew at
the same rate from 1950 to 1960. The initial capital stock for 1949 was then calculated
as the ratio of investment in 1950 to the sum of the depreciation rate and annual average
growth rate for 1950-60. We use a 10% annual depreciation rate. Starting with the capital
stock in 1949 and updating using the data for investment from the Penn World Tables we
26

arrive at the capital stock for 1980. Post 1980 we use the quarterly investment series from
OECD.

Appendix B: Identification and Estimation of Variance Decompositions
In this appendix we fill in the details for the KP SW methodology used in section 7. Our
reduced form V ECM can be expressed:

∆xt = µ + C(L)εt
where x = (y, c, i)0 . The structural model is given by

∆xt = µ + Γ(L)ηt .
The structural shocks η are related to ε by Γ0 η t = εt , where we assume Γ−1
0 exists. Our
balanced growth (cointegration) assumptions states
⎡
1 0 0
⎢
⎢
Γ(1) = ⎢ 1 0 0
⎣
1 0 0

⎤
⎥
⎥
⎥
⎦

where the first element of η, denoted η1 , is the permanent shock and we have normalized its

long run impact to one. This last assumption is without loss of generality as the variance
−1
e
of η is unrestricted. Note that C(1) = Γ(1)Γ−1
0 . Let D represent the first row of Γ0 and A

be a 3 × 1 vector of ones. Then

e
C(1) = AD.

We can solve for D as

e0 A)
e −1 A
e0 C(1).
D = (A

1
The fact that η t = Γ−1
0 εt implies that the first element of η can be recovered as η t = Dεt .
0

We also have σ 2η1 = DΣε D , where we have made use of the fact that η 1 ⊥ η 2 , η 3 .
To obtain the impulse response to a permanent shock, we start with Γ(L) = C(L)Γ0 .
Let H denote the first column of Γ0 . The first column of Γ(L) is therefore C(L)H. From
27

0

1
εt = Γ0 η t , we have Γ−1
0 Σε = E(η t η t )Γ0 . The orthogonality assumption regarding η implies

that DΣε = σ 2η1 H 0 , which gives
H = Σε D0 /σ 2η1 .
The impulse responses and variance decompositions regarding η1t can then be recovered
from Γ(L) ∗ (η1 , 0, 0)0 = C(L)Hη 1 . The stochastic trend depicted in figure 2 is constructed

by feeding the recovered η 1t through Γ(L). Note our stochastic trend is defined as all
fluctuations due to permanent shocks. This obviously diﬀers from the classical BeveridgeNelson decomposition in that we are not restricting the trend to be a random walk.

28

References
[1] Aguiar, Mark and Gita Gopinath (2004), “Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the
Current Account”, working paper.
[2] Arellano, Cristina and Enrique Mendoza (2002), “Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’
in Small Open Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle framework for Emerging
Market Crises, NBER Working Paper No. w8880.
[3] Atkeson, Andrew (1991), “International Lending with Moral Hazard and Risk of Repudiation”, Econometrica, vol 59, pp 1069-1089.
[4] Backus, David, Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn. E. Kydland (1995), “International Business
Cycles: Theory and Evidence”, Frontiers of Business Cycle Research, ed. Thomas F.
Cooley. Princeton University Press. Princeton, New Jersey.
[5] Beveridge, Stephen, and Charles R. Nelson (1981), “A New Approach to Decomposition
of Economic Time Series into Permanent and Transitory components with Particular
attention to the Measurement of the Business Cycle”, Journal of Monetary Economics
7: 151-74.
[6] Burnside (1999), “Real Business Cycle Models: Linear Approximation and GMM Estimation”, working paper.
[7] Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen Reinhart (2000), “When Capital Inflows come to
a Sudden Stop: Consequences and Policy Options”, in Peter Kenen and Alexandre
Swoboda, “Key Issues in Reform of the International Monetary and Financial System”,
Washington DC: International Monetary Fund, 175-201.
[8] Chari, V.V., Patrick Kehoe and Ellen McGrattan (2004), “Business Cycle Accounting”,
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staﬀ Report Number 328.
[9] Cochrane, John (1988), “How Big is the Random Walk in GNP?”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol 96(5)893-920.
[10] Correia, Isabel, Joao C. Neves, Sergio Rebelo (1995), Business Cycles in Small Open
Economies. European Economic Review 39,1089-1113.

29

[11] Dornbusch, Rudiger and Sebastian Edwards (1992), “Macroeconomics of Populism in
Latin America”, NBER Conference Volume.
[12] Faust, Jon and Eric Leeper (1997), “When Do Long-Run Identifying Restrictions Give
Reliable Results?”, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Vol 15(3), 345-353.
[13] Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Hoﬀman (1988), “Investment,
Capacity Utilization, and Real Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, June
1988, 78, 402-17.
[14] King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James Stock, and Mark Watson (1991), “Stochastic
Trends and Economic Fluctuations”, American Economic Review, Vol 81(4), 819-840.
[15] Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok and Charles H.Whiteman (2003), International
Business Cycles: World, Region and Country-Specific factors. American Economic
Review, Vol 93 (4).
[16] Mendoza, Enrique (1991), Real Business Cycles in a Small Open Economy, American
Economic Review, September, 797-818.
[17] Neumeyer, Pablo A. and Fabrizio Perri (2004), “Business Cycles in Emerging Markets:
The Role of Interest Rates”, NBER Working paper no. w10387.
[18] Restuccia, Diego and Schmitz, James (2004) “Nationalization’s Impact on Output and
Productivity: The case of Venezuelan Minerals”, working paper.
[19] Schmitt-Grohe, S., Uribe, M.(2003), “Closing Small Open Economy Models”, Journal
of International Economics, 61, 163-185.
[20] Schmitz, James and Teixeira, Arilton (2004), “Privatization’s Impact on Private Productivity: The case of Brazilian Iron Ore”, working paper.
[21] Sims, Christopher (1980), “Macroeconomics and Reality”, Econometrica 48, 1-49.
[22] Standard and Poor’s, (2000), “Emerging Stock Markets Factbook 2000” McGraw Hill
Company, New York, NY.
[23] Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2003), “ Understanding Changes in International Business Cycle Dynamics”, NBER Working Paper no. 9859.
30

Table 1: Emerging Vs Developed Markets (Averages)
Emerging Markets

Developed Markets

HP

BP

HP

BP

σ (Y )

2.74

2.02

1.34

1.04

σ ( ∆Y )

1.87

1.87

0.95

0.95

ρ (Y )

0.76

0.86

0.75

0.90

ρ ( ∆Y )

0.23

0.23

0.09

0.09

σ ( C ) / σ (Y )

1.45

1.32

0.94

0.94

σ ( I ) / σ (Y )

3.91

3.96

3.41

3.42

σ ( TB / Y )

3.22

2.09

1.02

0.71

ρ (TB / Y ,Y )

-0.51

-0.58

-0.17

-0.26

ρ ( C ,Y )

0.72

0.74

0.66

0.69

ρ ( I ,Y )

0.77

0.87

0.67

0.75

This table lists average values of the moments for the group of emerging (13) and developed (13) economies.
The values for each country separately are reported in Table 2. HP refers to hp-filtered data using a
smoothing parameter of 1600. BP refers to Band Pass filtered data at frequencies between 6 and 32 quarters
with 12 leads and lags. The standard deviations are in percentages. The definition of an emerging market
follows the classification in S&P (2000).

Figure 1
0.28

Israel

Norway

Austria

0.08

Sweden Brazil
Correlation of Net Exports with GDP

0

Switzerland
0.005
0.01
Belgium

0.015

0.02

0.025

0.03

Denmark
Portugal

-0.12

Netherlands
Canada
Peru

New Zealand
-0.32

Australia
Slovak Republic
Finland

Philippines

-0.52
Spain

-0.72

Korea
Argentina
Mexico

Malaysia

Ecuador
Thailand
-0.92
Standard Deviation of Growth Rates

Turkey

0.035

0.04

Table 2A: Volatility and Autocorrelation of Filtered Income and Growth Rates
σ(Y)

σ(ΔY)

ρ(Yt,Yt-1)

ρ(ΔYt,ΔYt-1)

Emerging Markets

Argentina

3.68

(0.42)

2.28

(0.37)

0.85

(0.02)

0.61

(0.08)

Brazil

1.98

(0.20)

1.69

(0.33)

0.65

(0.04)

0.35

(0.15)

Ecuador

2.44

(0.52)

1.52

(0.38)

0.82

(0.05)

0.15

(0.14)

Israel

1.95

(0.14)

1.99

(0.17)

0.50

(0.10)

0.27

(0.05)

Korea

2.51

(0.46)

1.71

(0.27)

0.78

(0.08)

0.17

(0.19)

Malaysia

3.10

(0.65)

1.84

(0.37)

0.85

(0.02)

0.56

(0.16)

Mexico

2.48

(0.33)

1.53

(0.25)

0.82

(0.01)

0.27

(0.11)

Peru

3.68

(0.70)

2.97

(.50)

0.64

(0.11)

0.12

(0.10)

Philippines

3.00

(0.43)

1.66

(0.27)

0.87

(0.07)

0.17

(0.15)

Slovak Republic

1.24

(0.20)

1.06

(0.24)

0.66

(0.18)

0.20

(0.13)

South Africa

1.62

(0.16)

0.82

(0.11)

0.89

(0.06)

0.58

(0.06)

Thailand

4.35

(0.65)

2.25

(0.40)

0.89

(0.02)

0.42

(0.20)

Turkey

3.57

(0.41)

2.92

(0.36)

0.67

(0.06)

0.05

(0.13)

MEAN

2.74

1.87

0.76

0.23

Developed Markets

Australia

1.39

(0.21)

0.84

(0.10)

0.84

(0.04)

0.36

(0.10)

Austria

0.89

(0.09)

0.47

(0.00)

0.90

(0.08)

0.52

(0.09)

Belgium

1.02

(0.09)

0.71

(0.05)

0.79

(0.05)

0.18

(0.09)

Canada

1.64

(0.21)

0.81

(0.09)

0.91

(0.04)

0.55

(0.11)

Denmark

1.02

(0.16)

1.04

(0.09)

0.49

(0.14)

0.15

(0.11)

Finland

2.18

(0.39)

1.32

(0.11)

0.85

(0.09)

0.01

(0.20)

Netherlands

1.20

(0.13)

0.88

(0.09)

0.77

(0.07)

0.03

(0.08)

New Zealand

1.56

(0.20)

1.13

(0.14)

0.77

(0.10)

0.02

(0.13)

Norway

1.40

(0.10)

1.46

(0.13)

0.48

(0.11)

0.46

(0.10)

Portugal

1.34

(0.14)

1.03

(0.13)

0.72

(0.11)

0.28

(0.17)

Spain

1.11

(0.12)

0.75

(0.09)

0.82

(0.03)

0.08

(0.18)

Sweden

1.52

(0.20)

1.45

(0.32)

0.53

(0.21)

0.35

(0.11)

Switzerland

1.11

(0.13)

0.50

(0.04)

0.92

(0.05)

0.81

(0.04)

MEAN

1.34

0.95

0.75

0.09

Note: The series for each country was deseasonalized if a significant seasonal component was identified. The income series were
then logged and filtered using an HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 1600. For growth rates the unfiltered series was used.
GMM estimated standard errors are reported in parenthesis. The standard deviations are reported in percentage terms.

Table 2B: Relative Volatility of Consumption, Investment, and Net Exports
σ(C)/σ(Y)

σ(I)/σ(Y)

σ(NX/Y)

Emerging Markets

Argentina

1.38

(0.07)

2.53

(0.01)

2.56

(0.67)

Brazil

2.01

(0.07)

3.08

(0.03)

2.61

(0.92)

Ecuador

2.39

(0.01)

5.56

(0.01)

5.68

(1.07)

Israel

1.60

(0.00)

3.42

(0.04)

2.12

(0.18)

Korea

1.23

(0.06)

2.50

(0.04)

2.32

(0.51)

Malaysia

1.70

(0.03)

4.82

(0.02)

5.30

(0.77)

Mexico

1.24

(0.05)

4.05

(0.02)

2.19

(0.32)

Peru

0.92

(0.08)

2.37

(0.01)

1.25

(0.15)

Philippines

0.62

(0.12)

4.66

(0.02)

3.21

(0.34)

Slovak Republic

2.04

(0.08)

7.77

(0.02)

4.29

(0.56)

South Africa

1.61

(0.08)

3.94

(0.03)

2.57

(0.50)

Thailand

1.09

(0.07)

3.49

(0.01)

4.58

(0.85)

Turkey

1.09

(0.06)

2.71

(0.03)

3.23

(0.40)

MEAN

1.45

3.91

3.22

Developed Markets

Australia

0.69

(0.00)

3.69

(0.03)

1.08

(0.12)

Austria

0.87

(0.14)

2.75

(0.04)

0.65

(0.04)

Belgium

0.81

(0.13)

3.72

(0.04)

0.91

(0.07)

Canada

0.77

(0.09)

2.63

(0.03)

0.91

(0.08)

Denmark

1.19

(0.10)

3.90

(0.02)

0.88

(0.14)

Finland

0.94

(0.07)

3.26

(0.02)

1.11

(0.10)

Netherlands

1.07

(0.09)

2.92

(0.03)

0.71

(0.09)

New Zealand

0.90

(0.10)

4.38

(0.02)

1.37

(0.18)

Norway

1.32

(0.12)

4.33

(0.03)

1.73

(0.19)

Portugal

1.02

(0.11)

2.88

(0.05)

1.16

(0.12)

Spain

1.11

(0.07)

3.70

(0.03)

0.86

(0.07)

Sweden

0.97

(0.14)

3.66

(0.04)

0.94

(0.09)

Switzerland

0.51

(0.31)

2.56

(0.05)

0.96

(0.09)

MEAN

0.94

3.41

1.02

Note: The series for each country was deseasonalized if a significant seasonal component was identified. The series were then
logged (except for TB/Y) and filtered using an HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 1600. GMM estimated standard errors are
reported in parenthesis. The standard deviation of the ratio of net export to GDP are reported in percentage terms.

Table 2C: Contemporaneous Correlation with Output
ρ(C,Y)

ρ(I,Y)

ρ(NX/Y,Y)

Emerging Markets

Argentina

0.90

(0.14)

0.96

(0.04)

-0.70

(0.17)

Brazil

0.41

(0.22)

0.62

(0.19)

0.01

(0.19)

Ecuador

0.73

(0.11)

0.89

(0.09)

-0.79

(0.11)

Israel

0.45

(0.15)

0.49

(0.12)

0.12

(0.16)

Korea

0.85

(0.08)

0.78

(0.15)

-0.61

(0.17)

Malaysia

0.76

(0.15)

0.86

(0.14)

-0.74

(0.18)

Mexico

0.92

(0.09)

0.91

(0.10)

-0.74

(0.14)

Peru

0.78

(0.17)

0.85

(0.14)

-0.24

(0.13)

Philippines

0.59

(0.14)

0.76

(0.11)

-0.41

(0.16)

Slovak Republic

0.42

(0.16)

0.46

(0.21)

-0.44

(0.13)

South Africa

0.72

(0.09)

0.75

(0.13)

-0.54

(0.13)

Thailand

0.92

(0.10)

0.91

(0.08)

-0.83

(0.12)

Turkey

0.89

(0.09)

0.83

(0.10)

-0.69

(0.13)

MEAN

0.72

0.77

-0.51

Developed Markets

Australia

0.48

(0.13)

0.80

(0.14)

-0.43

(0.16)

Austria

0.74

(0.20)

0.75

(0.11)

0.10

(0.13)

Belgium

0.67

(0.14)

0.62

(0.14)

-0.04

(0.10)

Canada

0.88

(0.08)

0.77

(0.13)

-0.20

(0.21)

Denmark

0.36

(0.20)

0.51

(0.11)

-0.08

(0.18)

Finland

0.84

(0.09)

0.88

(0.10)

-0.45

(0.17)

Netherlands

0.72

(0.11)

0.70

(0.11)

-0.19

(0.09)

New Zealand

0.76

(0.11)

0.82

(0.13)

-0.26

(0.15)

Norway

0.63

(0.12)

0.00

(0.11)

0.11

(0.11)

Portugal

0.75

(0.12)

0.70

(0.14)

-0.11

(0.15)

Spain

0.83

(0.09)

0.83

(0.12)

-0.60

(0.12)

Sweden

0.35

(0.17)

0.68

(0.13)

0.01

(0.12)

Switzerland

0.58

(0.14)

0.69

(0.17)

-0.03

(0.17)

MEAN

0.66

0.67

-0.17

Note: The series for each country was deseasonalized if a significant seasonal component was identified. The series were
then logged (except for TB/Y)and filtered using an HP filter with a smoothing parameter of 1600. GMM estimated standard
errors are reported in parenthesis.

Figure 2: Stochastic Trends estimated using the KPSW(1991) methodology
Canada: Stochastic Trend
7
6.8
6.6
6.4
6.2
6

Log Income
Stochastic Trend

5.8
5.6
5.4
5.2
5
1959

1964

1969

1974

1979

1984

1989

1994

1999

Mexico: Stochastic Trend
14.3
14.25
14.2
14.15
14.1
14.05
14

Log Income
Stochastic Trend

13.95
13.9
13.85
13.8
1982

1987

1992

1997

Argentina: Stochastic Trend

19.5
19.45
19.4
19.35
19.3
19.25

Log GDP
Stochastic Trend

19.2
19.15
19.1
19.05
19
1982

1985

1989

1993

1997

2000

Note: Stochastic trend is calculated using the methodology described in section 5 and Appendix B. See text for details.

Figure 3: Solow Residuals: Mexico and Canada (1987.1-2003.2)
8.75

-2.15
Jan-87

Jan-91

Jan-95

Jan-99

Jan-03

8.7
-2.2
8.65

-2.25

Mexico (left scale)
Canada (right scale)

8.6
8.55

-2.3

8.5
8.45

-2.35
8.4
-2.4

Note: See section 4 and Appendix A for details on the data sources and the calculation of Solow residuals.

8.35

Table 3: Benchmark Parameter Values

GHH

Cobb Douglas

Time preference rate
Labor Exponent (utility)

β
υ

0.98

0.98

1.6

NA

Labor Coefficient (utility)

τ

1.4

NA

Consumption Exponent (utility)

γ

NA

0.36

Steady-state debt to GDP

b

10%

10%

Coefficient on interest rate premium

ψ

0.001

0.001

Labor Exponent (Production)

α

0.68

0.68

Risk Aversion

σ

2

2

Depreciation Rate

δ

0.03

0.03

Table 4: Estimated Parameters

Mean Growth Rate

µg

“Developed”
(Canada)
GHH Cobb Douglas

“Emerging Market”
(Mexico)
GHH Cobb Douglas

1.007

1.007

1.006

1.005

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

Volatility of z

σz

0.57
(0.04)

0.72
(0.09)

0.41
(0.42)

0.46
(0.37)

Autocorrelation of z

ρz

0.88
(0.08)

0.96
(0.02)

0.94
(0.29)

0.94
(0.13)

Volatility of g

σg

0.14

0.44

1.09

2.50

(0.06)

(0.32)

(0.37)

(0.27)

0.94

0.50

0.72

0.06

(0.04)

(0.26)

(0.08)

(0.04)

2.63
(1.25)

3.76
(0.52)

3.79
(0.96)

2.82
(0.48)

0.12

0.16

0.13

0.44

Autocorrelation of g

Adjustment Cost Parameter
Test of Model Fit
(P-Value)

ρg
φ

Note: GMM estimates with standard errors in parentheses. See text for details of estimation. Standard deviations are
reported in percentage terms.

Figure 4: Impulse Responses from the Model
Ratio of Trade Balance to GDP
0.004
0.002
0.000
-4

1

6

11

16

21

26

-0.002
-0.004
-0.006

z shock
g shock

-0.008
-0.010
-0.012
-0.014

Ratio of Consumption to GDP
0.005
0.004

z shock
g shock

0.003
0.002
0.001
0.000
-4

1

6

11

16

21

26

-0.001
-0.002
-0.003
-0.004
-0.005

Ratio of Investment to GDP
0.060

0.050

z shock
g shock

0.040

0.030

0.020

0.010

0.000
-4

1

6

11

16

21

26

-0.010

Note: Figure 4 contrasts the impulse response following a 1% shock to the level of technology with the
impulse response to a 1% growth shock. The values plotted are deviations from steady state. The
parameterization corresponds to the Emerging Market Parameterization using GHH preferences.

Figure 5: Sensitivity to ρz and ρg
Ratio of Trade Balance to GDP
Response to z shock
0.010
rhoz=0.1
0.008

rhoz=0.5
rhoz=0.95

0.006
0.004
0.002
0.000

-4

1

6

11

16

21

26

21

26

-0.002
-0.004

Ratio of Trade Balance to GDP
Response to g shock
0.020
0.010
0.000
-4

1

6

11

16

-0.010
-0.020
-0.030
-0.040

rhog=0.1
rhog=0.5
rhog=0.95

-0.050
-0.060

Note: Figure 5 contrasts the impulse response of the trade balance to a transitory (first panel) and growth shock (second panel)
for varying values of the persistence of the level shock and growth shock respectively. The values plotted correspond to
deviations from steady state.

Table 5: Theoretical Business Cycle Moments
Table 5a: Moments for “Developed Market”

Data

σ ( y)

σ (∆y )

σ (I )

σ (c)

σ (nx)

ρ ( y)

ρ (∆y )

ρ ( y, nx)

ρ ( y, c)

ρ ( y, I )

1.64

0.81

4.33

1.27

0.91

0.91

0.55

-0.20

0.88

0.77

GHH

Table 5b: Moments for “Emerging Market”

Data

CD

1.30

1.39

(0.13)

(0.09)

1.06

0.97

(0.06)

(0.06)

4.09

4.08

(0.37)

(0.33)

1.12

1.08

(0.15)

(0.12)

0.91

0.96

(0.08)

(0.08)

0.74

0.79

(0.04)

(0.01)

0.06

0.11

(0.05)

(0.04)

-0.01

0.05

(0.13)

(0.12)

0.87

0.80

(0.05)

(0.04)

0.77

0.81

(0.07)

(0.05)

σ ( y)

σ (∆y )

σ (I )

σ (c)

σ (nx)

ρ ( y)

ρ (∆y )

ρ ( y, nx)

ρ ( y, c)

ρ ( y, I )

2.48

1.52

10.08

3.08

2.19

0.82

0.27

-0.74

0.92

0.91

GHH

CD

2.33

2.32

(0.28)

(0.26)

1.57

1.58

(0.16)

(0.16)

9.13

9.60

(1.22)

(1.15)

2.57

2.71

(0.37)

(0.32)

1.82

2.12

(0.23)

(0.22)

0.82

0.81

(0.03)

(0.02)

0.23

0.21

(0.07)

(0.07)

-0.62

-0.64

(0.09)

(0.07)

0.96

0.94

(0.01)

(0.02)

0.85

0.88

(0.04)

(0.03)

Note: Theoretical moments are calculated from the model using the parameters reported in Tables 3 and 4. Standard errors
reported in the parentheses are calculated from the parameter standard errors reported in Table 4 using the Delta method.
Standard errors for the data sample moments are not reported here but can be found in Table 2.

Table 6A: Solow Residual for Canada (1981.1-2003.2)
Data
Model
Hours Based
Employment Based
GHH

CD

σ ( SR )

0.93

1.04

0.85

1.14

ρ ( SR )

0.75

0.85

0.76

0.77

σ (∆SR )

0.68

0.59

0.64

0.81

ρ (∆SR )

-0.06

0.21

0.12

0.08

Table 6B: Solow Residual for Mexico (1987.1-2003.2)
Data
Model
Hours Based
Employment Based
GHH

CD

σ ( SR )

1.80

1.99

2.30

2.32

ρ ( SR )

0.77

0.77

0.91

0.74

σ (∆SR )

1.30

1.41

1.15

1.77

ρ (∆SR )

0.20

0.22

0.62

0.05

Note: Solow residuals are calculated as ln(Yt ) − α ln( Lt ) − (1 − α ) ln( K t ). σ ( SR) and ρ ( SR) represent
the standard deviation (%) and autocorrelation of the HP-filtered (smoothing parameter 1600) Solow
residual series. σ (∆SR) and σ (∆SR ) represent the same for the growth rate of the Solow residual.
Appendix A describes the data used in calculating the residual.

Figure 6: Sudden Stop – Mexico Tequila Crisis (1994-1995)
0.1
Data TB/Y
Model TB/Y

0.08

Tequila Crisis

Deviation from 1991Q1

0.06

0.04

Sudden Stop

0.02

0
1991Q1

1992Q1

1993Q1

1994Q1

1995Q1

1996Q1

1997Q1

-0.02

-0.04

-0.06

Note: Both series are deviations from 1991Q1. The dashed line represents the observed ratio of net exports to GDP in Mexico
and the solid line represents the ratio predicted by the model from the observed Solow residuals. See text for details.

Figure 7: Impulse Responses from a Vector Error Correction Model
Impulse Response to One Std Dev Permanent Shock (Mexico Data)
7%

6%

5%

output
consumption
investment

4%

3%

2%

1%

0%
1

5

9

13

17

21

25

29

Response of TB/Y to One Std Deviation Permanent Shock (Mexico Data)
0.002

0.000
1

5

9

13

17

21

25

29

-0.002

-0.004

-0.006

-0.008

-0.010

Note: The figure plots the impulse responses in a three variable VAR to a one standard deviation permanent shock, using
Mexican data and the VAR methodology discussed in section 5 and Appendix B. The first panel plots the impulse response of log
output, log consumption, and log investment. The second panel plots the implied response of net exports as a ratio to GDP.

Table 7A: Variance Decomposition for
Canada
Horizon

Table 7B: Variance Decomposition for
Mexico

Y

C

I

Y

C

I

1

0.39
(0.26)

0.61
(0.27)

0.00
(0.22)

Horizon
1

0.85
(0.38)

0.19
(0.29)

0.34
(0.24)

4

0.29
(0.25)

0.56
(0.27)

0.00
(0.23)

4

0.72
(0.32)

0.42
(0.26)

0.44
(0.25)

8

0.41
(0.26)

0.57
(0.27)

0.02
(0.24)

8

0.79
(0.33)

0.49
(0.27)

0.48
(0.25)

12

0.49
(0.26)

0.59
(0.26)

0.06
(0.24)

12

0.82
(0.32)

0.53
(0.28)

0.50
(0.25)

16

0.55
(0.25)

0.62
(0.25)

0.11
(0.25)

16

0.85
(0.31)

0.57
(0.27)

0.50
(0.24)

20

0.59
(0.23)

0.66
(0.23)

0.15
(0.24)

20

0.86
(0.28)

0.60
(0.25)

0.49
(0.22)

24

0.63
(0.21)

0.70
(0.21)

0.19
(0.24)

24

0.86
(0.26)

0.60
(0.23)

0.49
(0.21)

∞

1.00

1.00

1.00

∞

1.00

1.00

1.00

Note: The tables indicate the fraction of the forecast error variance attributed to the permanent shock. This is based on the VAR
methodology discussed in section 5 and Appendix B. The estimates were calculated using 8 lags of ∆Xt , where X is a vector of
log output, log consumption and log investment, and one lag of the error correction terms (ct-yt,) and (it-yt,), and a constant.
Standard errors shown in parentheses were computed by Monte Carlo simulations using 500 replications. The sample for Mexico
is 1980.1-2003.1. For Canada we have a longer time series data from 1959.1-2003.1

Table A1: Data Sources
Quarters

Source

1993.1-2002.4

IFS

1980.1-2002.1

NP

Brazil

1991.1-2002.1

NP

Ecuador

1991.1-2002.2

IFS

Israel

1980.1-2003.1

IFS

Korea

1979.4-2003.2

OECD

Malaysia

1991.1-2003.1

IFS

Mexico

1980.1-2003.1

OECD

Peru

1990.1-2003.1

IFS

Philippines

1981.1-2003.1

IFS

Slovak Republic

1993.1-2003.2

OECD

South Africa

1980.1-2003.1

IFS

Thailand

1993.1-2003.1

IFS

Turkey

1987.1-2003.2

OECD

Australia

1979.1-2003.2

OECD

Austria

1988.1-2003.2

OECD

Belgium

1980.1-2003.2

OECD

Canada

1981.1-2003.2

OECD

1957.1-2003.1

IFS

Denmark

1988.1-2003.1

OECD

Finland

1979.4-2003.2

OECD

Netherlands

1979.4-2003.2

OECD

New Zealand

1987.2-2003.2

OECD

Norway

1979.4-2003.2

OECD

Portugal

1988.1-2001.4

NP

Spain

1980.1-2003.2

OECD

Sweden

1980.1-2003.1

IFS

Switzerland

1980.1-2003.2

OECD

Emerging Markets

Argentina

Developed Markets

NP stands for Neumeyer and Perri (2004).

