                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE SOCIAL COSTS OF GUN OWNERSHIP

                                              Philip J. Cook
                                               Jens Ludwig

                                          Working Paper 10736
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10736


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Philip J. Cook and Jens Ludwig. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Social Costs of Gun Ownership
Philip J. Cook and Jens Ludwig
NBER Working Paper No. 10736
August 2004
JEL No. H21, I18, K42

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper provides new estimates of the effect of household gun prevalence on homicide rates, and

infers the marginal external cost of handgun ownership. The estimates utilize a superior proxy for

gun prevalence, the percentage of suicides committed with a gun, which we validate. Using county-

and state-level panels for 20 years, we estimate the elasticity of homicide with respect to gun

prevalence as between +.1 and +.3. All of the effect of gun prevalence is on gun homicide rates.

Under certain reasonable assumptions, the average annual marginal social cost of household gun

ownership is in the range $100 to $600.

Philip J. Cook
Sanford Institute of Public Policy
Box 90245
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
pcook@duke.edu

Jens Ludwig
Georgetown Public Policy Institute
Georgetown University
3520 Prospect Street, NW
Washington, DC 20007
ludwigj@georgetown.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        One in three American households currently keep at least one gun within the

home, often to protect members of the household against criminal predation (Cook and

Ludwig 1996).1 Like many other private decisions about health and safety, such as

getting vaccinated or driving a sport utility vehicle, private gun ownership may impose

externalities. Widespread gun ownership in a community could provide a general

deterrent to criminal predation, lowering the risk to owners and non-owners alike. But

widespread gun ownership could also lead to increased risks of various sorts, including

the possibility that guns will be misused by the owners or transferred to dangerous people

through theft or unregulated sale. Whether the social costs of gun ownership are positive

or negative is arguably the most fundamental question for the regulation of firearms in

the United States.

        This paper develops an estimate of the marginal social costs of gun ownership

based on our new estimates of the effect of household gun prevalence on homicide rates.

Previous research yields contradictory findings about whether the social costs of gun

ownership are positive, as argued by Duggan (2001), or negative, as argued by Lott

(2000). The present paper moves beyond earlier studies in three respects. First, our new

estimates utilize a better, well-validated proxy for county and state gun ownership rates,

the percentage of suicides committed with a gun (FSS).

        Second, we demonstrate that our results are robust to a variety of reasonable

specifications and methods. In the absence of a randomized experiment or even a

convincing natural experiment, ours and previous studies are necessarily correlational in

nature. However it is reassuring that we obtain similar estimates using different sources

1
 The General Social Survey for 2002 provides a recent estimate; 33.6 percent of all households possessed
at least one gun in that year.


                                                                                                       2
of variation in gun prevalence. Lott (2000) essentially uses cross-sectional variation in

gun ownership rates across states and finds that gun prevalence exerts an enormous

deterrent effect on homicide, with an elasticity estimate of -3.3 (p. 114). Duggan (2001)

uses across-state or –county, over-time variation, which yields an elasticity estimate

equal to +.2 in state data and +.15 in county data. Using the same source of variation in

gun prevalence in our panel (but a different proxy and estimation methods) we estimate

that the elasticity of homicides with respect to gun ownership is on the order of +.1 to

+.3. We also estimate separate regressions for gun and non-gun homicides and show that

it is only the gun homicide rate that responds positively to gun prevalence.

       Our findings are not sensitive to how we control for observable county or state

characteristics, including the robbery or burglary rate, or to conditioning on region/year

or division/year fixed effects. For our estimates to be driven by unobserved variables,

these would have to be orthogonal to all of the observed covariates included in our

model. We also show that our results are not sensitive to the influence of whatever

factors caused the dramatic increase and decline in homicide rates during the 1980’s and

1990’s, because we obtain similar findings when we estimate a long-difference estimator

comparing the beginning and end points of our panel. As a further check on whether our

results are driven by unmeasured variables, we replicate the panel regressions with a

variety of other outcome variables that have little logical connection to gun prevalence

(but are related to the homicide rate), demonstrating that FSS is not related to other types

of crime besides homicide, or (in the state data) with other indicators of risky or anti-

social behavior such as motor vehicle death rates.

       The third contribution of the present paper is to develop what we believe to be the

first estimates for the magnitude (rather than just sign) of the social costs of gun



                                                                                             3
ownership. At an average homicide rate of 10/100,000, our baseline elasticity estimate

implies that an additional 10,000 handgun-owning households is associated with one

additional homicide per year. Translating these results into a dollar-denominated cost

raises a number of additional complications. One approach is to assign a value per

statistical life for each homicide victim, adjusted in some way for the fact that those at

highest risk for homicide victimization appear to have below-average aversion to the risk

of death (Levitt and Venkatesh 2002). If the average value per statistical life for

homicide victims is only $1 million, far below the $3 to $9 million per statistical life

estimated from workplace samples (Viscusi 1998), then at mean values our baseline

estimate of +.1 implies that the social cost per gun owning household is on the order of

$100.

        That sort of calculation is standard in the literature on risks to life and limb, but

perhaps not adequate to assessing the social costs of gun violence. Gun violence

engenders fear, concern about other members of the family and community, and a variety

of costly avoidance and prevention activities (Cook and Ludwig 2000). Most of these

effects do not have a clear counterpart in the literature on compensating wage

differentials. Previous contingent-valuation (CV) estimates suggest that the complete

social costs of each assault-related gun injury in the U.S. may be on the order of $1

million. If we assume that the ratio of fatal to non-fatal assault-related gunshot injuries is

stable across time and space, these CV estimates would imply a social cost per gun

owning household on the order of $600. Using the largest reasonable elasticity estimate

suggests a figure of around $1,800.

        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section reviews the

mechanisms through which gun prevalence could increase or decrease homicide rates.



                                                                                                4
Section three discusses our proxy for gun prevalence, and four describes other variables

used in the analysis. Section 5 develops the empirical strategy, which is implemented in

Section 6. Section 7 considers the implications for social cost, and the final section

concludes.



II. GUNS AND VIOLENCE2

           America has at least 200 million firearms in private circulation, enough for every

adult to have one (Cook and Ludwig 1996). But only one-quarter of all adults own a gun,

the great majority of them men. Most people who have guns own several: three-quarters

of all guns are owned by those who own four or more guns, amounting to just 10 percent

of adults.

           Around 65 million of America’s 200 million privately held firearms are handguns,

which are more likely than long guns to be kept for defense against crime (Cook and

Ludwig 1996). In the 1970s one-third of new guns were handguns (pistols or revolvers),

a figure that grew to nearly half by the early 1990s and then fell back to around 40

percent (ATF 2000). Despite the long-term increase in the relative importance of

handgun sales, a mere 17 percent of gun-owning households have only handguns; 43

percent have both handguns and long guns, and 40 percent long guns only, reflecting the

fact that most people who have acquired guns for self-protection are also hunters and

target shooters.3

           Given the importance of hunting and sport shooting it is not surprising that gun

ownership is concentrated in rural areas and small towns, and among middle-aged,

middle-income households (Cook and Ludwig 1996). These attributes are associated

2
    The discussion in this section borrows in part from Cook and Ludwig (2003a).
3
    From the 2002 General Social Survey (www.icpsr.umich.edu, dataset 3728).


                                                                                              5
with relatively low involvement in criminal violence, suggesting that most guns may be

in the hands of people who are unlikely to misuse them. Some support for this view

comes from the fact that most of the people arrested for gun homicide, unlike most gun

owners, have prior criminal records (Cook and Ludwig 1996; Kates and Polsby 2000).

More generally, gun homicide offending and victimization is disproportionately

concentrated among low-income young men living in urban areas (Cook and Laub 1998;

Blumstein 2000).

More guns, more crime. There are both direct and indirect connections between

household gun prevalence and the availability of guns for criminal use. The direct

connection is simply that a household gun, no matter why it was acquired, may at some

point be misused by a member of the household, although this does not seem to account

for the bulk of lethal violence.4

         We suspect that the indirect connections are more important. Youths and

criminals will find it easier and cheaper to obtain a gun in a community with widespread

ownership than in a community where only a relatively few households have them. The

prevalence of ownership would not be relevant if most criminals obtained their guns

directly from retailers, but in fact that is quite rare (Cook and Braga 2001). More

commonly, crime guns are obtained by a variety of transactions involving guns already in

private hands – borrowing, renting, buying, or stealing. Theft in particular is a common

source of crime guns: more than 500,000 are stolen each year nationwide (Cook and

Ludwig 1996; Kleck 1997), and household burglaries are more likely to yield a firearm as


4
  Recent research using case control methods demonstrates that gun possession is a strong positive
correlate of the likelihood that a batterer will eventually kill his intimate partner (Campbell et al 2003).
More generally, a gun in the home has been shown to be a risk factor for homicide victimization, but only
for gun homicide, after controlling for several other household characteristics (Wiebe 2003; Kellermann et
al 1993). Whether these studies have identified a direct causal relationship is not clear, but the logic of
availability for misuse is compelling.


                                                                                                           6
part of the haul in communities where guns are more common (Cook and Ludwig

2003b). Search times in the informal or “secondary” market for guns should be less, and

prices quite possibly lower, where guns are plentiful.5 One piece of evidence for this

view comes from the fact that crime guns confiscated in low-prevalence jurisdictions are

much more likely to have been first purchased from an out-of-state dealer and then

(illegally) imported compared to crime guns confiscated in high-prevalence jurisdictions

(Cook and Braga 2001; Braga et al. 2003).

        From a social welfare perspective, variation across areas in gun availability to

criminals is only important if the type of weapon matters in influencing the likelihood of

crime or its seriousness. At one time, criminologists generally ignored the issue of

weapon choice as a determinant of homicide, focusing instead on more “fundamental”

causes, or even argued that guns themselves had little effect on the outcome of a violent

encounter (Wolfgang 1958). Beginning in the late 1960’s a growing body of empirical

evidence has documented the common-sense view that the type of weapon does matter in

the outcome of a criminal assault. Compared with other commonly used weapons, guns

kill more quickly and easily, with little skill or strength required, and with less chance of

effective self-defense (Zimring 1968; Cook, 1991; Wolfgang 1995). Because guns make

killing easier, it is reasonable to believe that the presence of a gun in a violent encounter

will increase the chance that it will end in death, controlling for the motivations of the

assailant – a hypothesis that has been supported by a variety of empirical evidence.

        This “instrumentality” effect of guns to increase the lethality of violent behavior

may influence the volume of violent behavior in a variety of conflicting ways. Guns


5
 The secondary market in guns consists of all gun transfers that do not involve licensed dealers (Cook,
Molliconi and Cole 1995), and accounts for 30 to 40 percent of all gun transfers and for most guns used in
crime (Wright and Rossi 1994; Beck and Gilliard 1993; Sheley and Wright 1995; Cook and Braga 2001).


                                                                                                         7
increase the costs of losing a contest that involves violence, which all else equal should

reduce the volume of violent behavior (Donohue and Levitt 1998). On the other hand,

relative to knives and fists, guns make the outcome of a violent encounter less predictable

and so may lead to more violence (Donohue and Levitt 1998). Guns could also lead to

more crime because their use appears to increase the “payoff” to robbery, by enabling

perpetrators to rob more lucrative targets with a lower risk of victim resistance (Cook

1987).

More crime, more guns. Crime may in principle be cause as well as consequence of local

gun ownership rates. While the majority of gun owners have guns for recreational

purposes, nearly half of gun owners say that their primary motivation for having a gun is

self-protection against crime (Cook and Ludwig 1996; Glaeser and Glendon 1998).

Previous research provides some support for the idea that local-area crime rates are

positively related to the prevalence of gun ownership, although personal victimization

risk or experience appears to have little association with keeping a gun (Kleck 1997;

Glaeser and Glendon 1998).

More guns, less crime. The same features of guns that make them valuable to criminals

may also make guns useful in self-defense. Just how often guns are used in defense

against criminal attack has been hotly debated and remains unclear. Estimates from the

National Crime Victimization Survey (NCVS), a large government-sponsored in-person

survey that is generally considered the most reliable source of information on predatory

crime, suggests that guns are used in defense against criminal predation around 100,000

times per year (Cook, Ludwig and Hemenway 1997). In contrast are the results of

several one-time telephone surveys, which provide a basis for asserting that there are

millions of defensive gun uses per year (Kleck and Gertz, 1995; Cook, Ludwig and



                                                                                             8
Hemenway 1997), although the internal inconsistencies and likely biases of these

estimates have been well documented (Hemenway 2004).

       Whatever the actual number of defensive gun uses, the mere threat of

encountering an armed victim may exert a deterrent effect on the behavior of criminals.

A growing body of research within criminology and economics supports the notion that

some criminals are sensitive to the threat of punishment (Nagin 1998; Levitt 2002). It is

therefore not surprising that the threat of armed victim response may also figure in a

criminal’s decision: around 40 percent of prisoners in one survey indicated that they had

decided against committing a crime at least once because they feared that the potential

victim was carrying a gun (Wright and Rossi 1994).

       In sum, our reading of the research suggests that the claims of both gun control

opponents and proponents are plausible: widespread gun ownership could in principle

make crime less common by deterring criminal activity, and the reverse outcome could

arise if the effective price of guns to criminals is lower in areas where legal gun

ownership is more common. Previous research yields conflicting conclusions regarding

which of these effects dominate.

       One prominent estimate for the effects of gun prevalence on homicide is by Lott

(2000), who relates state-level estimates of gun ownership rates from voter exit polls in

1988 and 1996 to state crime rates, conditioning on the state’s overall arrest rate, income,

population density, percent black, region dummies and a year dummy. Lott (2000, p.

114) estimates an elasticity of homicide with respect to state gun ownership rates equal to

-3.3 , with equally large elasticity estimates for other crimes such as aggravated assault

(-4.3), robbery (-4.3), burglary (-1.6), and auto theft (-3.2). One concern is that these

estimates are essentially cross-sectional, given that most of the variation in gun



                                                                                             9
ownership rates in a state-level panel that does not include state-specific fixed-effects will

be across states rather than over time (Azrael, Cook and Miller 2004), and so are

susceptible to bias from other across-state differences in social conditions, culture or

public policies.6

         A more fundamental problem with Lott’s estimates is that there are serious

problems with his survey data. While Lott’s voter exit poll data suggest that from 1988

to 1996 gun ownership rates increased for the U.S. as a whole from 27.4 to 37.0 percent

(p. 36), the best source of national data on gun ownership trends – the General Social

Survey – indicates that individual gun ownership trends were essentially flat during this

period (Kleck 1997, pp. 98-99). The difference is not too surprising, since voters are by

no means a representative sample of the adult public.

         The best previous study of the relationship between gun prevalence and homicide

is Duggan (2001), that identifies the relationship between guns and crime using over-time

variation in panels of states and also counties. Duggan’s elasticity estimate of +.2 is not

only of the opposite sign from Lott’s, but also more than an order of magnitude smaller in

absolute value. One concern about Duggan’s study is his proxy for gun prevalence, the

subscription rate to Guns and Ammo magazine.




6
  Kleck and Patterson (1993) analyze a cross-section of city-level data and find no statistically significant
relationship between gun ownership rates and homicide or other crime rates. However, rather than relying
on a simple cross-section regression-adjusted comparison of crime rates across areas with different rates of
gun ownership, they attempt to isolate variation in gun ownership rates that will be arguably unrelated to
the unmeasured determinants of local crime rates. Their choice of instrumental variable to explain
variation in gun prevalence – per capita rates of hunting licenses, and subscriptions to gun magazines – are
likely to be correlated with unmeasured variables that affect crime. The problem with the Kleck and
Patterson instruments can be seen by noting that Duggan (2001) actually uses gun magazine subscriptions
as a proxy (rather than instrument) for local gun prevalence.


                                                                                                          10
III. FSS AS A PROXY FOR GUN PREVALENCE

       Since most states lack any sort of registration or licensing system that would

generate administrative data on firearms ownership, household surveys provide the only

direct source of information on this matter. But survey data are not always available, so

analysts have employed a variety of proxy variables. Two independent inquiries have

recently identified one such proxy as superior to all others for the purpose of estimating

the cross-section structure of gun prevalence across large geographic entities (Azrael,

Cook, and Miller 2004; Kleck 2004). That proxy is the fraction of suicides committed

with a firearm (FSS).

       Table 1 reports validity tests of FSS and four other proxies that have been used in

the literature: the fraction of homicides with a firearm, the rate of fatal firearms accident,

and two measures of interest in guns and gun sports – the subscription rate to Guns &

Ammo, and membership in the National Rifle Association. FSS performs very well

indeed, and better than the other four in each of three tests: correlation with state-level

gun ownership estimated from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveys in 21 states,

correlation with state-level ownership rates estimated from two national surveys

(combined), and correlation across the nine Census divisions with gun ownership rates

estimated from the General Social Survey (Azrael, Cook, and Miller 2004).

       Our use of FSS is primarily to estimate variation over time rather than in the cross

section. To validate this use requires consistent estimates of gun prevalence over time,

preferably at a sub-national level. The "gold standard" for national surveys of gun

ownership is the General Social Survey, conducted by the National Opinion Research

Center most years from 1972 to 1993 and biennially since 1994 (Davis and Smith 1998).

In its current form the GSS is conducted in person with a national area-probability sample



                                                                                           11
of 3,000 non-institutionalized adults. The response rate has been quite high (for example,

78% in 1994, 76% in 1996, 76% in 1998). The sample is chosen to be representative of

the nation and of each of the nine Census divisions, but not of individual states.

        “Prevalence of gun ownership” may be usefully defined with respect to

individuals or households, and with respect to all types of guns or just handguns.

Handguns, including revolvers and pistols, are of particular interest because they are

vastly over represented in crime and suicide in comparison with long guns.7 The GSS

provides enough detail in recent years to estimate all four variants: the percent of

households with some type of gun, the percent of households with a handgun, the percent

of adult individuals who possess a gun, and the percent of adult individuals who possess a

handgun. These four prevalence measures are highly correlated across the nine Census

divisions. The inter-division correlations for these four measures are in every case above

.90, based on estimates from the GSS for 1994, 1996, and 1998 combined (Azrael, Cook

and Miller 2004). Hence a proxy that provides a good approximation to the geographic

structure of, say, household handgun prevalence, likely also provides a good

approximation of other measures of prevalence. On the other hand, the four measures

have followed somewhat different trajectories over time at the national level.8

        The proxy variable, FSS, is computed from the U.S. Vital Statistics mortality

data. These data have the virtues of being consistent across time and space, of high

quality, and readily available for annual estimates at the national, state, or county level,

though only counties with large populations are identified in the public-use data files.


7
  The long-gun category includes rifles and shotguns. While handguns make up only about one-third of the
total guns in private hands, they account for over 80% of gun crimes and injuries (Cook 1991).
8
  Since 1980 the household gun prevalence in the United States has trended down, while the prevalence of
individual ownership has been close to constant. The explanation for the difference in trends is in the
downward trend in the size of households, and in particular the declining percentage of households that
include a man.


                                                                                                    12
       In Appendix Table 1 we provide estimates from the General Social Survey of the

household prevalence of handgun ownership for all available years, together with an

estimate of the sampling error associated with each estimate. The variation over the

period 1973-2000 is quite muted; a small increase during the 1970s, and a drop during the

1990s, with the estimated prevalence in 2000 very close to that of 1974. Table A1 also

reports the national percentage of suicides with firearms, FSS, which follows a similar

pattern. (A plot of the time trends for both variables over time is included in Appendix

Figure A1, with FSS re-scaled so that the two series have the same mean averaged over

the entire time period). The correlation between the two measures for the 18 annual

observations is +.63.



       Handgun Prevalence (t) =       -.1012 + .5578 FSS(t)                            (1)

                                      (.0958)     (.1645)

The 95% confidence intervals for all 18 of the GSS estimates for handgun prevalence

overlap with this regression line.

       Table 2 reports the results of panel regressions of GSS-based estimates of gun

prevalence against two proxies, FSS and the subscription rate to Guns & Ammo. The

latter was singled out because it was used in the study of gun prevalence and crime

reported in Duggan (2001). The panel is defined over the nine Census divisions and the

years in which GSS fielded gun questions, since 1980. (That was the first year that GSS

included a question on individual ownership.) The estimated coefficients on FSS are in

every case significantly positive, and especially strong when year fixed effects are

omitted. (Fixed effects for census division are included in all cases.) The subscription




                                                                                             13
rate for Guns & Ammo performs less well, and in three cases the estimated coefficients

are negative.

        FSS has been used as a proxy for gun prevalence in a number of recent studies of

crime and violence: see, for example, Cook and Ludwig (2002; 2004; Miller, Azrael and

Hemenway 2002a,b). Our study of gun prevalence on residential-burglary rates and the

likelihood of “hot” burglaries (Cook and Ludwig 2003) utilizes the same general

approach as the current study.



IV. DATA

        The estimates presented below are based on panel data for 200 counties that had

the largest population in 1990,9 or a subset of those counties. We also present estimates

based on state-level panel data, but have some preference for county-level data because

of a larger sample size and the belief that local gun ownership is more closely related to

local gun availability. While it would have been possible to expand the set of counties

(the public-use data from Vital Statistics identifies over 400), the smaller counties do not

provide much additional information, since they tend to have very small counts of

homicides and suicides. The 200 largest counties accounted for 74 percent of all

homicides in the United States in 1990.

        Suicide and homicide counts are taken from Vital Statistics Program mortality

data, based on reports of coroners and medical examiners and compiled by the National

Center for Health Statistics. The alternative source for homicide is the FBI’s

Supplementary Homicide Reports, which are based on voluntary reports by law-


9
 Kelly (2000) used this sample of counties in studying the determinants of crime rates. The 5 counties of
New York City are combined in our analysis due to data limitations. Oklahoma City was dropped in 1995
due to the large homicide count associated with the bombing of the federal building there.


                                                                                                      14
enforcement agencies. The Vital Statistics data are generally more complete, reliable and

consistent (Wiersema, Loftin, and McDowall 2000).

       The FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports are our source for data on robbery, burglary,

and other types of crime besides homicide. Detailed information about the sources of

data used in our analyses are presented in Appendix 2.

       Finally, we would also like to control for other changes over time in county socio-

demographic characteristics that could affect both crime and gun prevalence.

Unfortunately such data are available at the county level only from the decennial census,

from which we interpolate data for the intercensal years. Our measures capture the socio-

economic status of county residents, including the percent black and percent households

headed by a female. The percent county living in an urban area is included in our set of

census variables given evidence on the relationship between cities and crime rates

(Glaeser and Sacerdote 1999). We also control for the percent of county or state

residents who were living in the same house 5 years ago, in part because of

criminological arguments about the effects of community instability on informal social

control. The movement of people across areas may affect gun ownership rates given the

strong regional component to gun prevalence (Cook and Ludwig 1996).



V. EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

       The basic empirical approach here is to estimate the relationship between gun

prevalence and homicide by exploiting the substantial across-area differences in trends in

gun ownership over a 20-year period. Our baseline estimates come from estimating a

model as in equation (2), which relates the natural log of jurisdiction (i)’s homicide rate

(or, alternatively, the gun- or non-gun homicide rate) in year t against FSS, the proxy for



                                                                                          15
the jurisdiction’s gun ownership rate, in year (t-1). FSS is lagged by one period out of

concern for reverse causation -- gun ownership may be consequence as well as cause of a

county’s crime rate – although the lag can also be justified for substantive reasons: the

thefts and secondary-market transfers that move guns from households to use by

criminals will ordinarily take some time. To further control for the possibility of reverse

causation, we condition on the natural log of the area’s burglary and robbery rates, which

are the kinds of crimes that seem likely to motivate the acquisition of a firearm for self

defense. These crime variables also are a good reflection of criminogenic factors in the

community that influence homicide rates (Blumstein 2000). To account for other county

or state characteristics that affect homicide, the regression model includes year and

county/state fixed effects, as well as the logs of the detailed set of county socio-

demographic characteristics described in the previous section. The regression estimates

are weighted by each county or state’s population to account for heteroskedasticity in the

error term.



       log Yit = β0 + β1 log FSSit-1 + β2 Xit + di + dt + εit                          (2)

       Another concern is serial correlation in the error structure of equation (2), given

that FSS changes only slowly over time within counties and other unmeasured

determinants of county crime rates may also have jurisdiction-specific trends. Testing for

the presence of serial correlation in fixed-effects models is complicated in applications

where the time dimension is fairly short compared to the number of observational units.

Following Solon (1984) we test for serial correlation by first-differencing the data, and

then keep the residuals from a regression of the log change in homicides against the log

change in FSS and year effects. A regression of these residuals against their one-year lag



                                                                                             16
yields a coefficient of -.4, close to the value of -.5 we would expect if the error structure

was serially uncorrelated in log levels.10 The data are a bit more serially correlated with

the state-level data.11 In any case, we address this problem when estimating equation (2)

by calculating Huber-White standard errors that are robust to an arbitrary autocorrelation

pattern in the errors over time within counties. Bertrand et al. (2004) show this approach

works better than more parametric strategies in panels with a short time dimension.

         A final concern in estimating equation (2) is that the proxy for gun prevalence,

FSS, is subject to measurement error, of two types. First, because it is only a proxy, the

correlation between FSS and the “true” prevalence is presumably less than one. Judging

the quality of the proxy in that sense is difficult, given that there are no error-free

measures of the criterion variable. In particular, survey-based estimates are subject to

sampling error and other sorts of error. Based on the analysis of the GSS estimates over

time reported above, the hypothesis that FSS is a “perfect” proxy cannot be rejected, but

that is not the same thing as demonstrating that it is perfect.

         Second, and probably more important, is that the reliability of FSS will depend on

the number of suicides used to compute it. For the 21 years of data on 200 large counties,

the 10th and 90th percentiles have 27 and 142 suicides respectively, with a median of 52.

If the choice of weapon in suicide follows a binomial process, then a jurisdiction with 50

suicides a year would generate an observed FSS that is subject to a standard error of 7


10
   When we regress the residuals against three year’s worth of lags, the coefficients equal -.536 (.028) for
the one year lag, -.334 (.031) for the two year lag and -.153 (.021) for the three year lag. If the data were
serially uncorrelated in log levels we would expect the two and three year lag coefficients to be equal to
zero, although our data still appear to be closer to being serially uncorrelated in level than in change form.
Similar results hold for the residual from log gun homicides, and when we include our full set of covariates
in the initial homicide or gun homicide equation. The estimated autocorrelation coefficients tend to be
somewhat larger in absolute value for the log of non-gun homicides.
11
   With our state data the coefficients from regressing the first-differenced residual against three years of
lagged residuals equals -.35, -.06 and -.07, a pattern that is close to what we would expect for an AR(1)
process for the error structure in levels with ρ=.30 (see Solon 1984, Table 3).


                                                                                                          17
percentage points. The effect of this measurement error will be to bias the coefficient

estimate of FSS toward zero. We attempt to limit its effects in several ways. First, all

regressions are weighted by population, which will give greater leverage to the larger

counties that have less “noisy” observed values of FSS. Second, we experiment with

limiting the data to the 100 largest counties, or the 50 largest counties, which shifts the

distribution of suicide counts upward. Third, we replicate our estimates using the

average value of FSS over several years. Finally, we also produce estimates using state-

level data.



VI. RESULTS

Descriptive Statistics. Table 3 presents descriptive statistics for the full panel data set

assembled from annual data for the 200 largest counties for the years 1980-1999. (All

calculations are weighted by county population.) Data for the year 1979 are not included

in these calculations since all analyses presented below begin with 1980; 1979 data are

only used to compute the lagged value of FSS in the first year for those analyses.

        Over the entire sample period the average homicide rate is 11 per 100,000

residents, with half of all suicides having been committed with a firearm. On average our

gun proxy – the share of suicides committed with a firearm – is calculated from 196

suicides per county per year.

        Table 3 also provides some sense for the nature of the variation in gun ownership

that identifies the panel-data estimates shown below. Table 3 shows that there has been

convergence in gun prevalence rates between high- and low-gun ownership areas over

time (see also Azrael, Cook and Miller 2004). The second and third columns of Table 3

present data for the top and bottom quartiles for our 200 counties ranked according to



                                                                                              18
their gun ownership rates at the start of our panel, in 1980. The (disproportionately

Southern) counties where guns are most common in 1980 experience a persistent and

pronounced reduction in household gun ownership rates during the 20 years of our panel,

as reflected by the nearly 20 percent decline in FSS over this period. At the same time,

counties where guns were least common in 1980 (disproportionately in the Northeast and

Midwest regions) experienced an increase in FSS of 20 percent from 1980 to 1999.

       The source of this convergence remains something of a mystery. Gun ownership

rates tend to be much higher for men than women and for whites than for blacks, and tend

to be lowest in cities (Cook and Ludwig 1996). Yet the descriptive statistics in Table 3

show that the two sets of counties experienced relatively little change in these population

characteristics over time either absolutely or in relation to one another. If whatever drove

this convergence between high- and low-gun ownership areas was orthogonal to the

determinants of homicide trends, then a difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of

FSS on homicide (Y) would be unbiased. In particular, expression (3) is an estimate of

the elasticity of Y with respect to FSS, where ∆ indicates the difference between 1999

and 1980, and the subscripts t and b refer to “top quartile” and “bottom quartile”

respectively.



       {∆ln Yt – ∆ ln Yb}/ {∆ln FSSt - ∆ ln FSSb}                                    (3)

       As seen in Table 3, the high-FSS counties experience a decline in overall

homicide rates of about 49% over this period, compared to a decline of 45% for the low-

FSS counties. Converting all figures to log form (consistent with a constant-elasticity

assumption), and dividing as in expression (3), the estimated elasticity of homicide with

respect to FSS is +.18. A similar calculation for gun homicides implies an estimated



                                                                                           19
elasticity with respect to gun ownership rates of +.35. These simple estimates, which use

just the variation in gun prevalence that arises from convergence between the highest-

and lowest-gun counties, turn out to be compatible with those derived from the panel

analysis below that uses all of the variation across counties over time.

Main Findings. The first column of Table 4 presents the results for our most

parsimonious model, which regresses log homicide rates against log FSS and county and

year fixed effects. The estimated elasticity of homicide with respect to the lagged value

of log FSS equals +.100, which is statistically significant at the 5 percent cutoff. The

final three columns of Table 4 show that our point estimate is not sensitive to controlling

for several powerful covariates: the log of the contemporaneous UCR burglary and

robbery rates, as well as percent black, urbanicity, a measure of residential stability and

the proportion of households headed by a female. These other coefficients generally have

the expected signs. While previous research typically finds that crime rates are higher in

cities (for example Glaeser and Sacerdote 1999), the negative coefficient on percent

urban in the fixed-effects model is not necessarily in contradiction, since it is not

identified off of cross-section variation, but rather off of the relative growth in the urban

portion of counties that were not entirely within city limits in 1980. In any case, with our

full set of covariates included the estimated elasticity of homicides with respect to FSS

equals +.086.

       Suppose that the predominant causal mechanism linking gun prevalence to

homicide is that increased prevalence induces substitution of guns for other weapons in

assaults, with a consequent increase in lethality. Then only the gun homicide rate will

increase in response to an increase in FSS. The estimates shown in the first row of Table

5 demonstrate that this is the case. The estimated elasticity of gun homicides with respect



                                                                                            20
to FSS is equal to around +.17, while the elasticity of non-gun homicides with respect to

FSS equals -.03 and is not statistically significant.

Extensions. The rest of Table 5 demonstrates that the results are robust to a variety of

modifications to our basic estimation approach. The second row shows that adding in a

series of additional county-level characteristics from the Census – namely, percent living

in poverty, percent county residents born outside of the U.S., and the percent residents in

different age groupings – has almost no effect on the point estimates. Our preferred

regression model relates homicide rates to lagged values of FSS in order to address the

problem of reverse causation, although this specification comes at the cost of omitting

any additional causal effect that current gun ownership rates may exert on homicide rates.

The results reported in the third row of Table 4 suggest that the cost of using lagged

rather than contemporaneous values of our gun proxy is modest. The fourth row of Table

5 shows that ignoring the problem of serial correlation changes our standard errors by

only around 25 percent, consistent with the finding reported above that there is only a

modest degree of serial correlation in the process determining county homicide rates.

       Re-calculating the estimates without weighting by county population produces an

elasticity estimate for homicide with respect to guns that is about two-thirds as large as

the weighted estimate (Table 5, row 5). We prefer the weighted estimates because they

assign greater importance to larger counties, which should have regression residuals that

have smaller variances compared to less-populous counties, and should also have less

measurement error in FSS given the larger suicide count in these counties. Estimating a

model where all variables are included in linear rather than log form (row 6) also reduces

the magnitude of the point estimates in relation to their standard errors. This change

appears to be due to the decision to log or not log our dependent variable, because



                                                                                           21
regressing FSS in linear form (row 7) against logged homicide rates yields results that are

as strong as in the baseline model. In our view, models focusing on proportional rather

than absolute changes in homicide rates per capita are more sensible – if for example the

effect of increasing gun availability is simply to increase the probability of any given

assault ending in death, then the relevant effects will be proportional.

       As expected, other efforts to reduce the problem of measurement error in FSS

lead to larger elasticity estimates, as shown in rows 8 through 10 of Table 5. Replacing

log lag FSS with the value averaged over the past two years nearly doubles the absolute

value of our point estimates. Limiting the sample to the 100 or 50 largest counties, for

which FSS values are calculated using larger numbers of suicides, produces a

qualitatively similar change.

       Given that we do not have a clearly exogenous source of identifying variation in

gun prevalence, there necessarily remains some concern that our estimates confound the

causal effects of guns on homicide with those of other variables not included as

covariates in any specification that may influence crime rates. However it is reassuring

that our results are not much affected by conditioning on region/year or division/year

fixed effects (rows 11 and 12, Table 5), which provides a flexible, non-parametric way of

accounting for regional trends in both homicides and gun prevalence. The fact that the

results are not sensitive to adjusting for region/year or division/year effects would also

seem to rule out bias from the influence of an unmeasured trend in the “Southern

subculture of violence” (Butterfield 1997). Another way to account for the possibility of

unmeasured variables is to condition on the lagged value of the dependent measure, as in

row 13, which yields a point estimate of around +.06. Interestingly, the point estimate for




                                                                                             22
this dynamic model implies a steady-state elasticity that is quite close to our preferred

baseline model.

         The final four rows of Table 5 shows what happens when we use state-level data,

which has the advantage over county-level data of reducing measurement error in FSS,

but perhaps at the cost of measuring gun prevalence at some level larger than the relevant

local gun market. In any case, replicating the baseline model using state data yields an

estimated elasticity of homicide with respect to gun prevalence of +.41. Further

accounting for the possibility of omitted variables bias by conditioning on either

region/year or division/year fixed effects, or the lagged value of the dependent variable,

implies a steady-state elasticity on the order of +.3.12

         Concern about unmeasured variables is particularly salient with our application

because homicide rates in America exhibit a powerful non-linear trend over our sample

period, with dramatic increases from the mid-1980’s through early 1990’s followed by an

equally dramatic decline. The leading explanations for this pattern focus on violence

associated with crack-cocaine markets, police and prison spending, and even the

legalization of abortion in the early 1970’s (see for example Cook and Laub 2002;

Blumstein and Wallman 2000; Levitt 2004). Our baseline regression model attempts to

indirectly control for the influence of most of these factors, for example by conditioning

on year or region-year fixed effects as well as each county’s robbery and burglary rates.

But there remains the possibility that difficult-to-measure factors that drive the

pronounced trends in crime during the time of our panel are influencing our estimates for

the effects of guns on homicide.


12
  The last row is closest in specification to Duggan’s (2001) preferred specification. But he used a
different proxy for gun prevalence (as explained earlier in the text) and only reports the results of estimates
when all substantive variables are in first difference form.


                                                                                                            23
        In Table 6 we attempt to circumvent the problem of trying to model or control for

whatever is driving the increase and decline in homicide over our sample period by using

just the long-term variation in gun ownership rates and homicide from the early 80’s to

the late 90’s. The first row of Table 6 presents estimates from a long-difference model

that shows the changes in log homicides (or log gun or non-gun homicides) from 1980 to

1999, regressed against the change in log FSS over the same period, conditioning on the

log changes in the other explanatory variables included in our baseline model (as shown

in the final column of Table 4). This long-difference estimator yields an elasticity of

homicide with respect to gun prevalence of +.3. Pooling data from multiple years to

reduce attenuation from measurement error with FSS serves to increase the magnitude of

the point estimates as expected.

        A final way to test for the possibility of bias from unmeasured variables is to

determine whether FSS predicts outcomes that logically have little relationship to gun

prevalence, in the spirit of Altonji, Elder and Taber (2000, 2002). Table 7 reports the

results of estimating the baseline model (final column, Table 4) on rates of other types of

crime from the UCR, and on the fatality rate from falls and from motor-vehicle accidents.

The estimated coefficients on FSS are not significantly different from zero in any of these

regressions.13 (Note that another implication from Table 7 is that the results are not

sensitive to measuring homicides using data from the UCR rather than our preferred

source, the Vital Statistics).

        Finally, Table 8 provides suggestive evidence that gun prevalence leads to

elevated rates of homicide through the transfer of guns from “legal” to “illegal” owners,

13
  The one exception is the arson rate, not shown, although we are not inclined to put much stock on this
outcome because arson is so poorly measured in the UCR.


                                                                                                           24
rather than through increased gun misuse by otherwise legal owners. In this exercise we

focus on homicide rates to victims 15 to 19, a relatively high percentage of whom are

killed in gang- and felony-related attacks by youthful criminals – with guns that are

typically obtained from the secondary market (Cook and Ludwig 2004). That this market

is closely tied to the prevalence of gun ownership is suggested by the large coefficient on

FSS.



VII. SOCIAL COSTS OF GUN OWNERSHIP

       In sum, gun prevalence is positively associated with overall homicide rates but

not systematically related to assault or other types of crime. Together, these results

suggest that an increase in gun prevalence may cause an intensification of criminal

violence – a shift toward greater lethality, and hence greater harm to the community.

Gun ownership also confers benefits to the owners and possibly other members of the

household. The benefits are associated with the various private uses of guns – gun sports,

collecting, protection of self and household against people and varmints. But the net

external effects are negative.

       The magnitude of these net external costs is suggested by the elasticity estimates

of homicide with respect to FSS. The baseline model applied to county-level data yields

an elasticity of +.09 or +.10, with a range of reasonable estimates from +.07 (from

conditioning on region/year or division/year fixed effects with the baseline county model)

to +.3 (from either long-differencing the county data or applying the baseline model to

state-level data with region/year or division/year fixed effects). All of these have the

feature that the associated estimates for gun and non-gun homicide indicate that the effect




                                                                                           25
on overall homicide is due to changes in gun use, with the possibility of some

substitution.

        These elasticity estimates with respect to FSS also serve as estimated elasticities

with respect to the household prevalence of gun ownership, if FSS is proportional to

prevalence. Based on cross-section data, FSS does not appear to be strictly proportional

– the best-fit line between FSS and survey-based gun-ownership rates is linear with a

significantly negative intercept (Azrael, Cook and Miller 2004). But proportionality is a

defensible assumption for time-series data: the regression of national handgun prevalence

rates on FSS reported in the text above finds an intercept with a t-statistic of about –1. In

what follows we treat the elasticity with respect to FSS as equal to the elasticity with

respect to the prevalence of gun ownership.

        The positive elasticity estimates imply that an increase in the prevalence of gun

ownership has positive marginal social cost. It is relevant to translate the elasticity into a

ratio: the annual change in the homicide count associated with a change in the number of

households with guns. That ratio is related to the elasticity by this formula:



        Ratio of changes in homicides to gun-owning households = [e×h×n]/g            (4)

where

        e = elasticity of homicide rate to prevalence of guns

        h = homicide rate per capita

        g = household prevalence of gun ownership

        n = number of people per household




                                                                                            26
       This ratio is proportional to the marginal social cost of an additional gun

homicide. The formula implies that the marginal social cost of acquiring a gun increases

with the homicide rate. For a given homicide rate, the marginal social cost is lower for

high-prevalence jurisdictions than low-prevalence – an algebraic result of the log-log

specification.

       It is important to distinguish between gun types. While handguns make up only

about one-third of the private inventory of guns, they account for 80 percent of all gun

homicides and a still-higher percentage of gun robberies. Handguns are also used in most

gun suicides. Hence the social costs of handgun ownership are much higher than

ownership of rifles and shotguns. Unfortunately it is difficult to distinguish between the

prevalence of long-gun ownership and handgun ownership in aggregate data, since they

are very highly correlated across jurisdictions. There is some divergence over time, as

overall gun ownership has had a strong downward trend that is not so evident for

handgun ownership. FSS is a better proxy over time for handgun ownership.

       If the marginal social cost of gun prevalence is entirely attributable to handguns,

then the relevant national average is about 20 percent (see Table A1). Using that value,

together with a homicide rate of 10/100,000 (which is close to the average for the 200

counties), an elasticity of +0.10, and 2 people per household, then the formula indicates

one additional homicide per year for every 10,000 additional handgun-owning

households.

       Table 9 offers similar calculations for other values of the baseline homicide rate

and handgun-prevalence rate, assuming throughout an elasticity of 0.1 and 2 people per

household. Each entry is the number of additional homicides per year resulting from a




                                                                                           27
change in the number of handgun-owning households. If the true elasticity is closer to

+.3 instead of +.1, then the figures reported in Table 9 should be tripled.

        Two additional questions relevant to calculating marginal social cost cannot be

resolved satisfactorily from our empirical results: which margin, and what geographic

unit?

Which margin? Most households that own one gun own several. About three-quarters of

all guns are owned by the one-third of gun-owning households that own at least four

(Cook and Ludwig 1996). FSS is a valid proxy for the prevalence of gun ownership, but

much of the “action” is at the intensive margin. With respect to providing the right

attribution of marginal social cost, it is important to determine whether the acquisition of

the nth gun by a gun-owning household has the same cost on average as the acquisition of

the first gun. Of course it is only the latter acquisition that will change prevalence.

What geographic unit? While our focus has been on county-level ownership, we note

that guns often travel across county lines. For that reason, household gun ownership in

nearby counties may affect gun availability to local criminals. If true, then “gun

prevalence in nearby counties” is a variable that belongs in the homicide regressions,

since it is substantively relevant and quite possibly correlated with within-county

prevalence. We experimented with specifications that included rest-of-state FSS in

addition to the usual within-county FSS, but unfortunately the results were not very

sensible. At this point, it is necessary to be guided by other sorts of evidence regarding

the importance of diffuse sources of guns outside of the immediate county. If one is

inclined to believe that there are few frictions in the flow of guns to criminals within a

state, then our state-level estimates are a better guide to the social costs than the county

estimates.



                                                                                             28
         Translated into the policy domain, the answers to these questions should influence

the nature of regulation adopted in response to the cost argument, and also the geographic

scope of the regulatory system. If the number of households with guns, as opposed to the

number of guns, is the main concern, then a licensing system may be the preferred form

of regulation.14

         What would be the optimal license fee per household? Answering this question

requires monetizing the social costs of the additional homicides that appear to be

generated by widespread gun prevalence. One possibility would be to assign each

homicide the value per statistical life that has been estimated in previous research, which

come primarily from studies of workplace wage-risk tradeoffs and suggest a range of $3

to $9 million per life (Viscusi 1998). But even the lower end of this range may overstate

the dollar value required to compensate the average homicide victim for a relatively

higher risk of death, given that (as noted above) such a large proportion of homicide

victims are engaged in criminal activity that entails a high risk of death. For example, a

study of the wage premium paid to gang members engaged in selling drugs suggests a

value per statistical life on the order of $8,000 to $127,000 (Levitt and Venkatesh 2000).

         Suppose that given local conditions with respect violence and gun ownership we

estimate a ratio of 10,000 handgun-owning households per annual homicide

(approximately what holds at the national average for gun prevalence and homicide).

Given a conservative value of life, $1 million, then the appropriate license fee for a

household would be $100 per year. That license fee would increase with the homicide

rate, and in some jurisdictions, such as Washington DC, would become so high that as to


14
  If it is the number of guns that matters, as opposed to the number of households, then an annual tax per
gun could be assessed. But our estimates are not directly relevant to estimating the appropriate fee in that
case.


                                                                                                          29
be the practical equivalent of a ban on ownership. (A ban on handgun acquisition is

currently in place in Washington, Chicago, and some other cities.) Of course, this

calculation ignores the problem of compliance.

       This calculation will understate the optimal license fee per gun-owning household

if our assumption about the average value per statistical life for homicide victims is too

low, or if, as seems likely, gun violence imposes costs on society that are not well

captured by any study of the value per statistical life. Figures for the value per statistical

life typically come from estimating the additional wage premium required to induce

workers to accept jobs with higher risks of death, and thus reflect the valuation an

individual places on an increase in the risk of death to himself of, say, 1/100,000.

Multiplying this figure by 100,000 then yields the value per statistical life. But a given

individual’s willingness to pay to reduce gun homicides in his community by 1/100,000

is almost surely likely to exceed his willingness to pay to reduce his own risk of death by

1/100,000. The reason is that a community-wide reduction in gun homicide rates reduces

the risk of death to others whom the individual cares about beyond himself, including

others in the household and the community at large, and may reduce the individual’s

expenditures on measures designed to reduce his own risk of victimization.

       Contingent-valuation estimates intended to capture the complete social costs of

gun violence indicate value of around $1 million per assault-related gunshot injury (Cook

and Ludwig 2000; Ludwig and Cook 2001). On average one in six assault-related

gunshot injuries results in death (Cook 1985; Cook and Ludwig 2000). Under the

assumption that this case-fatality rate is stable across time and space, then at the national

averages for gun prevalence and homicide our baseline estimate of a guns/homicide

elasticity of +.10 implies that each additional 10,000 gun-owning households leads to



                                                                                           30
around 6 additional crime-related gunshot injuries. One potential concern with this

calculation is that a decline in gun homicides and non-fatal injuries may be accompanied

by an increase in overall crime-related injuries, since previous research suggests that gun

assaults and robberies are less likely to lead to injury than non-gun crimes (Kleck 1997,

pp. 225-6; Cook 1976). In principle this substitution effect will be reflected in the

willingness to pay figures reported by CV respondents.15 In any case, if these contingent

valuation estimates are approximately correct, the optimal license fee per gun-owning

household would be on the order of $600. If the true elasticity of homicide with respect

to gun prevalence is on the order of +.30 rather than +.10, the optimal license fee may be

as high as $1,800 per household.



VII. DISCUSSION

         A fundamental issue for the regulation of firearms in America is understanding

whether the social cost of gun ownership is on net positive or negative. Answering this

question is complicated by the difficulty of measuring gun prevalence at the local level,

and in isolating the causal effects of gun prevalence on crime rates in the absence of a

randomized or convincing natural experiment. Our empirical analysis of county- and

state-level data finds that gun prevalence is positively related to overall homicide rates.

We are confident that our proxy for gun prevalence dominates what has been used in


15
   The willingness to pay values used here come in response to the following question, asked as part of a
1998 nationally representative telephone survey on firearm-related issues conducted by the National
Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago: “Suppose that you were asked to vote for or against
a new program in your state to reduce gun thefts and illegal gun dealers. This program would make it more
difficult for criminals and delinquents to obtain guns. It would reduce gun injuries by 30% but taxes would
have to be increased to pay for it. If it would cost you an extra [$50 / $100 / $200] in annual taxes would
you vote for or against this new program?” The dollar value included in this question was randomly
assigned across respondents. Survey participants were than asked a follow-up question about their support
at twice or half the initial value, depending on whether their initial response was positive or not (Cook and
Ludwig 2000, p. 103).


                                                                                                         31
previous research. While there necessarily remains some uncertainty about whether we

have successfully identified a causal effect of guns on crime, our main result is robust to

a variety of specification experiments.

       These panel-data estimates are identified in part by the convergence over time in

gun prevalence between areas that initially have quite different levels of gun ownership.

Much of this over-time within-county variation seems to come from reductions in gun

ownership rates in the South. We attempt to rule out the confounding effects of other

changes within the South over time by showing that the estimates are not much affected

by also conditioning on region/year or division/year fixed effects. We also show that our

results are not driven by whatever factors caused the homicide rate in the U.S. to increase

dramatically from the mid-1980’s to the early-1990’s and decline thereafter, because we

obtain qualitatively similar findings from a long-difference estimator that compares

changes in gun prevalence and homicide from the early 1980’s to the late 1990’s.

       In principle, our panel data estimates could still be confounding the effects of gun

prevalence with those of other unmeasured factors. Given this concern, it is noteworthy

that gun prevalence is not related to other types of crime as measured by data from the

FBI’s Uniform Crime Reporting system. Our estimates identify a factor that influences

the lethality but not the overall volume of crime within an area. Firearm ownership is

presumably the leading candidate as an explanation for this relationship. That conclusion

is strengthened by the fact that the estimated effect of FSS on gun homicide is larger than

overall homicide, while the effect on non-gun homicide is nil or negative.

       These estimates imply a positive marginal external social cost of gun ownership;

the lethality of criminal violence increases with gun prevalence. The cost per gun-

owning household will increase with the homicide rate and be inversely related to the



                                                                                          32
level of gun ownership. (Interestingly, public opposition to gun control is strongest in

rural areas, which typically have high rates of gun ownership and low rates of homicide –

exactly where our estimates suggest that the regulation on gun ownership should be

lightest, unless, of course, there is a free flow of guns across county or state lines.) In

general, effective law enforcement reduces the cost of gun ownership,16 and would

reduce the appropriate degree of regulation -- although in some cases enforcement may

be complemented by rather than substitute for particular regulatory measures. In any

event, the dramatic reduction in homicide rates nationwide during the 1990s made guns

less socially burdensome.

         Most of the harm is probably associated with handguns rather than rifles or

shotguns, but our analysis does not allow the relative contribution to be identified

directly. Nor can we determine the geographic scope of the relevant market for arming

criminals, or distinguish whether it is the number of gun-owning households, or the

number of guns, that is important in determining the availability to criminals.

         Assuming average levels of gun prevalence and homicide, and a low value of

human life, we make a very conservative estimate of $100 per handgun-owning

household per year. Given our various elasticity estimates and alternative valuations of

reducing gun violence, the correct cost could range as high as $1,800 per year.17



16
   The growing body of empirical evidence on the deterrent effects of punishment on crime provides one
reason for suspecting that enforcement activity may reduce gun crimes as well (Nagin 1998; Levitt 2002).
Previous evaluations of interventions that target gun crime specifically yield suggestive evidence for the
effectiveness of police patrols against illegal gun carrying (Cohen and Ludwig, 2003). On the other hand, a
recent evaluation of Richmond, Virginia’s Project Exile sentence-enhancement program, one model for the
national Project Safe Neighborhoods intervention, does not find any detectable effect on crime (Raphael
and Ludwig 2003), perhaps in part because of the scale of the program’s operations (Levitt 2003).
17
   By way of comparison, Lott’s (2000) estimated elasticity of homicide with respect to gun ownership of -
3.3 implies (using equation 4) one homicide is averted for each additional 303 gun-owning households.
Assuming a value per life of just $1 million per homicide victim, Lott’s estimate implies that a licensing fee
set to the external costs of gun ownership would involve a subsidy of $3,300 per year to each gun owning
household. If instead we use the contingent valuation estimates presented in Cook and Ludwig (2000) of


                                                                                                          33
        While the empirical estimates are largely silent on the mechanisms through which

household gun ownership affects homicide, in our view the most likely mechanism is

through influencing the supply of guns to prohibited individuals rather than through

increasing gun misuse among otherwise law-abiding people. If this interpretation is

correct, then interventions capable of reducing the flow of guns from legal to illegal

owners, or reducing gun misuse by prohibited people, will reduce the social costs of legal

gun ownership. Personalized gun technology that is currently under development could

in principle substantially reduce the social costs of private gun ownership by making

stolen guns inoperable to criminals, and by complementing regulatory efforts to reduce

secondary-market transfers to prohibited people (Cook and Leitzel 2002).




$1 million per gunshot injury, Lott’s estimates imply that each gun owning household should receive a
subsidy of nearly $20,000 per year.



                                                                                                        34
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The research reported on here was supported by a grant from the Joyce Foundation, and

was conducted in part while the authors were residents at the Rockefeller Foundation’s

Bellagio Study and Conference Center. Thanks to Mark Duggan for sharing his data on

gun magazine subscriptions, to Bob Malme, Dmitri Mirovitski, Joe Peters and Eric

Younger for excellent research assistance, and to seminar participants at the NBER

Health Spring 2004 meetings for helpful comments. All opinions and any errors are our

own.


REFERENCES

Altonji, J.G., Elder, T.E., and Taber, C.R. 2000. Selection on observed and unobserved

variables: Assessing the effectiveness of catholic schools. NBER Working Paper 7831

National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Altonji, J.G., Elder, T.E. and Taber, C.R. 2002. An evaluation of instrumental variable

strategies for estimating the effects of Catholic schools. NBER Working Paper 9358,

National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Azrael, D., Cook, P.J. and Miller, M. 2004. State and local prevalence of firearms

ownership: Measurement, structure and trends. Journal of Quantitative Criminology

20(1), 43-62.

Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., and Mullainathan, S. 2004. How much should we trust

differences-in-differences?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), 249-275.

Blumstein, A. 2000. Disaggregating the violence trends. In: Blumstein, A., Wallman, J.

(Eds.), The Crime Drop in America. Cambridge University Press, New York, 13-44.




                                                                                          35
Braga, A.A., Cook, P.J., Kennedy, D.M., and Moore, M.H. 2003. The illegal supply of

firearms. In: Tonry. M. (Ed.), Crime and Justice: A Review of Research. University of

Chicago Press, Chicago: 229-262.

Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms (ATF), US Department of Treasury. 2000.

Commerce in Firearms in the United States. US Government Printing Office,

Washington, DC.

Butterfield, F. 1997. All God’s Children: The Bosket Family and the American Tradition

of Violence. Alfred A. Knopf, New York.

Campbell, J.C., Webster, D., et al. 2003. Risk factors for femicide in abusive

relationships: Results from a multisite case control study. American Journal of Public

Health 93(7), 1089-1097.

Cohen, J., Ludwig, J. 2003. Policing crime guns. In: Ludwig, J., Cook, P.J. (Eds.),

Evaluating Gun Policy. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 217-250.

Cook, P.J. 1976. A strategic choice analysis of robbery. In: Skogan, W. (Ed.), Sample

Surveys of the Victims of Crimes. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, 173-187.

Cook, P.J. 1985. The case of the missing victims: Gunshot woundings in the National

Crime Victimization Survey. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 1(1), 91-102.

Cook, P.J. 1987. Robbery violence. Journal of Criminal Law & Criminology 70(2), 357-

376.

Cook, P.J. 1991. The technology of personal violence.” In: Tonry, M. (Ed.), Crime and

Justice: An Annual Review of Research. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 1-71.

Cook, P.J., Braga, A.A. 2001. Comprehensive firearms tracing: Strategic and

investigative uses of new data on firearms markets. Arizona Law Review 43(2), 277-310.




                                                                                         36
Cook, P.J., Leitzel, J.A. 1996. Perversity, futility, jeopardy: An economic analysis of the

attack on gun control. Law and Contemporary Problems 59(1), 91-118.

Cook, P.J., Leitzel, J.A. 2002. 'Smart' guns: A technological fix for regulating the

secondary gun market. Contemporary Economic Problems 20(1), 38-49.

Cook, P.J., Laub, J.H. 1998. The unprecedented epidemic in youth violence. In: Tonry,

M., Moore, M.H. (Eds.), Youth Violence. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 101-

138.

Cook, P.J., Laub, J.H. 2002. After the epidemic: Recent trends in youth violence in the

United States. Tonry, M. (Ed.), Crime and Justice: A Review of Research. University of

Chicago Press, Chicago, 117-153.

Cook, P.J., Ludwig, J. 1996. Guns in America: Results of a Comprehensive Survey of

Gun Ownership and Use. Police Foundation, Washington, DC.

Cook, P.J., Ludwig, J. 2000. Gun Violence: The Real Costs. Oxford University Press,

New York.

Cook, P.J., Ludwig, J. 2002. Firearms. In: Viscusi, W.K (Ed.), Regulation Through

Litigation. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC.

Cook, P.J., Ludwig, J. 2003a. Pragmatic gun policy. In: Ludwig, J., Cook, P.J., (Eds.)

Evaluating Gun Policy. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 1-37.

Cook, P. J., Ludwig, J. 2003b. Guns and burglary. In: Ludwig, J., Cook, P.J. (Eds.),

Evaluating Gun Policy. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 74-120.

Cook, P.J., Ludwig, J. 2004. Does gun prevalence affect teen gun carrying after all?

Criminology 42(1), 27-54.




                                                                                          37
Cook, P.J., Ludwig, J., and Hemenway, D. 1997. The gun debate’s new mythical number:

How many defensive uses per year? Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16(3),

463-469.

Cook, P.J., Molliconi, S., and Cole, T.B. 1995. Regulating gun markets. Journal of

Criminal Law and Criminology 86(1), 59-92.

Davis, J.A., Smith, T.W. 1998. General Social Surveys, 1972-1998 [machine-readable

data file]/Principal Investigator J.A. Davis; Director and Co-Principal Investigator, T.W.

Smith; Sponsored by National Science Foundation –NORC ed.- National Opinion

Research Center , Chicago [producer]; The Roper Center for Public Opinion Research,

University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT [distributor].

Donohue, J.J. III, Levitt, S.D. 1998. Guns, violence, and the efficiency of illegal market.

American Economic Review 88(2), 463-467.

Duggan, M. 2001. “More guns, more crime. Journal of Political Economy 109(5), 1086-

1114.

Glaeser, E.L., Glendon, S. 1998. Who owns guns? Criminals, victims, and the culture of

violence. American Economic Review 88(2), 458-462.

Glaser, E.L., and Sacerdote, B. 1999. Why Is There More Crime in Cities? Journal of

Political Economy 107(6), S225-S258.

Goldsmith, S.K., Pellmar T.C., Kleinman, A.M. and Bunney, W.E. (Eds.) 2002.

Reducing Suicide: A National Imperative. National Academies Press, Washington, DC.

Greene, W.H. 2003. Econometric Analysis, 5th Edition. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle

River, NJ.

Hemenway, D. 2004. Private Guns, Public Health. The University of Michigan Press,

Ann Arbor.



                                                                                         38
Hsiao, C. 1986. Analysis of Panel Data. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Kates, D.B., Polsby, B.D. 2000. The myth of the ‘virgin killer’: Law-abiding persons

who kill in a fit of rage. Mimeo. Presentation at American Society of Criminology

Annual Meeting, San Francisco.

Kellermann, A.L, Rivara, F.P., Rushforth, N.B., et al. 1993. Gun ownership as a risk

factor for homicide in the home. New England Journal of Medicine 329, 1084-1091.

Kelly, M. 2000. Inequality and Crime. Review of Economics and Statistics 82(4), 530-

539.

Kleck, G. 2004. Measures of gun ownership levels for macro-level crime and violence

research. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency 41(1), 3-36.

Kleck, G., Gertz, M. 1995. Armed Resistance to Crime: The Prevalence and Nature of

Self-Defense with a Gun. Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology 86(1), 150-187.

Kleck, G., Patterson, E.B. 1993. The impact of gun control and gun ownership levels on

violence rates. Journal of Quantitative Criminology 9(3), 249-287.

Kleck, G. 1997. Targeting Guns: Firearms and Their Control. Aldine de Gruyter, New

York.

Levitt, S. 2002. Deterrence. In: Wilson, J.Q., Petersilia, J. (Eds.), Crime: Public Policies

for Crime Control. ICS Press, Oakland, CA, pp. 435-450.

Levitt, S. 2003. Comment on Raphael and Ludwig’s ‘Prison sentence enhancements.’ In:

Ludwig, J, Cook, P.J. (Eds.), Evaluating Gun Policy. Washington, DC: Brookings

Institution Press, Washington, DC, pp. 277-280.

Levitt, S. 2004. Understanding why crime fell in the 1990’s: Four factors that explain the

decline and six that do not. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1), 163-190.




                                                                                         39
Levitt, S., Venkatesh, S. 2002. An economic analysis of a drug-selling gang’s finances.

Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 755-789.

Lott, J.R. 2000. More Guns, Less Crime, 2nd Ed. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Ludwig, J., Cook, P.J. 2001. The benefits of reducing gun violence: Evidence from

contingent-valuation survey data. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 22(3), 207-226.

McDowall, D. 2002. Tests of nonlinear dynamics in U.S. homicide time series, and their

implications. Criminology 40(3), 711-735.

Miller, M., Azrael, D., and Hemenway, D. 2002a. Household firearm ownership levels

and homicide across U.S. states and regions, 1988-1997. American Journal of Public

Health 92, 1988-93.

Miller, M., Azrael, D., and Hemenway, D. 2002b. Household firearm ownership levels

and suicide across U.S. states and regions, 1988-1997. Epidemiology 13, 517-524.

Nagin, D.S. 1998. Criminal deterrence research at the outset of the twenty-first century.

In: Tonry, M. (Ed.), Crime and Justice: An Annual Review of Research. University of

Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 1-42.

Raphael, S., Ludwig, J. 2003. Prison sentence enhancements: The case of Project Exile.

In: Ludwig, J., Cook, P.J. (Eds.), Evaluating Gun Policy. Brookings Institution Press,

Washington, DC, pp. 251-287.

Sheley, J.F., Wright, J.D. 1995. In the Line of Fire: Youths, Guns and Violence in Urban

America. Aldine de Gruyter, New York.

Smith, T.W. 2001. 2001 National Gun Policy Survey of the National Opinion Research

Center: Research findings. Working Paper, National Opinion Research Center,

University of Chicago, Chicago.




                                                                                         40
Solon, G. 1984. Estimating autocorrelations in fixed-effects models.” National Bureau of

Economic Research Working Paper, No. 32. National Bureau of Economic Research,

Cambridge, MA.

Viscusi, W.K. 1998. Rational Risk Policy. Oxford University Press, New York.

Wiebe, D.J. 2003. Homicide and suicide risks associated with firearms in the home: A

national case-control study. Annals of Emergency Medicine 41, 771-782.

Wiersema, B., Loftin, C. and McDowall, D. 2000. A comparison of supplementary

homicide reports and National Vital Statistics System homicide estimates for U.S.

counties. Homicide Studies 4, 317-340.

Wolfgang, M.E. 1958. Patterns in Criminal Homicide. Wiley, New York.

Wolfgang, M.E. 1995. A tribute to a view I have opposed. Journal of Criminal Law &

Criminology 86(1), 188-192.

Wright, J.D., Rossi, P.H. 1994. Armed and Considered Dangerous: A Survey of Felons

and their Firearms (Expanded Edition). Aldine de Gruyter, New York.

Zimring, F.E. 1968. Is gun control likely to reduce violent killings? University of

Chicago Law Review 35, 21-37.




                                                                                       41
                                              TABLE 1

      VALIDITY TESTS OF PROXIES FOR HOUSEHOLD GUN PREVALENCE
                      Correlation Coefficients, Cross-Section Data
                            HICRCa                  BRFSSb            GSSc
                          N=48 States             N=21 States      N=9 Divisions
            FSS                0.81                   0.90             0.93
     % Suicides with
         Firearms
           FHH                 0.02                   0.19             0.52
    % homicides with
         firearms
          UFDR                 0.61                   0.68             0.85
      Unintentional
     firearms deaths
           G&A                 0.75                   0.67             0.51
      Guns&Ammo
    Subscription rate
    NRA Membership             0.67                   0.55            -0.06
           Rate
a
  State estimates based on two Harvard Injury Control Research Center (HICRC) surveys, which were
conducted using the random-digit-dial technique in 1996 and 1999, with sample sizes of 1,900 and 2,500
respectively.
b
  Between 1992 and 1995 the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) included gun-
ownership items in surveys conducted in 21 states. These surveys were conducted under the auspices of
state health departments using the random-digit-dial telephone technique. The median sample size of
adults ages 18 and over was 2,061
c
  General Social Survey prevalence estimates are here based on pooled data from surveys conducted in
1994,1996, and 1998.
Source: Azrael, Cook and Miller 2004




                                                                                                     42
                                         TABLE 2
        VALIDITY OF TWO PROXIES WITH RESPECT TO 4 MEASURES
               Data from GSS Surveys, 1980-1998, for 9 Census Divisions
                Panel regression results with Census Division fixed effects
        Linear Regression coefficients on proxy (FSS or G&A), and standard errors
Which proxy?                 GSS % of           GSS % of          GSS % of         GSS % of
                          individuals who individuals who households with         households
                             own a gun        own a handgun          a gun      with a handgun
 With “year” fixed
effects
FSS                            .850b               .485c             1.108a          .737b
                               (.354)             (.250)             (.417)          (.305)
G&A                              .358               .713             -.055             .861
                              (1.196)             (.835)            (1.419)         (1.027)
No “year” fixed
effects
FSS                             .812a              .554a              .905a           .742a
                               (.285)             (.201)             (.355)          (.246)
                                                                            c
G&A                            -.762                .403            -2.219             .201
                              (1.013)             (.713)            (1.240)          (.878)
    Notes: Each cell contains the key coefficient estimate and standard error from a different regression.
    Each regression includes divisional dummies; the coefficients are not reported in this table. N = 126,
    annual observations from the General Social Survey for the following 14 years: 1980-1982, 1984,
    1985, 1987- 1991, 1993, 1994, 1996, and 1998. (The GSS was not fielded or did not include the
    relevant items during the missing years.)

    The two proxies for gun ownership are:
    • FSS = % of suicides in the Census Division committed with a gun, from Vital Statistics data
    • G&A= Subscriptions to Guns&Ammo per 10,000 residents of Census Division

a. Significantly different from zero at the 1% level
b. Significantly different from zero at the 5% level
c. Significantly different from zero at the 10% level




                                                                                                        43
                                    TABLE 3
                    DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS FOR COUNTY DATA

                                          Full sample             Bottom quartile               Top quartile
                                         (largest 200)              1980 FSS                     1980 FSS

Full period (1980-1999)
Northeast                                               26.8                        67.1                         0
South                                                   25.4                         2.4                      71.0
Midwest                                                 19.6                        23.9                      14.6
West                                                    26.2                         6.6                      14.4
FSS                                                     49.9                        34.6                      66.9
Homicide rate                                           11.0                        10.9                      14.4
Gun homicide rate                                        7.3                         6.9                      10.1
% Urban                                                 92.6                        94.7                      91.8
% Black                                                 14.0                        13.5                      19.5
% Female Household Head                                 18.0                        20.1                      18.5
# suicides                                             195.8                       192.5                     120.0

1980
FSS                                                     48.0                        29.2                         73.3
Homicide rate                                           12.9                        12.6                         17.2
Gun homicide rate                                        8.4                         7.5                         12.2
% Urban                                                 89.5                        93.1                         88.5
% Black                                                 13.0                        12.8                         18.9
% Female Household Head                                 16.6                        18.7                         16.3

1990
FSS                                                     52.8                        37.2                         69.1
Homicide rate                                           12.5                        13.2                         16.4
Gun homicide rate                                        8.5                         9.3                         11.5
% Urban                                                 93.0                        94.6                         92.4
% Black                                                 14.2                        13.6                         19.5
% Female Household Head                                 18.1                        20.3                         18.7

1999
FSS                                                     48.0                        34.9                         59.8
Homicide rate                                            6.7                         6.9                          8.8
Gun homicide rate                                        4.8                         4.7                          6.7
% Urban                                                 95.0                        96.6                         94.0
% Black                                                 14.7                        14.3                         20.2
% Female Household Head                                 19.2                        21.2                         20.3

Notes: Descriptive statistics calculated from county level data for the 200 largest counties in the U.S.,
weighting by county population.




                                                                                                            44
                                              TABLE 4
                           BASELINE RESULTS, COUNTY-LEVEL DATA 1980-1999

                                    Ln(Hom)                 Ln(Hom)             Ln(Hom)            Ln(Hom)
Ln FSS(t-1)                          .100 b                   .107a              .085 c              .086b
                                     (.044)                  (.037)              (.044)             (.038)
Ln Rob(t)                                                     .139a                                  .149a
                                                             (.043)                                 (.042)
Ln Burg(t)                                                    .258a                                  .226a
                                                             (.068)                                 (.072)
Ln % Black(t)                                                                        .233            .278c
                                                                                   (.166)           (.164)
Ln % Urb(t)                                                                        -.389b           -.537a
                                                                                   (.161)           (.157)
Ln % Same House 5 yrs                                                             -1.209a            -.690
ago                                                                                (.430)           (.419)
Ln % Female Headed                                                                  .790c            -.303
House                                                                              (.460)           (.413)
Year fixed effects?                     Yes                    Yes                   Yes              Yes
County fixed effects?                   Yes                    Yes                   Yes              Yes
R-squared                               .915                   .921                  .918             .923
N                                      3822                   3822                  3822             3822
            Notes Parentheses contain standard errors adjusted for serial correlation (see text). Estimates utilize county
            population as weight. Analytic sample consists of annual observations for 200 largest counties in U.S.
            over the period 1980-1999.
            a. Significantly different from zero at the 1% level
            b. Significantly different from zero at the 5% level
            c. Significantly different from zero at the 10% level




                                                                                                                      45
                                             TABLE 5
                                      SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS

                                    Ln(Homicide)           Ln(Gun Homicide)          Ln(Non-gun Homicide)
Baseline model, final                   .086b                   . 173a                      -.033
column,                                (.038)                   (.049)                      (.040)
Table 4
Additional Covariates                    .086b                       . 173a                      -.020
(Age, Poverty, Immigrants)               (.036)                     (.043)                       (.040)
Use contemporaneous (not                  .097a                       .250a                      -.089b
lagged) FSS                              (.035)                     (.056)                       (.042)
Without serial correlation               . 086a                       .173a                      -.033
correction                               (.030)                     (.040)                       (.037)
Baseline Model,                            .051                       .167a                      -.061
Unweighted                               (.043)                     (.043)                       (.042)
Baseline Model,                            .016                        .015                      -.004
Linear in all vars.                      (.012)                     (.011)                       (.004)
Baseline Model, Semi-Log                 .002b                      .0043a                       -.001
(FSS linear)                           (.00087)                     (.001)                     (.00095)
Average FSS over 2 years                  .148b                       .317a                      -.054
                                         (.059)                     (.089)                       (.061)
Limit sample to largest 100               .131a                       .207a                       .026
counties                                 (.047)                     (.066)                       (.051)
Limit sample to largest 50                .223a                      .252b                        .114
counties                                 (.076)                     (.101)                       (.078)
Add region/year Fixed                     .067c                       .152a                      -.038
Effects                                  (.037)                     (.046)                       (.040)
Add Census Division/year                  .068c                       .162a                      -.047
Fixed Effects                            (.035)                     (.044)                       (.038)
Condition on lag dependent                .061c                      .108b                       -.032
variable                                 (.033)                     (.046)                       (.040)
State-level data, baseline                .407a                       .562a                       .106
model                                    (.142)                     (.180)                       (.130)
State data, add region/year              .270b                        .421a                      -.017
fixed effects                            (.119)                     (.158)                       (.109)
State data, add                           .335a                       .534a                      -.066
division/year fixed effects              (.114)                     (.167)                       (.099)
State data, condition on lag             .208b                       .272b                        .103
dependent variable                       (.081)                     (.110)                       (.116)
Notes: Unless otherwise noted, analytic sample consists of 200 largest counties in US using data from
1980 to 1999. Each cell in table presents the coefficient estimate and standard error for the log of FSS(t-1)
(except for the last row), with the robbery rate, burglary rate, indicators for missing values for robbery and
burglary, and % black as covariates. Parentheses contain standard errors adjusted for serial correlation (see
text). Estimates utilize county population as weight.

a = Statistically significant at 1 percent.
b = Statistically significant at 5 percent.
c = Statistically significant at 10 percent




                                                                                                          46
                                TABLE 6
             LONG-DIFFERENCE ESTIMATES, COUNTY-LEVEL DATA

                             Ln(homicides)    Ln(gun homicides)     Ln(non-gun
                                                                    homicides)
1999 versus 1980             .304c            .782b                 -.300
                             (.154)           (.191)                (.183)
1998-99 vs 1980-81           .311c            .822b                 -.167
                             (.168)           (.217)                (.173)
1997-99 vs 1980-82           .471b            .988b                 -.091
                             (.166)           (.216)                (.160)
1996-99 vs 1980-83           .496b            .954b                 -.019
                             (.169)           (.225)                (.152)

Notes: Estimates derived from a first-difference equation for the variables listed in the
baseline model (final column, Table 4) averaged over the years shown in the first column
in the present table, calculated using weighted least squares with each county’s 1999
population as a weighting variable.
a = Statistically significant at 1 percent.
b = Statistically significant at 5 percent.
c = Statistically significant at 10 percent




                                                                                      47
                                   TABLE 7
      SPECIFICATION CHECKS FOR COUNTY AND STATE RESULTS
                                   1980-1999
Outcome:                     200 Largest County data State data
                                           c
Ln(UCR murder)                       .073              .645 a
                                     (.043)            (.200)
Ln(UCR rape)                          -.012            -.201
                                     (.048)            (.382)
Ln(UCR aggravated asslt)              -.040             .275
                                     (.038)            (.168)
Ln(UCR larceny)                        .004             .096
                                     (.015)            (.074)
Ln(UCR MV theft)                       .041             .046
                                     (.038)            (.189)
Ln(Fatality rate from falls)           N/A              .058
                                                       (.158)
Ln(MV crash fatality rate)             N/A              .081
                                                       (.068)
Notes: Each cell present the coefficient and standard errors (adjusted for serial correlation) for a separate
regression of the log of lagged FSS against the outcome measure described in the first column, controlling
for the log of the robbery and burglary rates as well as the other covariates described in the final column of
Table 4. The county-level regressions condition on county and year fixed effects and weight by county
population, using a sample of the 200 largest counties in the U.S.; the state-level regressions condition on
year and state fixed effects, as well as the weight by state population.
a = Statistically significant at 1 percent.
b = Statistically significant at 5 percent.
c = Statistically significant at 10 percent




                                                                                                           48
                                TABLE 8
           EFFECTS OF GUN OWNERSHIP ON YOUTH HOMICIDES
                         STATE DATA, 1980-1999
                    Ln(Hom 15-19)   Ln(Gun hom 15-19) Ln(Nongun 15-19)
                              a
State data               .593             .458b             -.053
Ln(State FSS)           (.194)           (.205)            (.373)
Notes: Each cell presents a coefficient and standard error (adjusted for serial correlation) from a separate
regression. Each regression controls for the log of the state’s burglary and robbery rate and percent black,
log state alcohol consumption per capita, and year and state fixed effects. Estimates are calculated using
state populations as weights.
a = Statistically significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                          49
                            TABLE 9
  INCREASE IN HOMICIDES RESULTING FROM 10,000 ADDITIONAL
               HANDGUN-OWNING HOUSEHOLDS
Homicide Rate/  10% prevalence   20% prevalence 30% prevalence
   100,000
      5              1.0              0.5            0.3
     10              2.0              1.0            0.7
     15              3.0              1.5            1.0
     20              4.0              2.0            1.3




                                                             50
                               Appendix Figure A1

                      Gun Prevalence, GSS vs FSS*X

              0.26


Index Value
              0.24
              0.22
              0.20
                                         GSS           FSS*X
              0.18
               73

                      76

                           79

                                 82

                                      85

                                           88

                                                  91

                                                       94

                                                            97

                                                                 00
              19

                     19

                          19

                               19

                                    19

                                         19

                                               19

                                                    19

                                                         19

                                                               20
                                           Year




                                                                      51
                                    APPENDIX 1
             National Household Prevalence of Handgun Ownership, and FSS
                    Handgun Prevalence                                 Est. Standard Error
    Year            General Social Survey             FSS                (Sample error)
    1973                     0.2023                  0.5302                   0.0128
    1974                     0.2001                  0.5595                   0.0128
    1976                     0.2181                  0.5489                   0.0132
    1977                     0.2066                  0.5608                   0.0127
    1980                     0.2407                  0.5790                   0.0137
    1982                     0.2245                  0.5864                   0.0133
    1984                     0.2155                  0.5843                   0.0132
    1985                     0.2303                  0.5895                   0.0132
    1987                     0.2541                  0.5889                   0.0140
    1988                     0.2281                  0.5975                   0.0166
    1989                     0.2536                  0.6013                   0.0166
    1990                     0.2348                  0.6110                   0.0172
    1991                     0.2045                  0.6013                   0.0158
    1993                     0.2411                  0.6090                   0.0160
    1994                     0.2458                  0.6026                   0.0119
    1996                     0.2237                  0.5878                   0.0117
    1998                     0.1961                  0.5699                   0.0113
    2000                     0.1998                  0.5651                   0.0115

Notes: FSS is computed as the ratio of firearms suicides to all suicides recorded in the
U.S. Vital Statistics mortality data. Handgun Prevalence is the estimated percentage of
households that have at least one handgun. The Estimated Standard Error is computed
as [P/(1-P)/(N*2/3)]1/2, where P is estimated handgun prevalence and N is the sample
size. The adjustment factor 2/3 is included at the suggestion of GSS documentation to
correct for geographic clustering in the sample:
http://www.icpsr.umich.edu:8080/GSS/rnd1998/appendix/apdx_a.htm


Source: For GSS: web: http://www.icpsr.umich.edu:8080/GSS/homepage.htm
For FS/S: 1979-2000 WONDER http://wonder.cdc.gov FSS data from 1973-1977
                                                ; Hyattsville, MD: U.S. Dept. of Health,
Monthly vital statistics report (Hyattsville, Md.)
Education, and Welfare, Public Health Service, National Center for Health Statistics




                                                                                             52
                                    APPENDIX 2
                              Data Sources for Analyses

County population data-Data for years 1979 to 2000. Downloaded from U.S. Census
Bureau data for each county available through the CDC Wonder website:
http://wonder.cdc.gov/census.html.

State population data-Data for years 1981 to 2000. Downloaded from state population
numbers used to calculate homicide rates in Fatal Injury Mortality reports available from
CDC’s National Center for Injury Prevention and Control’s Web-based Injury Statistics
Query and Reporting System (WISQARS) website, http://webappa.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc
/mortrate.html.

Homicide data-Data was obtained from three sources: Vital Statistics-United States
Department of Health and Human Services Mortality Detail Files 1979-1992, obtained
via ICPSR Study Datasets: 7632 (1979-1991) and 6798 (1992); National Center for
Health Statistics’ Multiple Causes of Death data 1993-1999, obtained via ICPSR Study
Datasets 6799 (1993), 2201 (1994), 2392 (1995), 2702 (1996), 3085 (1997), 3306 (1998),
and 3473 (1999); Uniform Crime Reports County Offense Data, 1979-2000, obtained via
ICPSR Study Datasets: 8703 (1979-83), 8714 (1984), 9252 (1985 and 1987), 9119
(1986), 9335 (1988), 9573 (1989), 9785 (1990), 6036 (1991), 6316 (1992), 6545 (1993),
6669 (1994), 6850 (1995), 2389 (1996), 2764 (1997), 2910 (1998), 3167 (1999), and
3451 (2000); and the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports Supplementary Homicide Reports
(SHR) 1976-1999, obtained from ICPSR Study No. 3180. Separate state data was
obtained for homicide from CDC WISQARS dataset for 1981-2000.

Suicide data- From Vital Statistics-United States Department of Health and Human
Services Mortality Detail Files 1979-1992, obtained via ICPSR Study Datasets: 7632
(1979-1991) and 6798 (1992); and National Center for Health Statistics’ Multiple Causes
of Death data 1993-1999, obtained via ICPSR Study Datasets 6799 (1993), 2201 (1994),
2392 (1995), 2702 (1996), 3085 (1997), 3306 (1998), and 3473 (1999). Separate state
data was obtained for suicide from CDC WISQARS dataset for 1981-2000.

Other Crime data (Robbery, Burglary)-From the FBI’s Uniform Crime Reports, County-
Level Offense Data, 1979-2000. Obtained via ICPSR Study Datasets: 8703 (1979-83),
8714 (1984), 9252 (1985 and 1987), 9119 (1986), 9335 (1988), 9573 (1989), 9785
(1990), 6036 (1991), 6316 (1992), 6545 (1993), 6669 (1994), 6850 (1995), 2389 (1996),
2764 (1997), 2910 (1998), 3167 (1999), and 3451 (2000).

Urban Population Data-Calculated for 1990 and 2000 from Decennial Census data from
US Census Bureau. 1990 Data from Census of Population and Housing, Summary Tape
File 3C, downloaded from ICPSR Study No. 6054. Data for 2000 was for US Census
Bureau’s Census 2000 Gateway website, Summary Tape File 3, downloaded from:
http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2002/sumfile3.html on March 3, 2004.




                                                                                      53
