NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW DOES COST-SHARING AFFECT DRUG PURCHASES? INSURANCE REGIMES
IN THE PRIVATE MARKET FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
Avi Dor
William Encinosa
Working Paper 10738
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10738

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

This research is a substantial revision and extension of our earlier 2004 NBER working paper no. 10738
“Does Cost Sharing Affect Compliance? The Case of Prescription Drugs”.
© 2004 by Avi Dor and William Encinosa. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

How Does Cost-Sharing Affect Drug Purchases? Insurance Regimes in the Private Market
for Prescription Drugs
Avi Dor and William Encinosa
NBER Working Paper No. 10738
September 2004, Revised August 2009
JEL No. I11,L11
ABSTRACT
Insurance for prescription drugs is characterized by two types of cost-sharing: flat copayments and
variable coinsurance. We develop a theoretical model to show that refill purchases of preventive drugs
(compliance) are lower under coinsurance due to the consumer’s exposure to variation in drug prices.
Coinsurance creates countervailing incentives. Consumers who never comply under flat copayments
might find it optimal to comply if they drew a relatively low price under coinsurance. In contrast, consumers
who always comply under flat copayments might stop complying if they drew a relatively high price
under coinsurance. Our theory shows the second effect dominates under certain distributional assumptions
about health states. Empirically, we derive comparable models for compliance behavior in the two
regimes. Using claims data from eight large firms, we focus our analysis on diabetes, a common chronic
condition that leads to severe complications when not continuously treated with medications. Propensity
score methods are used to create matched samples for the two insurance regimes. We find that when
coinsurance and flat copayments have the same expected out-of-pocket of $9, at least 34% of patients
under copayments would fully comply and refill their medication over the next 90 days, compared
to only 24% under coinsurance. Similarly, under copayments, moving from the 25th percentile to the
75th percentile of cost sharing results in a significantly lower shift into the non-compliance state compared
with coinsurance. Thus, the empirical results confirm the main theoretical predictions. This research
is a substantial revision and extension of our earlier 2004 NBER working paper no. 10738.

Avi Dor
George Washington University
2021 K street NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20037
and NBER
avidor@gwu.edu
William Encinosa
Center for Delivery, Organization and Markets
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
540 Gaither Rd.
Rockville, MD 20850
wencinos@ahrq.gov

1

Introduction
Overall drug spending in the private sector grew approximately 15-20 percent per year

during the 1990s (Thomas et al, 2002), and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
project similar rates of growth through the next decade. In 2002, national expenditures
on prescription drugs amounted to over $160 billion, with employer-sponsored insurance
covering most of the bill (Woellert, 2002). Moreover, between 2006 and 2008 the federal
government’s share of the national spending on drugs was predicted to increase from 22%
to 40% due to the introduction of the Medicare Part D prescription drug benefit for the
elderly (Frank, 2004). This benefit is expected to increase drug spending by 12% to 17%
(Yang et al, 2004).
Driven by concerns over rising costs, Medicare, employers, and insurers are now designing
pharmaceutical benefit plans to allow greater consumer cost sharing. Early evaluations
of such plans suggest that increased cost sharing is indeed helping to bring about lower
consumer spending on prescription drugs, and hence, lower employer costs. For example,
Joyce et al (2002) have shown that a doubling of copayments decreased total spending on
drugs from 19% to 33%. However, Huskamp et al (2003) find little change in spending for
some drugs classes aimed at chronic conditions (statins, ACE inhibitors, and proton-pump
inhibitors) after copayment increases. Goldman et al (2004) show that this is due to the
fact that chronically ill patients decrease utilization of their nonessential medications more
so than their chronic care drugs when copayments are increased.1
In most circumstances, economists would conclude that such developments are rational
responses to market imperfections in the presence of insurance — increased patient cost
sharing reduces moral hazard and excessive medical consumption, thereby improving social
welfare (Pauly, 1974). Indeed, empirical research (spurred by the Rand Health Insurance
Experiment) has shown that reasonable increases in copayments lead to reduced medical
1

Similar patterns occur with copayments for outpatient services. Liang et al (2004), show that the use
of copayments discourage the use of controversial services, such as prostate cancer screening, but have no
effect on recommended services like mammography screening for breast cancer.

3

expenditures in a variety of situations, with little adverse impact on health (Manning et al,
1987; Newhouse 1993).
However, the case of prescription drugs is more complex. Often drugs are associated
with preventive efforts to reduce further illness and complications, and the patient might
not share the doctor’s clinical understanding of these long run benefits of drugs. In this
case underutilization may be the problem, and ‘too much’ cost sharing may lead to a loss of
welfare. This was theoretically shown to be possible for preventive drugs, such as statins,
by Ma and Riordan (JEMS, 2002), and, generally, for preventive care by Dor (2004). In
fact, empirically, Hsu et al (2006) found that a $1,000 cap on drug benefits resulted in
lower drug use and poorer control of blood pressure, lipid levels, and glucose levels among
Medicare+Choice beneficiaries.
Moreover, underuse of drugs with respect to clinical guidelines has long been a problem
even before the additional concerns of increased cost-sharing arose. In a study of three of
the ten largest health plans in California in 1999, underuse of drugs was severe: only 27.5%
of antidepressant users received the recommended 6 months of continuous therapy, only
48% of asthma patients received at least one inhaled corticosteroid drug, and only 54.5% of
patient with congestive heart failure received an ACE inhibitor (Gilberg et al 2003). Similar
underuse of beta blockers after a heart attack are well documented nationally (National
Healthcare Quality Report, 2003). In half the states, 45% of patients with an irregular
heart beat did not receive follow-up blood thinning drugs (Warfarin) to prevent a stroke
(Leatherman and McCarthy, 2002).
In this paper, we will explore the degree to which cost-sharing can act as a barrier to
preventive effort as measured by ‘compliance’—the adherence to refilling of prescriptions
of preventive care drugs without interruption. In particular, we will focus on the impact
of cost-sharing on compliance with anti-diabetic medications. It should be noted that
we are not merely interested in levels of copayments. Rather, we distinguish between two
main insurance regimes, namely fixed copayments and variable coinsurance (i.e., percentage
copayments). While economists have begun to explore the issue of the impact of cost4

sharing on utilization (so called demand management)2 , this important distinction in costsharing structures has not been previously considered. While Ma and Riordan (2002) have
developed the demand management theory for the trade-off between premiums and the
level of copayments, in this paper we develop the demand management theory for the
trade-off between coinsurance and copayments. This trade-off seems to be the most cogent
trade-off currently underway in the health insurance marketplace. In fact, since drug prices
increase each year, many employers have been moving from flat and tiered copayments to a
coinsurance rate (Hewitt Associates, 2002). Even the preventive care-focused HMO, Kaiser
Permanente, has switched to coinsurance for specialty drugs in 2008 due to their rapid price
increases. This forces the patient to pay 30% of any cost increase, if the coinsurance rate
is 30% for example, otherwise, under a flat copayment the employer will have to pay 100%
of the cost increase. However, critics argue that coinsurance is more difficult for patients
since it leads to greater variation and uncertainty in out-of-pocket expenses, causing greater
non-compliance (Bymark and Waite, 2001).
Indeed, as we argue below, the incentives facing consumers under these two regimes are
not identical, and therefore responses to cost-sharing should not be identical. To motivate
this, we develop a simple theory; our empirical results conform with the theoretical prediction that compliance will be lower under variable coinsurance than under flat copayments.
This is due to the fact that the patient does indeed face greater uncertainty in out-of-pocket
drug costs under coinsurance.

Why Diabetes?
Diabetes is one of the most common chronic condition for which prescription medications
exist, with 18 million Americans, or 6.2 percent of the U.S. population estimated to have
2

The issues explored in these studies are quite different than ours. For instance, Crown et al, (2003),
focus on the role of physicians in asthma prescription behavior, while Ridley (2004) focuses on the role of
promotional drug advertisements on demand. They find conflicting results with regard to the impact of
copayments on utilization. Ellison et al (1997) consider full price effects rather than copayments, and find
some evidence of positive cross-price elasticities for drug substitutions within the same therapeutic class.

5

this diagnosis. It is the leading cause of adult blindness, kidney failure, and non-trauma
amputations, and a leading cause of heart disease. 180,000 people die each year from
diabetes in the U.S., making it the sixth leading cause of death. The prevalence of diabetes
in the U.S. increased by more than 30% over the last ten years. Moreover, the annual
costs of diabetes in medical expenditures and lost productivity climbed from $98 billion
in 1997 to $132 billion in 2002. As the incidence of diabetes reaches epidemic proportion,
leading to spiraling costs, the need to undertake prevention measures is becoming even more
pronounced.
There are two major forms of the disease. Type I diabetes occurs in about 10 percent of
cases; in this manifestation of the disease, a person is unable to produce insulin, the major
hormone in the body that regulates blood sugar level. Persons with type I diabetes are
dependent on daily insulin injections, but few oral prescription medications are available.
In type II diabetes mellitus, persons either produce low levels of insulin or the insulin
produced is deficient in regulating blood sugars. For this variant of the disease, five types
of oral prescription medications are available: Sulfonylureas (SU), Non-SU (Meglitinides),
Metformin, Thiazolidinediones (TZD), and alpha-Glucosidase Inhibitors (AGI). Each of
these drugs targets a separate organ site in the body to control blood sugar levels, as
illustrated in Table 1. These five pharmacological methods of controlling of blood sugar can
substantially delay or prevent the costly medical complications arising from diabetes (see
Cohen et al, 2003, for instance).
Compliance with these medications is of recent importance, since it was found that
only 55% of diabetics keep their blood sugar under control (National Healthcare Disparities
Report, 2008). A person is considered compliant if he or she adheres to the anti-diabetic
drug regimen prescribed by a physician (Hughes et al, 2001; Dezii, 2000). Since these antidiabetic medications are intended to be taken permanently, measurement of compliance is
relatively straightforward when tracking such individuals. In this paper, we will examine
patient compliance with all five anti-diabetic drugs in Table 1. In particular, we focus on
compliance in terms of purchasing prescription refills to cover the 90 days after using all
6

the pills supplied in the initial prescription. Our main concern is that increases in patient
cost-sharing levels for these drugs may induce some patients to not comply with their antidiabetic medications3 . Indeed, we find that increases in cost-sharing from the 25th percentile
to 75 percentile in copayments (from $6 to $11) increased the number of diabetics who never
complied within 90 days by 9%. For diabetics facing a coinsurance rate rather than a flat
copayment, an increase from the 25th percentile to 75 percentile in coinsurance (from 23%
to 42%) increased the number of diabetics who never complied within 90 days by 25%.
The paper is organized as follows. First, section 2 sets up a theoretical model of the
patient’s decision to comply. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 delineates the empirical
methods. Section 5 discusses the empirical results and simulations. Section 6 concludes with
a discussion.

2

Theory Model
Cost-sharing for prescription drugs by the patient-consumer can occur either in the

form of a fixed copayment (e.g., $25 per prescription) or in the form of a coinsurance rate
(e.g., 20% of the final retail price of the prescription). This distinction between fixed copayments and variable payments under coinsurance creates fundamentally different constraints
for patients. With a fixed copayment, the patient knows exactly what she will pay outof-pocket for her next prescription, namely, a flat dollar amount. Under coinsurance, the
patient is exposed to any fluctuations in retail drug prices. Below, we present a simple
theoretical model that reflects the different sets of incentives that consumers face in each of
the two cost-sharing regimes.
Suppose a patient currently has a prescription for a chronic condition. The patient must
decide whether to refill the prescription once it runs out. Let y be the patient’s income.
As in the demand theories of Ma and Riordan (2002) and Glazer and McGuire (2002), we
3

In fact, Karter et al, (2003), show that use of outpatient diabetic services decline with copayment
increases.

7

assume that there is a continuum of consumers, where each patient has a unique level of
sickness s distributed on [0, 1] with cumulative distribution G(s) and density g(s). This
variation in s captures the variation in how well diabetics cope without their medications.
Healthy patients (s = 0) able to exercise regularly may have less severe symptoms, while
patients with the poorest health (s = 1), with, say, very unstable glucose levels, may require
hospitalization shortly after stopping their medications. That is, if the patient does not refill
her medication, she will experience a loss in health L(s), and her reservation utility of not
complying will be U (y − L(s)), where L0 (s) > 0 and where U is an increasing, concave or
linear utility function.
Next, suppose that the random retail price p of the next prescription (30-day supply) is
generated by a cumulative distribution F (p) with mean price E(p) = p̄ and variation σ 2 on
domain [pL , pH ]. We assume the patient can learn the retail price before deciding to refill
the medicine. Define C(p) to be the out-of-pocket payment that the patient must pay for
the drug:
C(p) =

(

c
rp

under copayments
under coinsurance,

(1)

where c is the flat copayment and r is the coinsurance rate. Let V be the gross value that the
patient places on the drug for which she is debating whether to refill, so that the net value
of the drug is V − L(s).4 Next, let e(s) = es be the patient’s effort or personal disutility
required to refill the medication, with e > 0. Note that sicker patients will necessarily have
to exert greater effort in order to refill their medications. This is corroborated in our data
where we find that sicker patients are much less likely to comply.5 Thus, the patient’s net
benefit of taking the medication is V − es − L(s). Then, the patient’s utility when taking
a medication is U (y + V − es − L(s) − C(p)). Thus, the patient will comply and refill
her medication only if her utility is higher under medications than without medications:
U (y + V − es − L(s) − C(p)) > U (y − L(s)). Since U is increasing and weakly concave, this
4

A more general model where V is allowed to vary with s is considered in Appendix 2.
This can be seen in Figure 1 and in the regressions of Table 3, where compliance is negatively related
to the presence of “four or more chronic conditions” under both coinsurance and flat copayments.
5

8

holds if the following inequality holds:
y + V − es − L(s) − C(p) > y − L(s).

(2)

The left-hand side of (2) captures the net economic value of the next prescription, and
the right-hand side captures the utility of not getting the next prescription. Note that (2)
reduces to
V − es − C(p) > 0.

(3)

That is, the patient will refill the medication if the value of refilling exceeds the outof-pocket cost of the drug and the effort of refilling. From (3), we can define the patient
indifferent between complying and not complying at cost C(p) as
s∗ =

V − C(p)
.
e

(4)

Then from (3) and (4), patient s will comply with her medication only if s < s∗ .6
Then, G(s∗ ) is the proportion of the population who will comply. More specifically, if we
assume that, on average, the out-of-pocket is the same for both copayments and coinsurance
(c = rE(p)), the probability of compliance over the entire population under copayment
C(p) = c is


!



V −c
V − rE(p)
P r(comply|copayment) = G(s ) = G
=G
.
e
e
∗

(5)

However, for the patient s facing coinsurance out-of-pocket C(p) = rp, the refill compliance inequality (3) will hold only for patient s with s <

V −rp
.
e

So, the expected probability

of compliance over the entire population under coinsurance is




V − rp
P r(comply|coinsurance) = EG
,
e

(6)

where the expectation E is over prices.7
6

This accords with our empirical data in Figure 1, where compliance declines with s, as measured by
the medical possession ratio (the percentage of days in the year that the patient possesses a medication).
7
Note that equations (5) and (6) are generally not equal since G( V −rE(p)
) 6= EG( V −rp
e
e ) when G is
nonlinear.

9

Comparing coinsurance in (6) with flat copayments in (5), we see that there is a tradeoff. The disadvantage of coinsurance is that a person may draw a higher price than average
and comply less than they would have under flat copayments. The advantage of coinsurance
is that a person may instead draw a lower price than average and comply more than under
flat copayments. Thus, it is not immediately clear whether more people are expected to
comply under flat copayments than under coinsurance. As we show next, whether the
flat copayment regime induces more compliance than the coinsurance regime depends on
the distribution G(s) of the sick. The magnitude of the difference in compliance between
regimes depends on the variance of the drug price, σ 2 .8
Proposition 1 Suppose that the expected out-of-pocket under coinsurance is equal to the
flat copayment (rE(p) = c). Then, the probability of medication compliance over the entire
population under coinsurance is

P r(comply|coinsurance) ' P r(comply|copayment) +

r2 σ 2 00 ∗
G (s ).
2e2

(7)

Thus,
(1) coinsurance induces less compliance than flat copayments when the population’s marginal
distribution of illness is declining at the indifferent patient (G00 (s∗ ) < 0).
(2) coinsurance induces more compliance than flat copayments when the population’s marginal distribution of illness is increasing at the indifferent patient (G00 (s∗ ) > 0).
8

In our previous work we used the mean-variance utility function to model the effect of price uncertainty
on compliance decisions (Dor and Encinosa, 2004). That model was somewhat restrictive in that it did not
incorporate the dependence of patients behavioral responses on health states. By using more general utility
functions we now show that neither insurance regime dominates the patient’s medication purchase decision
unambiguously. Rather, the dominance of copay versus coinsurance is determined by the distribution of
health states in the population. For instance, price increases under coinsurance are more of an impediment
to compliance when patients are sufficiently healthy to benefit from standard medication therapies. Thus,
which effect may initially dominate becomes an empirically testable issue, which we address by providing
the distribution of health states in our data.

10

Proof: See Appendix 1. A proof for the more general case where value V is a function of
severity s is provided in Appendix 2.

Proposition 1 leads to two basic results:
• First, from (7) we see that the magnitude of the difference in compliance between flat
copayments and coinsurance increases with the variance of price, σ 2 , and with the coinsurance rate, r. Copayments and coinsurance induce the same level of compliance if there
is no variation in drug prices (σ 2 = 0). However, it turns out that there is substantial
variation in prescription drug prices, both longitudinally and cross sectionally, with drug
prices exhibiting a high level of price dispersion even within the same geographical market.9
• Second, from (7) we see that whether coinsurance induces more compliance than flat copayments depends on the marginal distribution of illness (G00 ) at the indifferent patient s∗ .
In fact, in Figure 1, we see that G00 (s) < 0 at every s in our data.

The intuition behind Proposition 1 is simple. Note that the patient s∗ is indifferent
between complying and not complying under flat copayment c (from (4)). Coinsurance will
have two effects, one on each two groups of people: those patients above s∗ and those below
s∗ :

(1) Note that the people with s > s∗ never comply under flat copayment c. Thus, if they
were exposed instead to coinsurance r and random out-of-pocket rp (with mean E(rp) = c),
they might just start complying if they drew a really low price p. That is, coinsurance might
induce more compliance under coinsurance than under flat copayments for patients s > s∗ .

9

In our own data we find that drug prices do vary on a monthly basis. While overall prices increased
8% over the 18 months, prices moved in both directions. For example, Glucotrol decreased by 27% while
Glyset increased by 17%. Similarly, in our own data there was a high degree of price dispersion within the
same insurance plan. While the coefficient of variation (standard deviation/mean) for price for the overall
sample was 0.50, within-plan coefficients of variation ranged from 0.24 to 1.32.

11

(2) Note that the people with s < s∗ always comply under flat copayment c. Thus, if they
were exposed instead to coinsurance r and random out-of-pocket rp (with mean E(rp) = c),
they might just stop complying if they drew a really high price p. That is, coinsurance might
induce less compliance under coinsurance than under flat copayments for patients s < s∗ .

So which of these two effects dominates? Clearly, the second effect will dominate if the
density g(s) of illness places more weight on the patients with s < s∗ than on the group of
patients with s > s∗ . This occurs if g(s) is declining at s∗ (i.e., g 0 (s∗ ) < 0). This is exactly
what Proposition 1 says. Recalling that G0 (s) = g(s), Proposition 1 says that coinsurance
will induce less compliance than flat copayments when the marginal distribution of illness
is declining at the indifferent patient, G00 (s∗ ) < 0, or g 0 (s∗ ) < 0.
Thus, whether coinsurance induces more compliance than flat copayments depends on
the marginal distribution of illness at the indifferent patient. In general, most common
distributions are usually single-peaked in the middle of the density. In that case, they start
out convex (g 0 = G00 > 0) and then become concave after the peak (g 0 = G00 < 0). In
practice, most copayments appear to be set so that, on average, more than the median of
patients comply under flat copayments (we find 70% of all patients comply). This suggests
that the threshold point s∗ of non-compliance is often well to the right of the median and
the peak of the population density and well into the final concave portion of the density
(G00 < 0). So, the most common outcome in Proposition 1 is for coinsurance to induce less
compliance than copayments (i.e., G00 (s∗ ) < 0 in (7)). We will verify this to be the case
empirically for the preventive case of diabetic medications, where, in Figure 1, we see that
G00 (s) < 0 at every s in our data.

Finally, the different behavior between coinsurance and flat copayments predicted by
Proposition 1 leads to a phenomenon that would not be observed by standard demand
theory. First, suppose that the flat copayment c did not change. Then standard demand
theory would not detect a change in compliance. However, while c does not change, for a
12

coinsurance out-of-pocket rp with a constant expected out-of-pocket rp̄ = c, we may have
r and p̄ varying while c remains constant. These fluctuations in r and p̄ while c remains
constant are not innocuous. An increase in r would expose consumers to a greater risk of
drawing a higher or lower price than expected, which would affect compliance as we saw
above in Proposition 1. The increase in r would be accompanied with a commensurate
decrease in p̄ so that rp̄ = c. This decrease in price would encourage more compliance.
Thus, the overall net effect on compliance from changes in r and p could be positive or
negative. Unfortunately, standard demand theory would detect no change since the average
out-of-pocket c did not change. Thus, in this paper we go beyond standard demand theory
and present a specification that can detect such nuanced changes in compliance within the
coinsurance regime.
To empirically capture this nuance, we specify an empirical model based on the theoretical specifications from Proposition 1. We are mainly interested in how p and r should enter
the empirical model, e.g., multiplicatively or separately. Equation (7) provides direct guidance for variable specification in the empirical model. In general, (7) gives us the following
empirical specification for the cost-sharing variables.
P rob{comply = 1} =

(

βc
βr p̄ + γr2

under copayments
under coinsurance.

(8)

The coefficient β < 0 captures the standard demand theory effect of the out-of-pocket on
compliance. The coefficient γ will capture any additional coinsurance effect even when on
average rp = c while r and p still vary. Note that γ < 0 if G00 (s∗ ) < 0 in (7).

3

Data
In this analysis we use one of the largest available databases of privately insured indi-

viduals in the U.S., which is the MarketScan database maintained by the Medstat group.
This database encompasses up to 3.5 million individuals who are covered by employersponsored health insurance offered by about forty large firms. These include both regular
13

employees and annuitants (retirees). The complete database contains various files with detailed information on medical conditions, insurance coverage, and payments for persons with
any insurance claims for inpatient, outpatient, and prescription drug services. For purposes
of this study five different files belonging to MarketScan 1999-2000 and the MarketScan
Medicare Supplement were linked to create a single analysis file. The first file was the MarketScan Drug Benefit File, which contains the insurance drug claims for all individuals who
purchased prescription drugs. The second was the Employer Benefit Plan Design (EBPD)
database, with information on benefit design and drug copayment structure from some of
the larger employers in MarketScan, offering a total of 50+ insurance plans with prescription drug benefits. The third was the MarketScan Enrollment File, which linked individuals
to their health plan enrollment history. The fourth and fifth files, respectively, were the
MarketScan Hospital Inpatient File and the Outpatient Services File containing information
on patients’ medical conditions and certain demographic characteristics. Finally, the 1999
and 2000 Redbooks (Medical Economics Company, 2001) were used to obtain additional
explanations about the particular prescription drugs for diabetes as they appear in the data.
We focus on adults over the age of eighteen with chronic type II diabetes who require
oral anti-diabetic medications on an ongoing basis as previously described (Table 1). We
use any ICD-9 Type 2 diabetes diagnosis on any inpatient or outpatient claim over a two
year period to identify Type 2 diabetics. Access to detailed patient information allows us
to track patient compliance, as measured by the sequence of prescription refills within a
defined time interval. We observe a 19 month period from June 1, 1999, to December 31,
2000, and consider individuals who are continuously enrolled with drug coverage over this
entire period. To allow for a uniform 90 day tracking interval for all observations, we only
track individuals with at least one purchase of an anti-diabetic drug prescription with a
30-35 day drug supply that started between June 1, 1999 and September 1, 2000, and that
ended no later than October 1.10 This resulted in an initial sample of 54,649 persons.
10

About 80% of the prescriptions were 30-35 days. The remainder of the prescription were 60-90 days.
To allow for a uniform tracking period these were excluded from our sample. Note that mail orders, which

14

Merging the EBPD resulted in a sample of 28,031 individuals belonging to eight large
firms for which we had drug copayment information. Of these, 20,464 individuals belonged
to 14 insurance drug benefit plans that required consumers to pay a flat copayments per
prescription, while 6,567 individuals belonged to three drug benefit plans that used coinsurance rates (See Table 2).11 These two subsamples constitute the “Raw Sample,” with
its descriptive statistics given in Table 3.
Within the Raw Sample, for some control variables, like “out-of-pocket,” it can be seen
that the coinsurance subsample has different characteristics than the copayment subsample. Thus, we also construct the “Matched Sample” for the copayment sample in Table 3,
consisting of a subset of copayment patients with similar characteristics as the coinsurance
patients. By using the version 3.0.0 pscore2 propensity score matching routine of Leuven
and Sianesi (2003), we match 6,537 patients from the 20,464 copayment sample patients
to 6,537 coinsurance sample patients. To do this, we first create the propensity score with
a logit regression of the probability that the patient has coinsurance (as opposed to a flat
copayment), controlling for the 18 covariates in the copayment regression of Table 3. Next,
using the nearest-neighbor method (Dehejia and Wahba, 2002; Becker and Ichino, 2002),
we create the matches by balancing propensity scores across the 18 covariates. Thirty coinsurance sample observations lacked a common region of support and were excluded (Becker
and Ichino, 2002). As can be seen in Table 3, the Matched copayment patients and the
coinsurance patients now have very similar characteristics for most of the covariates. The
median absolute value of the bias in the covariates between copayment and coinsurance
patients was reduced from 41.9 to 8.6 due to the matching.12 Patients from all eight firms
appear in the matched sample.
Next, the 18 covariates and financial variables are described in detail. First, as in
employ the longer prescription cycles, have become more common since the end of our study period, growing
from 9% nationally in 2000 to 13% in 2005 (Stagnitti 2008).
11
A fuller discussion of the benefit features in these data is available in Encinosa (2002).
12
The bias is the difference in the sample means between copayment and coinsurance patients as a
percentage of the square root of the average of the sample variances in the copayment and coinsurance
patients. See Rosenbaum and Rubin (1985).

15

Goldman et al (2004), the prices are weighted prices. The weighted prices are constructed
for the drug benefit plans in the following manner. First, note that by focusing on diabetes,
we are able to exploit a clinical trait, major metabolic defect (Table 1), to assign individuals
to three classes of drugs that are medically indicated independently of insurance status. For
each metabolic defect we were able to create a weighted price using the share of persons
using a particular drug within that group. In particular, there are three drug classes,
based on which organs in the human body the drug targets to control metabolism. The
first drug class consists of Sulfonylureas and Meglitinides, which target pancreatic beta
cells (Table 1) to address defection insulin secretion. The second class addresses insulin
resistance and consists of Biguanides (Metformin) and Thiazolidinediones (TZD) which
target the skeletal muscles, liver, and adipose tissues. The third class consists of the AlphaGlucosidase Inhibitors (AGI), which target the small intestines to increase carbohydrate
absorption. Thus, overall, the out-of-pocket payment and transacted price per prescription
are averaged over 17 plans, 3 drug classes, and 3 time periods consisting of the three sixmonth intervals between June 1, 1999, and December 31, 2000. The averages are taken on
a total of 213,635 prescriptions. Out of the 153 potential cells for the sample (17 plans x 3
drug classes x 3 periods), we observe 75 distinct copayment values in the data. See Table 2
for the copayments per plan. The distribution of out-of-pocket expenditures by plan size is
shown in Figure 2 (plan size is increasing from left to right). Finally, out of the 153 possible
cells, we observe 153 distinct retail prices.
To control for patient heterogeneity (case mix), we controlled for age, sex, and 28 chronic
conditions developed by Elixhauser et al (1998) in the AHRQ Comorbidity Software
(www.ahrq.gov/data/hcup/comorbid.htm), and updated by McDonald et al, (2002). These
comorbidities were obtained from the MarketScan Hospital Inpatient File and the Outpatient Services File. We use a binary indicator to control for patients with four or more of
these chronic conditions.13 Patients with multiple chronic conditions may have difficulty
13

The 28 conditions are congestive heart failure, arrhythmias, valvular disease, pulmonary circulation
disease, peripheral vascular disease, hypertension, paralysis, other neurological disorders, chronic pulmonary

16

complying with their medications since they may require several expensive medications.
We also control individually for cardiac, pulmonary, and kidney conditions, as well as for
obesity.
Next, we control for “Hospitalizations,” which indicates whether the patient was hospitalized during the prescription or during the 90 days following the prescription. Such a
hospitalization might give the patient less of an opportunity to refill the prescription. If
the patient was not the primary insurance policy holder, but a dependent, this is recorded
in the variable “Dependent.” If there was more than one diabetic in the household under
the same plan, this is captured with the binary indicator “Other diabetic in house.” More
than one diabetic in the house may make compliance less likely since the household must
purchase twice the amount of drugs or more. Or, more than one diabetic in the household
may make compliance more likely via a peer group effect. We control for four age categories.
Note that 71% of people in the raw copayment sample and 61% of people in the coinsurance
sample are retirees age 65 or over, who were insured by the firm. However, after propensity
score matching, both matched samples have 61% of people as retirees. The four regions
indicate the employee’s geographical location. Finally, to account for factors correlated with
unobservables that might affect employer choice of offering coinsurance versus copay, in the
propensity score matching we also include instruments that control for market area conditions, such as income and percent white collar. These are good predictors of the local labor
pool. Generosity and type of benefits offered are affected by the composition of the labor
pool.14 Area characteristics included in the propensity score model, such as log income and
percent white collar workers, were taken from the Area Resource File (ARF).
disease, diabetes with chronic complications, hypothyroidism, renal failure, liver disease, peptic ulcer disease
with bleeding, lymphoma, metastatic cancer, solid tumor without metastasis, rheumatoid arthritis collagen,
coagulopathy, obesity, weight loss, fluid and electrolyte disorders, chronic blood loss anemia, deficiency
anemias, alcohol abuse, drug abuse, psychoses, and depression.
14
These variables performed well as instruments, in that they were significant in the propensity score
modeling of copayment structure, but insignificant when included independently in the drug compliance
regressions. Comparing the regressions with and without the instruments, we find that they are basically
stable; while no specific test exists, this generally means that the results are robust to the specification of
the propensity score (Dehejia, 2005).

17

4

Empirical Methods
Individuals in the data were sorted into three groups:

(0) ‘non-compliers’ — individuals who did not buy another anti-diabetic agent prescription to cover any of the 90 days after the first prescription ran out;
(1) ‘partially compliant’ individuals — individuals that buy one or more prescriptions, but
those prescriptions do not cover the full 90 days (allowing a 5 days grace period after each
prescription);15 and
(2) ‘fully compliant’ individuals — individuals that buy one or more prescriptions to cover
all 90 days (allowing a 5 days grace period after each prescription).

We estimate compliance among these three groups as an ordered logit model, with outcomes ranked, as above, as 0, 1, 2, respectively. As a secondary investigation, we also
examine a continuous measure of compliance, the medicine possession ratio, using weighted
least squares. The medicine possession ratio (MPR) is the ratio of days with a supply of
medicine over the 90 days.16

Copayment Model
In Table 4, the regressions follow the specification given below in equation (9) derived
from the theory in Proposition 1. That is, from equation (8), for each patient i, we can now
15
Here we follow the pharmacological literature where it is standard to allow for a 5-7 grace period for
refill continuity (e.g., Ellis et al 2004). Note that we explored the wider 7 day window but this had little
effect on the results.
16
MPR ratios are sometime used in the pharmacological literature (Rizzo and Simons, 1997; Steiner and
Prochazka, 1997), but have the disadvantage of ignoring discontinuities in coverage. For this reason we focused on our discrete measures of compliance, ranked as full compliers, partial compliers, and non-compliers.
The continuous analysis on MPR and the ordinal logistic analysis yielded qualitatively similar results. Compare Tables 5 and Table 6. While insulin was recently added as a possible therapeutic intervention for type
2 diabetes, this does not affect our study period and we do not include it in the MPR.

18

write the ordered logit model for copayments as
P r(yi = 0) = P r(βC(p)i + Zi ζ + ωi ≤ κ1 ),
P r(yi = 1) = P r(κ1 < βC(p)i + Zi ζ + ωi ≤ κ2 ),
P r(yi = 2) = P r(κ2 < βC(p)i + Zi ζ + ωi ),

(9)

where C(p) = c under copayments, and where the error term ω is logistically distributed.
Note that yi = 0 if the patient never complied within 90 days of finishing her last prescription; yi = 1 if the patient sometimes complied, but not always; and yi = 2 if the patient
always complied for the 90 days. Vector Zi is a vector of patient risk adjustors. The cutoffs
κ1 and κ2 are estimated along with the other coefficients in Table 3. We correct the standard errors for clustering at the plan level.

Coinsurance Model

The regression in the last column of Table 4 now includes the coinsurance rate squared,
r2 , according to the theory from Proposition 1. That is, from (8), for each patient i, we can
now write the ordered logit model for coinsurance as
P r(yi = 0) = P r(βC(p)i + γri2 + Zi ζ + ωi ≤ κ1 ),
P r(yi = 1) = P r(κ1 < βC(p)i + +γri2 + Zi ζ + ωi ≤ κ2 ),
P r(yi = 2) = P r(κ2 < βC(p)i + γri2 + Zi ζ + ωi ),

(10)

where C(p) = rp̄ under coinsurance and where the error term ω is logistically distributed.
Note that yi = 0 if the patient never complied within 90 days of finishing her last prescription; yi = 1 if the patient sometimes complied, but not always; and yi = 2 if the patient
always complied for the 90 days. Vector Zi is a vector of patient risk adjustors. The cutoffs κ1 and κ2 are estimated along with the other coefficients in Table 4. We correct the
standard errors for clustering at the plan level. From Proposition 1, we expect to find that
19

β < 0 and that γ < 0, since the distribution of illness is declining in the number of chronic
conditions in our data (Figure 1).
The coefficients in the ordered logit are not marginal effects. However our main interest
is in assessing the impact of a change in cost-sharing policy on compliance, changing flat
copayments to coinsurance. In Table 5 we present a simulation in which the copayment
and coinsurance rate are set so that the expected out-of-pocket is at the same $9 level, the
median for the data. In Table 5, we also present simulations that demonstrate the effect
on the distribution of compliance via flat copayments versus coinsurance rates when the
out-of-pocket is increased over the 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th percentiles, from $4 to $18.
Note that marginal effects for each alternative can be calculated for continuous variables. To
conserve space we do not report effects for all alternatives separately, but these are available
from the authors upon request. Coefficients in Table 4 can be interpreted as indicators of
the effect of covariates on the relative propensity to comply.

5

Results

In Figure 3, we see that in the first week of the 90 days following the prescription, about 54%
of the copayment sample fully complied. By week 4, more than 60% were fully complying.
This tapers off to about 58% by the end of the 90 days. Figure 4 provides the hazard rate of
compliance. For the copayment sample, about 46% of the people had not complied by the
end of the first week. By the end of the 90 days, about 31% still had never complied. This
corroborates the general claim of drug manufacturers that about 30% of people do not take
their medication appropriately. From Figure 4, we also see that about 69% had complied
for at least one week by the end of 90 days. Thus, about 15% of the initial non-compliers
under copayments became partial compliers during the 90 days.
In Figure 3, we also see that people under coinsurance generally have the same behavioral
pattern as the people under copayments, except that compliance is systematically about

20

10% lower under coinsurance. In the first week following the end of the prescription, about
44% of the coinsurance sample people fully complied. By week 4, about 50% were fully
complying. This tapers off to about 48% by the end of the 90 days. In Figure 4’s hazard
rate of compliance, for the coinsurance sample about 56% of the people had not complied
by the end of the first week. By the end of the 90 days, about 42% still had never complied.
We also see that about 58% had complied for at least one week by the end of 90 days. Thus,
about 14% of the initial non-compliers under coinsurance became partial compliers during
the 90 days.
In Table 4, the coefficient for the out-of-pocket has the expected negative sign as predicted by the theory, indicating that cost sharing reduces compliance. Thus, the standard
demand theory out-of-pocket effect of theory equation (8) holds for both copayments and
coinsurance. The additional term for coinsurance (r2 ) in Table 4 shows that coinsurance
further reduces compliance beyond the effect of the out-of-pocket. This verifies the coinsurance effect of Proposition 1, and shows that as the coinsurance rate increases, compliance
further declines under coinsurance, as predicted in equations (7) and (8). Thus, the full
model of Proposition 1 holds empirically.
Other variables are of lesser interest, and were included as controls to allow us to obtain
adjusted cost-sharing effects. Nevertheless, a number of results are worth noting. First,
patients with 4 or more chronic conditions are less likely to comply, as predicted. Other
diabetics in the household increased compliance. Next, the variable hospitalization represents interruptions in daily drug regimen, and, thus, not surprisingly, reduces compliance
significantly. Finally, compliance is significantly higher for those over age 68. A possible
explanation is that this is a time-price effect—retired individuals have more free time to
reach a pharmacy or follow their regimen, compared with working age adults.

Sensitivity Analysis
The Table 5 simulations were based on the matched sample regressions of Table 4.
Table 5 compares flat copayments to coinsurance, where the copayment and coinsurance
21

rate are constructed so that the expected out-of-pocket is equal for the two regimes, at
$9, the population median out-of-pocket in the matched sample. That is, the copayment
is set at c = 9 in the matched copayment sample, and, to generate an equivalent case in
the matched coinsurance sample, we took the coinsurance rate r to be r = 9/E(p), the
rate that would yield a $9 out-of-pocket, on average (i.e., r=34%). Table 5 suggests that
the non-compliance rate is 82% higher in the coinsurance case (48.7% versus 26.7%), as
predicted by the theoretical model in Proposition 1 (since G00 < 0 in Figure 1 for the case of
our data). The share of compliers declines by 31%, from 34.1% to 23.5% moving from flat
copayments to coinsurance at the same expected out-of-pocket. Partial compliers declined
from 39.2% to 27.8%.
Next, in addition to simulations at the median out-of-pocket $9, in Table 5 we also
simulate the effect on the distribution of compliance via flat copayments versus coinsurance
rates when the out-of-pocket is increased over the 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th percentiles,
from $4 to $18. In particular, in the last column of Table 5, we simulate the percent increase
from the 25th to the 75th percentile of out-of-pocket, which is equivalent to an increase from
$6 to $11. In the flat copayment model, this increase resulted in a statistically significant
8.5 percentage point increase in the share of non-compliant persons, and a concomitant 9.8
percentage point reduction in the share of fully compliant persons. There was a statistically
insignificant increase in the share of partially compliant individuals. In contrast, in the
coinsurance model, an increase in the coinsurance rate that would increase the expected outof-pocket from $6 to $11 corresponded to an increase from 23% to 42% in the coinsurance
rate. This resulted in a statistically significant increase in the share of those who never
comply, up by 25 percentage points, while the reduction in fully compliant persons was also
much higher than in the copayment model, 19.7 percentage points.
To test the robustness of our ordered logit model in Tables 4 and 5 which uses only
three groups—compliers, partial compliers, and never compliers—we also ran weighted least
square regressions with the covariates of Table 4 but with a continuous independent variable:
the medicine possession ratio, the percentage of days that the patient possessed medications
22

over the 90 days following the completion of the first prescription. In Table 6, we find very
similar results with the medicine possession ratio. At the median out-of-pocket, $9, the
medicine possession ratio is 47% higher in the flat copayment case (63.6 versus 43.4), as
predicted by the theoretical model in Proposition 1 (since G00 < 0 in Figure 1 for the case
of our data). Simulating the percent increase from the 25th to the 75th percentile of outof-pocket, $6 to $11, the medicine possession ratio decreases 12% under copayments (from
68.4 to 60.3). In contrast, it decreases by 44% under coinsurance (from 57.8 to 32.1). Thus,
coinsurance has a more dramatic impact on noncompliance than does copayments when
out-of-pocket increases.
As a further test of robustness, instead of using ordered logit over three outcomes (full,
partial, no compliance) as in Table 4 and 5, in Table 6 we also include simulations from
three different logit binary models for compliance. In the first binary model of Table 6, we
code the fully and partially compliant patient as 1, and 0 if they never complied. In the
second binary model, we code the fully compliant patient as 1, and 0 if they partially or
never complied. In the third binary model, we use the second binary model but with partial
compliers removed from the analysis. All three models exhibit the same qualitative results
supporting the theory of Proposition 1: coinsurance produces significantly less compliance
than copayments.
Finally, to test the robustness of the results with respect to a possible selection bias in
which patients self-select into copayment plans or coinsurance plans, we reran our regressions
on a subsample restricted to firms that offered no choice of health plans. Thus, out of 14
plans with copayments, 5 of these plans were offered as the only choice. Of the 3 coinsurance
plans, one was offered without a choice. On this matched subsample of no choice plans,
the coefficients of the key parameters were close to those of the full sample of plans. The
coefficient on the “out-of-pocket” variable in the copay sample was -.13 with no choice
versus -.11 in the full sample (P-value .80). In the coinsurance sample, the coefficient on
the “out-of-pocket” variable in the copay sample was -.029 with no choice versus -.028 in
the full sample (P-value .58). Generalized Hausman tests (run via seemingly unrelated
23

estimation so that we could cluster standard errors at the plan level in the test) indicated
that no self-selection problems exist.17

6

Discussion
We examined compliance and non-compliance with drug prescription regimens in a

sample of non-insulin diabetics. Diabetes represents a case in which prescription medication
must be taken permanently to mitigate adverse health effects and consequently minimize
future treatment costs. We found that increased cost-sharing results in lower rates of compliance and higher rates of non-compliance regardless of the cost-sharing mechanism in
place. However, the negative effects of cost-sharing on non-compliance are larger in the
coinsurance regime than in the copayment regime. The theory suggests that this is due to
greater uncertainty in out-of-pocket costs created under coinsurance.
The implications of these results are broad, for both private employers and for government programs. First, payers may wish to reexamine benefit policies that have imposed
higher levels of cost-sharing for prescription drugs, often ignoring the function of prescription drugs in prevention of complications from chronic conditions such diabetes, arterial
diseases, hypertension and the like. For instance, the recent run-up in state budget deficits
have forced some state-managed Medicaid programs to raise drug copayments. For low income people who are the beneficiaries of Medicaid coverage, the non-compliance effect could
be larger than we estimate here. Medicare Part D, a prescription drug benefit plan for the
elderly introduced in 2006, is estimated to cost more than $500 billion over 10 years and
involves high copayments at certain ranges: in a so-called ‘donut’ type plan, beneficiaries
will face a 25% coinsurance rate up to some level of spending, a 5% coinsurance rate above
a certain upper limit, but a full 100% coinsurance rate in the middle range. The findings
17

The Hausman test estimates V (b−B) with V (b)−V (B). For V (b)−V (B) to be an admissible estimator
of V (b−B), there can be no clustering in the data. Since we have clustering, we use the generalized Hausman
test, which, with seemingly unrelated estimation, estimates V (b−B) with V (b)−cov(b, B)−cov(B, b)+V (B),
which is an admissible estimator.

24

of this study suggest that compliance in this range will be particularly low.
Second, in our empirical analysis we demonstrated that non-compliance is higher under
coinsurance compared with fixed copayments, holding the level constant. Thus, for certain
chronic conditions such as diabetes, where improved compliance leads to reduced illness,
cost-savings can be attained in a budget neutral way by switching from variable coinsurance
rates to flat copayment rates. Of course, coinsurance may still result in lower costs for
medications in more benign settings or when use is inappropriate. This applies not only to
Medicare, but also to prescription drug plans offered in the private sector. If the goal is to
improve compliance and reduce cost in the long run, then many employers are moving in
the wrong direction: In 2002, 19% of employers who offer prescription drug benefits to their
employees switched from copayments to coinsurance at the expiration of their contracts
(Encinosa, 2002). In addition, many employers are moving to consumer-driven health plans
and health savings accounts, where employees face high coinsurance rates (particularly,
through large deductibles). The idea is that coinsurance exposes the consumer to more of
the medical price, inducing the patient to shop for lower prices (maybe lower than what the
employer could shop for). In our data, we do observe lower prices for the non-Sulfonylureas
diabetic drugs (like Metformin) among the coinsurance patients compared to the copayment
patients ($57.01 versus $57.88), but not for the Sulfonylureas diabetic drugs ($18.21 versus
$17.99). This may have been due to more price shopping under coinsurance, or may have
been due to more switching to cheaper drugs, such as generics, under coinsurance. However,
we find that 15% of the coinsurance sample used generics compared to 22% of the copayment
sample. Future research should examine the extent of price shopping under coinsurance in
greater detail.
Interestingly, anecdotal evidence suggests that other employers are beginning to recognize the compliance issue, and are revising their benefit structure accordingly. For example,
Kaiser Permanente offered zero copayments for preventive care in some of their plans in
2007. In particular, Pitney Bowes, a firm with 35,000 employees, recently dropped its
coinsurance rate for diabetic drugs from 50% to 10%. According to the firm, this reduced
25

the overall costs of care for the median diabetic by 12% (Fuhrmans, 2004). Moreover, the
University of Michigan began a pilot program in 2006 in which it provides no cost or discounted diabetes medications to its employees and their dependents. There is surprisingly
little literature, however, that can shed light on the optimal level of cost sharing in such
plans. Chernew, Encinosa, and Hirth (2000) show that it is sometimes optimal to have
negative copayments, i.e., actually offer rebates, for patients with severe chronic conditions
or for individuals likely to opt for low quality treatment at the margins18 . There is a need
for further theoretical and empirical research on this issue. Future research should also
examine the costs and benefits of patient cost-sharing increases in finer detail. Specifically,
there is a need to develop estimates of averted treatment costs from improved compliance.

18

(Zweifel, 1995) has also examined such rebates in the German health care system.

26

Appendix 1
Proof of Proposition 1: First, we assume there are no boundary solutions. That is, we
V −rp
e

assume interior conditions such that 0 < s∗ < 1 and that 0 <

< 1 for all prices.

Next, from (6), for any given p we expand the probability of compliance under coinsurance
G( V −rp
) in a Taylor series about the fixed point
e


V −rE(p)
e

!



V − rp
V − rE(p)
V − rE(p)
=G
+ G0
G
e
e
e
1
V − rE(p)
+ G00
2
e

!"

to get

!"

#

V − rp − (V − rE(p))
+
e

V − rp − (V − rE(p))
e

#2

+ ...

(11)

Now taking the expectation E of price in (11) leads to
!




G00
V − rp
V − rE(p)
EG
=G
+
e
e



V −rE(p)
e
2e2



r2 σ 2

+ ...

) = P rob(comply|copay). Also, recall that s∗ =
Note that from (5), G( V −rE(p)
e

(12)
V −c
e

=

V −rE(p)
e

from (4). Thus, (12) provides the approximation in (7). Note that compliance is higher
under copayments in (7) when G00 < 0. Also, note that G00 < (>)0 when G is concave
(convex). Or, in other words, from Jensen’s Inequality (Mood, Graybill, and Boes (1974),
page 72), we know that G(E( V −rp
)) > E(G( V −rp
)) holds precisely when G is concave, with
e
e
the converse holding when G is convex. 2

Appendix 2
A generalized Proof of Proposition 1 for the case where V varies with s: First,
define benefit function B(s) = V (s) − es (Appendix 1 dealt with the case B(s) = V − es).
Thus, now s∗ = B −1 (C(p)) for out-of-pocket C(p). Assume that B is concave with marginal
returns to benefit declining at the marginal, indifferent patient, B 0 (s∗ ) < 0. Then all patient
with s above s∗ will not comply, and the probability of compliance under out-of-pocket
C(p) will be defined as Λ(C(p)) = G(B −1 (C(p))). Then equation (7) in Proposition 1 now
generalizes to
P r(comply|coinsurance) ' P r(comply|copayment) +
27

r2 σ 2 00
Λ ,
2

(13)

where
Λ00 = G00 (s∗ ) · [(B −1 )0 [rE(p)]]2 + G0 (s∗ ) · (B −1 )00 [rE(p)].

(14)

To prove this, for any given p we expand the probability of compliance under coinsurance
Λ(rp) in a Taylor series about the fixed point rE(p) to get
Λ00 (rE(p))[rp − rE(p)]2
+ ...
Λ(rp) = Λ(rE(p)) + Λ (rE(p))[rp − rE(p)] +
2
0

(15)

Now taking the expectation E of price in (15) leads to (13). Thus, from (13) and (14) we
see that less compliance will occur under coinsurance if G00 < 0, since in the second term of
the right-hand-side of (14) we have (B −1 )00 < 0 since B is concave.2

28

References
Becker, S. and A. Ichino. 2002. Estimation of Average Treatment Effects Based on Propensity Scores. The Stata Journal 2 (4), 358-377.

Bymark, L., and K. Waite. 2001. Prescription Drug Use and Expenditures in California: Key Trends and Drivers. California HealthCare Foundation: Oakland, CA.

Chernew, M., W. Encinosa, and R.Hirth. 2000. Optimal Health Insurance: The Case
of Multiple Treatment Options. Journal of Health Economics 19 (2000), 585-609.

Cohen FJ, CA Neslusan, JE Conklin, and X. Song. 2003. Recent Hyperglycemic Trends
for U.S Privately Insured Patients With Type 2 Diabetes. Diabetes Care 26:1847-1851.

Crown, W.H, Brendt, E.R., Baser, O. et al. 2003. Benefit Plan Design and Prescription
Drug Utilization Among Asthmatics: Do Patient Copayments Matter? NBER Working
Paper 10062: Cambridge MA.

Dehejia, R., and S Wahba. 2002. Propensity Score-Matching Methods for Nonexperimental Causal Studies. Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (1):151-161.

Dehejia, R. Practical propensity score matching: a reply to Smith and Todd. Journal
of Econometrics, 2005, vol. 125, issue 1-2, 355-364.

Dezii C.M. 2000. Medication Noncompliance: What is the Problem? Managed Care 9(9),
12-7.

Dor, A. 2004. Optimal Price Rules, Administered Prices and Suboptimal Prevention: Evi29

dence from a Medicare Program. Journal of Regulatory Economics, 25(1) 81-104.

Dor, A., and W. Encinosa. 2004. Does Cost Sharing Affect Compliance? The Case of
Prescription Drugs. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 10738.
September, 2004. Cambridge, MA.

Elixhauser, A., C. Steiner, D. Harris, and R. Coffey. 1988. Comorbidity measures for
use with administrative data. Medical Care 36:1, 8-27.

Ellis, JJ, Steven R Erickson, James G Stevenson, Steven J Bemstein, Renee A Stiles, and
Mark A Fendrick. 2004. Suboptimal Statin Adherence and Discontinuation in Primary and
Secondary Prevention Populations: Should We Target Patients with the Most to Gain? J
Gen Intern Med 19(6): 638645.

Ellison, SF., I. Cockburn, Z. Griliches and J. Hausman, 1997. Characteristics of Demand
for Pharmaceutical Products: An Examination of Four Cephalosporins. Rand Journal of
Economics 28:3, 426-446.

Encinosa, W. 2002. Pharmacy Benefit Design Options Available to Employers. Expert
Review of Pharmacoeconomics and Outcomes Research 2(4):389-396, 2002.

Frank, R. 2004. Prescription-Drug Prices. New England Journal of Medicine 351;14, 13751377.

Fuhrmans, V. 2004. A Radical Prescription. Wall Street Journal May, 10, 2004. pp R3-R4.

Gilman, K., M. Laouri, S. Wade, and S. Isonaka. 2003. Analysis of Medication Use Patterns: Apparent Overuse of Antibiotics and Underuse of Prescription Drugs for Asthma,
30

Depression, and CHF. Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy 9:3, 232-237.

Glazer, Jacob and Thomas G. McGuire Multiple payers, commonality and free-riding in
health care: Medicare and private payers. 2002. Journal of Health Economics 21:6, 10491069.

Goldman, D. et al. 2004. Pharmacy Benefits and the Use of Drugs by the Chronically
Ill. Journal of the American Medical Association 291:19, 2344-2350.

Hewitt Associates. Survey Findings: Health Care Expenditures: Future Strategy and Direction 2002. Hewitt Associates, Lincolnshire, IL (2002).

Hsu, J. et al. 2006. Unintended Consequences of Caps on Medicare Drug Benefits. New
England Journal of Medicine 354:22, 2349-2359.

Huskamp, H., et al. 2003. The Effect of Incentive-Based Formularies on PrescriptionDrug Utilization and Spending. New England Journal of Medicine 349:23, 2224-2232.

Hughes DA, et al. 2001. Accounting for Non-Compliance in Pharmacoeconomic Evaluations. Pharmacoeconomics 19(12): 1185-97.

Inzucchi, S. 2002. Oral Antihyperglycemic Therapy for Type 2 Diabetes. Journal of the
American Medical Association 287:3, 360-372.

Joyce, GF, JJ Escarce, MD Solomon, DP Goldman. 2002. Employer Drug Benefit Plans
and Spending On Prescription Drugs. Journal of the American Medical Association 288:4,
1733-1739.

31

Karter, AJ. et al. 2003. Out-of-Pocket Costs and Diabetes Prevention Services. Diabetes Care 26:8, 2294-2299.

Leatherman, S., and D. McCarthy. 2002. Quality of Health Care in the United Sates:
A Chartbook. April, 2002. The Commonwealth Fund: New York, NY.

Leuven, E. and B. Sianesi. 2003. PSMATCH2: Stata module to perform full Mahalanobis
and propensity score matching, common support graphing, and covariate imbalance testing.
http://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s432001.html

Liang, S., K.Phillips, S. Tye, et al. 2004. Does patient Cost Sharing Matter? Its Impact on Recommended versus Controversial Cancer Screening Services. American Journal
of Managed Care 10:2, 99-107.

McDonald K, Romano P, Geppert J, et al. 2002. Measures of Patient Safety Based on
Hospital Administrative Data-The Patient Safety Indicators. Technical Review 5. AHRQ
Publication No. 02-0038. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality: Rockville, MD.

Ma, C.A., and M. Riordan. 2002. Health Insurance, Moral Hazard, and Managed Care.
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy 11:1, 81-107.

Manning, WG, J.P. Newhouse, N. Duan, E.B. Keeler, A. Leibowitz, and M. S. Marquis.
1987. Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from a Randomized
Experiment. American Economic Review 77:251-277.

Mood, A., F. Graybill, and D. Boes. 1974. Introduction to the Theory of Statistics. Third
Edition. McGraw-Hill: New York, NY.

32

National Healthcare Quality Report 2003. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, MD.

National Healthcare Quality Report 2008. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Rockville, MD.

Newhouse, J.P. and the Insurance Experiment Group. 1993. Free for All? Lessons from
the RAND Health Insurance Experiment. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Pauly, M V. 1974. Overinsurance and the public provision of insurance: the role of moral
hazard and adverse selection. Quarterly Journal of Economics 88:1, 44-62.

Prince, J. Repeat Purchase amid Rapid Quality Improvement: Structural Estimation of
Demand for Personal Computers. 2008. Journal of Economics and Management Strategy
17:1, 1-33.

Ridley D. 2004. Payments, Promotion, and the Purple Pill. Fuqua School of Business,
Duke University, Working Paper.

Rizzo, JA, and W.R. Simons. 1997. Variations in compliance among hypertensive patients by drug class. Clinical Therapeutics 19(6) 1446-1457

Rosenbaum, P.R. and Rubin D.B. 1985. Constructing a control group using multivariate
matched sampling methods that incorporate the propensity score. The American Statistician 39(1), 33-38.

Stagnitti, M. N. Comparing Population Characteristics of Persons Purchasing Prescribed
Drugs from Mail Order Pharmacies with Persons Purchasing Prescribed Drugs from Other
33

Outlets, 2005. Statistical Brief #200. February 2008. Agency for Healthcare Research and
Quality, Rockville, MD.
http://www.meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/data files/publications/st200/stat200.pdf.

Steiner, J., and A. Prochazka. 1997. The Assessment of Refill Compliance Using Pharmacy Records: Methods, Validity, and Applications. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 50:1,
105-116.

Thomas CP, SS Wallack, S. Lee, and GA Ritter. 2002. Impact of Health Plan Design
and Management on Retirees’ Prescription Drug Use and Spending. Health Affairs Dec
2002 v21: w408-w409.

Wagner, EH, et al. 2001. Effect of Improved Glycemic Control on Health Care Costs
and Utilization. Journal of the American Medical Association 285:2, 182-189.

Woellert, L. 2002. Soon We Will All Be Paying More for Prescription Drugs. Business
Week, May 6.

Yang, Z., D. Guilleskie, and E. Norton. Prescription Drugs, Medical Care, and Health
Outcomes: A Model of Elderly Health Dynamics. NBER Working Paper No. 10964.

Zweifel, P. 1995. Bonus Options in Health Insurance. Kluwer: London.

34

Figure 1: Distribution of States of Health and Compliance
18000

60

16000

Number of People

14000
12000

40

10000
30
8000
6000

20

4000
10
2000
0

0
1

2

3

4

5

Number of Chronic Conditions

6

7

Medication Possession Ratio (%)

50

N
MPR

Figure 2

Figure 3: Rate of Weekly Compliance
0.7
0.6

0.4
Copayment
Coinsurance

0.3
0.2
0.1

Weeks

13

11

9

7

5

3

0
1

Compliance Rate

0.5

Figure 4: Compliance Hazard Rate
0.6

Percent Not Yet Complying

0.5

0.4
Copayments
Coinsurance

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
Weeks

Table 1: Pharmacological Treatment of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitusa
Major Metabolic Defect

Drug Therapy

Defective Insulin Secretion
Pancreatic Beta Cells (decreased
insulin secretion)

Secretagogue Therapy
Sulfonylureas (SU)
Non-SU Secretagogues (Meglitinides)

Insulin Resistance

Insulin Sensitizer Therapy
Thiazolidinediones (TZD)

Skeletal Muscle (decreased
glucose uptake)
Liver (increased glucose
production)

Biguanides (Metformin)
TZD

Adipose Tissue (increased
lipolysis)

TZD

Carbohydrate Absorption
Small Intestines
a

Source: Inzucchi (2002).

Drug Therapy
Alpha-Glucosidase Inhibitors (AGI)

Table 2: The 17 Heath Plans and Their Diabetic Copayment Levels
Mean

Min

Max

Copayment Plans
Plan 1
$5.01
$5.00
$5.50
Plan 2
6.88
5.00
8.00
Plan 3
8.03
6.60
10.40
Plan 4
11.93
6.00
16.00
Plan 5
10.08
7.50
15.10
Plan 6
14.03
11.50
15.30
Plan 7
11.70
8.70
15.10
Plan 8
10.12
9.20
11.20
Plan 9
10.25
10.00
10.50
Plan 10
10.36
8.80
25.00
Plan 11
11.14
10.10
13.30
Plan 12
6.41
5.30
7.80
Plan 13
8.39
7.60
9.70
Plan 14
16.89
11.30
22.40
Coinsurance Plans
Plan 15 (6% coinsurance)
$14.90
$8.00
$24.10
Plan 16 (10% coinsurance)
13.08
4.10
22.20
Plan 17 (18% coinsurance)
12.52
5.90
18.40
Note: There 75 distinct copayment values and 153 distinct retail prices across plans.

Table 3: Descriptive Statisticsa
Variables
Never Comply
Partially Comply
Always Comply
Average Out-of-Pocketb
Average Coinsurance Rate
4 or more chronic conditions
Other diabetic in house
Hospitalization
Age
Female
Dependent
Cardiac
Pulmonary
Kidney
Obese
North East
North Central
South
West

Raw Sample
Copayment

Coinsurance

Matched Sample
Copayment
Coinsurance

.309
(.462)
.321
(.467)
.369
(.483)
$8.586
(2.384)
.403
(.087)
.029
(.167)
.086
(.280)
.070
(.254)
67.309
(12.527)
.499
(.500)
.268
(.443)
.115
(.319)
.057
(.231)
.020
(.139)
.014
(.117)
.283
(.450)
.363
(.481)
.311
(.463)
.043
(.203)

.422
(.494)
.289
(.453)
.289
(.453)
$13.015
(6.370)
.309
(.022)
.008
(.089)
.059
(.236)
.060
(.237)
64.335
(12.703)
.543
(.498)
.283
(.451)
.069
(.254)
.036
(.187)
.016
(.126)
.000
(.021)
.003
(.051)
.080
(.272)
.912
(.283)
.005
(.070)

.318
(.466)
.363
(.481)
.319
(.466)
$12.288
(5.423)
.454
(.108)
.011
(.104)
.071
(.256)
.086
(.281)
64.523
(17.509)
.506
(.500)
.317
(.465)
.088
(.283)
.046
(.209)
.018
(.131)
.000
(.017)
.003
(.052)
.045
(.206)
.945
(.228)
.008
(.087)

.422
(.494)
.289
(.453)
.289
(.453)
$13.015
(6.370)
.309
(.022)
.008
(.089)
.059
(.236)
.060
(.237)
64.335
(12.703)
.543
(.498)
.283
(.451)
.069
(.254)
.036
(.187)
.016
(.126)
.000
(.021)
.003
(.051)
.080
(.272)
.912
(.283)
.005
(.070)

$29,290
(7,758)
.600
(.468)

$24,866
(7,082)
.540
(.937)

$24,587
(6,573)
.532
(.940)

$24,866
(7,082)
.540
(.937)

Excluded Market Area Variables
Income
Percent White Collar

Number of Observations
20,464
6,537
6,537
6,537
a
Standard deviations are in parentheses. Matching of samples was done by propensity score
matching. The excluded market variables are used only in the propensity score.
b
Based on 135 plan x period x drug class (clinically indicated) cells.

TABLE 4: ORDERED LOGIT ESTIMATES OF COMPLIANCEa
Flat Copayments

Coinsurance
Raw
Independent Variables:
Raw Sample
Matched Sample
Sample/Matched
Sample
Average Out-of-Pocket
-0.070*
-0.106**
-0.028***
(0.040)
(0.042)
(0.002)
Coinsurance Squared
---9.903*
(5.587)
4 or more chronic conditions
-0.129**
0.324*
-0.269***
(0.052)
(0.183)
(0.061)
Other diabetic in house
0.182*
0.425
0.034
(0.099)
(0.471)
(0.034)
Hospitalization
-0.350***
-0.042
-0.215***
(0.049)
(0.322)
(0.040)
Age 68-73
1.833***
1.813***
2.479***
(0.312)
(0.222)
(0.023)
Age 74-80
1.839***
1.762***
2.460***
(0.327)
(0.260)
(0.005)
Age 81+
1.721***
1.331***
2.447***
(0.341)
(0.348)
(0.052)
Female
-0.065*
-0.072
-0.141***
(0.035)
(0.203)
(0.053)
Dependent
0.079
-0.037
-0.078***
(0.080)
(0.315)
(0.017)
Cardiac
0.171***
0.372
0.141***
(0.063)
(0.316)
(0.043)
Pulmonary
-0.154**
-0.075
-0.149
(0.074)
(0.297)
(0.128)
Kidney
-0.118**
-0.316*
0.050
(0.049)
(0.173)
(0.040)
Obese
-1.443***
-29.820***
-27.819***
(0.463)
(0.812)
(0.986)
K1
-0.548
-0.717
-0.254
(0.634)
(0.749)
(1.435)
K2
1.268
1.242
1.461
(0.607)
(0.575)
(1.500)
WaldX2(df )
81,442(16)
314,986(14)
1,464(3)
Psuedo R2
0.12
0.14
0.18
Number of Observations
17,802
6,537
6,537
a
Robust standard errors in parentheses are corrected for clustering at the plan level. Three
region indicators are not shown.. Dependent variable is ordered as: 2 if Always Comply, 1 if
Partially Comply and 0 if Never Comply.*** Significant at 99%.** Significant at 95%.*
Significant at 90%

Table 5: Simulated Percent Change in Compliance Associated with an Increase in Cost-Sharinga
Out-of-Pocket
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
Change in
percentile percentile
percentile percentile
percentile
Percentiles:
Compliance
from 25th to 75th
percentile
Compliance Levels:
Under Copayments:
$4

$6

$9

$11

$18

Never Comply

0.188

0.218

0.267

0.303

0.444

0.085*** (39%)

Partially Comply

0.370

0.381

0.392

0.393

0.367

0.012 (3%)

Always Comply

0.442

0.401

0.341

0.303

0.189

-0.098*** (-24%)

$4

$6

$9

$11

$18

Never Comply

0.286

0.350

0.487

0.600

0.951

0.250*** (71%)

Partially Comply

0.302

0.299

0.278

0.246

0.039

-0.053*** (-18%)

Always Comply

0.413

0.351

0.235

0.154

0.010

-0.197*** (-56%)

Copayment:

Under Coinsurance:
Expected Out-of-Pocket:

a

The compliance distributions give the probability of being in each of the three compliance categories. Results are
simulated from regressions in Table 4. The percentage change from the 25th to 75th percentile is in parentheses.
*** Significant at 99%. ** Significant at 95%. *Significant at 90%.

Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis: Alternative Compliance Measures
Simulated Percent Change in Compliance Associated with an Increase in Cost-Sharinga
Out-of-Pocket
10th
25th
50th
75th
90th
percentile percentile
percentile percentile
percentile
Percentiles:

Change in
Compliance
from 25th to 75th
percentile

Under Copayments:
Copayment:

$4

$6

$9

$11

$18

MPR
Binary Models

0.714

0.684

0.636

0.603

0.484

-0.081 (-12%)

Full or Partial
Compliance

0.811

0.785

0.743

0.715

0.613

-0.070 (-9%)

Full Compliance

0.501

0.451

0.379

0.334

0.199

-0.117 (-26%)

Fully Complied vs
Never Compiled
Under Coinsurance:

0.693

0.651

0.587

0.544

0.406

-0.107 (-16%)

Expected Out-of-Pocket:

$4

$6

$9

$11

$18

MPR
Binary Models

0.648

0.578

0.434

0.321

0.028

-0.257 (-44%)

Full or Partial
Compliance

0.760

0.685

0.538

0.431

0.047

-0.254 (-37%)

Full Compliance

0.376

0.339

0.269

0.216

0.060

-0.123 (-36%)

Fully Complied vs
0.534
0.478
0.381
0.314
0.078
-0.164 (-34%)
Never Compiled
a
MPR is the medical possession ratio, the percentage of days in the year with compliance. “Full or Partial
Compliance” equals 1 if always or sometimes complied and 0 if never complied. “Full Compliance” equals 1 if always
complied and 0 otherwise. “Fully Complied vs Never Compiled” is 1 if fully complied and 0 if never complied, with
partial compliers removed. Results are simulated from regressions. The percentage change from the 25th to 75th
percentile is in parentheses and is statistically significant at the 99% level.

