                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               LABOR MARKET INSTITUTIONS, WAGES, AND INVESTMENT

                                           Jorn-Steffen Pischke

                                          Working Paper 10735
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10735


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




This paper was prepared for the CESifo Area Conference Employment and Social Protection in Munich on
June 11-12, 2004 and draws heavily on my previous work in this area. I thank Daron Acemoglu, Francesco
Caselli, Jason Cummins, and the conference participants for helpful comments and the Economic and Social
Research Council (Grant RES-000-22-01-0160) for financial support. This paper was written while I was
visiting the NBER in Cambridge, and I thank them for their hospitality. Some of the data used in this paper
have been obtained from the German Zentralarchiv für Empirische Sozialforschung at the University of Köln
(ZA). Neither the producers of the data nor the ZA bear any responsibility for the analysis and interpretation
of the data in this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research

©2004 by Jorn-Steffen Pischke. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Labor Market Institutions, Wages, and Investment
Jorn-Steffen Pischke
NBER Working Paper No. 10735
August 2004
JEL No. E22, E24, J23, J24, J31

                                           ABSTRACT

Labor market institutions, via their effect on the wage structure, affect the investment decisions of

firms in labor markets with frictions. This observation helps explain rising wage inequality in the

US, but a relatively stable wage structure in Europe in the 1980s. These different trends are the

result of different investment decisions by firms for the jobs typically held by less skilled workers.

Firms in Europe have more incentives to invest in less skilled workers, because minimum wages or

union contracts mandate that relatively high wages have to be paid to these workers. I report some

empirical evidence for investments in training and physical capital across the Atlantic, which is

roughly in line with this theoretical reasoning.

Jorn-Steffen Pischke
CEP
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
and NBER
s.pischke@lse.ac.uk
1      Introduction

Labor market institutions affect the outcomes of workers in a variety of ways. Many of
these institutions are related to the wage setting process, and hence influence the wages
paid to workers directly. But even institutions like unemployment insurance or
employment protection will affect wages indirectly, because they change workers’
bargaining power in the wage setting process. The wages actually set will in turn
influence the hiring decisions of firms, and hence employment outcomes. There is a vast
literature studying these issues, both theoretically and empirically.

In this paper, I will focus on a more indirect impact of labor market institutions, and of
the resulting wage structure, namely their effect on investment decisions made by firms.
These decisions to invest in training of the work force and physical capital will change
the productivities of workers, and hence also influence wage and employment outcomes.
I will focus on a particular premise: frictions in the labor market are important, so that
these markets deviate from the competitive benchmark. These frictions will lead to rents
for the firms. Labor market institutions distort the wage structure, and hence the amount
of employment rents firms earn from workers with different productivities. This in turn
will influence the decisions of firms as to what investment to make in particular workers
or jobs. Because labor market institutions, and hence the wage structure, are so different
in Anglo Saxon and continental European countries, this story helps us understand the
different evolutions of the labor markets in these countries, as I will argue.

The discussion in this paper will draw heavily on work which Daron Acemoglu and I, as
well as others, have done in order to understand the financing of on-the-job training. The
traditional framework for human capital investment implies that workers will pay for
skills which are transferable between employers, and reap the full rewards of this
investment. In a series of papers (Acemoglu and Pischke 1998; 1999a; b), we have
shown that this may not be true in frictional labor markets. I will start in the next section
by reviewing the key theoretical arguments for why frictions and the wage structure
matter for human capital investment decisions.




                                              1
In section 3, I will argue that a better understanding of the investment behavior of firms
might help us better understand the differential evolution of labor markets across the
Atlantic during the past two decades. In a nutshell, wage inequality has increased
dramatically in the US, and to some extent in Canada and the UK. Wage inequality has
remained more or less constant in continental Europe but unemployment has risen
sharply during this period. The standard explanation for the trend in wage inequality in
the US is skill biased technical change, globalization, or some combination of these.
However, these same trends should have impacted Europe in a rather similar way. An
attractive hypothesis, often labeled the “Krugman hypothesis” (Krugman 1994) links the
differential developments to labor market institutions. While both continents were hit by
the same shock, labor market institutions in Europe have protected the wages of low
skilled workers but led to higher unemployment.

Unfortunately, the empirical evidence does not seem to support the Krugman hypothesis.
It implies that employment should have collapsed in Europe for low skilled workers only.
Instead the data show employment trends which are far too uniform across skill groups.
However, the model of human capital investment in frictional labor markets has
important implications for the evolution of investment choices made by firms. In
particular, if workers cannot make their own human capital investments, it implies that
firms will invest less in low skilled workers in the US and more in continental Europe.
The same argument can easily be extended to physical capital investment (see Acemoglu
2003). Hence, differential investments by skill group might have altered the relative
productivities of workers in different countries in a way to lead to the different labor
market outcomes we observe for the 1980s.

This suggests that understanding the investment behavior of firms in the face of labor
market imperfections might be an important ingredient in understanding the behavior of
labor markets. The story I have outlined above also seems like an attractive alternative to
the Krugman hypothesis, given the observed employment trends. Nevertheless, this still
leaves open the question whether the alternative explanation is of any more relevance
empirically.




                                              2
I will address this issue in section 4 of the paper. I will first review some of the evidence,
which links labor market institutions and training outcomes directly. I will then go on
and present some evidence for the evolution of training in the US and Germany.
However, data on human capital investment is highly imperfect, and no comparable data
across countries is available for this exercise. I will therefore also present some new
evidence on investment in physical capital and on labor productivity growth. The
evidence on investment is generally more favorable to the story I outlined than the
findings on productivity growth.

The big question arising from all this is, of course, what it means for labor market reform
in Europe. This is a difficult question, and I believe that we know far too little
empirically of what exact model of investment is correct to be able to answer it at this
stage. Nevertheless, I offer some suggestions in the conclusion, and point out where
more research is needed.




2      Training in Imperfect Labor Markets

The standard neoclassical model of human capital investment due to Becker (1964)
assumes that labor markets are perfectly competitive. In this case, workers will be paid
according to their marginal product, and firms do not receive any rents from the
employment relationship. If skills are general, i.e. perfectly transferable from one
employer to the next, then firms cannot finance any of the human capital investment
directly because they would never be able to recoup any of their investment. Hence, all
investment has to be financed by the worker. This may happen implicitly, through lower
wages earned during the training period to reimburse the firm for any outlays. As long as
wages are flexible, and workers have to resources to finance the investment, their training
choices should be made optimally, and there is no role for government intervention in the
market for human capital.

Things may be different when labor markets are imperfect, as studied in detail in
Acemoglu and Pischke (1999a; b). Figure 1 explains the key argument. t denotes the



                                              3
level of training or skill of a worker. f(t) denotes productivity (marginal product), which
rises with t. In the absence of labor market imperfections, the wage would be equal to
f(t). Frictions in the labor market imply that wages are lower than f(t), for example like
w(t) in the figure. The firm earns a rent f(t) – w(t) from the employment relationship. The
way the figure is drawn, this rent is independent of t. In the absence of any labor market
institutions impacting the wage structure, the firm still has no incentive to pay for the
training of its worker, although it could now possibly finance such training out of the
employment rent. Nevertheless, this rent is the same at all skill levels, so the firm will
prefer an unskilled worker, which is available at zero training cost.

Now suppose there is a government or union imposed minimum wage, denoted wmin in
the figure. The wage the firm now has to pay is wmin for all workers with training level
below t0, and it is still w(t) for skill levels above that. The way the figure is drawn, the
firm would now actually make a loss from a worker who is completely unskilled (t = 0)
because the minimum wage is above the productivity level of this worker. In a
competitive labor market the firm would have no choice but to lay off the worker. In a
frictional labor market, the firm has another choice, however. By giving the workers
some training, it can restore its employment rent. This is the case for any training level
of t0 and above. Of course, training is costly for the firm, and the training cost is denoted
by c(t) in the figure. Hence, the firm will choose the lowest level of training which gives
it f(t) – w(t), which is t0, and the firm will now earn f(t0) – w(t0) – c(t0).

This demonstrates how labor market institutions can create an incentive for firms to
invest in the skills of their workers. Strictly speaking, labor market institutions are not
really necessary for this argument, although the example of a minimum wage highlights
the workings of the model nicely. However, what is necessary for firms to invest is
simply that the wage structure w(t) is compressed, i.e. that w(t) is flatter than f(t). If this
is the case, then the rents the firm can earn from more skilled workers will be greater than
the rents earned from less skilled workers. Hence, it may invest in training. Such a
compression of the wage structure may come about for a variety of reasons, many linked
to the natural operation of the labor market, like search and bargaining, information




                                                 4
asymmetries, complementarities with firm specific skills, etc. (see Acemoglu and Pischke
1999a; b for the details).

So far, I have only demonstrated that firms have an incentive to invest in the training of
their workers, even when the skill is easily transferable to another employer. However,
workers may also want to invest in their own skills: the traditional Becker mechanism.
Hence, depending on the contract between the worker and firm, it could be either the
worker or the firm, who makes the investment, or the investment could be shared by both
parties. All we can say is that firms will bear the full investment cost when workers
cannot contribute to the investment at all. This may happen if workers are credit
constrained so they are unable to bear the upfront costs, or if it is impossible to write
contracts over the training to be provided by the firm, if the worker pays the firm upfront.
These considerations are likely to be important for at least some workers, and hence at
least some human capital investments should be made by firms in practice.

If this is the case, the implication of the theory is that training investments should go up
when wage compression, the slope of w(t) relative to f(t), increases. This can easily be
seen in figure 1 again by returning to the example of a minimum wage. If the minimum
wage is higher, it will intersect w(t) at a higher training level, which will be the training
level chosen by the firm (as long as c(t) < f(t) – w(t)).




3       The Evolution of Wage Inequality, Employment, and the Role of Investment

I will now turn to the question whether the framework outlined in the previous section
can help us understand the evolution of labor markets in the US and Europe in the past
two decades. Wage inequality has increased sharply in the US during this period. This
increase was concentrated in the 1980s, while wage inequality in the 1990s remained
relatively stable (see Card and DiNardo 2002; Lemieux 2003). Table 1 presents some
data on the evolution of wage inequality in a number of selected OECD countries,
focusing on the period from 1980 to 1990. The data are taken from the OECD
Employment Outlook 1996 (OECD 1996) and refer to the change in the ratio of the 90th



                                               5
and 10th percentile of the wage distribution during the decade. The table shows that wage
inequality increased dramatically in the US but remained stable or fell in continental
European countries. Canada and the UK also saw rising wage inequality in these data,
but by less than the US.

The standard explanation for increasing wage inequality in the US is skilled biased
technical change (see Acemoglu 2002 for a recent survey, and Card and DiNardo 2002
for a critical view). According to this hypothesis, technological developments (or
deliberate decisions by firms) lead to investments which were complementary with more
skilled workers (or more so than in previous decades). This raised the wages of more
skilled workers, while depressing the wages of less skilled workers.

A challenge for this hypothesis is to explain why trends in wage inequality where so
different in Europe, when technological developments should be fairly much the same
across most OECD countries. Labor market institutions are a possible explanation, as
first noted by Krugman (1984), Freeman (1995) and others. Figure 2 illustrates the
argument. This is a standard labor supply–labor demand diagram with relative wages of
more and less skilled workers on the vertical axis and relative employment of more and
less skilled workers on the horizontal axis. The downward sloping line is relative labor
demand. Relative labor supply is probably comparatively inelastic in the short run, and is
hence drawn as a vertical line. The intersection yields relative wages and employment at
the beginning of the period, i.e. around 1980. Skill biased technical change implies that
relative labor demand shifted out. In the US, this implies an increase in wage
differentials and little change in relative employment. In Europe, in contrast, labor
market institutions prevent wage inequality from rising. This is denoted by the flat wage
setting schedule in the graph. It implies that there is gap between relative supply and
demand in Europe at the prevailing relative wage, denoting relative unemployment. A
simple version of this story there would be full employment of skilled workers and the
relative unemployment would imply unemployment among unskilled workers in Europe.
Unemployment has indeed increased dramatically in Europe during this period, and table
1 provides some data for the selected countries.




                                             6
While this hypothesis is simple and appealing, the problem is that it implies a gap in
relative unemployment or employment rates in Europe, not simply an increase in
unemployment. Nickell and Bell (1995; 1996) first demonstrated that relative
unemployment rates by skill increased far too uniformly in Europe to be consistent with
this story. The problem with looking at unemployment rates is that it is not completely
clear whether one should look ratios or differences of unemployment rates by skill group.
Unfortunately, which way the analysis is done often matters because unemployment rates
for the skilled are relatively low and unemployment rates for the unskilled are much
higher. This problem can be avoided by looking at employment rates, an exercise first
undertaken by Card, Kramarz, and Lemieux (1999) for the US, Canada, and France. If
the Krugman hypothesis is correct, employment trends for different skill groups should
be roughly the same in the US, while employment of the unskilled should have fallen (or
risen less) in France. Canada should occupy an intermediate position. Instead,
employment trends are virtually indistinguishable across the three countries.

Krueger and Pischke (1998) have repeated this exercise for the US and Germany, and I
present our results in figures 3 and 4. For this analysis, individuals have been grouped
into 20 groups by age and education. For each group, the change in wages between 1979
and 1991 is shown as a square and the change in employment rates is shown as a circle.
These changes are plotted against the mean wage for the group in 1979 as a measure of
the skill level of the group. Figure 3 demonstrates that wages for the more skilled
increased at a much faster rate than those for the less skilled. Employment fell for the
less skilled over the period and showed little change for the more skilled. Figure 4 shows
the same picture for Germany. There is little relationship between wage growth and the
skill level of the group. The same is true for employment growth. If the Krugman
hypothesis was correct, we ought to see a strongly upward sloping relationship between
employment growth and initial wages for Germany, but this relationship looks, if
anything, flatter than for the US.

How can the framework of human capital investment in imperfect labor markets with
rents help us to understand these trends? The first observation to make is that it might
imply that the baseline human capital level for the least skilled workers is higher in


                                             7
Europe than in the US. If credit constraints are important for these types of workers, then
they may have difficulties in financing schooling or training in the US. In Europe, on the
other hand, this might imply that firms do (some of) the investing, and hence these
workers still get some skills. Many authors (Nickell and Bell 1996; Freeman and
Schettkat 2001; Blau and Kahn 2001) have noted that low skilled workers in Europe tend
to be more skilled than low skilled workers in the US, although some of these differences
may stem from differences in the school systems. If the US and Europe are now hit by
the same relative labor demand shock which is unfavorable to low skilled workers, this
will imply that there is a much larger mass of workers to be affected in the US than in
Europe. Hence, we ought to see much less in terms of an increase in relative wage
inequality in Europe in response to the same shock.

In order to see this more formally, return to the setup in figure 1 which is reproduced in
figure 5. Skill biased technical change implies that the schedule f(t), which denotes the
worker’s productivity level, becomes steeper. This is depicted by the two schedules
labeled “1980” and “1990” in the figure. If there is a minimum wage in Europe but labor
markets are otherwise perfect, this shift may imply some additional loss of employment
for relatively low skilled workers. If there are employment rents on the other hand, firms
have an incentive to provide enough training for workers to have at least skill level t0.
There will be no workers in Europe with skills below this level, and hence we may not
see any relative employment declines for this group.

The second point is that skill biased technical change coupled with relative wage rigidity
in Europe may imply changes in relative investment incentives. In order to see this,
consult figure 5 again. Our assumption is that labor markets in the US are relatively
flexible. For simplicity, assume that wages in the US are equal to f(t). In Europe, wages
are given by w(t), possibly coupled with a minimum wage but the wage schedule is the
same in 1990 as in 1980. As skill biased technical change takes place, wages change
according to the rotation of the f(t) schedule in the US. Because workers make all the
investment in the US labor market, their incentive to invest has now increased. But if
workers are credit constraint, they may not be able to make additional investments. In
Europe, the change in productivities is also given by the two f(t)-schedules. Because the


                                              8
wage schedule is unchanged, this means that the incentives for the firm to invest in
training have increased in Europe. Hence, if workers are credit constrained, investment
in training in Europe may have increased.

Note that this argument only works if workers are credit constraint, and hence firms make
the investment. The same reasoning can therefore be more straightforwardly applied to
physical capital investment, where it is easier to argue that the costs are solely born by
the firm. This argument has been laid out in Acemoglu (2003), and can be illustrated
most clearly with a numerical example adapted from that paper. Assumes that a worker’s
productivity is 10 in the absence of investment, and 20 after investment. Investment
costs 6, and the costs are paid by the firm. Rents are shared in a way so that wages are
half of productivity. This means that the firm obtains a profit of 5 without investment,
but only 4 if it made the investment (20 – 10 – 6 = 4). Hence it will not undertake the
investment for this type of worker.

Now assume there is a minimum wage of 7 in place. It is easy to see how this changes
the picture. Without the investment, the firm makes a profit of 3 because it has to pay a
wage of 7 to a worker with a productivity of 10. If it invests, the minimum wage will no
longer bind, and it will still make a profit of 4 as before. Hence, investing is more
profitable. The intuition for the result is the exact same as in the training case discussed
above: it is the interaction of employment rents and wage compression through the
minimum wage which give the firm an incentive to invest.

It is easy to see how this mechanism will modify the outcomes if both the US and Europe
are subject to skill biased technological change. Skill biased technical change should be
thought of here as a change in the world technology frontier. Firms in each country will
then decide which technologies to adopt and which investments to make. Suppose, the
costs of investing were only 4 initially, rather than 6. In this case it would always pay for
firms to invest in low skilled workers. Now suppose that the 1980s were characterized by
technologies which were more costly to implement, and the investment costs now rise to
6. Firms in the US will not adopt the new technologies with low skilled workers
anymore, following the reasoning above.



                                              9
Think of high skilled workers as workers with productivities of 20 without investment
and 40 with investment, so that investing is always profitable, and the minimum wage
does not affect these workers. In Europe, where minimum wages are in place, firms will
make the investment with both high and low skilled workers, before and after the
increase in investment costs. Hence, the observed technical change in Europe will be less
skill biased than in the US.

This model generates sharply rising wage inequality in the US. In the numerical
example, the wages of high skilled relative to low skilled workers will rise from 2 before
the new technology is available to 4 after it is available. In Europe, wage differentials
will remain constant at 2. The model has other attractive features. Acemoglu (2003)
embeds this in a matching model of unemployment. The rising investment costs in the
1980s imply that profits will fall in both the US and Europe, which will reduce job
creation and hence raise unemployment. However, profits will fall less in the US
(because the European minimum wage leads firms to make suboptimal investment
decisions in low skilled workers) than in Europe, so unemployment will rise more in
Europe. Moreover, unemployment may rise across the board, rather than just for less
skilled workers, if there are some complementarities in the creation of skilled and
unskilled jobs.




4      What is the Empirical Evidence?

I have argued above that the wage structure, and hence labor market institutions, affect
the investment behavior of firms. Understanding how wages affect the investment
behavior of firms, in turn, helps us understand the evolutions of relative wages and
employment in Europe and the US during the past two decades. The story is attractive,
because it fits the facts on wage inequality and employment or unemployment better than
previous explanations. However, the question remains: is this the correct explanation?

In order to take a stab at answering this question, we need some direct empirical evidence
on the investment behavior of firms in the US and Europe, and how this investment



                                             10
behavior changed during the 1980s. In this section, I will present a few pieces of
evidence. I will start by reviewing some direct tests of the model of training investment
presented in section 2. I will then go on and present some evidence on changes in
training levels during the 1980s. However, comparable data on training levels over time
and across countries are difficult to obtain, so this comparison will be limited to the US
and Germany. In order to present some evidence for a variety of countries, I will close
with some results on investment in physical capital. Neither piece of evidence by itself is
necessarily very conclusive, but taken together, the evidence clearly supports the story
outlined above.

In order to test the model of training in imperfect labor markets with wage compression
against the more standard human capital theory, it is necessary to observe a change in the
wage structure while marginal products are unchanged, or vice versa. This is a difficult
task. In Acemoglu and Pischke (2003), we have argued that changes in the minimum
wage provide a suitable example: there is no reason to expect that a change in a
government mandated minimum wage coincides with changes in relative productivities.
The starkest versions of the standard human capital model and the imperfect labor
markets model with credit constrained workers have opposite implications in this case: in
the former case an increase of the minimum wage should lead to less training, in the latter
case to more training. Moreover, the effects of minimum wages on training are also of
direct policy interest.

In Acemoglu and Pischke (2003), we estimate the effect of changes in state and federal
minimum wages on training during the period 1987 to 1992 in the US by comparing
workers in different states. We find very little effect. We attribute this result to the
possibility that training investments may be governed by a hybrid model where some
training is financed by workers, and some is financed by firms. We find some weak
support for this idea by linking the response of training to minimum wages to differences
in labor market rents across industries. Arulampalam, Booth, and Bryan (2002) carry out
a similar exercise for Britain, studying the impact of the introduction of the national
minimum wage in 1999. They compare lower and higher wage workers before and after
the introduction of the minimum wage and find positive effects on training. They also try


                                              11
to link the response of training to labor market rents, but do not find the same relationship
across industries as we did for the US. However, they find the expected relationship
when comparing labor markets of different sizes.

While these results provide some support for the imperfect labor market model of
training, there are other studies, which find more negative results. Neumark and Wascher
(2001) also analyze state and federal minimum wage changes in the US using different
data and a somewhat different methodology and find strongly negative effects of
minimum wages on training. Other studies have used a different methodology, and
compared cross sections of workers rather than differences over time. It is difficult to
argue that the precondition for testing the model, holding marginal products constant
across the treatment and control groups, are satisfied in this case.

Other approaches to testing training models with imperfect labor markets have relied on
more explicit mechanisms for wage compression. In Acemoglu and Pischke (1998), we
tested a model where wage compression resulted from superior information of training
firms about the ability of their trainees compared to other firms in the market. We found
some support for implications of this model using data on German apprentices. These
results have been corroborated with a much bigger data set by Dustmann and Schönberg
(2004). They focus on an alternative model, where union wage setting induces training
by firms. They demonstrate that this model has similar implications to ours, and they
find additional evidence linking training to unionization.

In summary, there is some, although not unequivocal, support for the idea that labor
market institutions may induce training investments by firms. Does this mean the model
helps us understand the evolution of wage inequality during the 1980s? In order to
address this question, I have assembled some data on on-the-job training in the US and
Germany during this decade in Pischke (1998). The results are reproduced in table 2.
The table shows the incidence of training in firms at the beginning and end of the decade.
The training incidence across countries is not directly comparable, because the relevant
questions in the respective surveys differ.




                                              12
There is little evidence from the data in table 2 that training incidence has risen over the
1980s in the US, although there might have been a slight increase of some types of
training for more educated workers. However, training incidence seems to have fallen
for the least educated. This is inconsistent with the standard human capital model in the
face of skill biased technical change. The data therefore suggest that credit constraints of
low education workers may play some role, and prevent these workers from paying for
some training. The picture is different for Germany, where training of both low and high
education workers increased. This is consistent with the model of training in imperfect
labor markets if firms invest. Nevertheless, these differences in training are unlikely to
be large enough to explain the differential evolution in wages across the US and Europe
by themselves.

I therefore turn to investment in physical capital. Recall from the discussion in the
previous section that the model suggests that investment complementary to low skill jobs
fell in the US compared to Europe during the 1980s. Investment in high skilled jobs, on
the other hand, should have grown at similar rates. It is difficult to link investment data
directly to the skill level of workers. In order to do this, I utilize data on investment by
industry from the OECD STAN database for Industrial Analysis (OECD 2004). I use 18
industries, and assign them the average skill level of the workers (based on the education
level of workers in the US). The industry mix and the capital intensity of industries will
differ across countries even in the 1970s. Hence, there is little point in comparing the
levels of investment. Instead, using the real investment series from the STAN database, I
calculate investment growth from 1980 to 1990 by industry. This is appealing, because
there is no need to convert the investment series to a common currency.

In order to relate the evolution of investment to the skill levels of workers, I regress the
growth in investment on the skill level in the industry for each country according to the
model:

                        ginv8090ic = αc + βcaveduc80iUS + εic                             (1)

where ginv8090ic is the growth in investment from 1980 to 1990 in industry i and country
c, aveduc80iUS is the average education level of workers in the industry in the US, εic is a


                                              13
random term, and αc and βc are coefficients to be estimated for each country. A similar
exercise has been previously performed for US industries by Caselli (1999). The
interesting aspect of this exercise is, however, to extend it to multiple countries with
different wage setting institutions. For the 1980 to 1990 period, this can be done for 10
countries (see the data appendix for more details). The coefficients βc reflect the strength
of the association of the skill level in the industry and investment growth.

Investment growth should have been higher for more skilled workers in countries where
wage inequality increased a lot, like in the US. Hence, we would expect βc to be positive
in these countries. On the other hand, investment growth should have been more similar
across skill groups, and therefore industries, in countries where wage inequality did not
rise, as in continental Europe. Hence we would expect to βc to be close to zero in these
countries, or in any case smaller than for the US. Table 1 reports the resulting βc
coefficients and figure 6 plots them against the change in wage inequality in these
countries over the period. It can be seen that the US and Canada, the countries with the
largest changes in wage inequality, had the strongest relationship between investment
growth and skills. For the US, the estimate of βc is statistically significant, and for
Canada marginally so, while these estimates are insignificant for the European countries
including Belgium. This suggests that there are basically three distinct data points in the
figure: The US, Canada, and the European countries.

An alternative way to carry out this empirical exercise is to pool the data for all the
countries and industries, and run the following regression:

                 ginv8090ic = αc + βaveduc80iUS*wineq8090c + εic                           (2)

where wineq8090c is the change in wage inequality from 1980 to 1990. This regression
combines the two steps of the previous exercise, the country level regressions to derive
the coefficients βc, and the regression of these coefficients on the change in wage
inequality, which is implicit in figure 6. The coefficient β now tells us directly the
strength of the association of the two variables in figure 6, and is analogous to passing a
regression line through this scatter plot. Results for this and related regressions are



                                             14
displayed in the first row of table 3. The coefficient estimate for β is 0.42 with a standard
error of 0.11.1

One danger in interpreting these results is that the association between investment growth
and skill level of the industry may reflect other features of the industries in the different
countries, and the association with changes in wage inequality across countries may be
purely incidental. In order to probe this issue, I repeat the same exercise for the 1970s, a
period when wage inequality changed much less in the US and Canada. Figure 7 plots
the results again against the change in wage inequality in the 1980s. We would not
expect the points to line up in an upward sloping manner in this case. While Canada still
has a somewhat higher association between investment growth and skills than the
European countries, this is no longer true for the US. Investment grew at about the same
rate in US industries as in Belgium, Norway, and Germany in the 1970s.2 The estimate
from the regression in equation (2) is now no longer significant.3 This suggests that the
pattern in the 1980s is indeed special. US investment shifted more towards high skilled
industries during this period, while a similar shift did not happen in European countries.
This is exactly what we would expect if labor market institutions and the wage structure
affect the investment decisions of firms.4 Another caveat is that the result may be special
to using the skill levels in US industries. Particularly low skilled industries may have a
different composition in Europe. The second row in table 3 demonstrates that all the
results are robust to using the German skill distribution instead.

Even physical capital investment does not fully capture all the implications of the theory.
For example, skill biased technical change may take the form of workplace
reorganization, and this may not be associated directly with actual investment. In order
to capture effects of this type, it is possible to look at changes in labor productivity by

1
  The regression coefficient is 0.36 with a standard error of 0.12 if Belgium, which seems to be an outlier,
is omitted.
2
  Caselli (1999) finds the same result for the US when comparing the change in capital-labor ratios between
1960 – 1975 and 1975 – 1990.
3
  The result for the 1980s holds up if the sample is limited to the 7 countries for which data are available for
the 1970s.
4
  Of course, it is possible that other forces lead to these results. For example, deregulation might have lead
to more growth and investment in some sectors in the US (and to some degree in Canada) and if these
sectors had above average skill levels, we will find the same pattern of results. Much more research is
necessary to distinguish this and other explanations from the interpretation I suggest.


                                                      15
industry. In fact, the evolution of labor productivity will reflect the combined influence
of investment in human capital, physical capital, and intangible investments, like
workplace reorganization, which also affect productivity. Running regression (2) above
with the growth in output per worker as the dependent variable is possible for a set of 9
countries, somewhat different from the one above (see the appendix for details).
Unfortunately, the result is not as supportive of the theory in this case: the association is
much weaker than in the case of investment growth, and not significant as can be seen in
table 3. There is no association if industry fixed effects are added. One possibility why
this does not work better with the productivity data is that hours have remained constant
in the US, while they have declined in the low skill sectors in European countries.
However, hours data is only available for very few countries in the STAN database. This
leaves us with a somewhat mixed bag of results: positive findings for the training and
investment data, but less confirmation of the theory with the productivity data.




5      Conclusion

I have argued in this paper that understanding the role of labor market institutions for the
investment decisions of firms is important to help us understand the differential evolution
of labor markets in the past two decades. Labor market frictions, the resulting rents, and
wage compression together imply that firms have an incentive to invest more in the
training of low skilled workers, and in the physical capital with which these workers
work. This is turn has implications for how investment decisions evolve as an outside
shock, like skill biased technical change, affects the economy. Economies, where labor
market institutions, and hence wage compression, is more important, will generally see
relatively more investment by firms in low skilled workers. Economies, where wage
compression is absent, will tend to shift investment more towards high skilled workers. I
have presented some empirical evidence that this is indeed the case for both on-the-job
training and for investment in physical capital.

The investment decisions of firms will feed back into the wage and employment
outcomes of workers. Labor market institutions, like unions and minimum wages, which


                                              16
raise the wages of less skilled workers, are generally thought to imply employment losses
for the affected groups, as these workers are priced out of the market. This may not be
the case if firms make investments to raise the productivity level of these workers to be
commensurate with the required wage. Once an exogenous shock arrives, which
threatens the position of less skilled workers, these workers will be much more insulated
from the shock in Europe than in the US. Cheaper garments from Malaysia or Mexico
becoming available because of increased globalization may have impacted the wages and
jobs of textile workers in the US in the 1980s. The impact on textile workers in Europe
would have been much less, because the textile industry in Europe was already much
more capital and skill intensive, and focusing on higher end apparel. In addition, the shift
of investment towards more skilled workers in the US in the 1980s drove the
productivities and hence the wages of workers apart. European firms chose different
investment patterns during this period, raising the productivities of different types of
workers more equally, and hence avoiding large changes in wage inequality.

The story I have told in this paper suggests that European countries have reacted in some
ways more favorable to a period of adverse shocks than has the US labor market. Are the
institutions, which have been much decried for making the European labor markets
sclerotic, possibly a good thing? Drawing this conclusion based on the evidence I have
provided would certainly be short sided. Institutions, like minimum wages and unions,
which redistribute incomes from firms to workers, will lower the profits of firms. This
decreases job creation and therefore raises unemployment. Not surprisingly, high
unemployment is the central reason for the attempt of making labor markets more
flexible in many European countries.

Labor market institutions redistribute incomes and provide insurance to workers. Labor
market reforms therefore face the traditional conundrum: efficiency enhancing reforms
will tend to increase inequality. If continental European countries desire a certain level
of redistribution, and there is much evidence that they do, they may want to undo the
effects of labor market deregulation through other mechanisms, like a more progressive
tax structure. This, of course, also has efficiency costs. The optimal package of
redistribution may therefore well include some degree of labor market regulation. The


                                             17
difficult question is which institutions and how much labor market regulation should
European countries retain. This is a question the research literature is just beginning to
provide some answers to.

The current paper contributes to this debate, because realizing that institutions affect
investment behavior alters the equity-efficiency tradeoff. The possibility of investments
by firms will tend to undo some, but not all, of the undesirable effects of regulations.
Hence, incorporating the investment channel is likely to be an important ingredient in the
theoretical modeling when we are trying to address these issues. On the other hand, the
empirical evidence on the investment channel is still very sketchy and ambiguous, and we
need a much better understanding as to how and why firms make their investment
decisions.




                                             18
 Data Appendix

 This appendix describes the construction of the data shown in table 1. Data for wage
 inequality refer to all workers and are taken from 3.1 in the 1996 OECD Employment
 Outlook. That table reports the ratios of the 90th and 50th as well as the 50th and 10th
 percentile of the wage distribution, which are used to calculate the ratio of the 90th and 10th
 percentile. The change in the wage distribution was calculated as the difference in these
 ratios for 1990 and for 1980. Where data for these years were not available, data for the
 nearest available year were used; in particular for Belgium: 1986 – 90, Canada: 1981 – 90,
 West Germany: 1983 – 90, and Italy and Norway: 1980 – 91. In those cases where the
 period does not refer to exactly ten years, the difference was multiplied by 10/(end year –
 beginning year). Data for the US are not only reported for all workers, but only for males
 and females separately. Therefore, I regressed the change in wage inequality for all
 workers on the change for males for those countries were both statistics are reported. The
 change in wage inequality for the US is the predicted value from this regression using the
 US change for males.

 Changes in investment growth and labor productivity were calculated using data from the
 OECD STAN database for Industrial Analysis (OECD 2004). I used data for 18 industries,
 which are classified in STAN according to the ISIC (Rev. 3) classification. I matched these
 industries to 1970 US SIC codes, and industry codes in the German 1979 QaC Survey, in
 order to match the data with information on skill levels. The 18 industries are the
 following:

                                        ISIC                                     Industry code in the
Industry                                code    1970 SIC code (CPS)              1979 QaC Survey
                                        (STAN)
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing          01 – 05 17 – 29                          0–3
Mining and Quarrying                    10 – 14 47 – 58                          5–8
Food Products, Beverages, Tobacco       15 – 16 268 – 299                        54 – 58
Textiles, Leather, Footwear             17 – 19 307 – 327, 388 – 397             45 – 52
Wood and Wood Products                  20      107 – 109                        40, 42
Pulp, Paper, Printing, Publishing       21 – 22 328 – 339                        43, 44, 77
Chemicals, Rubber, Plastic Products     23 – 25 347 – 387                        9 – 13
Other Non-metallic Mineral Products     26      119 – 138                        14 – 16
Basic Metals, Fabricated Metal          27 – 28 139 – 169                        17 – 23, 37
Products
Machinery and Equipment                 29 – 33    177 – 209, 239 – 258          26, 27, 33 – 36
Transport Equipment                     34 – 35    219 – 238                     24, 28 – 29, 31, 32
Other Manufacturing, Furniture          36 – 37    118, 259 – 267, 398 – 399     38, 39, 41, 53
Electricity, Gas, Water Supply          40 – 41    467 – 477, 479                4
Construction                            45         67 – 78                       25, 59 – 61
Wholesale and Retail Trade,             50 – 55    507 – 699, 749 – 767, 777 –   30, 70, 95 – 97
Restaurants, Hotels                                778, 789 – 797
Transport and Communication             60 – 64    407 – 449, 499, 907           63 – 68
Finance, Insurance, Business Services   65 – 74    707 – 748, 849, 888 – 899,    69, 79 – 83, 85, 86
Personal, Community, Professional       75 - 99    478, 769, 779 – 788, 798 –    71 – 76, 78, 84, 87 -
Services                                           848, 857 – 887, 917 – 947     94



                                                  19
For investment growth, I used the quantity index for gross fixed capital formation (STAN
code GFCFK). Investment growth for the 1980s is calculated as the ratio of average
investment in 1989, 1990, and 1991 to average investment in 1979, 1980, and 1981. For
the 1970s it is the ratio of average investment in 1979, 1980, and 1981 to average
investment in 1970, 1971, and 1972. The purpose of the three year averaging is to smooth
out some high frequency fluctuations in investment. Data for the 18 industries are
available for most countries, except for Australia (9 industries) and France (16 industries).
Data for the 1970s are not available for France, Austria, and Finland.

For labor productivity, I used gross output (STAN code PRODK) divided by total
employment (STAN code EMPN). The growth rate is calculated as above, using three
year averages at the beginning and end of the period. Data are available for Austria,
Denmark, Finland, France (12 industries), Italy, Japan (16 industries) Norway, the US (15
industries) and Germany (8 industries); 18 industries are available where nothing else is
indicated.

As the skill level in an industry I use the average number of grades completed in the
industry for workers in the US. Data are taken from the merged outgoing rotation group
samples of the Current Population Surveys for 1979, 1980, and 1981. The sample consists
of all workers with labor force status recodes 1 and 2, and industries have been assigned as
shown above. Alternatively, I use the average education levels from the German 1979
Qualification and Career Survey.

The coefficients βc are coefficients from an OLS regression of growth in investment on the
average education in the US across the 18 industries. Separate regressions were run for
each country to estimate the country specific coefficients.




                                              20
References

Acemoglu, D. (2002), “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,” Journal of
     Economic Literature 40, 7-72.

Acemoglu, D. (2003), “Cross-Country Inequality Trends,” Economic Journal 113, F121-49.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1998), “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and Evidence,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 79-119.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1999a), “Beyond Becker: Training in Imperfect Labor
     Markets” Economic Journal 109, F112-42.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (1999b), “The Structure of Wages and Investment in
     General Training,” Journal of Political Economy 107, 539-72.

Acemoglu, D. and J.-S. Pischke (2003), “Minimum Wages and On-the-job Training,”
     Research in Labor Economics 22, 159-202.

Arulampalam, W., A.L. Booth, and M.L. Bryan (2002), “Work-Related Training and the
      New National Minimum Wage in Britain,” IZA Discussion Paper No. 595.

Becker, G. (1964), Human capital, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Blau, F. and L.M. Kahn (2001), “Do Cognitive Test Scores Explain Higher US Wage
        Inequality?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8210.

Card, D. and J. DiNardo (2002), “Skill-Biased Technological Change and Rising Wage
       Inequality: Some Problems and Puzzles,” Journal of Labor Economics 20, 733-83.

Card, D., F. Kramarz, and T. Lemieux (1999) “Changes in the Relative Structure of Wages
       and Employment: A Comparison of the United States, Canada, and France,”
       Canadian Journal of Economics 32, 843-77.

Caselli, Francesco (1999) “Technological Revolutions,” American Economic Review 89, 78-
        102.

Dustmann, C. and U. Schönberg (2004) “Training and Unions,” mimeographed, University
      College London.

Freeman, R.B. (1995), “Are Your Wages Set in Bejing?” Journal of Economic Perspectives
      9, 15-32.

Freeman, R.B. and R. Schettkat (2001), “Skill Compression, Wage Differentials, and
      Employment: Germany vs the US,” Oxford Economic Papers 53, 582-603.




                                           21
Krueger, A. and J.-S. Pischke (1998), “Observations and Conjectures on the U.S.
      Employment Miracle,” in: Third Public GAAC Symposium: Labor Markets in the
      USA and Germany, German-American Academic Council, Bonn, 99-126.

Krugman, P. (1994), “Past and Prospective Causes of High Unemployment,” in: Reducing
      Unemployment: Current Issues and Policy Options, A Symposium Sponsored by the
      Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 25-27, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 49-
      80.

Lemieux, T. (2003), “Composition Effects, Wage Measures, and the Growth in Within-
      Group Wage Inequality,” mimeographed, University of British Columbia.

Neumark, D. and W. Wascher (2001), “Minimum Wages and Training Revisited,” Journal
      of Labor Economics 19, 563-95.

Nickell, S. (2003) “A Picture of European Unemployment: Success and Failure,” CEP
        Discussion Paper No. 577.

Nickell, S. and B. Bell (1995), “The Collapse in Demand for the Unskilled and
        Unemployment Across the OECD,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 11, 40-62.

Nickell, S. and B. Bell (1996), “Changes in the Distribution of Wages and Unemployment
        in OECD Countries,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 82,
        302-08.

OECD (1996), “Earnings Inequality, Low Paid Employment and Earnings Mobility,”
     Employment Outlook 1996, OECD, Paris, 59-108.

OECD (2004), STAN Database, OECD, Paris.

Pischke, J.-S. (1998) “Ausbildung und Lohnstruktur: Deutschland und die USA in den 80er
       Jahren,” in B. Gahlen, H. Hesse, and H.J. Ramser, eds., Verteilungsprobleme der
       Gegenwart. Diagnose und Therapie, Schriftenreihe des
       Wirtschaftswissenschaftlichen Seminars Ottobeuren 27, Verlag Mohr Siebeck, .
       Tübingen, 95-117.




                                           22
                                Figure 1
        Training in Labor Markets with Rents and Minimum Wages



 f(t)
 w(t)
 c(t)                                                            f(t)




                                                                     w(t)

wmin


                                                                 c(t)




                                                                 t
        0                             t0




                                 23
                               Figure 2
            Relative Labor Demand and Supply over the 1980s



   Relative wage
                   1990
                              Relative Labor Supply
          1980
wUS-90


                                               Wage setting
wUS-80                                         schedule in Europe
wEurope



                                              Relative Labor Demand

                                                   Relative employment
                          Rel. unempl. in Europe




                                   24
                                                               Figure 3
                                                Changes in Wages and Employment Rates
                                                          US Men, 1979 - 1991


                                              Change in Log Wage                  Change in Empl Rate


                                   .6
Change in Wage, Employment Rate




                                   .4




                                   .2




                                   0




                                  −.2
                                        1.8           1.9           2         2.1        2.2            2.3
                                                                   Mean Log Wage 79




                                                                     25
                                                               Figure 4
                                                Changes in Wages and Employment Rates
                                                       German Men, 1979 - 1991

                                              Change in Log Wage                    Change in Empl Rate



                                   .6
Change in Wage, Employment Rate




                                   .4




                                   .2




                                   0




                                  −.2
                                        2.4                    2.6                      2.8               3
                                                                     Mean Log Wage 79




                                                                       26
                              Figure 5
            Training with Skill Biased Technical Change



 f(t)                                                     f(t) 1990
 w(t)
 c(t)
                                                          f(t) 1980



                                                              w(t)

wmin




                                                          t
        0                            t0




                                27
                                                                  Figure 6
                                             The Association of Investment Growth 1980 - 1990
                                               and Skill versus Changes in Wage Inequality


                                  .4
                                                                                             US


                                                                                Canada
Inv Growth Skill Assoc 80 − 90




                                  .2                     Norway
                                                   Italy
                                                          Australi
                                                              Finland

                                              Germany
                                  0                            Austria
                                                            France




                                 −.2


                                                Belgium

                                 −.4
                                       −.5                   0                         .5         1
                                                            Change 90/10 Wage Diff 80 − 90




                                                                         28
                                                                  Figure 7
                                             The Association of Investment Growth 1970 - 1980
                                               and Skill versus Changes in Wage Inequality


                                  .4

                                                                                  Canada
Inv Growth Skill Assoc 70 − 80




                                  .2            Belgium Norway                                 US
                                              Germany




                                  0                        Australi


                                                   Italy

                                 −.2




                                 −.4
                                       −.5                     0                         .5         1
                                                              Change 90/10 Wage Diff 80 − 90




                                                                       29
                                              Table 1
                   Labor Market Trends and Investment in Selected OECD Countries


                                                 Standardized Unemployment Rate (%)                    Regression
                       Change in Wage
                                                                                                     Coefficient of
                         Inequality
Country                                        1973-79      1980-87      1988-95      1996-99         Investement
                          1980-90
                                                                                                    Growth on Skill
United States                 0.73                6.4           7.6         6.1          4.8               0.35
United Kingdom                0.50                4.8           10.5        8.8          6.9                ---
Canada                        0.44                6.9           9.7         9.5          8.7               0.23
Japan                         0.15                1.8           2.5         2.5          3.9                ---
Austria                       0.06                1.4           3.1         3.6          4.3              -0.00
Finland                       0.04                4.1           5.1         9.9          12.2              0.12
Denmark                       0.02                4.1           7.0         8.1          5.3                ---
France                        0.00                4.3           8.9         10.5         11.9             -0.02
Australia                     -0.03               4.6           7.7         8.7          7.8               0.14
Norway                        -0.07               1.8           2.4         5.2          3.9               0.19
Italy                         -0.20               4.5           6.7         8.1          9.9               0.16
Belgium                       -0.22               5.8           11.2        8.4          9.2              -0.32
West Germany                  -0.26               2.9           6.1         5.6           7.l              0.03

         Notes: The changes in wages inequality refers to the change in the ratio of the 90th and 10th
         percentile of the wage distribution for all workers. These are calculated from the data in table 3.1 in
         the 1996 OECD Employment Outlook. Where possible changes are calculated for the period 1980
         – 90 except for the following: Belgium (1986 – 90), Canada (1981 – 90), West Germany (1983 –
         90), and Italy and Norway (1980 – 91). In those cases, the changes were rescaled to correspond to a
         ten year period. Data on unemployment rates are taken from Nickell (2003) and refer to the OECD
         standardized unemployment rate, with some adjustments. The regression coefficient of investment
         growth on skill refers to the coefficients βc as described in the text for investment growth from 1980
         – 90.




                                                           30
                                         Table 2
             Incidence of Participation in On-the-job Training (in Percent)



                                        USA                                 Germany
                               1983               1991              1979               1991
                                   Training Courses by Firms
 Less Skilled                   4.2                3.8               3.6                 4.6
                               (0.3)              (0.3)             (0.3)               (0.4)
 Skilled                       13.6               14.5              10.6                14.1
                               (0.2)              (0.4)             (0.2)               (0.3)
                       Job Related Training Including Informal Training
 Less Skilled                  15.4               10.7               ---                 ---
                               (0.5)              (0.4)
 Skilled                       26.9               24.0               ---                 ---
                               (0.3)              (0.2)

Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. The data for the US are calculated from the
Training Supplements to the January CPS. The data for Germany are calculated from the
BIBB/IAB Qualification and Career Survey. The samples include men and women age 20 to 59,
working in the private sector. Less skilled workers in the US are those with less than 12 years of
schooling. Less skilled workers in Germany are those with less than 12 years of schooling and no
completed apprenticeship or similar vocational qualification. The questions about participation in
training differ between the US and German surveys, and incidence should not be compared directly
across countries. Training in the US refers to the training in the current job. Training in Germany
refers to all job related training within the last 5 years.




                                                31
                                                 Table 3
                                            Regression Results


                                                             Dependent Variable
                                  Investment Growth          Investment Growth          Productivity Growth
Independent variable                  1980-1990                  1970-1980                  1980-1990
Avg. education in the              0.42          0.39          0.22         0.15          0.09         -0.01
industry in the US*change         (0.11)        (0.13)        (0.15)       (0.12)        (0.14)        (0.08)
in wage inequality
Avg. education in the              0.68          0.64          0.09         0.05          0.26          0.02
industry in Germany*              (0.14)        (0.19)        (0.13)       (0.13)        (0.27)        (0.13)
change in wage inequality
Country effects                     9             9             9            9             9                9
Industry effects                                  9                          9                              9
Number of countries                 10            10            7             7             9               9
Number of observations              168          168           116           116          141           141

      Notes: OLS regression models corresponding to equation (2) in the text. Each entry corresponds to
      a separate regression. Standard errors, which are shown in parentheses, are adjusted for clustering
      at the country level.




                                                       32
