NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE TAXATION OF INCOME FROM CAPITAL:
A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF THE U.S., U.K.,
SWEDEN AND WEST GERMANY
—-COMPARISONS OF EFFECTIVE TAX RATES--

Mervyn A. King

Don Fullerton

Working Paper No. 1073

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

February 1983

This working paper represents Chapter 7 of a book edited by Mervyn
King and Don Fullerton, to be submitted to the University of
Chicago Press for publication consideration. The other chapters
include an introduction, a theoretical framework, chapters on the
United Kingdom, Sweden, West Germany, the United States, and a
conclusion. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in Taxation. Any opinions expressed are those of
the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NEER Working Paper #1073
February 1983

The Taxation of Income from Capital:
A Comparative Study of the U.S.,
U.K., Sweden and West Germany
——Comparisons of Effective Tax Rates——

ABSTRACT
This working paper presents Chapter 7 of a book to be published for the
National Bureau of Economic Research by the University of Chicago Press. The
point of the book is to compare taxes on income from capital in four countries,
accounting for corporate, personal, and property taxes, and including national,

regional, and local level taxes. We describe statutory tax rates and other
tax rules in each country and calculate overall effective marginal tax rates
for different combinations of asset, industry, source of finance, and ownership
categories.

This chapter compares effective tax rates in the four countries for
different assets, industries, sources of finance, and ownership categories.
Differences in overall effective tax rates among countries are attributed to
differences in rates of inflation, actual depreciation, tax parameters, or
differences in the amount of capital in each combination.

For each country,

we plot the effect of inflation on overall tax rates, and we plot the distribution of different effective tax rates at a given rate of inflation. We
further investigate the sensitivity of results to assumptions about inflation
and interest rates.

Mervyn A. King
Department of Economics
University of Birmingham
P.O. Box 363
Birmingham, Bl5 2TT ENGLAND
021—472—1301, ext 3427

Don Fullerton
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
08544
Princeton, NJ
(609) 452—4811

Preface

In early 1979, Martin Feldstein suggested that the general approach of

Mervyn King's Public Policy and the Corporation (1977) could be used to measure
effective marginal tax rates on a comparable basis for several different

countries. Our feeling was that the existing studies had employed different
methodologies thus making inter—country comparisons a hazardous task. We
decided to launch a study based on a common methodo1or which might help to shed
light on the significant economic differences among the tax systems in four

major economies which have experienced differing degrees of economic success,
the U.S., U.K.

,

West Germany and Sweden. In this book we report the results of

this enterprise which was undertaken with the combined financial and human
resources of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) in Cambridge,

Massachusetts, the Institute for Economic Research (IFO) in Munich, West
Germany, and the Industrial Institute for Economic and Social Research (iui)

in

Stockholm, Sweden. In addition, we gratefully acknowledge financial support
from the National Science Foundation under grant numbers SES791120 and
SES8O25J40.

Our first meeting was held at NBER in August, 1979. This meeting
included Helnut Laujner

and Willi Leibfritz from IFO in Germany, Gunnar Eliasson

and Jan S6dersten from IUI in Sweden, Mervyn King and John Flemxning from

Britain, and several U.S. economists including Alan Auerbach, David Bradford,
Larry Dildine, Martin Feldstein, Don Fullerton, Charles NcLure, John Shoven, and
Lawrence Summers. Subsecjuent meetings were held in Stockholm, June 1980, in
Munich, November 1980, in Cambridge, August 1981, at the London School of
Economics,

January 1982, and again in London in June 1982. We received valuable

comments and assistance from participants at each of these meetings.

Preface, p2

In particular, although all authors participated in the writing of the

whole manuscript, we would like to acknowledge the primary efforts made with

respect to each chapter. The U.K. chapter was written primarily by Mervyn King
of the University of Birmingham and NBER, by Michael J. Naldrett of the
University of Birmingham and later of Princeton University, and by
James Poterba of Nuf field College, Oxford and NBER. We received invaluable
assistance from E. B. Butler, R. N. Elliss, J. King, and P. Penneck of the

Inland Revenue, from H. I. Armitage of the Central Statistical Office, and from
J. S. Flemxning and J. rding of the Bank of England.
The chapter on Sweden was written primarily by Thomas Lindberg of IUI

and by Jan Sódersten of IUI and the University of Uppsalla, Sweden. We are

especially indebted to Vi1J.y Berstrxn, Gran Normann Rbck and Rolf Rundfelt
for valuable assistance and helpful comments. Contributions were also made by
Ragnar Bentzel, Christen Herzen, Sven—Olof Lodin, Gustav Sandstrin, and
Leif Sundberg.

Primary authors of the chapter on Germany were Willi Leibfritz of IFO
and Julian Alvorth of the Bank for International Settlements in Geneva,

Switzerland. We are especially grateful to Heinz Ludwig of IFO for research
assistance. Other helpful comments and assistance were received from Hans—Georg

Jatzek, Josef Krner, and Stephan Teschner. We are also grateful for statistical help from Christa Bronny and Christian Wagner, and from the
Deutsche Bundesbank and the Statistisches Bundesaurt.

Don Fullerton was the primary author of the U.S. chapter, though fre—

quent assistance was provided by Yolanda K. Henderson. At several points during

Preface, p3

our progress, we received help from Alan J. Auerbach, Larry L. Dildine,
Daniel Feenberg, Martin Feldstein, Barbara M. Frauineni, Roger H. Gordon,

Dale W. Jorgenson, Lawrence B. Lindsey, Charles E. McLure, John B. Shoven,
Nartin A. Sullivan, and Lawrence H. Summers.

Mervyn King had primary responsibility for the introductory Chapters 1
and 2, and he began the computer programniing with Michael Naldrett at the

University of Birmingham. Later, computer work was undertaken at Princeton
University by Don Fullerton, Michael Naldrett, and Thomas Kronmiller. Fullerton
had primary responsibility for authorship of Chapter 7. Tables for that chapter
were drawn up by Thomas Kronmiller, and t.vid Bradford, also at Princeton,
kindly contributed his efforts as the primary author of our concluding chapter.
Particular mention xaist be made of Don Fullerton7s efforts to produce results

for each country from the Princeton computer according to a tight schedule.
Again, although we wish to credit these responsibilities for each
chapter, we also wish to emphasize that this book is a joint product and is not

a collection of separately authored papers. All authors participated in the
drafting and redrafting of the manuscript and in the development of a common
view as to how best to tackle the problem we set ourselves.

Finally, we would like to express our thanks for remarkable efficiency
and patience to those who typed various parts of the manuscript, Ingrid Hensel,
Alice Pattersson, Jenny Saxby, Judy Weinberger, Michael Wickhain and Maja Woxen,
and to Annie Zeuiner of NBER and Liz Johnson of Chicago University Press for

making life as easy for the authors as it is possible for a publisher to do. A

last word of thanks must go to Randall Mrck who organized and shepherded the
preparation of the final manuscript.

October 1982

Chapter 7
Comparisons of Effective Tax Rates

One of
effective

the main purposes of our stuy is to examine the variations in

tax rates among the four countries, and to explain the nin reasons

for these differences. A summary of the main results for each country was pre-

sented above in the appropriate chapter. In

this chapter we analyze the results

more fully, placing particular emphasis on comparisons across countries (section

7.1). Such comparisons help to place the results for any one country in perspective, and to shed light on some key relationships such as the impact of

inflation on effective tax rates. As we shall see, this impact differs significantly from one country to another (section 7.2). We shall also examine the
extent to which differences in tax rates are attributable to differences in the

tax

systems

or to differences in the importance of particular industries,

sources of finance and owner (section

assets,

In

7.3).

addition to these basic questions, we examine the sensitivity of the

estimated tax rates to the values of p (in the fixed—p case) and r (in the

fixed—r

case) at which they are evaluated (section 7.1.).

issue is that,

constant

One aspect of this

at different inflation rates, we evaluate the tax rates at

average net of personal tax rates of return. The question of how sen-

sitive our results are to this assumption is tackled in section 7.5. Finally,
for each ccAintry we calculate the distribution of effective marginal tax rates.

7.1 Corparin Results under Standard Assunmtions

Let us first suirmarize the results with the standard parameters for
each country. Thble 7.1 shows effective tax rates in the fixed—p case for the
four

countries. From

the final

row of Table 7.1 we see that the highest overall

effective marginal tax rate is the 148 percent rate in West Germany, followed by
37

percent

in the U.S., 36

percent

in Sweden, and only 14

percent

The overall rate for each country is an average of the effective

rates

in the U.K.

marginal tax

for the 81 combinations, weighted by the proportion of capital in each

combination. These weights, together with all 1980 input parameters for each
country, are shown in Appendix A, and the matrices of tax rates for different
combinations and inflation rates in the four countries are given in Appendix B.

Each row in Table 7.1 shows a weighted average tax rate for a subset of

combinations. For example, the first row shows the average tax rate over all
combinations which include machinery. From this row we can see that immediate
expensing
The

of machinery is a major reason for the low overall

rate in the U.K.

effective tax rate on machinery is minus 37 percent, while other assets are

taxed at over 39 percent. Britain has the lowest total tax on machinery and the
highest

share of machinery in its capital stock.1

ciation

of machinery at a 30 percent annual rate for tax purposes is con-

siderably more than the 7

to

Sweden's exponential depre-

20 percent rates which we estimate for economic

depreciation. This accelerated depreciation plus the 11 percent investment
grant mean that the total corporate and personal tax wedge on machinery in

Sweden is zero. A limited degree of accelerated depreciation plus a 10 percent
grant in the U.S. imply

that

the total tax on machinery is 18 percent, while tax

lives of 11 years and only 2 percent credits in Germany
machinery of 145

percent.

The

effective tax

result

in a tax rate on

rate on investment in buildings is

strikingly similar in all four countries, with rates ranging from 36

to

143

Chapter 7.1, p.'
percent. The row for inventories demonstrates the ijrjortance of inflation
accounting, since the lower tax rates are in the U.K. and U.S., where FIFO
accounting is
are

found

not obligatory for tax

purposes, while 59

and 69 percent tax rateB

in Germany and Sweden where half of inventories and all

of inventories

are on FIFO accounting, respectively.
Looking

facturing is
industry

at the industry breakdown in the U.K. ,

lowest

because of the

th tax rate for manu-

high weight on machinery and because that

receives extra grants for machinery. The "other industry" category,

although qualifying for lower grants, has a higher relative weight on machinery.
The more interesting aspect of the industry breakdown, however, is that in
Germany and Sweden the tax rate in "other industry" is higher than the overall

rate, and in the U.K. and U.S. it

is

lower than the overall rate. The low U.S.

rate reflects the availability of investment tax credits for both machinery and
buildings in utilities. The higher tax rates in Germany and Sweden reflect
larger weights on buildings which receive less generous depreciation allowances
and lower grants.
In the breakdown by source of finance, the U.K. again provides the most

striking contrast. Debt—financed investments are heavir subsidized, since
assets receive accelerated or immediate depreciation, while corporate interest
payments

share

are fully deductible from taxable incon. Investment

financed

by new

issues receives a small subsidy because of the tax credits for dividends

afforded by the iutation system of corporation tax Only investment projects
financed by retained earnings are taxed at positive rates in Britain.

Chapter 7.1, p.3
In all four countries tax deductibility of interest payments keeps down the tax

rate on debt finance. Because of the imputation system both in Germany and the
U.K., the tax rate on projects financed by new share issues is lower than that
on projects financed by

retained

earnings. In Sweden and the U.S., in contrast,

the relative positions of the two sources of equity finance are reversed,

because of a classical system of corporation tax.
Finally, Table 7.1 shows effective tax rates by ownership category.
These rates reflect the differences in personal rates on interest and dividends
in each country which are shown in Appendix A. Households in Sweden and Germany
have particularly high personal tax rates, and effective marginal tax rates on
projects financed directly from households are 105 and 71 percent, respectively.
In Germany, however, tax—exempt institutions do not receive refunds of dividend
tax

credits or

withholding taxes, so that only in Germany is the tax wedge posi-

tive for projects financed by tax-.exenipt institutions.
In other countries tax—exempt institutions are subsidized because their

receipts of income are tax—free and the corporations in which they invest
receive deductions for interest payments, accelerated
grants,

depreciation, investment

and in certain cases credits for dividends paid. The position of

Insurance

companies Is rather different. Although they are, on average, sub-

sidized in Britain and Germany, they are taxed at positive rates in Sweden and

the U.S. We discovered that in all four countries the taxation of insurance

conanies was an extremely conlex matter. The effective tax rate depends critically on special provisions, such as the possibility of making tax—free allo—
cations to reserves, which imply that the tax may be quIte different from the

statutory corporate rate applying to insurance conanies, and can increase
rapidly with inflation as we shall see in Section 7.2.

Chapter 7.1, p.4

The tax rates shown in Table 7.1 refer to projects all of which are

assumed to earn a pre—tax rate of return of 10 percent per annum. These figures
give some idea of the incentives provided by the tax schedule but do not tell us
what revenue we would expect to collect at the margin corresponding to a small

increase in the capital stock as a whole. This is because we might expect projects to be pushed to the point at which all projects yield the same rate of

return before deduction of personal taxes. This arbitrage equilibrium we call
the fixed—r case. It gives greater weight to the nxre highly taxed combinations, because it is these combinations which require a higher pre—tax rate
of return in order to generate funds to pay the given market rate of return.

The results for the fixed—r case are shown in Table 7.2. As untioned above,
the weighted—average tax rates in Table 7.2 wIll generally be larger than those

in Table 7.1 for the fixed—p case.2 The overall marginal tax rates in the
fixed—r case are 30 percent in the U.K., 50 percent in the U.S., 5 percent in
Sweden, and 65 percent in West Germany.

Although the absolute values of the tax rates shown in Table 7.2 are
higher than those in Table 7.1, the patterns of variations of tax rates both

among countries and across combinations remain the same. Investment in machinery is subsidized in the U.K., pays virtually no tax in Sweden, and is taxed at

higher positive rates in the United States and especially in West Germany. Tax
rates on investments in inventories are highest in Sweden and Germany.

Investment in the U.K. is taxed less heavily in manufacturing than in other
industries, whereas in the United States manufacturing pays a higher tax rate
than other sectors of the economy.

It is clear that investment financed by borrowing is much less heavily

taxed than that financed by equity. In three of the four countries, such

Chapter 7.1, p.5

projects are subsidized, and in the exception, Sweden, they receive a tax rate
of

only

11.5 percent. In Britain the subsidy is sufficiently large that the

rate of
return before personal taxes to savers, is actually negative. Thus the factor
pre—tax rate of return, necessary

required

to generate a 5

percent

income net of depreciation which would be produced in arbitrage equilibrium is

negative, and the use of this factor incorre as the denominator of an estimated
tax rate would
intuition.

7.2

produce figures with a sign opposite to that corresponding to our

The tax wedge on debt finance

in the U.K. is

negative, and in Table

the implied tax rate would be positive because of the

negative pre—tax rate

of return. Hence this figure is omitted. One advantage of reporting the
results in the form of the implied tax wedge (p—s) is that the sign of the wedge
always corresponds to the impact of the tax system on the incentive to save and

invest.
Finally, there are substantial differences in the effective tax

levied

rates

according to the identity of the provider of the funds for the project.

Tax-exempt institutions receive a net subsidy in all countries except Germany,

whereas

in all four countries projects financed directly by households pay

extremely high tax rates.

Chapter 7.2, p.1

7.2 Effects of Inflation on I4arginal Tax sates

Section

of each country chapter provides estimates of tax rates for

inflation rates of zero, ten percent per annum, and the estimated actual infla-

tion rate during the period 1970—1979. In this section we investigate more
systematically the effect of inflation on marginal tax rates. Figure 7.1 shows
the overall effective marginal tax rates in the fixed—p case for inflation rates

varying from 0 to 15 percent. The figure illustrates some major differences
among

the four countries. In particular, overall marginal tax rates in Germany

and the U.S. are rather insensitive to the rate of inflation, whereas in Sweden
and

Britain the tax rate is much more dependent on the inflation rate. But the

influence of inflation is in oposite directions for the latter two countries.

At zero inflation both countries have an overall marginal tax rate of around 13
percent, but as inflation increases the tax rate rises in Sweden and falls in
the U.K.

In order to discuss Figure 7.1 and the different net effects of infla-

tion in each country, it is useful first to summarize four separate effects of

inflation that mit operate in any one country. First, a marginal investment
in 1980 typically has future depreciation allowances that are based on histori
cal cost (the 1980 purchase price for the asset). Since inflation reduces the
real value of these fixed nominal deductions, it tends to increase effective tax

rates. As inflation increases further, however, the real value of depreciation

rate of inflation does
real value of these deductions approach zero. For this reason, the effect

allowances falls at a reduced
the

of

rate: only

at an infinite

historical cost depreciation becomes less important with successive increases

in the rate of inflation. It is also less important in Britain where machinery
receives immediate expensing and hence inflation has no effect on the vector of
such allowances.

Section 7.2, p.2
Secondly, inflation increases the nominal interest rate. Where nominal
interest payments are deductible from the corporate income tax,

inflation

tends

to increase these deductions and decrease the overall tax. At the same time,
where nominal interest receipts are included in the personal income tax base,
inflation tends to increase these receipts and increase the overall tax. In
combination, since the corporate rate is greater than the personal rate averaged

over investors in st of our countries, inflation tends to decrease overall
taxes.

Thirdly, inflation increases the nominal value of inventories.

Under

FIFO inventory accounting, taxable profits are measured by the difference between nominal sales price and nominal costs.

Thus, for given real ngnitudes,

inflation tends to increase taxable nominal profits and increase the effective

tax rate. This effect depends on the proportion of assets held as inventories.
Fourth3r, tax rules for insurance cozianies can exacerbate the effects

of

inflation. In the U.S. and

Sweden, insurance cocanies are allowed deduc-

tions for reserves that are based on fixed nominal interest rate assumptions.
As inflation increases nominal interest receipts, it reduces the real value of

deductions for reserves. The entire addition to the nominal return is taxed,
even if it is needed to meet reserve obligations. As a result, inflation tends

to

increase the effective tax rate proportionateJr.
These

four effects of inflation operate in different directions and

with

different magnitudes in each country, but the total effects are shown _n
Figure 7.1. In Germany, for example, the tax rate starts at 145 percent with no

inflation. It tends to increase because of historical cost depreciation and
inventory accounting, but it
deductions

tends

to decrease because of nominal interest

at a corporate rate that exceeds the personal rate. The net effect

Chapter 7.2, p.3

is positive at first, but the effect of historical cost depreciation diminishes

with further inflation. Nominal interest deductions become relatively more
inortant at a 5 percent rate of inflation, and further inflation reduces the
total tax.

The same general story applies to the U.S., except that the effect of
FIFO inventory accounting is replaced by the effect of nominal reserve allow-

ances for insurance coxanies. Taxes increase with inflation, but at a diminishing rate as the effect of historical cost depreciation diminishes. The
curve becomes almost flat at high rates of inflation, where the tax—increasing
effects of insurance rules are almost exactly offset by the tax—reducing effects
of nominal interest deductions at a corporate rate which exceeds the personal
rate.

All four effects operate in the same direction for Sweden. First,
depreciation is allowed on a historical cost basis. Secondly, nominal interest
is taxed at a personal marginal rate of 49 percent, a rate which exceeds

the corporate rate. (Sections 2.5 and 4.3 of Chapter 4

find

that the effective

corporate rate in Sweden was 35 percent in 1980.) Thirdly, Sweden requires FIFO
inventory accounting. Fourthly, insurance companies are allowed only a fixed
nominal return for reserves. The combination of these four effects for Sweden
itself is dramatic, but the contrast with Britain in Figure 7.1 is tremendous.

Nominal

interest

in Britain is deducted at the 52 percent corporate rate, and it

is received by households with a 28 percent rate, tax—exempt institutions, or

insurance conpanies with a 17 percent rate. This effect swamps that of his—
torical cost depreciation. Although some buildings in Britain receive delayed
depreciation

operate

at historical cost, other assets are expensed. Inflation does not

to increase taxes through inventories or insurance companies. As a

Chaper 7.2, p.14

result, overall taxes start at about 13 percent of the pre—tax return, they fall
with inflation, and they keep falling as inflation increases.
Figure 7.1 does not show differential effects of inflation among. coin—

binations in each country. To investigate differences among assets, industries,
financial sources, or owners, we start with tax rates for zero inflation in

Table 7.3. These tax rates for each country are taken from the zero—inflation
column of the first table of results in each country chapter. The columns for
the U.K. and Sweden demonstrate that these two countries not Ofli start at the
same overall 13 percent effective tax rate with no inflation, they also start

with very similar tax rates on particular combinations. Machinery is subsidized
in both nations, because of acceleratedor immediate depreciation, and other
assets

are taxed. Debt is subsidized

deductions

in both nations, because of interest

at the corporate level, and other sources of finance are taxed. Tax—

exextt institutions are subsidized,
There,

and households are taxed.

however, the similarity ends. Table 7.14 shows, for each

combination in each country, the differential effect of inflation. Each entry

the addition (or subtraction) to the tax rate in that combination for an
increase of inflation from 6 percent to 7 percent. Almost all of the entries
shows

for the U.K. are negative and a1nst all of the entries for Sweden are positive. One percentage point of inflation reduces British taxes by one percentage point for machinery, by 5 points for debt, and by 3 points for tax—

exempt institutions. The one point of inflation raises Swedish taxes by14
points for inventories, by 14

points for insurance companies, and

by 5 full

points for households. It even increases the tax rate on debt by 2 percentage
points.

Chapter 7.2, p.5

Finally, we might also be interested in the variance of the effects of

inflation within each categorization. Among owners in the U.S., for example,
an extra point of inflation adds 5 points to the tax rate on insurance companies and

subtracts 4.5 points from the tax rate on exeiit institutions. This difference
of 9.5 points is larger than the difference among owners in any other country.

Britain has the smallest difference among owners. Among sources of finance,
Germany has the largest differences (—5.1 for debt and +3.7 for retained ear-

nings, for a difference of 8.8), and Sweden has the smallest difference. Among
industries, Gernny has the largest differences, and Britain has the smallest.
Finally, among assets in each country, Sweden has the largest differences, and

Britain the smallest. Thus, we conclude that while inflation reduces overall
-

taxes

in Britain, it does so on a comparatively regular basis.

7.3 Differences Among

the

Four Countries

While the U.S., U.K., Sweden, and Gerny show obvious differences in
the tax treatments of different assets, they differ also in the relative amounts

of each asset. The weighted—average tax rates differ for both of these reasons.
Secondly, while we have found clear differences in the way inflation affects tax
rates in each country, we have also found different actual rates of inflation.
Tax rates differ for both of these reasons as well.

Finally, while new invest-

ments receive different grants and allowances in each country, thej also have

different actual rates of depreciation. They thus have differences in the rates
at which reinvestment qualifies for new grants and allowances. This section
investigates how much of the overall tax rate differences are attributable to
tax law and how much are due, instead, to differences in the measured weights,
inflation rates, or actual depreciation rates.

To perform thib decososition, we first recalculate tax rates in all
countries, using their own parameters everywhere except for a common set of

weights. We recalculate tax rates again with own parameters everywhere except
for a common inflation rate, and then with own parameters except for a common

set of actual depreciation rates. Finally, we recalculate tax rates in all
countries using their own tax parameters, but using common weights, inflation
rates, and actual depreciation rates.
The choices for the common weights, inflation rates, or depreciation

rate are essentially arbitrary. We might select the weights or rates from any
one of the four countries, or we might apply to each country an average et of

weights or rates. We do not wish to introduce a fifth set of weights, however,
even if it is an average of the four coutries, because such parameters would not

reflect any actual experiences. Instead, we select U.S. weights and rates for
the standard of comparison.

Chapter 7.3, p2

Table 7.5 reflects

results of the first simulation which attempts to

answer two questions. First, what would be the effective rginal tax rates in
each country if they all had the U.S. mix of assets, industries, sources of
finance,

and owners? Secondly, or conversely, how

much of

existing tax rate

differences are attributable to different weights on each category? If all
countries

provided the same relative tax treatments to different assets,

industries, sources, or owners, then we would not expect taxes to cause dif—

ferences

in the distribution of capital among those components. If relative tax

treatments differ, however, then we might

expect

substitution among production

processes to allow relatively more use of a particularly

tax—favored asset, more

output of a tax—favored industry, more finance through a tax—favored source, or
more savings channelled through a pension fund, insurance company, or other particularly tax—favored

ownership category. Since there are these differences

among countries, we might expect the switch to a common set of weights in each

case to put less weight on particular tax—favored investments, and thus
the

to raise

overall average tax rate.
The fourth column of Table 7.5, for the U.S., is identical to that of

Table 7.1. Since weights for the U.S. have not changed, the overall rate is
still 37 percent in the fixed—p case. The overall rate for Britain, however,

has increased from 3.7 to 11.6 percent. This overall change results primarily
from the fact that the U.S. has a much lower weight for machinery than does the

U.K. where machinery is subsidized. It is somewhat offset by the fact that the
U.S. has more weight on debt, which Britain also subsidizes.

The overall tax rate in Sweden increases from 36 to 8 percent when
U.S. weights are employed. Zero—taxed machinery is given less weight, low—taxed

Chapter 7.3,

p.3

debt is given rruch less weight, and the highj.y—taxed households are given rela—
tively more weight. Moreover, because U.S. statistics include more privately

owned utilities in the other industry category, this highly—taxed sector is also
assigned more weight with the U.S. proportions. In West Germany, the overall
tax rises from 143 to 58 percent when U.S. weights are exrloyed. Again, the
other industrial sector plays a major role, because it is the most highly taxed

sector

in Germany, and its weights are the largest in the U.S. Also, debt

changes from a net subsidy to a tax, because relatively more of it is held by

households in the U.S. Individual

coronents can be further investi-

gated by considering the individual country weights as shown in Appendix A.
Thus, as expected, overall tax rates of all countries increase when
common

spread

for

weights were exr1oyed. The differences, however, remain intact. The
actually increases from 1414

Germany and 3.7

for

percentage points (the difference between 148.1

the U.K.) to 146

percentage points (the difference

between 57.5 and 11.6 for the same two countries). According to these experi-

ments, then, differences in weights by themselves do not account for any of the
Overall tax rate differences.

Next, we turn to inflation. How xrmch of the actual tax rate differences would remain if all countries had the same rate of inflation? This

question can be answered by looking at the zero inflation column of each
country's 1980 results table (brought together in Table 7.3),

the

7.6,

or

by looking at.

ten percent column of each 1980 results table. For consistency, in Table
we

look at the tax

rates that would exist in each

inflation, the actual U.S. rate of inflation.

country with 6.77 percent

Chapter 7.3, p.14

Again

rates in

tax rates in the

U.S.

are the same

as

they were before. Tax

other countries rise or fall, as can be seen from Figure 7.1. Since

taxes in Britain fall with inflation, and since 6.77 percent is less than the
actual U.K. rate, the 3.7 percent tax rate in Table 7.1 rises to an 8.9 percent

rate in Table 7.6. This overall change incorporates smaller subsidies on machi—
nery, debt, and tax—exempt institutions, as well as higher positive taxes on

other categories. Since taxes in Sweden rise with inflation, and since 6.77 is
less than the actual Swedish rate, the 35.6 percent tax rate in Table 7.1 falls

to a 29.5 percent rate in Table 7.6. Finally, note that the Figure 7.1 tax rate
curve for Germany reaches its highest point at a 5 percent rate of inflation and
then starts to decline. Since we change the German inflation rate from 14.2 per-

cent to 6.77 percent, the overall tax rate is hardly affected. The flatness of
that curve incorporates offsetting effects, however, so there is a higher tax on
inventories and a lower tax on debt.

According to these experiments, then, some of the actual tax rate differences can be attributed to inflation rate differences. The 1414 point spread
in Table 7.1 falls to a 39 point spread in Table 7.6 (147.9

for

for Germany minus 8.9

the U.K.). This conclusion is not robust, however, as can be seen from

Figure 7.1. For any two countries in that diagram, tax rates become more simi—
lar if we choose one common inflation rate and less similar if we choose a different common inflation rate.
Finally, we ask, how imich of the differences in tax rates may be attri-

buted to differences in actual depreciation rates? We have two reasons for
addressing this question. First, we want to isolate differences attributable
solely to tax law. Of course, the tax law can induce producers to alter the

maintenance or type of particular assets enloyed. Secondly, each of our

Chapter 7.3, p.
country chapters uses its own procedures to derive estimates of actual depre-

ciation. These methodological differences might contribute to apparent effective tax rate differences.
Table 7.7 shows calculations for all countries when we
use only U.S.

depreciation rates. As shown in Appendix A, these rates for buildings are
greater than those for Britain and Sweden but less than those for Germany. The
U.S. rates for machinery

are approximately in the middle of those for other

countries but depend on industrial location.
serves to reduce the overall tax rates

Substitution of these parameters

in Britain and Germany and slightly

increase that in Sweden. The spread between the low rate of Britain and the

high rate of Geriny is

essentially unchanged.

While these factors sometimes

we conclude that none has a

greatly affect individual combinations,

major impact on the differences in overall tax rates

among countries. In Table 7.8, however, we take all of these factors together
and calculate effective tax rates when all countries have the
same weights,

inflation rates, and depreciation rates. Because these factors are not addi-

tive, they have more of an iact together than they do separately. Taken
together, these factors increase the tax in Britain for two reasons: we use
less weight on Britain's subsidized machinery, and we use a lower rate of infla-

tion. The overall rate in the U.K.

increases from 3.7 to 18.9 percent, while

that on Germany only increases from 48.i

to

52.6

percent.

The spread thus falls

form

to 33.7 percent. These remaining differences can be attributed solely
to tax law.
All the above calculations

referred to the fixed—p case. In Table 7.9

we show consarable calculations for the fixed—r case. When all countries have

all of their own paraxrters,

fixed—r tax rates vary between the 30 percent rate

Chapter 7.3, p.6

for l3ritain and the 65 percent rate for Geriiny (as shown in Table 7.2). When
all countries have their own tax paraneters but U.S. weights, depreciation and
inflation, fixed—r tax rates vary between !2 percent for Britain and almost 70

percent for Sweden (as shown in Table 7.9). The spread thus falls from 35

points to 28 points. Changes in the individual coronents of any countrd can be
explained by arguments similar to those for the fixed—p case above.

7.1 nsitivity to Assuied Fats of Retum
in general, the xasured effective tax rate depends on the assumed
value for p or r in the fixed-p or fixed—r calculations. Are our estirntes
relatively robust to these choices, or do they depend greatly on the assumed

rate of return? This section discusses the possible reasons for this dependence
and then calculates different effective tax rates for different rates of return.
In

a linear system, the tax is a constant fraction of the pre—tax

return. Thus the tax rate is independent of the pre—tax or post—tax rate of

return. In general, however, tax systems are not linear. The tax rate depends
on the present value of depreciation allowances, which depend nonlinearly on the
rate of return used for discounting. The importance of this point justifies
some algebraic elaboration. In chapter 2, equation (2.23) provides a coipli—
cated expression for the pre—tax return (p) as a function of the corporate tax
rate (T), the firm's discount rate (p), the depreciation rate (6), the present

value of allowances (A), and other parameters. in order to focus on the rain
issue, and to abstract from unnecessary corlications, we consider the case with
LIFO accounting (v=O), no corporate wealth taxes (w=o), and no inflation (iC,

or,

equivalently, colete indexation for inflation). In this simple case,

(2.23)

reduces

to

=

Also in

___ (6)

- 6

.

(7.1)

chapter 2, equations (2.2I) to (2.27) provide expressions for the firm's

discount rates when finance is obtained by debt, new share issues (NSI), and

retained earnings (RE). If we take a classical corporate tax system (0=1) and
ignore capital gains taxes (z=O), then these equations reduce to

DEBT =

r(l—t)

NSI =

r

RE =

r(l—m)

(7.2)

Chapter 7., p.2

where m is the personal tax rate. The real interest rate r is equal to the
nominal

rate I

saver's post—tax
s

since inflation is assumed to be

,

zero

here. Finally, the

real rate of return in equation (2.6) reduces to

=

(7.3)

.

r(1-m)

With these forrilae, for any source of finance, we can calculate the effective

tax rate t =

Starting

(p—s)/p .

directly as linear

functions. In

with r , for exaile, we have s and p
general, however, the

present value term A

not a linear function of p , so the tax is not linear in r . Similarly, if
we start with a value for p , we can generally find a value for p that is
is

consistent

with equation (7.1). However, it also will depend nonlinearly on the

initial p chosen. The tax rate ren.ins a nonlinear function of p
Suppose, however, that there are no cash grants nor immediate expensing
=

= 0),

and that depreciation allowances are equal to economic depre-

ciation at replacement cost. In this case,

f

A = AD =

_(&4-p)udU

the present value of allowances is

=

,

(7.4)

and equation (7.1) reduces sixrqly to

p

7.5

Now the three effective tax rates reduce to

tDEBT =
tNSI =

tRE=t

m

t + m(l—t)
.

(7.6)

Cha.pter 7., p.
That is, interest is deductjb:e at the corporate level, so the return to debt is

i

taxed on' at the personal rate m

corporate rate t
at

it

.

The

return

to

equity

is taxed only

at

the

is retained, but the after—tax profits are taxed again

the personal rate if the earnings are distributed.
Equations

(7.6) make

clear that these effective tax rates do not depend

on

p or r .

any

pre—tax return. Our effective tax rate foriaxlae provide global estimates of

The system is linear in that the tax is a constant fraction of

the tax rate, in either the fixed—p case or the fixed—r case, for any

or

initial p

r

In our example above, linearity depends upon the assumption of economic

depreciation at replacement cost.- Actual tax systems conform neither to an
income

tax on properly measured income nor to a consumption tax. In particular,
depreciation allowances are often accelerated relative to economic depreciation.
Because

these tax advantages are delayed, the effective tax rate depends on

their present value and tYius nonlinearly on the rate of discount.

For these

reasons, there is no such number as the effective tax rate. Different estimates
are obtained for different values p and r.

It is very important, therefore, to

investigate the sensitivity of results to the initial

space,

p or r .

For

reasons of

we limit this investigation to the standard 1980 parameters in each

country. We also limit the investigation to one example, machinery in the manu-

facturing sector. Our

sensitivity

analysis should consider the most sensitive

case, and machinery has differentially accelerated depreciation allowances. It
is therefore expected to exhibit some of the greatest nonlinearities. We weight
over owners and sources of finance to calculate the total tax wedge or tax rate
on the "average" investment in manufacturing machinery in each country.

Chapter 7.14, p.1

Figure 7.2 plots for each country, the effective tax rate on nchinery
as the pre—tax return varies from 1 to 30 percent.

These calculations employ

the fixed—p uthodolo, but the firm's discount rate is linked by our formulae
to this pre—tax return. For nchinery in the U.K., immediate expensing nans
that the discount rate does not affect the present value of depreciation
allowances, but additional grants ensure that the asset receives a subsidy at

pre—tax return. When this subsidy is expressed as a fraction of a 1 percent
pre—tax return or less, the rate of subsidy becomes arbitrarily large. Because

the rate of tax or subsidy is misleading in such cases, we also show the tax

wedge in Figure 7.3. As the pre—tax return becomes small, the negative wedge in
Britain is reduced in absolute size although it becomes a larger fraction

of p
In Sweden, as we see in Table 7.1, the total tax on the average new

investment in machinery is essentially zero. The wedge (p—s) is zero, so the

wedge as a fraction of p is also zero. As a result, the curves for Sweden in
Figures 7.2 and 7.3 are essentially flat at zero.
To understand the curves for Germany and the U.S., consider first a
hypothetical case with no inflation but with accelerated depreciation arid

investment grants. When the pre—tax return is relatively low, the discount rate

is also relatively low, and the delayed depreciation allowances are re irnpor—
tant. A subsidy may result in such a case, and it may be an arbitrarily high
fraction of p •

As

p (or the discount rate) increases, depreciation allowan-

ces become less important, and the tax may rise to zero or above. In such a
case, the curve would look like that of the U.K.
With significant inflation, as in the U.S., or with long asset lifetimes, as in Germany, depreciation allowances on historical cost may be less

Chapter 7.1,

than economic

depreciation at replacement cost. In

may be positive, and it may be an arbitrarily high

such

cases, the

fraction

tax

p.5

wedge

of a very small p

Moreover, as p (or tne discount rate) increases, the unadvantageous depreciation allowances becoir less important, and the effective tax rate falls.

Figure 7.3 shows that the tax wedges in the U.S. and Germany are small

at

low

p , even if the, are a high fraction of p as shown in Figure 7.2.

An important aspect of Figures 7.2 and 7.3 is that the curves do not

cross. At actual inflation rates and standard 1980 parameters, the choice of p
does not affect the conclusion that the highest taxes are in Germany, followed

by the U.S., Sweden, and the U.K. Moreover, while the amount of tax naturally
increases with the earnings from the asset, as shown in Figure 7.3, the tax rate

curves of Figure 7.2 have large segments that are fairly flat. Beyond some cri-

tical value of p ,

the tax rate is not nuch affected by further changes in p

Standard calculations use a p of 10 percent, clearly beyond this sensitive
range.

Similar

7.L and

analyses are performed for the fixed—r methodolor in Figures

7.5. Curves for Germany and the U.S. are very similar to those for the

fixed—p case above. In Sweden, the fixed—r calculation implies a snail positive
wedge for machinery in manufacturing. When r is 1 percent in this case, the
value of p is only 0.1 percent. A small denominator makes the tax rate
misleadingly

high.

For the U.K., Figure 7.5 demonstrates that machinery is clearly sub-

sidized at any value for r .
the subsidy (p—s) becomes

As

r is reduced to about 2 percent, however,

equal to the whole return to the saver (s). Since the

government provides the saver's entire return, the asset need earn nothing. The
pre—tax

return p

is zero, and the

subsidy rate (p—s) /p is not defined. At

Chapter 7.L,

even lower values for r ,

the

p.

subsidy is even larger than the saver's return,

and the asset can make a loss. A negative wedge (p—s) divided by a negative p
iilies a positive rate in spite of the subsidy.
We need a common standard for coraring taxes on different assets or in

different countries. The tax—inclusive effective rate (p—s)/p is a logical
candidate, because it corresponds to our general conception of a tax rate and

because it reduces to the statutory rate in special cases. Because p can be
zero or negative, however, this rate is often not useful for drawing corn—

parisons. The tax—exclusive rate (p—s)/s is a logical alternative, but the
next section describes cases where s can be zero or negative as well. Both
rates are subject to misleadingly wide variations when their denominators are

close to zero. The remaining alternative is to report the tax wedge (p—s); in
this case we do not have a denominator. This effective tax measure alwas has
the "correct" sign, and it can be interpreted as a wealth tax rate, the percen-

tage of the asset value paid in tax each year. As the earnings of the asset
increase in Figures 7.3 and 7.5, so does the amount of tax or subsidy. The tax
—

.4-_

.LJ

.4._ l_.
V L,L?

___+_. Ui.
.1

.L -L

•S+
JL4.

..O

—

sequence of the fact that the tax rates level off in Figures 7.2 and 7.J4.
These diagrams demonstrate clearly the nonlinear aspects of our effective tax fornulae. The tax rates in Figures 7.2 and 7.14 are particularly nonli-

near because p appears in the denominator. Even the tax wedges in Figures 7.3
and 7.5 are nonlinear, however, because p is a nonlinear function of r

Both wedges and rates are sensitive to the choice of p or r , so care must be
taken in their interpretation.

One other interesting result can be explained with the use of the

equations given above. It turns out that the effective tax rate is related

Chapter 7., p.7

inversely

to the personal tax rate m in some instances. In the U.S., for

example, the effective tax rates in some categories are raised by the use of
"low

tax" parameters, or reduced by

the

use of "high tax" parameters. In par-

ticular, the effective tax rate on retained earnings is 67
value for in , 62 percent with the standard value for m ,
with

percent

and

with the low

only 58

percent

the high value for m (see Tables 6.20 to 6.23).
This result derives from the arbitrage assumption of Chapter 2.

In

equilibrium, savers are assumed to require the same net—of—tax real return on

any investment, in any asset or industry. Thus s is always given by the real
net—of—tax interest rate, whatever source of finance is actually used. Consider
an increase in the personal tax rate in

on interest income. If the source is

retained earnings, then individuals still earn a lower net return s
Secondly, since equity does not actually pay the tax on interest income, the
firm can earn a lower gross return on the asset and still provide a net return

equal to that on interest income. Whether the gross return p falls by nxre or
less than the net return s depends on depreciation deductions. If depreciation
allowances are not immediate, and the higher m implies a lower discount rate
for the firm, then the present value of allowances rises. In this case, the

required return p falls by nre than s , and the tax wedge is reduced.

In

effect, the increase in m raises the relative advantage of internal finance if
capital gains are taxed at concessionary rates, and in some cases this can reduce the tax wedge on an investment project.
Consider, for example, the simple case with no inflation, no wealth

taxes, no capital gains taxes, and no investment grants. Discount rates for
this case are shown in equation (7.2), and the saver's return is shown in

equation (7.3). With economic depreciation at replacement cost, the pre—tax

Chapter 7., p.8
return reduces to p/(l—t) , as shown in equation (7.5). The total tax rate on
debt is in

, on new share issues is t + zn(i—t)

,

and on retained earnings is

as shown in equations (7.6). An increase in in thus raises effective tax
rates for debt and new share issues, but leaves unchanged the rate for retained

earnings. With other than economic depreciation, however, the expression for
the pre—tax return does not reduce to equation (7.5). To reduce the expression

for p in a different way, suppose actual depreciation (o)

0

represents "accelerated" depreciation, and

a

is zero. Then A >

higher discount rate reduces the

present value of depreciation allowances. With this alteration, the expression

for the gross return p changes from (7.1) to

(7)

p(l—A)

and the effective tax rate on retained earnings changes from t

to
(7.8)

Now a change in the personal tax rate in

affects

t for projects

financed from retained earnings according to
3A
3t
—(1—t)
____
..
—=
3m
Il—A]2

With
(

p = r(l—m)

3p/3m ( 0 ).

,

the

Since

ap

ap

am

(7.9)

.

discount rate for retained earnings falls as

3A/3p is negative, and t

is

in rises

less than one, the effec-

tive tax rate also falls as m rises.
The effect on any single asset or industry depends on the share of

retained earnings as a source of finance. In the countries studied here, other
sources of finance are large enough that the overall effective tax rate does
in fact increase with the personal tax rate.5

7. Sensitivj- to Assumed eatonshi bet.een inflation and interest Rate
In fixed—i' calculations above, we assume that arbitrage eliminates dif—

erences in net—of—tax interest rates, except for differences in personal tax

rates among owners. In this case, the same real interest rate r is earned on
any investoent. Because of tax differences, then, the pre—tax returns p must
differ among investments. While we hold r constant across investments at any
inflation rate, this assumption provides no guide as to correct comparisons
among inflation rates. There is no arbitrage story to be told here, and we are
concerned simply with the choice of r at which to evaluate the tax rate. With a
linear tax system, the choice would not matter, but in practice nonlinearities
necessitate an assumption to. enable us to make comparisons for ceteris paribus

changes

in the rate of inflation. For this purpose, we 1rpically hold constant the

average real rate of return to savers. This assumption implies a particular
relationship between the inflation rate and the nominal interest rate, and the
purpose

of this section is to investigate alternative assumptions about this

relationship.

In the fixed—r case, we may interpret

rF as the interest rate that

would exist if there was no inflation. In such a case, the average post—tax
return to savers would be s =

rF(1_m)

,

where

in

is

the weighted average of

different owners' personal marginal tax rates. If inflation increased to the

rate

,

and the nominal interest rate rose to a value i

the average saver would receive

S

i(l—m) — ii .

If

to savers is to be constant across inflation rates, by
set these two expressions equal

to

,

then in real terms

the averaLe real return

assumption,

then we must

each other and solve for the nominal interest

rate as:

i

r1.

+—--

.

(7.10)

Chapter 7.5, p2

Because nominal interest is subject to tax, inflation iust adu more than point—

to the nominal interest rate for the real after—tax return to be
constant. In our calculations above, we do not mean to claim that inflation
for—point

does add more than point—for—point to nominal interest. 1ather, equation (7.10)
is a natural consequence of the standard we use for conaring across inflation
rates.

Other assumptions might be employed, however, and we now investigate

their implications for our results. One such alternative is suggested by
Frauzneni and Jorgenson (1980) who find a roughly constant real after—tax rate of

return in the corporate sector. If corporations successfully arbitrage between
bonds

and real capital, then the real after—tax return that they earn on an

investment must be the same as the real net interest saved by retiring a bond,
namely, rF(lt) with no inflation or i(1—T)—n with inflation at rate

iT

Assuming equality of these expressions across inflation rates implies

I =

r.

+—

(7.11)

Feldstein and Summers (1978), on the other hand, have estimated that

inflation adds approximately point—for—point to nominal interest rates. This

is

described as the result of two countervailing forces within the tax system.

Taxation of nominal interest tends to raise i by more than

iT to keep the

real net return constant, while historical cost depreciation and taxation of
nominal capital gains tend to reduce the real net return that can be earned.

Summers (1981) makes a stronger statement, that nominal interest rates rise by

at most the inflation rate, if at all. This empirical finding can be summarized
as
I =

rF +

iT

.

(7.12)

Chapter 7.5, p3

In the absence of taxes, (7.12) would keep borrowing and lending oppor-

tunities independent of the rate of inflation. Since Irving Fisher originally
considered the case without taxes, (7.12) has been referred to as "Strict

Fisher's Law" (Bradford and Fullerton, 1981). In a tax system where all nominal

interest receipts are taxed at the rate t

, and all nominal interest payments

are tax—deductible, (7.11) would keep real borrowing and lending opportunities

independent of inflation. This relationship has been referred to as "Modified
Fisher's Law." In the other relationship used above, equation (7.10), we account
for varying tax rates on nominal interest income by keeping the average saver's

opportunities independent of inflation. It is, of course, a different modification to Fisher's Law.

When inflation is zero, all versions of Fisher's law imply the same

result. When inflation is positive, however, the choice among these relationships has an effect on tax rate estimates. Table 7.10 shows overall tax
rates for each country, using actual inflation and standard 1980 parameters
(only the fixed—i- case is presented). In the middle rows of Table 7.10, where
the standard assumption of equation (7.10) holds, the effective tax rates match

those from Table 7.2 above. In the bottom set of rows, where (7.11) holds, the
effective tax rates in all countries are reduced. Because (7.11) holds constant
the real return after corporate taxes, additional inflation serves to increase

the real return after personal taxes. To net the higher required net return,
assets nist earn more before tax as well. The result is similar to consideration of Figures 7.2 to 7.5, where higher rates of return imply lower tax
rates.

In the top rows of Table 7.10, where Strict Fisher's Law applies,

effective tax rate estimates in each country are increased. Because inflation

Chapter 7.5, p.14

adds only point—for—point to nominal interest, and because nominal interest is
fully taxable in these countries' tax systems, inflation reduces the real after—

tax returns s (except for tax—exempt institutions). The assets need only earn
a

in

lower pre—tax return p •

While the tax wedges (p—s) are all sma1ler as shown

the table, division by small values for p imply higher tax as a proportion

of gross returns. In fact, individual pre—tax returns are often negative under
Strict Fisher's Law, so the use of effective tax rates presents more of a

problem generally. We provide p and s separately in the table for this
reason. 6

With Strict Fisher's Law, the ordering of country tax rates is altered.
Germany takes second place while Sweden acquires the highest tax rate estimate.

The inflation rate in Germany is low, however, so the taxation of nominal

interest does not reduce s or p as much in that country as it does in

Sweden. The high rate in Sweden reflects a low denominator, since the wedge is
still

higher in Germany.
To get an idea

of

effective tax rates within

the

how these assumptions might affect the breakdown of

a country, Table 7.11

presents

detailed results for

United States. For any individual combination, p is always lower under

Strict Fisher's Law (in the first column) than it is under either modified ver-

sion of Fisher's Law. The tax wedges (p—s) are also lower, but division by p

provides tax rates that are higher. The subsir for debt is so large that p
is very close to zero, and the subsiy rate is misleadingly large. In fact,
since further inflation reduces real net returns still more under Strict

Fisher's Law, calculations for ten percent inflation imply that p is negative

for the average debt financed U.S. investment. The net return s is small but
positive, so this subsidized investment would shoi a large positive tax "rate".

Chapter 7.5, p5

These sections have deLonstrated that effective tax rates (p—s)!p may
not be useful indicators of the total tax or subsidy on a given marginal invest—
inent.

They are not very stable at low values of the pre-.tax return, and they

may even

have the wrong sign. We recommend great care in their use and inter-

pretation, and we suggest using the tax wedge
always

has the right sign.

(p—s) which

is more stable and

7.6 Summary

nave tried

in

this chapter to present effective marginal thx rate

calculations in a number of different ways for each country. While
results depend fundamentally

upon

these

the basic methodoloT chosen for our

study,

they depend also on a number of additional assumptions. In particular, the

results
the

reflect our decision to look at the statutory provisions which determine

tax liability on a marginal investment in each combination of asset,

industry,

source of finance, and owner. The precise values of the estimated tax

rates depend upon our choice of a given value for the pre-tax rate of' return on

all projects in the fixed—p case, and upon our choice for the interest rate

earned

on all projects in the fixed—r case.
Table 7.12 sujnjarizes the

first—row,

the

tax

rates refer to the fixed—p case, with a pre—tax annual

of 10 percent on all

interest

rate

major findings for each country. In the

assets. In the second row, they are based

of 5 percent

return

on a fixed real

per annum for all assets. These fixed—r results are

higher than the corresponding tax rates for the fixed—p case, but 'the ranking of'

the countries is the same. We find the highest overall effective tax rates in
Germany, followed by Sweden, the U.S., and the U.K. As shown above, this
ranking is unaffected by the values of p and r at which the tax rates are
evaluated.

A major issue in all countries is the effect of inflation on efi'ective

tax rates. The overall effective tax rates for inflation rates betieen zero and
fifteen percent are plotted for each country in Figure 7.1. The surprising
result is that taxes in Sweden and

the U.K.

start out at a common 13 percent

rate at zero inflation, but they diverge dramatically as inflation
increases. Tax rates in Sweden rise with inflation, while those in Britain fall
with inflation. In Germany, overall taxes rise initially, due to historical
overall

Chapter 7.6, p2

cost depreciation, but eventually fall as nominal interest deductions become

more important at higher rates of inflation. The

curve

for the U.S. is simi-

larly shaped, but tax rates level off only at a 15 percent inflation rate. At
lower inflation rates, the effective marginal tax rates rise with inflation.
The fourth row of Table 7.12 shows the change in taxes when inflation increases
from 6 to 7 percent in each country.

We tried also to decompose tax rate differences into those attributable.

to differences in rates of inflation, the allocation of investment, and actual
depreciation rates, as opposed to differences in tax parameters themselves.

Table 7.12 summarizes these results, indicating that none of these differences
taken by itself had a major impact on the spread of tax rates, but that in total

they do have some impact. fective tax rates are somewhat more equal among

countries

when only tax parameter differences remain.

A very important aspect of our study is not captured by any of these

overall effective tax rate calculations. That is, the overall tax rates conceal
a wide distribition of individual effective tax rates within each country. To
summarize these differences in each country, Figures .6 to 7.9 provide
histograms for the actual inflation rate with 1980 parameters. For the height
of each bar in the histogram, we add together the capital stock weights for any

individual

combinations that are taxed at effective rates falling in each ten

percent interval between —320 percent and +200 percent.

These bounds are chosen because at least one combination in the U.K. is

taxed at a —312 percent rate. Appendix B shows the individual fixed—p tax rates
for each combination, at each inflation rate, in each country. For actual
inflation rates, the lowest tax rate anywhere is the —312 percent rate in
Britain, for debt—financed machinery in the manufacturing sector, where the debt

Chapter 7.6, p3

is held by tax—exempt institutions. At an annual inflation rate of 13.6 percent
in the U.K. , a considerable inflation premium in the nominal interest rate is

tax—deductible at the corporate level, but for this combination it is not taxed
at

the personal level. Machiner- receives immediate expensing, and in addition

qualifies

for a cash grant. At the other extreme, Appendix B shows a +130 per-

cent rate on an internally financed investment in other industrial buildings in
the U.K. ,

where the equity is held by households. Buildings receive only

straight—line depreciation, and other industry receives smaller grants than

manufacturing. Because of disparate tax treatments of different assets,
industries, sources, and owners, Figure 7.6 shows a relatively flat distribution

of tax rates in Britain. They extend from —312 to +130 percent, with no more
than 12 percent of the capital stock taxed within a single ten point interval.
This implies a very high variance of marginal tax rates.
A similarly flat distribution is shown for Sweden in Figure 7.7.

Again, no more than 12 percent of the capital stock is taxed at rates falling

ten point interval. In this case, however, the rates range from —116
+11414 percent. The investment with the lowest tax rate is a machine in other

within any
to

industry financed by bonds sold to tax—exempts. Although the 11.14 percent grant

and 30 percent exponential depreciation allowances are the same for machinery in

all sectors, machinery in other industry was found to have lower true rates of
economic depreciation. The result is higher relative acceleration of allowances
and the lowest total tax rate. Other combinations with tax rates less than —110
percent bring the total weight for that interval up to almost 10 percent of

total capital in Sweden. The investment with the highest total tax is a
building in other industry financed by issuing new shares to households. Sweden
had no dividend tax credit in 1980, so earnings on such an investment are taxed
by both the corporate and personal tax systems.

Chapter 7.6, p1

German investments are taxed at a much narrower spread of rates, as

shown in Figure 7.8. The lowest tax rate is only —59 percent, on a building in
manufacturing financed by debt issued to tax—exempt institutions.

Machinery in

Germar receives relatively long 11 year tax lifetimes, as well as a wealth tax
rate that is higher that that on buildings. Interest deductions make the lower
building tax rates negative. At the other end, the highest rate is "only" 102
percent, on inventories financed internally through equity held by households.

(This rate is identical for all industries.) Inventories receive the highest
tax rate because of unfavorable inflation accounting practices required for tax
purposes, and internal finance receives the highest tax rate because of taxation

at both corporate and personal levels. Dividends, on the other hand, receive
imputation credit at the personal level for corporate tax already paid.

Unlike the U.K. and Sweden, Germany and the U.S. have most of their

capital stock taxed at rates between zero and 100 percent. Figure 7.9 shows
that nearly 30 percent of U.S. capital is taxed at rates between 80 and 90 per--

cent. Because another 30 percent of U.S. capital is taxed at rates between —30

and +20 percent, and because rates extend down to 105 percent, the weighted—
average marginal tax rate is found to be 37 percent in this fixed—p case. As in
all other countries, the least taxed investment in the U.S. is financed by debt

to tax—exempt institutions, but in this case the asset is machinery used in
the commercial sector. This asset receives lower grants in commerce and the
sold

same depreciation allowances in all sectors, but the faster actual depreciation
rate in comxrrce means that reinvestment

qualifies for those tax advantages more

often. The highest tax rate in the U.S. is +111 percent, on buildings financed
by new shares sold to households, in either manufacturing or commerce.
Buildings receive less accelerated depreciation allowances, while dividends are

fully

taxed at both corporate and personal levels.

Chapter 7.6, p5

In general, we find that the histograms in Figures 7.6 to 7.9 provide

much nre useful inforntion than individual overall tax rates in each of the
four countries studied.

These disparate tax treatments in each country would be eliminated
under a comprehensive income tax, that is, with full integration of corporate

and personal tax systems, economic depreciation at replacement cost, no special
grants or incentives, no wealtn taxes, full indexing, and the full taxation of

accrued real capital gains. In such a case, all investments would be taxed at
the weighted—average personal tax rate. For comparison purposes, in Table 7.13,
we calculate this marginal personal tax rate in each country, taking weighted

averages over household rates on debt and on equity. In order to capture a
comprehensive tax concept, we do not include tax—exempt institutions or
insurance companies, nor do we reduce personal rates to account for returns

earned in the form of tax—free banking services. The U.S., U.K., and Geriany
are very close together, at 43_14L percent tax rates, and Sweden is at a 57 per-

cent rate. Histograms under such a hypothetical comprehensive income tax would
collapse to a vertical line at the country's single tax rate, applied to 100
percent of the capital stock.
We do not mean to imply that countries could easily switch to a compre-

hensive income tax, nor that to do so would be desirable. Rather, these calculations demonstrate another striking constrast: the overall effective rate in
Britain is a full

percentage points below the average marginal personal rate,

the overall effective rate in Sweden is 21 points below the average personal
rate, the effective rate in the U.S. is 6 points below the personal rate, and

the effective rate in Germany is several points above the personal rate. Our
four countries are quite different in this respect.

Chapter 7.6, p6

Finally,

we might naturally ask about the inlications of tnese effec—

tive tax rates for economic gro.ith in each country. Clearly, this is not a

about coxrarative capital formation, incore growth, or living standards in
the four countries. We have attempted to measure effective marginal tax rates
study

in each country in a number of different ways, but we have not tried to use
these estimates to measure

effects on growth, excess burdens, or income distri-

bution. Nevertheless, it is interesting to look at soixe summary growth statistics in light of our tax rate findings. To do so, Table 7.lLi reproduces our
standard fixed—p overall effective tax rates, and it shows two average annual

growth rates in constant dollars from 1960 to 1980 in each country. The first
growth rate is for GD?, and the second is for the nonfinancial corporate capital
stock, excluding inventories.

The results are surprising to say the least. If we rank .the four
countries by their average annual growth in GD?, we obtain exactly the same

order as when we rank by effective tax rates. Germany has the highest overall
effective tax on income from capital and the highest growth rate. The U.S. is
second in both categories and Sweden is thirth The U.IC has the lowest overall
effective

tax on income from capital arid the lowest growth rate. If we look at

growth of nonfinancial corporate capital, results are substantially the same.
The U.S. and Sweden are reversed, but Germany is still the highest and Britain

is

the lowest.

Nothing here should be construed to iriply causation in either direc—

tion. It is certainly possible that the slower growing countries have reacted
to their slow growth by providing more investment incentives which reduce

overall effective taxes. As we saw in Chapters 3—6, tax rates have changed over
time, in sorxe cases markedly. For example, tax rates in the U.K. were very high

Chapter 7.6, p7

in 1960 but have fallen dramatically since then. This reduction in rates xray
lead to higher investment in the future than would otherwise have taken place.
It is also possible that high groith is associated with high taxes on capital if
these taxes are somehow less distorting than alternative taxes on labor

incon.T Rather, the correlations in Table 7.l1 are interesting by themselves.
They suggest multiple interpretations and hypotheses, many of which will, we
hope, be investigated further and tested using the estimates of tax rates and
data on individual countries which we have produced in the course of this study.

60
50
—

—

.— -

-

TA

—

GERMANy
— —
—

DEN-

—U.K.
—

SWE

—

THE OVERALL EFFECTIVE

zH
ftJ
11

'10-

2

4

6

—

FIGURE

—

—

7-I

—

10

—

——
—-—

12

—--

—

14

——

16

RATE AS INFLATION VARIES IN EACH COUNTRY

—

8

______________________________________

10-

20-

30>
H

U
Lii

0

0

INFLATION RATE (IN PERCENT)

200 \GERMANY

IOO.S.
O----------—SWEDEN
/

U.K.i

/
/

I

5

FIGURE 7.2

I

I

25

I

I

IN

I

20

I

I

15

-

RD

—

THE EFFECTIVE TAX RATE ON MACHINERY AS p VARIES

H

F-

>

F--200U-

0

GROSS RETURNp(IN PERCENT)

EACH COUNTRY

30

35

30

I0-

°—---10-

5

I

I

FIGURE 7.3

—----—

25

IN EACH COUNTRY

30

GERMAN

s.
(IN PERCENT)

35

_______________________

THE EFFECTIVE TAX WEDGE
(p - s) ON MACHINERY AS p VARIES

zFU
£1.

U

U
U
LL

-20

0

ID
15
GROSS RETURN p

F—

/

1

_
10

__

FIGURE

r(IN

74

25

r VARIES

PERCENT)

20

I

ON MACHINERY AS

I

15

GERMANY__

5

,U.K.

7.
I
I

THE EFFECTIVE TAX RATE

200—

z 300U
Ui
'z

100

°
F—IOO

U-

W300
Ui
0

INTEREST RATE

IN

35

EACH COUNTRY

30

,u

30

I

-

———-—---—_____.

-

______

C'DAAKIv
.)Li
U.S.

SWEDEN

——

I

25

I

30

I

35

IN EACH COUNTRY

I

20

——

I

15

U.K.

10

— — —— ———
—— —

0—-_-____._____
——— —

5

—

FIGURE 7.5
THE EFFECTIVE TAX WEDGE (p - s) ON
MACHINERY AS r VARIES

zI—
o
Lii
LI-

z

H

>-

1iJ

H
U
U
1i

lii

-20

0

INTEREST RATE r (IN PERCENT)

—I

tfl fl
-200

FIGURE 7.6
FOR THE U.K.

i

—tOO

0

00

200

THE PROPORTION OF INVESTMENT TAXED AT EACH RATE IN THE FIXED - p CASE

-J

10-

20-

ti
3O
U
Lii

0
cL
a:
0
U

0
I—

O.
-300

EFFECTIVE TAX RATE (IN PERCENT)

I

-200

1

FIGURE 7.7

I

FOR SWEDEN

-

-100

0

THE PROPORTION OF INVESTMENT TAXED AT EACH RATE

-J

-300

-3O200
0
LL
0
z
1—

LU

U

O

N

EFFECTIVE TAX RATE (IN PERCENT)

THE FIXED

100

-

p CASE

200

.:L_

30

4

FIGURE 7.8

THE PROPORTION OF INVESTMENT TAXED AT EACH RATE IN THE FIXED
FOR GERMANY

uJ

F-

0
Cl:.

0
0
U0

zH
liJ

U
Ui
a-

EFFECTIVE TAX RATE (IN PERCENT)

-

p CASE

401

-200

FIGURE 7.9
FOR THE U.S.

riH11
-100

0

_

00

-

p CASE

200

_____

THE PROPORTION OF INVESTMENT TAXED AT EACH RATE IN THE FIXED

-J

30<
U
lii

-

-300

0
200
0
1i
0

z
Id

U
Id
O

EFFECTIVE TAX RATE (IN PERCENT)

Table 7.1

Actual Effective Tax Rates for Each Country in the Fixed—p Case
(actual inflation, actual depreciation, actual weights)

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

—36.8
39.3
39.5

0.2

1414.5

17.6

36.6

142.9

141.1

68.8

59.0

147.0

—9.6

27.1

148.1

52.7

60.5
39.2

57.0

i14.6

Inry
1. Manufacturing

2.
3.

Other Industry
Coxnnrce

_5.14
36.2

1414.14

38.2

Source of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings

—100.8

5.0

—14.2

90.14

30.6

6b.2

—3.1
62.6
90.2

142.0

—16.3
91.2
62.14

Owner

1.

2.

3.

Households
Tax Exempt Inst.
Insurance Co.

Overall

105.1

71.2

57.5

—1414.6

—51.8

6.3

—6.7

18.9

—3.8

—21.5
23.14

3.7

35.6

37.2

Table 7.2

Actual Effective Tax Iates for Each Country in the Fixed-.r Case
(actual inflation, actual depreciation, actual weights)

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

Asset

Machinery

1.

2. Buildings

Inventories

3.

—57.5

-0.7

63.24

56.24
145.9

148.5

59.9

72.5

70.14

10.7
12.0
55.0

245.1

65.0
69.5

26.14
514.1
514,5

Industry
1. Manufacturing

2.
3.

Other Industry
Commerce

Source

1.

61.2

61.3

224.24
248.8

of Finance
Debt

2. New Share Issues
3.

77.0
53.7

tained Earnings

——

11.5

—17.9

—72.5

—1.8
148.2

92.9
89,6

73.2

81.8

85.24

66.5

1014.6
_314.5

i24i.o

8224

73.14

—68.8

14.5

26.9

26.5
9.1

22.14

30.0

53.6

614.8

49.9

Owner

1. Households

2. Tax Exent Inst.
3.

Insurance Co.

Overall

21.3

Table 7.3

Effective Tax Rates for Each

Country with Zero Inflation

(fixed—p case, actual depreciation, actual weights)

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

As set

1. ?chinery

214.2
141.5

—18.1
28.9

38.1

2. Buildings

142.7

3.9
35.14

50.5

26.5

57.7

50.9

—1.7

8.1

414.7

1414.2

14.6

29.6
12.1

50.8

10.0

1414.6

37.9

—29.6
7.6
23.5

—12.9

—2.0
61.0

40.9

12.1
56.1
72.0

26.6
—5.1
8.7

57.1
—39.2

59.7
17.6

414.1

—16.0

14.6

4.0
14.0

12.6

12.9

45.1

32.0

3.

Inventories

Industry

1. nufacturing

2.

Other Industry

3. Commerce

Source

146.8

of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings

414.2

48.14

Owner

1.

Households

2. Tax Exempt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

Table 7.14

Change in Effective Tax Rates for a Change in the Inflation Rate
from 6 Percent to 7 Percent, Fixed—p Case
(actual depreciation, actual weights)

U.K.

Sweden

Gerxnany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

—1.0
—0.2
—0.8

2.0
0.9
14.1

0.5
—1.9
0.3

1.8
Q,14

—0.5

Industry
1. Manufacturing
2. Other Industry
3. Commerce

—0.6
—0.7
—0.8

1.9

3.3
2.7

—0.1
0.2
—1.3

0.8
0.4

—0.2

Source of Finance

1. Debt

—5.2

2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings

—0.9
0.5

2.0
4.8

2.6

—5.1
0.7
3.7

—2.0
4.3

1.5

Owner

1. Households
2. Tax Exenpt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

1.1

—3.0
—1.1
—0.6

1.6
—14.5

14.2

2.0
—4.1
—5.9

2.4

—0.2

0.14

5.0
—1.6

5.0

Table 7.5

Effective Tax Rates for each Country, with U.S. Weights
(fixed—p case, actual inflation, actual depreciation)

U.K.

Sweden

Geriany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

—4.5
24.8
35.8

25.7
58.4
87.6

54.6
52.5
71.5

17.6
41.1

22.0
—13.6
24.8

66.6
44.4
59.8

69.2
54.3

52.7
14.6
38.2

—84.].

46.9
61.5

29.4
109.6
69.6

2.1
63.2
87.5

—16.3
91.2
62.4

48.3
—82.6
—46.5

103.0
—65.2
7.7

73.3

31.6
—9.1

57.5
—21.5
23.4

11.6

58.0

57.5

37.2

47.0

Industry

1.
2.

Manufacturing

Other Industry

3. Commerce

43.6

Source of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings
Owner

1.

Households

2. Tax Exempt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

Table 7.6

Effective Tax Rates for Each Country with 6.77 Percent Inflation
(fixed—p case, actual depreciation, actual weights)

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings

3.

Inventories

—30.2

146.3

17.6

38.9
59.8

141.1

48.2
58.3
141.8

52.7
i4.6
38.2

—15.4
64.6
100.1

—16.3
91.2
62.4

92.1
—47.7
6.6

76.5
18.2

57.5
—21.5
23.4

29.5

147.9

37.2

142.0

—5.2
33.9

145.5

58.6

_14.8

22.1

0.2
42.2

51.7
32.2

—64.6
2.1

—0.6
77.8

27.9

618

34.8
—23.8
1.9
8.9

47.0

du

In

1. Manufacturing
2. Other Industry
3. Commerce
Source of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings
Owner

1. Households
2. Tax Exempt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

—3.14

Table 7.7

Effective Tax Rates for each Country, with U.S. Depreciation Rates
(fixed—p case, actual inflation, actual weights)

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

17.6

—142.2
39.7
39.5

—0.8
38.3
68.8

40.3
35.4
59.0

—13.5
—5.1
36.1

27.2
61.2
39.7

1414.5

52.7

51.3

39.2

i4.6
38.2

—104.2
—6.6
28.5

5.14

90.6
68.3

—8.9
59.0
87.8

—16.3
91.2
62.4

68.1
0.9
—9.9

57.5
—21.5
23.4

141.1

47.0

Industry

1. Manufacturing
2. Other Industry
3. Commerce
Source of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings
Owner

1. Households
2. Tax Exempt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

40.0

105.3

—147.5

—51.14

—9.2

19.2

1.3

35.9

37.2

Table 7.8

Effective Tax Rates for each Country, with 6.77 Percent Inflation,
U.S. Depreciation, and U.S. Weights, in the Fixed—p Case

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

—37.3
31.7
43.3

19.0
56.0
76.7

42.0
75.4

21.0
1.1
37.4

60.9
40.2
53.5

69.3
32.5
48.2

52.7
14.6

—45.0

22.0
96.4
65.9

—20.3
59.2
92.2

-.16.3

40.4
52.4

43.3
—43.6
—19.8

92.5
—52.4
—3.6

73.3
19.3
—37.2

57.5
—21.5
23.4

18.9

52.6

52.6

37.2

53.8

17.6
41.1
47.0

Industry

1. Manufacturing
2. Other Industry
3. Commerce

38.2

Source of Finance
1.

Debt

2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings

91.2
62.4

Owner

1. Households
2. Tax Exempt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

Table 7.9

Effective Tax Rates for each Country, with 6.77 Percent Inflation,
U.S. Depreciation, and U.S. Weights, in the Fixed—r Case

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

Asset

1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

30.1
69.5
81.5

69.2

26.4

59.2

514.1

79.3

54.5

78.7
55.9
68.3

77.8

61.2

51.4

214.14

64.9

148.8

—125.5
71.14
86.6

—72.5

64.

27.4
93.5
88.2

—61.5
51.7
51.].

Industry

1. Manufacturing
2. Other Industry

3.

Commerce

43.3

25.0
514.7

Source of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings

—1114.5

55.0

81.8
66.5

Owner

1. Households
2. Tax Exempt Inst.
3. Insurance Co.
Overall

69.3

120.7

-.33.5
—114.0

—65.2

84.8
39.7

—6.0

—145.3

73.4
—21.3
22.4

42.3

69.8

68.14

49.9

Table 7.10
Overall Tax Rates for Alternative Assumptions about the Effect of
Inflation on Nominal Interest
(fixed—r case, actual inflation, 1980 parameters, in percent)

U.K.

i =

r

+

Equation (7.12)

r + _!

j

=r

+

IL

U.S.

1.5

2.3

5.7

3.5

s

0.7

—0.2

1.5

1.3

p—s

0.8

2.6

4.2

2.2

51.5

110.2

74.4

62.6

p

5.5

6.0

8.2

6.8

S

3.9

2.8

2.9

3.4

p—s

1.7

3.2

5.3

3.4

(p—s)/p

30.0

53.6

64.8

49.9

p

16.1

6.5

13.8

io.4

s

12.1

3.2

6.0

5.8

4.0

3.3

7.9

4.9

24.9

50.8

56.9

45.7

1-rn

Equation (7.10)

Germany

P

(p—s)/p

i =

Sweden

1 —t

(Equation 7.11)

p—s
(p—s)/p

Table 7.11

Effective Tax Rates in the U.S. for Alternative Assumptions
about the Effect of Inflation on Nominal Interest
(fixed—r case, actual inflation, 1980 parameters, in percent)

i=r+_

i=r+1T

11

iT

1—

Equation (7.12)

Asset
1. Machinery
2. Buildings
3. Inventories

Industry
1. Manufacturing
2. Other Industry
3. Comrerce

Source

Equation (7.10)

t

S

26.14

7.9
11.14

514.5 12.0

5.9
5.9
5.7

25.6

514.1

8.2 3.2

61.2 12.5

5.5

14.9 3.7

214.14

8.0 6.2

55.9
23.5

6.9 3.5

148.8 11.0

6.0

145.7

—p--

2.0

1.3
1.3
1.2

32.9
68.7
62.1

14.7 3.5
7.5 3.14

7.3 3.3

1.1
1.5

75.3
31.8
58.6

2.2 —769.9

2.7 14.6

3.2

4.14

2.2
3.3

1.14

t

p

p

—.—

14.2

Equation (7.11)

148.6
52.1

of Finance

1. Debt
2. New Share Issues
3. Retained Earnings

Owner
1. Households
2. Tax Exempt Inst.

3.

t

i—t

Insurance Co.

Overall

0.3
10.0
4.7

—72.5

5.5

5.1

5.1

76.7
60.1

11.1

3.9

614.5

91.9 15.5 2.8
82.7

8.14

98.0

3.3
1.9

0.1
5.0
1.5

—149.8

7.1 1.9
6.7 8.1

19.3

14.8 3.8

22.4

3.5

1.3

62.6

6.8 3.4

149.9 10.7

3.6

2.8

7.3 —32.7

81.8 21.8
66.5 12.7

0.8
0.8

73.14

-21.3 io.6 11.6 —10.1

8.2 6.2

214.2

5.8

145.7

Table 7.12

Summary

Table
Number

of

Overall Effective Tax Rates in each Case

Case

U.K.

Sweden

Germany

U.S.

7.1

Actual, fixed—p

3.7

35.6

48.1

37.2

7.2

Actual, fixed—r

30.0

53.6

64.8

49.9

7.3

Zero Inflation, fixed—p

12.6

12.9

45.1

32.0

7.4

Change in t for change in ii, fixed—p

—0.6

2.4

—0.2

0.4

7.5

With U.S. Weights, Fixed—p

11.6

58.0

57.5

37.2

7.6

With U.S. Inflation, Fixed—p

8.9

29.5

47.9

37.2

7.7

With U.S. Depreciation Rates, Fixed—p

1.3

35.9

44.2

37.2

7.8

With U.S. Depreciation, weights
and Inflation, Fixed—p

18.9

52.6

52.6

37.2

7.9

With U.S. Depreciation, weights,
and Inflation, Fixed—r

142.3

69.8

68.4

49.9

Table 7.13
Comparison with a Comprehensive Income Tax
(percent)

U.K.

Weighted—average personal rate
on debt and equity (m)
Overall effective rate Ct)
Difference (m—t)

Sweden

Germany

57.3

U.S.

143.1

3.7

35.6

48.1

37.2

40.3

21.7

—3.7

5.9

Source: Own calculations as described in the text.

Table

Comparison with Alternative Growth Rates

(percent)
U.K.

Sweden

Germny

U.S.

Overall Effective Bate Ct)

3.7

35.6

Average Annual Growth of GDP
in Constant Prices (1960—1980)

2.3

3.2

3.7

3.5

2.6

1.7

5.1

3.7

37.2

Average Annual Growth of

Nonfinancial Corporate Capital
Constant Prices (1960—1980)

in

Source: United Kingdom: Blue Book. Sweden: National Accounts. Gernny:
Bundesbank and Statistical Office. United States: Survey of Current
Business.

-

Footnotes

1. The first matrix of weights in Appendix A shows the proportion of capital

stock that is used in each combination of asset and industry. If we add
across the three industries in each country, we find that machinery is 17
percent of total capital in Britain, 42 percent in Germany, 32 percent in

Sweden, and 22 percent in the U.S. The high percentage in Britain can be
explained by the tax advantages afforded machinery, and the low percentage
in the U.S. can be explained by the fact that a larger proportion of utili-

ties are private corporations in the U.S. than in Earope. Since there are
more structure—intensive utilities in the "other industry" category, the
U.S. has a lower relative total weight on machinery.

2.

If the tax system were linear, then the effective tax rate calculated for a

particular combination would not depend on the choice of p or r in
either the fixed—p or fixed—r calculations. Since individual tax rates
would then be the same in both cases, any weighted—average in the fixed—r

case must be greater than the corresponding weighted—average in the fixed—p
case.

The tax system is not linear, however, so the individual tax rates

depend

on the chosen p of 10 percent in Table 7.1, and on the chosen r

of 5 percent in Table 7.2. Since the tax rates for individual combinations
are not identical in the two cases, averages over tax rates in the fixed—r

case do not necessariiy exceed those in the fixed—p case. Indeed, when we
average over all combinations involving a particular asset, industry,

source, or owner, the fixed—r tax rate in Table 7.2 is sometimes less than

the

corresponding fixed—p rate of Table 7.1.

—F2 -

Footnotes

(continued)

3. Auerbach and Jorgenson (1980) suggest a "first—year recovery" system where
the investor receives only an immediate deduction, equal to the present

value of actual depreciation on the asset. All internally financed invest-

ments are then subject to a uniform tax rate T

, from

equation (7.6). This

is not the only linear tax system, however. At the other extreme, immediate
expensing in our simple case provides a uniform rate of zero on all inter-

nally financed assets. Brown (1981) suggests that any uniform rate between

zero and t

can be obtained by providing a common rate of grant that is

proportional not to the purchase price of the asset, but to the purchase
price minus the first—year deduction.

4.

Table 7.2 shows a small subsidy
5

percent,

for machinery

in

Sweden when r is fixed at

but that calculation considers an average over all industries,

sources, and owners. Here, when we look at machinery
we have a small positive tax at any value for

5.

In

only in

manufacturing,

r

an alternative xnethodolor, Bradford and Fullerton (1981) assume that

firms

arbitrage

between debt and real capital such that the net—of—tax

return to the corporation is equalized. Since r(l—t) would be saved by
retiring a unit of debt, the
asset using any source

discount rate, so

same aist

be earned by a new investment in any

of finance. This net rate is always the firm's

cannot affect the gross return p . However, when the
incon from the asset is retained, distributed, or paid out in interest,
m

different personal tax treatments inly that the net returns s nust
differ. Thus, when risk is ignored, one can either assume that individuals

-F3 -

Footnotes (continued)
arbitrage away differences in s ,

or

that firn arbitrage away differences

in source of finance, but not both.

6. The choice among equations (7.10) to (7.12) also affects the relationship
between inflation and effective tax rates. While curves in Figure 7.1
correspond to equation (7.10), similar curves could be plotted for each
country under each alternative assumption.

7.

See Fullerton and Gordon (1981) for soxr elaboration and testing of the idea

that replacennt of capital taxes with a labor tax of equal yield can
provide a welfare gain.

References

Auerbach, Alan J. and

Jorgenson,

D.W. 1981. Inflation—proof depreciation 01'

assets. Harvard Business Review, Vol. 58, September—October.
Bradford

and Fullerton. 1981. Pitfalls in the construction and use of effec-

tive tax rates. In

taxation

Hulten, C.R., ed., Depreciation, inflation, and the

of income from capital. Washington, D.C.: The Urban Institute.

Brown, E. Cary. 1981. The 'net' versus the 'gross' investment tax credit, in
Charles FL Hulten, ed., Depreciation, inflation, and the taxation of income

from capital. The Urban Institute, Washington, D.C.

Feldstein, Martin

term

and Summers, L.

1978. Inflation, tax rules,

and the long—

interest rate. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 61—109.

Frauinenj, Barbara M. and Jorgenson, D.W. 1980. The role of capital in U.S.
economic growth, l948—1976, in George von Furstenberg (ed.), Capital,
Efficiency and Growth, Ballinger, Cambridge, pp. 9—250.

Summers, Lawrence. 1981. The non—adjustment of nominal interest rates: A
study of the Fisher effect. National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper #836, Cambridge, Mass.

P.chinery
BuIldings
InventorIes

Households
Tax—Exempt Inst.
Insurance Co.

Tax-Exempt Inst.
Insurance Co.

1.
2.
3.

Households
Tax-Exempt inst.
Insurance Co.

Tax Rate on Capital Gains (z

3.

1-busehoids

1.

2.

Tax Rates on interest (m)

3.

2.

1.

Personal Wealth Tax Rates

2.
3.

1.

Wealth Tax Rates (w
C

V

11

T
0

S

A

0.2832
0.0
0.1765

0.3055
0.0
0.2328

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.2632
0.0
0.1765

0.4500
0.0
0.1765

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0
0.1765

02632

0.4500
0.0
0.1765

0.0
0.0
0.0

l.5)

(.05+
l.Sj)

(.05+

026

l.5u)

0.640
0.0
(.103+

0.017
0.0
0.0

l.5ff)

0.0

026

l.5)

0.640
0.0
(.103+

0.017
0.0
0.0

0.0
(.05+

0.26
0.0

0.490
0.0
(.103+
2.05,)

0.006
0.0
0.0

Retained
Earnings

0.0

0.0
0.0

0.398
0.0
0.028

0.005
0.0
0.007

Debt

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.480
0.400
0.028

0.005
0.0
0.007

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.480
0.400
0.028

0.005
0.0
0.007

Retained
Earnings

New
Shares

Debt

New
Shares

Retained
Earnings

New
Shares

Debt

Source of Finance

Source of Finance

0.0096
0.0029
0.0096

0.6200
2.2727
0.0420
0.5000

Germany

Source of Finance

0.0
0.0246
0.0

0.1357
0.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.5700
1.0000
0•0940
1.0000

0.5:200
1.4290

Sweden

U.K.

Standard Input Parameters for all Four Countries

Appendix

0.14
0.0
0.28

3.8&ii)

0.14
0.0
0.28

0.475
0.0
0.069

0.0
0.0
0.0

New
Shares

0.284
0.0
(.149+

0.0
0.0
0.0

Debt

0.14
0.0
0.28

0.475
0.0
0.069

0.0
0.0
0.0

Retained
Earnings

Source of Finance

0.00768

0.01126

0.00768

0.4450
1.0000
0.0677
0.0

U.S.

Machinery
Buildings
inventories

(f2)

Machinery
BuildIngs
InventorIes

MachInery
Buildings
inventories

MachInery
Buildings
Inventories

*

KEY:

3.

0

1

0

0

1

12

——

0

1

0

12

——

2

0.0

0.0

0.5

0.0
0.04

1.0
0.01
0.0

0.0831
0.0250
0.0

0
3
0

28

——

0.7
1.0
0.0

0.0
0.6

0.3

0.077
0.026
0.0

0.0

0.0

3
0

0

33

0

3

0

36

——

1.0

——

0.7

1.0

0.3
0.0
0.6

0.182
0.018
0.0

0.7

0.3
0.0
0.193

0.197
0.023
0.0

Manufac—
Other
turing
industry Commerce

Industry

Sweden

declining balance/straight line;

Commerce

0.0

1.0
0.5
0.0

0.1535
0.0250
0.0

0

12

——

0.0
0.5
0.0

1.0
0.5
0.0

0.0819
0.0250
0.0

Other

Industry

——

0 = exponential; 1 = straight line;
4 = U.S. only (see U.S. chapter)

InventorIes

1.Machinery
2.Buildings

Type of Depreciation
(I SUB)*

2.
3.

1.

Lifetimes CL)

2,
3.

1.

Proportion with later
Depreciation
Ct1)

I.
2.
3.

Prcportion immediate
Depreciation

3.

2.

1.

Depreciation Rates (6)

turing

Manufac—

industry

U.K.

Appendix A (continued)

3

0

1

2

30

11

1.0
1.0
1,0

0.0
0.0
0.0

11

0

1

2

30

0

1

2

30

11

1.0
1.0
1,0

0.0
0.0

1.0
1.0
1.0

0.0.

0.0
0.0

0.1566
0.0456
0.0

0.0

0.0456
0.0

0.1566

Commerce

U.S.

2

4
4
0

1.0

1.0

1,0

0.0
0.0

0.0

0

4

4

1.0
1.0
1.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.0

0.1302
0.0304

4
4
0

1.0
1.0
1.0

0.0
0.0
0.0

0.1110
0.0247
0.0

Commerce

percent for 5 years;

0.1331
0.0343
0.0

Industry
Manufac—
Other
turing
industry

straight line with extra

0.1566
0.0456
0.0

Industry
Manufac—
Other
turing
Industry

Germany

3
3
3
3

3
3

3

3

3
3
3

3
3
3

3

3
3

3
3

3
3

3
3
3
3
3
3

Asset

3

3

3

2
3

1

3

1

2

2
2
3

2
3

2

1

I

1

2
3

1

3

2

3
3
3

2

2
2

62.3
69.6
0.0
31.4
44.7
23.3
43.5
54.4

30.6

54.4

23.3
43.5

44.7

31.4

0.0

3
1

69.6

2

1

1

30.6
62.3

54.4

3
1

43.5

—108.3
—11.5
21.8
—36.6
25.8
53.2
—14.1
83.7
102.0
—108.3
—11.5
21.8
—36.6
25.8
53.2

102.0

83.7

—14.1
83.7
102.0
—108.3
—11.5
21.8
—36.6
25.8
53.2
—14.1

30.6
62.3
69.6
0.0
31.4
44.7
23.3

2

1

3

2

Ten

Zero_

52.1

—147.0
—26.8
12.7
—57.9
19.5

113.1

—57.9
19.5
52.1
—30.1
91.3

12.7

—147.0
—26.8

113.1

91.3

—30.1

19.5
52.1

—57.9

12.7

—147.0
—26.8

113.1

—30.1
91.3

81.3
80.8
—36.9
0.7
—0.6
—22.8
10.9
9.8

36.2

30.5
28.3

1.8

22.5
20.0

—12.4
36.0
9.7
53.0
77.5
57.9

148.5

158.0

97.7

84.9
64.1

18.0
59.3

45.9

—9.5

102.3
161.5
151.5

77.5
57.9

53.0

9.7

97.7
158.0
148.5
—12.4
36.0

Ten

—3.4

88.2

89.1

9.8
50.2

10.9

36.2
81.3
80.8
—36.9
0.7
—0.6
—22.8

Actual
(13.57) Zero

73.5
55.3

481

153.6
144.9
—13.1
34.7
10.5

—60.0
—8.2
63.0

111.1

—60.0
—8.2
63.0
39.6
89.9
128.0
—74.7
67.2

16.5
44.3
65.0
48.9
71.4
82.5
6.8
61.3
74.1
16.5
44.3
65.0
54.8
81.3
61.8

944

111.1

74.1

67.2

—74.7

128.0

63.0
39.6
89.9

—60.0
—8.2

111.1

39.6
89.9
128.0
—74.7
67.2

Ten

19.2

61.3

82.5
6.8

71.4

157.3
148.1

44.3
65.0

74.1
16.5

48.9
71.4
82.5
6.8
61.3

Zero

48.9

—3.6
44.9

Germany

21.4

56.6

22.2

101.6

—27.4
63.8
89.6
—15.7
22.2
64.2

42.9

42.9
33.9
75.5
67.8
7.7
53.4
38.7
21.4
56.6

38.7

53.4

21.4
56.6
42.9
33.9
75.5
67.8
7.7

38.7

33.9
75.5
67.8
7.7
53.4

Zero

—15.7
64.2
45.0
79.2

U.S.

9.2
—7.9
123.0
92.4
—90.3
53.4
—4.9
65.6
63.5
9.2

63.5

—90.3
53.4
—4.9
65.6

92.4

—7.9
123.0

9.2

65.6
63.5

—7.9
123.0
92.4
—90.3
53.4
—4.9

Ten

34.5
61.3
21.3

10.5

85.2
—58.7
53.4

5.6
107.7

34.5
61.3
21.3

10.5

—58.7
53.4

85.2

107.1

5.6

34.5
61.3
21.3

10.5

85.2
—58.7
53.4

5.6
107.7

Actual
(6.77)

inflation Rates

63.8
89.6

—27.4

101.6

22.2
64.2
45.0
79.2

—15.7

89.6

45.0
79.2
101.6
—27.4
63.8

Actual
(4.2)

inflation Rates

99.2

73.5
55.3

48.1

144.9
—13.1
34.7
10.5

153.6

94.4

(9•4)

Actual

Inflation Rates

Inflation Rates

1

3
3

3
3
3
3
3

3
3
3

2
2

2
2
2
2

2

2
2

1

1

1

1

I

1

3

1

1

2
2
2
3

2

1

1

I

1

1

I

lndusty Owner

Source
of
Finance

Sweden

U.K.

Appendix B (continued)

Glossary of Notation

This glossary includes notation defined in Chapter 2 and used through-

out the book. Notation that is specific to one country and used in a limited
context is defined at the point where it is used.

A

Percent discounted value of tax savings from depreciation allowances
associated with a unit investment.

Ad

Percent discounted value of tax savings from standard depreciaton
allowances associated with a unit investment.

A

Present value of depreciation allowances associated with a unit
investment (Ad =

a

Rate of tax depreciation on exponential basis.

a'

Rate of exponential tax depreciation before switch (

B

Declining balance rate (= 2 for double declining balance).

b

Proportion of funds allocated to IF which must be deposited in
Central Bank (Sweden).

b(n)

Value age profile of an asset (Sweden).

C

Effective cost of an asset.

Cr

Total gross dividends paid.

C

Tax on distributed profits (Germany).

Tax on undistributed profits (Germany).

B/L).

—2-

Glossary of otation (continued)

D

Economic depreciation (Sweden).

d(n)

Average age of retirement of machines (Sweden).

d1

Dummy equals unity if corporate wealth taxes deductible against
corporate tax; zero otherwise.

Dummy equals unity if asset is inventories; zero otherwise.

f(n)

Fraction of value of asset retained after n years (Sweden).

Il

Proportion of cost of asset which is entitled to standard depreciation
allowances.

Proportion of cost of asset which is entitled to immediate expensing.

Proportion of cost of asset which is entitled to cash grant.

g

Rate of cash investment grant.

H

Multiplicative coefficient (Hebesatz) for local business tax (Gewerbesteuer) (Germany).

i

Nominal interest rate.

K

Net capital stock (Sweden).

L

Asset life.

L5

Time of the asset's life for an optimal switch of depreciation method.

—3—

Glossary

of

Notation (continued)

1

Proportion of profits which may be allocated to the IF (Sweden).

M

Base rate (Mesazahi) for local business tax rate (Germany).

MRR

Gross

m

Marginal personal tax rate.

md

Marginal tax rate on dividend income (Sweden).

marginal rate of return on a project.

Hypothetical tax rate where no initial tax credit is given (Sweden).

Equivalent tax rate (Sweden).

N

Number of machines originally in a cohort of assets (Sweden).

n

Period of fiscal depreciation (Sweden).

p

Pre—tax real rate of return on a project.

p

Mean of p.

q

Ratio of market value to replacement cost (Tobin's q).

r

Real interest rate.

S(u)

Survivor curve for capital assets (Sweden).

Post-tax real rate of return to the saver.
T

Total tax liability.

—4—

Glossary of Notation (continued)

t

Marginal tax rate (v/p).

t

Average marginal tax rate (w/p).

te

Marginal tax rate on tax—exclusive basis (w/s).

u

Time index.

V

Present discounted value of profits of a project.

v

Proportion of inventories taxed on historic cost principles.

w

Tax wedge (p —

w

Mean of w.

s).

Rate of corporate wealth tax.

W
F

Rate

of Dersonal wealth tax.

Y

Corporate taxable income.

z

EFfective accrued tax rate on capital gains.

Z5

Statutory

z5SF

Equivalent tax rate on capital gains (Sweden).

rate of capital gains tax.

Proportion of net capital stock attributable to kk combination of
asset, industry, source of finance and

owner.

—5—

Glossary of Notation (continued)

Growth rate in value of shares held by investment fund (Sweden).

y

Implied deduction against tax base of insurance company (Sweden).

6

Rate of exponential depreciation.

0

Opportunity cost of retained earnings in terms of gross dividends
foregone.
-

A

Proportion

of accrued gains realized by investors in each period.

Dividend yield of investment fund portfolio (Sweden).

Rate of inflation.

p

Rate at which firm discounts net of tax cash flows.

Investor's nominal discount rate.
Rate of corporation tax.

Effective tax inclusive local business tax rate (Germany).

Te

EFfective tax rate on insurance company (Sweden).

Statutory corporate tax rate (Sweden).

