                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND THE RISE IN HEALTH SPENDING

                                             Robert E. Hall
                                             Charles I. Jones

                                          Working Paper 10737
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10737


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2004




We are grateful to Ron Lee and participants at the Summer Institute meeting of the NBER's Health and Aging
Program for helpful comments. Jones thanks the Center for Economic Demography and Aging at Berkeley
for nancial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Robert E. Hall and Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Value of Life and the Rise in Health Spending
Robert E. Hall and Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 10737
August 2004
JEL No. I1, E1

                                          ABSTRACT

Health care extends life. Over the past half century, Americans have spent a rising share of total

economic resources on health and have enjoyed substantially longer lives as a result. Debate on

health policy often focuses on limiting the growth of health spending. We investigate an issue

central to this debate: can we understand the growth of health spending as the rational response to

changing economic conditions---notably the growth of income per person? We estimate parameters

of the technology that relates health spending to improved health, measured as increased longevity.

We also estimate parameters of social preferences about longevity and the consumption of non-

health goods and services. The story of rising health spending that emerges is that the diminishing

marginal utility of non-health consumption combined with a rising value of life causes the nation

to move up the marginal-cost schedule of life extension. The health share continues to grow as long

as income grows. In projections based on our parameter estimates, the health share reaches 33

percent by the middle of the century.

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@stanford.edu

Charles I. Jones
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
chad@econ.berkeley.edu
2                             HALL AND JONES


                           1. INTRODUCTION
    The United States devotes a rising share of its total resources to health
care. The share was 5.2 percent in 1950, 9.4 percent in 1975, and 15.4
percent in 2000. Over the same period, health has improved. The life
expectancy of an American born in 1950 was 68.2 years, of one born in
1975, 72.6 years, and of one born in 2000, 76.9 years.
    Why has this health share been rising, and what is the likely time path
of the health share for the rest of the century? We present a framework
for answering these questions. In the model, the key allocative decision
is the division of total resources between consumption and health care.
Utility depends on quantity of life (life expectancy) and quality of life
(consumption). Health spending is valued because it allows people to live
longer and better lives. In our analysis, the rise in the health share occurs
because of an income effect. As consumption increases with income, the
marginal utility of consumption falls rapidly while the value of extending
life rises. As agents in our model get richer and richer, consumption rises
but they devote an increasing share of resources to health care.
    Many of the important questions related to health involve the institu-
tional arrangements that govern its financing—especially Medicare and
employer-provided health insurance. One approach would be to introduce
these institutions into our model and to examine the allocation of resources
that results.
    Instead, we take an alternative approach. We examine the allocation of
resources that maximizes social welfare in our model. This allows us to
abstract from the complicated institutions that shape spending in the United
States and to ask a more basic question: from a social welfare standpoint,
how much should we spend on health care, and what is the time path of
optimal health spending? We look at these issues from two points of view,
first under the hypothesis that historical levels of health care were optimal
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                       3

and second under the hypothesis that they were not. In the second case, we
make progress by drawing on the results of a large body of existing research
on the value of a statistical life.
  We start by documenting the aggregate facts for health spending and life
expectancy, the two key variables in our model. We then present a simple
stylized model that makes some extreme assumptions but that delivers our
basic results. From this foundation, we consider a richer and more realistic
framework and develop a full dynamic model of health spending. The
remainder of the paper estimates the parameters of the model and shows a
number of simulation results.
  Our modeling approach is closest in spirit to the theoretical papers of
Grossman (1972) and Ehrlich and Chuma (1990), who consider the optimal
choice of consumption and health spending in the presence of a quality-
quantity tradeoff. Our work is also related to a large literature on the value
of life and the willingness of people to pay to reduce mortality risk. Classic
references include Schelling (1968) and Usher (1973). Arthur (1981) and
Shepard and Zeckhauser (1984) are more recent examples that include
simulations of the willingness to pay to reduce mortality risk. Interestingly,
the simulations in these papers restrict attention to constant relative risk
aversion utility, with a curvature parameter that is between zero and one.
We will show that relaxing this assumption is crucial to explaining the rising
health share.


                              2. BASIC FACTS
  We will be concerned with the allocation of total resources to health and
other uses. We believe that the most appropriate measure of total resources
is consumption plus government purchases of goods and services. That is,
we treat investment and net imports as intermediate products. Similarly,
we measure spending on health as the delivery of health services to the
4                                                                          HALL AND JONES


                           FIGURE 1. The Health Share in the United States
    0.18



    0.16



    0.14



    0.12



    0.10



    0.08



    0.06



    0.04



    0.02



    0.00
        0

               2

                      4

                             6

                                    8

                                           0

                                                  2

                                                         4

                                                                6

                                                                       8

                                                                              0

                                                                                     2

                                                                                            4

                                                                                                   6

                                                                                                          8

                                                                                                                 0

                                                                                                                        2

                                                                                                                               4

                                                                                                                                      6

                                                                                                                                             8

                                                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                                                           2

                                                                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                                                                         6

                                                                                                                                                                                8

                                                                                                                                                                                       0
        5

               5

                      5

                             5

                                    5

                                           6

                                                  6

                                                         6

                                                                6

                                                                       6

                                                                              7

                                                                                     7

                                                                                            7

                                                                                                   7

                                                                                                          7

                                                                                                                 8

                                                                                                                        8

                                                                                                                               8

                                                                                                                                      8

                                                                                                                                             8

                                                                                                                                                    9

                                                                                                                                                           9

                                                                                                                                                                  9

                                                                                                                                                                         9

                                                                                                                                                                                9

                                                                                                                                                                                       0
     19

            19

                   19

                          19

                                 19

                                        19

                                               19

                                                      19

                                                             19

                                                                    19

                                                                           19

                                                                                  19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                       19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                     19

                                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                                   19

                                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                                                               19

                                                                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                                                                             19

                                                                                                                                                                                    20
      Note: The numerator of the health share is consumption of health services plus
      government purchases of health services and the denominator is consumption
      plus total government purchases of goods and services. For further information
      on sources, see Section 5.



public and do not include investment in medical facilities. Thus we differ
conceptually (but hardly at all quantitatively) from other measures that
include investment in both the numerator and denominator. When we speak
of consumption of goods and services, we include government purchases
of non-health goods and services.
    Figure 1 shows the fraction of total spending devoted to health care,
according to the U.S. National Income and Product Accounts. The nu-
merator is consumption of health services plus government purchases of
health services and the denominator is consumption plus total government
purchases of goods and services. The fraction has a sharp upward trend,
but growth is irregular. In particular, the fraction grew rapidly in the early
1990s, flattened in the late 1990s, and resumed growth after 2000.
                  THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                                                    5

                FIGURE 2. Life Expectancy in the United States



         78



         76



         74



         72



         70



         68



         66



         64



         62
           50

           52

                  54

                  56

                         58

                                60

                                62

                                       64

                                       66

                                              68

                                              70

                                                     72

                                                     74

                                                            76

                                                                   78

                                                                   80

                                                                          82

                                                                          84

                                                                                 86

                                                                                 88

                                                                                        90

                                                                                        92

                                                                                               94

                                                                                               96

                                                                                                      98

                                                                                                      00
         19

         19

                19

                19

                       19

                              19

                              19

                                     19

                                     19

                                            19

                                            19

                                                   19

                                                   19

                                                          19

                                                                 19

                                                                 19

                                                                        19

                                                                        19

                                                                               19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                             19

                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                    20



    Note: Life expectancy at birth data are from Table 12 of National Vital Statistics
    Report Volume 51, Number 3 “United States Life Tables, 2000", December 19,
    2002. Center for Disease Control.



  Figure 2 shows life expectancy at birth for the United States. Following
the tradition in demography, this life expectancy measure is not expected
remaining years of life (which depends on unknown future mortality rates),
but rather represents life expectancy for an individual who faces the cross-
section of mortality rates from a given year.
  Life expectancy has grown about 1.7 years per decade. It shows no sign of
slowing over the 50 years reported in the figure. In the first half of the 20th
century, however, life expectancy grew at about twice this rate, so a longer
times series would show some curvature. Whether life expectancy rises
linearly or less-than-linearly over time is somewhat open to debate in the
demography literature. Oeppen and Vaupel (2002) document a remarkable
6                               HALL AND JONES


linear increase in the upper tail of female life expectancy dating back to
1840. See Lee (2003) for an overview of this debate.


                             3. BASIC MODEL
    We begin with a model based on the simple but unrealistic assumption
that mortality is the same in all age groups. We also assume that preferences
are unchanging over time and income and productivity are constant. This
model sets the stage for our full model where we incorporate age-specific
mortality and productivity growth. As we will show in Section 4, the stark
assumptions we make in this section lead the full dynamic model to collapse
to the simple static problem considered here.
    The economy consists of a collection of people of different ages who
are otherwise identical, allowing us to focus on a representative person.
Let x denote the person’s state of health, which we will call health status.
The mortality rate of an individual is the inverse of her health status, 1/x.
Since people of all ages face this same mortality rate, x is also equal to life
expectancy. For simplicity at this stage, we assume zero time preference.
    Expected lifetime utility for the representative individual is
                                Z       ∞
                   U (c, x) =               e−(1/x)t u(c)dt = xu(c).       (1)
                                    0

That is, lifetime utility is the present value of her per-period utility u(c)
discounted for mortality at rate 1/x. In this stationary environment, con-
sumption is constant so that expected utility is the number of years an
individual expects to live multiplied by per-period utility. We assume for
now that period utility depends only on consumption; in the next section,
we will introduce a quality-of-life term associated with health. Here and
throughout the paper, we normalize utility after death at zero.
    Rosen (1988) pointed out the following important implication of a spec-
ification of utility involving life expectancy: When lifetime utility is per-
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                         7

period utility, u, multiplied by life expectancy, the level of u matters a
great deal. In many other settings, adding a constant to u has no effect on
consumer choice. Here, adding a constant raises the value the consumer
places on longevity relative to consumption of goods. Negative utility also
creates an anomaly—indifference curves have the wrong curvature and the
first-order conditions do not maximize utility. As long as u is positive,
preferences are well behaved.
  Rosen also discussed the following issue: If the elasticity of utility rises
above one for low values of consumption—as it can for the preferences
we estimate in this paper—mortality becomes a good rather than a bad.
A consumer would achieve a higher expected utility by accepting higher
mortality and the correspondingly higher level of later consumption. Thus
one cannot take expected utility for a given mortality rate as an indicator of
the welfare of an individual who can choose a lower rate. This issue does
not arise in our work, because we consider explicit optimization over the
mortality rate. An opportunity for improvement of the type Rosen identified
would mean that we had not maximized expected utility.
  The representative individual receives a constant flow of resources y that
can be spent on consumption or health:

                                  c + h = y.                                (2)

The economy has no physical capital or foreign trade that permits shifting
resources from one period to another.
  Finally, a health production function governs the individual’s state of
health:

                                  x = f (h).                                (3)

  The social planner chooses consumption and health spending to maxi-
mize the utility of the individual in (1) subject to the resource constraint (2)
8                              HALL AND JONES


and the production function for health status (3). At the optimum, the
marginal benefit of health spending, in extended lives, equals the marginal
cost. Here, and frequently in the rest of the paper, we measure costs and
benefits in terms of resources per saved life. On the benefit side, the utility
gained from saving a life is U (c, x). To translate units of utility into units of
resources, we use the marginal utility of goods consumption, u 0 (c). Thus

                                           U (c, x)
                              L(c, x) ≡                                         (4)
                                            u0 (c)
is the benefit of a life extension that saves one life.
    The marginal cost of saving a statistical life is dh/dm, where dh is the
increase in resources devoted to health care and dm is the reduction in the
mortality rate. For example, if reducing the mortality rate by .001 costs
2000 dollars, then saving a statistical life requires 1/.001 = 1000 people
to undertake this change, at a cost of 2 million dollars.
    Our model contains health status x as an intermediate variable, so it is
                                         dh        dh/dx
useful to write the marginal cost as     dm   =    dm/dx .   Since health status is
defined as inverse mortality, m = 1/x so that dm = dx/x2 . In the previous
paragraph, we required 1/dm people to reduce their mortality rate by dm to
save a life. Equivalently, setting dx = 1, we require x2 people to increase
their health status by one unit in order to save a statistical life. Since the
cost of increasing x is dh/dx = 1/f 0 (x), the marginal cost of saving a life
is therefore x2 /f 0 (x).
    The first-order condition for the optimal allocation that equates the marginal
benefit of saving a life to the marginal cost is therefore

                                             x2
                               L(c, x) =           .                            (5)
                                           f 0 (h)
    To solve further, let ηh denote the elasticity of the health technology:
                                        h 0
                                 ηh ≡     f (h),                                (6)
                                        x
                  THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                       9

and let s = h/y denote the share of resources devoted to health care. Then
the first-order condition can be written as
                                      L(c, x)/x
                            s = ηh ·            .                      (7)
                                          y
The optimal allocation of resources makes the health share proportional to
the value of a year of life L/x as a fraction of per capita income. This
first-order condition together with the production function for health status
and the definition of the value of life determine the optimal allocation of
resources in the model.
  Now suppose we ignore the fact that income and life expectancy are taken
as constant in this static model and instead consider what happens if income
grows. Despite this short-cut of using a static model to answer a dynamic
question, the results anticipate the findings in our full dynamic model. With
the value of life held constant, equation (7) implies that growing y would
cause the health share to decline. In other words, to get a rising health share,
it must be the case that the value of a year of life, L/x, rises faster than per
capita resources y. This conclusion is true as stated if ηh is constant; if this
production elasticity falls as spending rises, then the value of a year of life
needs to rise even faster than income.
  In this basic model, L/x = u(c)/u0 (c). Using this fact, we can rewrite
equation (7) as
                                  s   ηh
                                     = ,                                    (8)
                                 1−s  ηc
where ηc ≡ u0 (c) uc is the elasticity of flow utility with respect to consump-
tion. This form of the optimality condition shows several results. First, the
health share depends on the ratio of the production elasticity to the utility
elasticity. We will argue that the key to understanding the rising health
share is that the utility elasticity falls as consumption rises. This decline
leads to a rising health share provided the health production elasticity does
not fall too rapidly as spending increases.
10                             HALL AND JONES


  For a large class of utility functions, the utility elasticity declines as
consumption rises. For example, this occurs if u(c) is bounded or if u(c) =
log c. As we discuss later, for the kind of health production functions that
match the data, the production elasticity is either constant or declines. For
example, we will often assume a Cobb-Douglas health production function
such as x = (zh)θ , where z is the productivity of health resources in
producing health status. This specification implies a constant η h = θ.
Alternatively, the linear trend in life expectancy might lead one to favor a
production function such as x = φ log(zh), in which case the elasticity is
ηh = φ/x. In this latter case, the elasticity falls as life expectancy rises, so
one needs the utility elasticity to fall even faster.
  Another remark on the solution to this basic model relates to the role of the
health technology parameter z that we just introduced. Equation (8) shows
that the only way z affects the optimal health share is through the elastic-
ity ηh . For the Cobb-Douglas health production function, this elasticity is
invariant to z, so increases in health productivity do not affect the optimal
health share. Alternatively, for the semi-log specification, the elasticity
is ηh = φ/x, which declines as z rises. This suggests that technological
progress in the health sector can actually reduce the optimal health share,
other things equal. Stepping back, the general point is that our framework
does not put technical change in the health sector at the center of an explana-
tion for the rising health share; we will discuss this more in the conclusion
to the paper.
  We can also generalize the utility function to U (c, x). The solution for
this case is s/(1 − s) = ηh ηx /ηc , where ηx ≡ Ux x/U is the elasticity of
utility with respect to life expectancy. Our result, then, is that the health
share rises when the consumption elasticity falls faster than the product
of the production and life expectancy elasticities. As just one example
U (c, x) = xα u(c) delivers a constant ηx even with sharply diminishing
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                       11

returns to life expectancy (that is, α close to zero), so our main results
are unchanged in this case. In summary, our basic model suggests that
the health share rises over time as income grows if the joy associated with
living an extra year does not diminish as quickly as the marginal utility of
consumption.

                             3.1. An Example
  To illustrate some of the principles of the analysis, we calibrate the static
model to U.S. data for 1950 and 2000. In the calibration, we ignore the fact
that the planner in both cases would understand that the economy is not
static and also that mortality is far from constant by age. We tackle both
of those issues in the next section. It will turn out that the static model is
similar to the full dynamic model with age-specific mortality.
  Suppose that the flow of utility takes the constant-elastic form with an
additive constant:
                                           c1−γ
                              u(c) = b +        .                           (9)
                                           1−γ
Concavity requires γ > 0. When γ > 1, the realistic case, the base level
of utility, b, needs to be positive and large enough to ensure that flow utility
is always positive, so that the optimum occurs at an interior point. Notice
that in this case u(c) is bounded so that the elasticity ηc is decreasing in
consumption.
  In the constant-elastic case, it is straightforward to show that the value
of a year of life, L(c, x)/x, satisfies

                           L(c, x)          c
                                   = bcγ −     .                           (10)
                             x             γ−1
For γ > 1, the growth rate of the value of a life year approaches γ times the
growth rate of consumption from above. Therefore, the value of a year of
life will grow faster than consumption if γ is larger than 1. It turns out that
12                            HALL AND JONES


this is enough to get the value of a year of life to grow faster than income as
well. According to equation (7), this is one of the key ingredients needed
for the model to generate a rising health share.
  Assume the health technology also takes a constant elasticity form


                            x = f (h) = A(zh)θ ,                          (11)


where z is the productivity of health resources in producing health status
and A is a constant. This specification implies diminishing returns to adding
resources in health care if θ is below one.
  Now we pick some parameter values for this utility function and the
production function for life expectancy. According to the data underlying
the figures at the beginning of the paper, resources per capita rose from
0.315 to 1.0 (as an index based in 2000), health spending rose from 0.016
to 0.154 (in the same units), and life expectancy rose from 68.2 to 76.9 years.
We assume that health productivity, z, is normalized to one in the year 2000
and grows at a constant exponential rate; as discussed later in the paper, we
assume this growth rate is one percent per year. Fitting the life expectancy
and health spending data to our health technology, equation (11), we find
parameter values θ = 0.0438 and A = 83.46.
  We estimate the curvature parameter, γ, and the base level of utility, b, for
the constant-elastic utility function by matching the first-order condition to
the data in 1950 and 2000. Using the consumption, health spending, and
life expectancy data, we solve the two instances of the first-order condition,
for 1950 and 2000, for the two parameters. We find γ = 1.71 and b = 6.28.
  Figures 3 and 4 show the results of the model simulation with these
parameter values. Because we chose the four parameter values to match
the beginning and ending data points for each figure, the simulation results
match up nicely with the data. Projecting forward, the basic model suggests
             THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                           13

FIGURE 3. Simulation with the Basic Model: the Health Share

      Health Share, s

          0.35

           0.3

          0.25

           0.2

          0.15

           0.1

          0.05

             0
            1950                        2000                          2050
                                                               Year


Circles “o” show actual data. The solid line shows the simulated values.

 FIGURE 4. Simulation with the Basic Model: Life Expectancy

      Life Expectancy

           86

           84

           82

           80

           78

           76

           74

           72

           70

           68
           1950                         2000                          2050
                                                               Year


Circles “o” show actual data. The solid line shows the simulated values.
14                            HALL AND JONES


a health spending share of nearly 30 percent by the year 2050, when life
expectancy reaches 85 years.
  The basic mechanism of the rising health share is straightforward. Be-
cause γ is greater than one, the value of a year of life rises faster than
income. Life becomes increasingly valuable relative to consumption for a
society with these preferences.
  We can calculate exactly how valuable life becomes by computing L(c, x)
in the simulation. For the year 2000, the model implies a value of life of
$8.1 million (in 2000 prices). We will discuss the empirical literature on
the value of life in a later section, where we will conclude that this value
is probably at the upper end of the reasonable range. Taken at face value,
the model implies that aggregate health spending in 2000 was at roughly
the right level—if we believe the true value of life in 2000 was around $8
million—or was too high by roughly a factor of two if instead the true value
of life was $2 million.
  The simple model develops intuition, but it falls short on a number of
dimensions. First, the model assumes constant total resources and con-
stant health productivity—we have been flouting these assumptions in the
simulations by letting these grow. Second, the model assumes a constant
mortality rate at all ages. Finally, as we will show, in the full dynamic
model with age-specific mortality, the value of life is substantially lower.


                   4. THE FULL DYNAMIC MODEL
  We turn now to the full dynamic model, allowing age-specific mortality
and the associated heterogeneity, as well as growth in total resources and
productivity growth in the health sector. This model also incorporates a
quality-of-life component associated with health spending.
  An individual of age a in period t has an age-specific state of health, x a,t .
As in the basic model, the mortality rate for an individual is the inverse of
                 THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                           15

her health status. Therefore, 1−1/xa,t is the per-period survival probability
of an individual with health xa,t .
  An individual’s state of health is produced by spending on health h a,t :

                                xa,t = fa (zt ha,t ),                           (12)

where zt is an exogenous productivity factor that converts spending on
health ha,t into effective health input. Note that we allow the production
function for health to depend on age—mortality varies by age because of
variations in health input and variations in the effectiveness of health inputs
in raising health status.
  The starting point for our specification of preferences is the flow utility of
the individual, ua,t (ca,t , xa,t ). In addition to depending on consumption,
the flow utility of an individual also depends on her health status, x a,t .
Spending on health therefore affects utility in two ways, by increasing the
quantity of life through a mortality reduction and by increasing the quality
of life.
  For reasons that will become clear in the empirical section, we also allow
flow utility to depend on both time and age. For simplicity, we assume the
time and age effects are additive, so that

                     ua,t (ca,t , xa,t ) = ba,t + u(ca,t , xa,t )               (13)

Here ba,t is the base value of flow utility for a person of age a and u(ca,t , xa,t )
is the part that varies with the current consumption and health status. Fur-
thermore, we assume the invariant part of the utility function takes the
following form:

                                           c1−γ
                                            a,t    x1−σ
                                                    a,t
                       u(ca,t , xa,t ) =        +α      ,                       (14)
                                           1−γ     1−σ
where γ, α, and σ are all positive. The first part of this function is the
standard constant-elastic specification for consumption. We assume further
16                                    HALL AND JONES


that health status and consumption are additively separable in utility (this
implies, for example, that consumption will not depend on health status),
and that quality of life is a constant elasticity function of health status.
  In this environment, we consider the allocation of resources that would
be chosen by a social planner who places equal weights on each person
alive at a point in time and who discounts future flows of utility at rate β.
Let Na,t denote the number of people of age a alive at time t. Then social
welfare is
                        ∞
                      ∞ X
                                 Na,t β t (ba,t + u(ca,t , xa,t )) .
                      X
                                                                                      (15)
                      t=0 a=0

The optimal allocation of resources is a choice of consumption and health
spending at each age that maximizes social welfare subject to the production
function for health in (12) and subject to a resource constraint we will
specify momentarily.
  It is convenient to express this problem in the form of a Bellman equa-
tion. Let Vt (Nt ) denote the social planner’s value function when the age
distribution of the population is the vector Nt ≡ (N1,t , N2,t , ..., Na,t , ...).
Then the Bellman equation for the planner’s problem is
                                     ∞
                                     X
        Vt (Nt ) =      max                Na,t ua,t (ca,t , xa,t ) + βVt+1 (Nt+1 )   (16)
                     {ha,t ,ca,t }
                                     a=0

subject to
                          ∞
                          X
                                Na,t (yt − ca,t − ha,t ) = 0,                         (17)
                          a=0
                                                             !
                                                    1
                        Na+1,t+1 =            1−                 Na,t ,               (18)
                                                 f (ha,t )
                                           N0,t = N0 ,                                (19)

                                       yt+1 = egy yt ,                                (20)
                 THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                        17

                                   zt+1 = egz zt ,                            (21)

and subject to the production function for health status in equation (12).
The first constraint is the economy-wide resource constraint. Note that we
assume that people of all ages contribute the same flow of resources, y t . The
second is the law of motion for the population. We assume a large enough
population so that the number of people aged a + 1 next period can be taken
equal to the number aged a today multiplied by the survival probability.
The third constraint specifies that births are exogenous and constant at N 0 .
The final two constraints are the laws of motion for resources and health
productivity, which grow at rates gy and gz .
  Let λt denote the Lagrange multiplier on the resource constraint. The
optimal allocation satisfies the following first order conditions for all a:

                                uc (ca,t , xa,t ) = λt ,                      (22)
               ∂Vt+1      f 0 (ha,t )
          β             ·             + ux (ca,t , xa,t )f 0 (ha,t ) = λt .   (23)
              ∂Na+1,t+1      x2a,t
That is, the marginal utility of consumption and the marginal utility of
health spending are equated across people and to each other at all times.
This condition together with the additive separability of flow utility implies
that people of all ages have the same consumption ct at each point in time,
but they have different health expenditures ha,t depending on age.
                  ∂Vt
  Let va,t ≡     ∂Na,t   denote the change in social welfare associated with
having an additional person of age a alive. That is, va,t is the social value
of life at age a in units of utility. Combining our two first-order conditions,
we get a new version of the optimal allocation condition that we derived
before for the static model:
                         βva+1,t+1 ux x2a,t     x2a,t
                                  +         = 0        ,                      (24)
                            uc       uc      f (ha,t )
As in the earlier static model, the optimal allocation sets health spending at
each age to equate the marginal benefit of saving a life to its marginal cost.
18                                  HALL AND JONES


The marginal benefit is the sum of two terms. The first is the social value of
life from the preference side, βva+1,t+1 /uc . The second is the additional
quality of life enjoyed by people as a result of the increase in health status.
The marginal cost is the same as before—recall that the squared value of x
arises in translating changes in health status x into mortality 1/x.
  Finally, by taking the derivative of the value function, we find that the
social value of life satisfies the recursive equation:
                                           !
                                     1
     va,t   = ba,t + u(ct ) + β 1 −            va+1,t+1 + λt (yt − ct − ha,t ).(25)
                                    xa,t
The additional social welfare associated with having an extra person alive
at age a is the sum of four terms. The first is the base level of flow utility
enjoyed by that person. The second is the adjustment for the quality of life
associated with the current consumption level. The third is the expected
social welfare associated with having a person of age a+1 alive next period,
where the expectation employs the survival probability 1 − 1/x a,t . Finally,
the fourth term is the net social resource contribution from a person of age
a, her production less her consumption and health spending.

                          4.1. Relation to the Static Model
  It is worth pausing for a moment to relate this full dynamic model to the
simple static framework. With constant income y, a time- and age-invariant
health production function f (h), β = 1, and a flow utility function that does
not depend on health status, the Bellman equation for a representative agent
can be written as

        V (y) = max b + u(c) + (1 − 1/f (h))V (y) s.t. c + h = y.             (26)
                    c,h

Given the stationarity of this environment, it is straightforward to see that
the value function is just

                 V (y) = max (b + u(c)) x(h) s.t. c + h = y.                  (27)
                              c,h
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                        19

This is exactly the static model that we postulated earlier, restated in discrete
time.


                                   5. DATA
  We organize the data into 20 five-year age groups, starting at zero and
ending at 99. We consider 11 time periods in the historical period, running
from 1950 through 2000.
  We obtained data on age-specific mortality rates from Table 35 of Na-
tional Vital Statistics Report Volume 51, Number 3 United States Life Ta-
bles, 2000, December 19, 2002, Center for Disease Control. This source
reports mortality rates every 10 years, with age breakdowns generally in 10-
year intervals. We interpolated by time and age groups to produce estimates
for 5-year time intervals and age categories.
  We obtained data on age-specific health spending from Meara, White and
Cutler (2004). These data are for 1963, 1970, 1977, 1987, 1996, and 2000.
We distributed national totals for health spending across age categories,
interpolated to our 5-year age categories.
  We obtained data on national totals from Table 2.5.5 of the revised Na-
tional Income and Product Accounts of the Bureau of Economic Analysis,
accessed at bea.gov on February 13, 2004 (for private spending) and Table
3.15 of the previous NIPAs, accessed December 2, 2003 (for government
spending). Data on government purchases of health services are no longer
reported in the accounts.
  The empirical counterpart for our measure, y, of total resources is total
private consumption plus total government purchases of goods and services,
from the sources described above.
20                            HALL AND JONES


     6. ESTIMATING THE HEALTH PRODUCTION FUNCTION
  We begin by assuming a functional form for the production function of
health:

                    xa,t = fa (zt ha,t ) = Aa (zt ha,t )θa .              (28)

Notice that we allow the parameters of this production function, A a and θa ,
to depend on age.
  We also need to specify how the productivity of the health technology
changes over time. Recall that we assume exponential improvement over
time at rate gz :

                                 zt = z 0 eg z t ,                        (29)

and normalize the level of z in the year 2000 to one.
  Our procedure is to use outside evidence on gz and then to estimate Aa
and θa from data on health spending and mortality. Evidence on the value of
gz is limited to case studies of particular disorders. These studies estimate
price declines of more than 1 percent per year, but are selectively chosen.
A key contribution of these studies is to adjust for quality change. Cutler,
McClellan, Newhouse and Remler (1998) find that the real quality-adjusted
price of treating heart attacks declined by 1.1 percent per year between 1983
and 1994. Shapiro, Shapiro and Wilcox (1999) estimate a real annual rate
of decline of 1.5 percent for the price of treating cataracts between 1969 and
1994. Berndt, Bir, Busch, Frank and Normand (2000) find that the price
of treating acute phase major depression declined at an annual rate of more
than 3 percent between 1991 and 1996. See Jones (2003) for the details
underlying these numbers. We consider a benchmark value of g z = .01.
This value implies that technical change in the health sector has proceeded
at a rate that is one percentage point faster than technical change in the rest
of the economy.
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                       21

  Because health spending has grown at an annual rate of about 4.5 per-
cent, our assumption of gz = .01 amounts to assuming that increased
health spending accounts for just over 80 percent of the average decline in
mortality between 1950 and 2000. [add something about the 20 percnet]
We considered increasing gz to capture a trend in other determinants of
mortality, but we could not find evidence of any other determinants that
might have trended consistently over this period. One natural candidate is
changes in smoking behavior, but this is probably better captured as first
increasing and then decreasing over our sample period and therefore would
not explain much of the overall trend.
  To estimate Aa and θa , we take logs of the production function in equa-
tion (28) and add an error term:


                 log xa,t = log Aa + θa log(zt ha,t ) + a,t .             (30)


Our identifying assumption is that the error, a,t , has mean zero and no trend.
Accordingly, we use a GMM estimator based on the two orthogonality
conditions of zero mean and zero covariance with a liner trend variable.
Because ha,t is strongly trending, the trend instrument is strong rather than
weak and the resulting estimator has small standard errors.
  Figure 5 shows the GMM estimates of θa , the elasticity of health status,
x, with respect to health inputs, zh, by age category. The groups with
the largest improvements in health status over the 50-year period, the very
young and the middle-aged, have the highest elasticities. The fact that the
estimates of θa generally decline with age, particularly at the older ages,
constitutes an additional source of diminishing returns to health spending
as life expectancy rises.
  Figure 6 shows the actual and fitted values for two representative age
groups. Because the health technology has two parameters for each age—
22                                               HALL AND JONES


  FIGURE 5. Estimates of the elasticity of health status with respect to
health inputs

                   0.6


                   0.5


                   0.4
      Elasticity




                   0.3


                   0.2


                   0.1


                   0.0
                         0-4 5-9 10- 15- 20- 25- 30- 35- 40- 45- 50- 55- 60- 65- 70- 75- 80- 85- 90- 95-
                                 14 19 24 29 34 39 44 49 54 59 64 69 74 79 84 89 94 99
                                                          Age group

Note: The height of each bar measures the elasticity, θa , in the specification log x =
log Aa + θa log(zh). Standard errors are shown at the top of the bars.



intercept and slope—the equations are successful in matching the level and
trend of health status. The same is true in the other age categories.
  From these estimates, we can calculate the marginal cost of saving a life
at each age. However, before turning to these calculations, it is helpful
to have in mind a summary of the empirical literature on the value of a
statistical life (VSL).

                         6.1. Evidence on the Value of a Statistical Life
  In evaluating our results, three dimensions of the VSL literature are rel-
evant. We are interested in (i) the level of the VSL, (ii) the rate at which
the VSL changes over time, and (iii) how the VSL varies with age.
  Most estimates of the level of the value of a statistical life are obtained
by measuring the compensating differential that workers receive in more
dangerous jobs. Viscusi and Aldy (2003) provide the most recent survey of
                                    THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                                                        23




FIGURE 6. Estimation of the parameters of the health technology

                          110                                                                        12

                                                  Age 35-40, left
                          100                     scale                                              10


                           90
   Health status, 35-40




                                                                                                          Health status, 65-70
                                                                                                     8
                                                                                  Age 65-70,
                           80                                                     right scale
                                                                                                     6
                           70

                                                                                                     4
                           60


                                                                                                     2
                           50


                           40                                                                         0
                             0.00   0.05   0.10     0.15   0.20     0.25   0.30    0.35    0.40   0.45
                                                           Health input

 Note: The curving lines show actual health inputs zh on the horizontal axis and
 health status, x, on the vertical axis, for two age groups, 35-40 and 65-70, for
 the period 1950 through 2000. The smooth lines shows the estimated functions,
 log x = log A + θ log(zh).
24                            HALL AND JONES


this evidence and find estimates of the value of a statistical life that range
from $4 million to $9 million, in year 2000 prices.
  Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004) provide an alternative approach to
estimating the VSL. Their research design exploits the fact that states took
differential advantage of the relaxation of federal mandatory speed limits
that occurred in 1987. They find that a much lower number of 1.5 million
dollars (in 1997 prices) represents an upper bound on the VSL, suggesting
that various problems including omitted variable bias and selection prob-
lems account for the higher estimates in the labor market literature.
  How does the value of life change over time? Recall that a rising value
of life is crucial in this model to understanding the rising health share.
Unfortunately, there is relatively little empirical evidence on changes in the
value of life over time.
  Costa and Kahn (2003) appear to provide the first estimates from a con-
sistent set of data on changes in the value of life in the United States. They
use decennial census data from 1940 to 1980 and estimate the value of a
statistical life in 1980 of 5.5 million dollars (in 1990 dollars). Moreover,
they find that this value has been rising over time at a rate equal to between
1.5 and 1.7 times the growth rate of per capita GDP. Hammitt, Liu and
Liu (2000) made a similar study for Taiwan, combining a time series of
cross-sections, and they estimate an elasticity of the value of a statistical
life with respect to per capita GDP of between 2 and 3. Because life ex-
pectancy itself grows relatively slowly, these studies therefore support the
key requirement in this paper that the value of a year of life as a ratio to per
capita income is rising over time, and provide an estimate of how rapidly
the rise occurs.
  A different approach to estimating changes in the value of life finds the
opposite result, however. In addition to surveying the existing literature
that estimates the value of life at a point in time, Viscusi and Aldy (2003)
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                        25

also conduct a “meta-analysis” to estimate the elasticity of this value with
respect to income. Looking across some 60 studies from 10 countries, they
regress the average value of life estimates from each study on a measure of
average income from each study and obtain an estimate of the elasticity of
the dollar value of life with respect to income of about 0.5 or 0.6, with a 95
percent confidence interval that is typically about 0.2 to 0.8. This appears
to be consistent with several other estimates from different “meta-analysis”
studies that are also summarized by Viscusi and Aldy.
  Some additional insight on this issue comes from looking back at our
model. Recall that equation (10) in the simple model suggests that the value
of life as a ratio to life expectancy is roughly proportional to consumption
raised to the power γ. That is, in units of output, the value of a year of
life grows with cγ . One way of thinking about γ is that it is the inverse
of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution, which recent empirical work
estimates to be less than one. This suggests that γ > 1, and in fact the
values that Costa and Kahn (about 1.6) and Hammitt, Liu, and Liu (about 2
or 3) find accord well with this interpretation. Kaplow (2003) puzzles over
the low income elasticity estimates from the meta-analysis literature for a
similar reason; the recent empirical work by Costa and Kahn and Hammitt,
Liu, and Liu helps to resolve this puzzle, we think.
  Finally, we turn to evidence on variation in the value of a statistical life by
age. Aldy and Viscusi (2003) summarize the existing empirical literature,
which primarily consists of contingent valuation studies. They go on to
provide their own age-specific estimates using the hedonic wage regression
approach. Qualitatively, they support the contingent valuation literature in
finding an “inverted-U” shape for VSL by age. Quantitatively, their main
finding is that the value of life for a 60-year old is about 5.5 million dollars,
while the value of life for 30 to 40-year olds is about 2.5 to 3.0 million
dollars, a gradient of about 1/2 across these age groups.
26                            HALL AND JONES


  To summarize, we take the following stylized facts from the VSL litera-
ture. First, there is substantial uncertainty regarding the level of the VSL:
it could be as low as 1.25 million in the late 1980s, but could range much
higher to numbers like 5 million or more. These numbers are plausibly
interpreted as the value of life at some average age, which we will take to
be the 35 to 39-year olds. Second, recent estimates suggest that the VSL
grows over time, at a rate something like 1.6 or 2 times the growth rate of
income. Finally, it appears that the VSL varies with age in an inverted-U
pattern, with a relatively gentle slope, falling by about 1/2 between the ages
of 35 and 60.

                6.2. The Marginal Cost of Saving a Life
  Our estimates of the health production function allow us to calculate
the marginal cost of saving a life, given the observed allocation of re-
sources. Recall, from the discussion surrounding equation (24), that this
marginal cost is x2 /f 0 (h). With our functional form for the health tech-
nology, f 0 (h) = θx/h, so the marginal cost of saving a life is hx/θ. It is
important to realize that this calculation only involves the health produc-
tion function. For this part of the paper, the preference side of the model is
irrelevant.
  Table 1 shows this marginal cost of saving a life for various age groups.
We can interpret these results in terms of the three findings from the empir-
ical VSL literature. First, the marginal cost of saving the life of a 40-year
old in the year 2000 was about 1.4 million dollars. This lines up reasonably
well with lower end of the level estimates from the literature, for example,
the numbers from Ashenfelter and Greenstone (2004). This would suggest
that health spending was at approximately the right level as a whole for
this age group in 2000. Alternatively, of course, if one believes the higher
                  THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                                 27



                                 TABLE 1.
        The Marginal Cost of Saving a Life (thousands of 2000 dollars)
                                                                                    Growth
Age           1950              1970             1990              2000              Rate
 0-5            10                60               310              430               7.7
10-15          140               480             2,060            4,690               7.1
20-25          410             1,310             2,580            3,240               4.1
30-35          310               760             1,460            2,900               4.5
40-45          120               240               780            1,370               4.9
50-55           60               130               490              810               5.4
60-65           30               130               390              680               5.9
70-75           30               100               420              590               6.2
80-85           30               120               470              560               6.1
90-95           30               160               520              570               5.6

Note: The middle columns of the table report the value of a statistical life for various age
 groups. The estimates are calculated as the marginal cost of extending life, hx/θ, using
 the estimates of θ given in Figure 6 and using actual data on health spending and mortality
 by age. Standard errors for these values based on the standard errors of θ a are small. The
 “Growth Rate” column reports the average annual growth rate between 1950 and 2000.




estimates of the VSL from the literature, the calculation from Table 1 would
suggest that health spending for this group was too low.
  Next, the final column of the table shows the growth rate for the marginal
cost of saving a life. These growth rates are high, on the order of 5 percent
per year or more. By comparison, the empirical VSL literature finds sig-
nificantly lower growth rates. Taking income growth to be about 2 percent
per year, for example, the income elasticity from Costa and Kahn (2003)
of about 1.6 suggests that the VSL grows at a rate of 2 × 1.6 = 3.2 percent
per year. This implies that the value of life in 1950 or 1960 would have
been much higher than the marginal cost of saving a life. Therefore, we
may have been spending too little on health prior to the most recent decade,
even taking the level of the VSL from the lower end of the estimates.
28                                  HALL AND JONES




                                TABLE 2.
         The Marginal Cost of Saving a Life, Per Year of Life Saved
Age                 1950                   1970                  1990                   2000
 0-5                   0                      1                      4                      6
10-15                  2                      8                     32                     73
20-25                  8                     26                     48                     59
30-35                  8                     18                     33                     64
40-45                  4                      8                     22                     38
50-55                  3                      6                     19                     30
60-65                  2                      8                     22                     36
70-75                  3                     11                     36                     51
80-85                  6                     23                     79                     93
90-95                 21                     77                    237                    267

Note: The numbers in this table are the marginal cost of saving a life in thousands of 2000
 dollars, from Table 1, divided by life expectancy at each age. Life expectancy for this
 calculation follows the vital statistics definition. That is, it is computed using the cross-
 section of mortality rates for a given year. Therefore, the values for young ages are likely
 to be overestimates.



  Finally, in terms of variation by age, the general pattern of the marginal
cost of saving a life matches the inverted-U shape found in the VSL litera-
ture. Quantitatively, the slope of the relation appears to be slightly steeper
than what that literature finds. Another way of saying that is this: if the
value of life at age 60 is really as high as half of that at age 30, then we may
be spending too little on health at higher ages. Similarly, it appears that the
marginal cost of saving a life at very young ages is so low that additional
spending at those ages might be worthwhile.
  Another way of looking at these results appears in Table 2.                    This table
reports the marginal cost of saving a life, per year of life saved. That is,
it shows the numbers from Table 1 divided by life expectancy at each age.
For example, the marginal cost of saving an extra year of life at age 50 is
about 30 thousand dollars. Interestingly, the cost of saving a life year in
the youngest age category is only about 6 thousand dollars, while the cost
               THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                     29

for saving a life year for the oldest ages rises to well above 100 thousand
dollars.


       7. ESTIMATING THE PREFERENCE PARAMETERS
  We present results for two approaches. The first takes the observed levels
of health spending as optimal and estimates the preference parameters. The
second estimates preference parameters from the evidence in the empirical
VSL literature; it implies that health spending has been inefficiently low
during the last half century.

           7.1. Estimation Using the First-Order Condition
  Our model contains the following preference parameters: the discount
factor β, the base levels of flow utility ba,t , the consumption parameter
γ, the quality-of-life parameter σ, and the weighting parameter α. For
the moment, we consider the case where health status does not affect flow
utility so that α = 0. We will reintroduce this quality-of-life consideration
shortly.
  We have explored a variety of parametric restrictions on the base utility,
ba,t . These include making it a constant for all ages and years, making
it vary by age, and giving it a trend over time. The evidence in favor of
age effects is strong. There is evidence of trends in base utility, but not
at the same rate for different age groups. We have not found a useful
parametric restriction—candidates such as a set of age effects and a set of
time effects result in sufficiently large residuals that the other parameters
take on improbable values.
  Accordingly, we treat the values of ba,t as parameters themselves, without
imposing any restriction. Because there is one of these parameters for each
data point, estimation is a matter of solving for the values, not minimizing
a GMM norm or other criterion. Further, this means there are not enough
30                             HALL AND JONES


equations to estimate the other two parameters, β and γ. We use outside
evidence on these parameters before solving for the values of b a,t .
  With respect to the discount rate, we use the following approach: the
Euler equation for consumption with constant-elastic preferences is
                               ct
                                    = [β(1 + r)]σ                           (31)
                             ct−1
where σ is the intertemporal elasticity of substitution (see, for example,
Hall (1988)). We take its value to be 0.5, in line with a substantial amount
of research on this subject over the past two decades. r is the real return
to saving, which we take to have the value 0.05—see Hall (2003) and the
research cited there. The value of β that reconciles the observed growth
rate of consumption per person over the sample period 1950-2000 of 2.08
percent per year is 0.992, or, for the 5-year intervals in the model, 0.963.
  For the utility curvature parameter γ, we look to other circumstances
where curvature affects choice. First is intertemporal choice, as just dis-
cussed. The intertemporal elasticity of substitution, σ, is the reciprocal of
the elasticity of marginal utility with respect to consumption. If marginal
utility is quite elastic, diminishing marginal utility of future consumption
inhibits trading off future for current consumption and the intertemporal
elasticity is low. If we make an analogy between valuing future consump-
tion for the purposes of choosing its level and valuing the enjoyment of
future live for the purpose of choosing health spending and thus choosing
mortality, then we would relate our curvature parameter γ to the reciprocal
of σ, suggesting a value of 2. This value is also not too different from the
value of 1.7 we calculated in section 3.2.
  The second dimension of choice is over uncertain outcomes. Risk-averse
consumers will apply a concave utility function to those outcomes. If the
utility function has a constant elasticity, the elasticity of marginal utility is
the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Lucas (1994) discusses the evidence
                        THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                                                                         31

                    FIGURE 7. Estimates of base flow utility, ba,t



           150




           100




            50




              0




           -50




          -100




          -150
                  5-9   10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80-84 85-89 90-94 95-99




    Note: Each line shows the cross section of base levels of utility in a period. The
    periods cover 5 years each from 1950 through 2000.



on this parameter and concludes that 2 is a reasonable value. Again, if we
make an analogy between choosing among risky outcomes and evaluating
the benefit of the value of future life, we would relate our curvature param-
eter γ to the coefficient of relative risk aversion, once more suggesting a
value of 2.
  Given the data and the values of θa , β, and γ, we first calculate the
implied value of life from equation (24) and then recover the base levels
of utility from a rearranged version of equation (25). Figure 7 shows the
results of the calculations. Each line portrays the base level of utility for
every age group in a particular year, for the 11 years at 5-year intervals
from 1950 though 2000. The lines share a common pattern—negative flow
utility in the youngest group and usually in the second-youngest group, and
32                            HALL AND JONES


also negative flow utility for teenagers. Negativity of flow utility does not
contradict any principles of the model. The motivation for continuing to
live is to capture next period’s value of life. Negative flow utility marks
a difficult period of life that people choose to live through so that they
can enjoy later periods with positive utility. For older people, flow utility
stabilizes at a common, lower positive level over all periods. Flow utility
rises somewhat for the very elderly.
  We could also interpret the solved values for ba,t as the residuals from the
first-order condition in a model with a constant b. Economically, they arise
because the marginal cost of saving a life—the right side of equation (24),
with values shown in Table 1—varies considerably more across ages than
the value of life on the preference side would in the absence of variation in
b. That is, with a constant b across ages, the value of life on the preference
side—the left side of equation (24)—turns out to be relatively flat across
ages. For example, consider the marginal cost of saving a life reported
in Table 1. The only way the model can make sense of the fact that we
spend so little on health care for children from 0 to 4 and so much on those
between 5 and 9 is by having a substantially lower b for the younger group.
  These calculations provide estimates of the base level of utility during the
historical period. For our projections for the next 50 years, we need future
values of the base utility parameters. For this purpose, we make use of
additional information, namely the level of the value of life in utility units
from equation (24) in the last historical year, 2000. This level information
is not used in the calculation of the historical values of ba,t from equation
(25), which is in difference form. To make use of the level information,
we hypothesize that ba,t will not change over the future from its values in
2000. This hypothesis makes sense, because there is no systematic trend
in the historical values in Figure 7. Then we proceed in the following way:
When we solve the model for the years 2000 through 2095, we treat b a as
                        THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                                                                  33

  FIGURE 8. Comparison of historical average base utilities and values
inferred from values of life in 2000

     100

                       Solved




      50




       0




     -50


                            Historical average



    -100




    -150
           5-9   10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 60-64 65-69 70-74 75-79 80-84 85-89 90-94 95-99



    Note: The dashed line is the average of all of the lines in Figure 7 and the solid
    line is the set of base values of utility inferred from the value of life in 2000




a set of unknowns to solve and then require that the model solution match
the value of life in 2000.
  Figure 8 compares the results of the two approaches. The solid line infers
the future values of ba from the year-2000 values of life and the dashed line
is the average of all of the historical lines in Figure 7. Except for the more
erratic values for the younger groups, the match is quite good.

           7.2. Matching the Literature’s Value of Life Estimates
  For this approach, we drop the assumption that the observed data are gen-
erated by maximizing social welfare given our estimated health technology.
Instead, we take the age-specific spending data and the consumption data as
given and compute the value of life at each age, βva+1,t+1 /uc , from these
data. For future values of health spending by age, we project the existing
34                            HALL AND JONES


data forward at a constant growth rate. Until the year 2020, this growth rate
is the average across the age-specific spending growth rates. After 2020
we assume spending grows at the rate of income growth. (The rate must
slow at some point; otherwise the health share rises above one. Our results
are similar if we delay the date of the slowdown to 2050.)
  We then estimate a constant and common value ba,t = b and the curvature
parameter γ to match some estimates from the VSL literature. We start with
the estimate from Ashenfelter and Greenstone of a value of life for 35–39
year olds of $1.25 million in 1987. We project this back to 1950 and forward
to 2000, using a growth rate of 1.6 × 2.31 = 3.70 percent per year, based
on the Costa and Kahn income elasticity. By matching the value of life
for this age group in 1950 and 2000, we obtain b = 13.90 and γ = 1.584
for the case where health status does not affect flow utility (i.e. α = 0).
Finally, we recalibrate the time discount factor β to an interest rate of 5
percent based on this new value of γ.

                  7.3. The Quality-of-Life Parameters
  We know of no empirical literature that allows us to determine values
for the quality-of-life parameters σ and α. We therefore calibrate these
parameter values in the following way. Consider the following question:
What fraction of consumption would a 60 year old be willing to give up in
order to have the quality of life implied by the health status of a 35 year old?
Similarly, what fraction of consumption would an 85 year old be willing to
give up in order to have the quality of life implied by the health status of a
60 year old?
  In our model, the answer to this question is given by the value of τ that
satisfies

               c1−γ    x1−σ   ((1 − τ )c)1−γ    x̃1−σ
                    +α      =                +α       ,                    (32)
               1−γ     1−σ        1−γ           1−σ
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                      35

where we assume that x̃ is the new health status “purchased” by giving up
consumption.
  To calibrate our parameters, we assume the 85 year old would be willing
to give up 60 percent of her consumption to have the health status of a 60
year old, and the 60 year old would give up 20 percent of her consumption
to have the health status of a 35 year old. At a baseline value of γ = 2,
these data points yield parameter values of σ = 1.64 and α = 2.05. As a
check, these parameter values imply that a 35 year old would give up just
under 6 percent of her consumption to have the health status of a 20 year
old.


                       8. SOLVING THE MODEL
  We now solve the model over the sample period 1950 through 2000 and
also project the economy out to the year 2050. We solve the model using
both of our approaches to calibrating the preferences parameters (the b a,t
and γ) and using two approaches to the quality of life (α = 0 and α > 0).
When we recalibrate our other preference parameters to the α > 0 case, we
find in the first instance values of ba,t that look very similar to those shown
in Figure 7. In the second instance where we match the literature’s value
of life estimates, we obtain b = 14.516 and γ = 1.575, values very close
to the original case of α = 0.
  For the historical period, we take resources per person, y, at its actual
value. For the projections, we use the historical growth rate for the sample
period, 2.31 percent per year. During the historical period, we use the actual
age distribution of the population in the model solution. For the projections,
we get the age distribution in year t by applying the model’s mortality rate
from the previous year to that year’s population by age. At the moment, we
project births to be a constant 4 million per year and ignore immigration;
36                                 HALL AND JONES


     FIGURE 9. Simulation Results: The Health Share of Spending

     Health Share, s

         0.35
                                                        Treating observed health
                                                         spending as optimal
          0.3

         0.25

          0.2       Matching the value of life

         0.15

          0.1

                               Actual
         0.05

            0
           1950                                  2000                              2050
                                                                            Year

Circles “o” show actual data for the health share. The upward-sloping lines for the period
2005-2050 show the projected health share based on the full model where the VSL is
inferred from the health technology, as in Table 1. The gently sloping lines for the period
1950-2050 show the hypothetical historical and projected share for preferences inferred
from the VSL literature. Within these two approaches, the upper line corresponds to the
case that includes a quality-of-life term (α > 0), while the lower line does not (α = 0).



in the future, we should improve on these assumptions. The details for the
numerical solution of the model are discussed in the Appendix.
  Figure 9 shows the calculated share of health spending over the period
1950 through 2100. For the historical period, the figure also shows the
actual share.
  The rising health share observed in the data is a robust feature of the
optimal allocation of resources in the health model. For both approaches,
we find that the optimal allocation of resources involves a rising health
share. The key force at work in the model behind this result is that the
                THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                      37

marginal utility of consumption falls rapidly. Intuitively, spending an extra
dollar on consumption yields a gain of u0 (c), which goes to zero quickly,
while spending an extra dollar on health yields a gain of βvf 0 (h)/x2 . This
term also goes to zero, of course, but if the value of life is growing over
time, the decline is slower.
  It is important to be clear that this occurs as consumption is rising in
all years. Consumption grows, but at a rate that is slower than the rate of
income growth. As we get richer and richer, the most valuable thing we
have to purchase is more time to live.
  The figure shows a substantial difference between projected health shares
for the two approaches. Our first approach would match the actual health
share between 1950 and 2000 exactly. The projection based on that ap-
proach implies a rapidly growing health share in the future, reaching 34
percent in 2050. The second approach, based on the VSL estimates in the
literature, produces a much flatter health share. It suggests underspending
on health for the last 50 years. The optimal health share rises gradually in
the future, reaching only 27 percent in 2050.
  Figure 10 shows the actual and projected levels of life expectancy at birth.
For the projection based on inferring the VSL from actual spending and our
estimated health technology, the projected path does not grow quite as fast
as historical life expectancy. The slowdown is the result of the decline in
the elasticity of health status with respect to spending, θa , at high ages. It
is also interesting to notice how similar the predicted life expectancies are
in the year 2050, despite the relatively large differences in health spending
observed in Figure 9. The reason is again related to the relatively sharp
diminishing returns associated with health spending.
38                                    HALL AND JONES




        FIGURE 10. Simulation Results: Life Expectancy at Birth

     Life Expectancy


          82

          80

          78
                 Matching the value of life           Treating observed health
          76                                           spending as optimal


          74

          72
                                 Actual
          70

          68
          1950                                2000                                2050
                                                                           Year

See notes to Figure 9. Life expectancy is calculated using the cross-section distribution
of mortality rates at each point in time.
                 THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                          39

                              9. CONCLUSION
  A relatively standard economic model yields a strong prediction for the
health share. Provided the marginal utility of consumption falls sufficiently
rapidly — as it does for a widely-used specification of preferences featur-
ing a constant intertemporal elasticity of substitution less than one — the
optimal health share rises over time. The rising health share occurs as con-
sumption continues to rise — consumption grows more slowly than income.
The intuition for this result is that life is extremely valuable, and as we get
richer and richer, the most valuable channel for our spending is to purchase
additional years of life. This fundamental mechanism in the model receives
support from conventional estimates of the intertemporal elasticity of sub-
stitution and from the recent work of Costa and Kahn (2003) and Hammitt
et al. (2000), who document that the value of a statistical life appears to be
rising faster than income over time.
  The recent health literature has emphasized the importance of technolog-
ical change as an explanation for the rising health share—for example, see
Newhouse (1992). We believe that our approach is complementary to the
technological view. For example, one could imagine that the production
function for health status is xt = f (ht ) if f (ht ) < x̄t but is limited to x̄t at
higher levels of spending. The discovery of new medical technologies then
shifts out x̄t over time. Implicitly, then, we are assuming that the medical
technology shifts out rapidly enough so that this technology constraint is
not binding. In this respect, Jones (2003) considers the alternative extreme
where the technology constraint always binds.
  What our model shows is that the technological explanation only works
if preferences accommodate the rising health share. The discovery of new
drugs and medical procedures can lead the optimal health share to rise from
5 to 15 percent only if spending 15 percent on health is optimal from the
40                            HALL AND JONES


preference side. Both sides of Marshall’s scissors must be in favor of high
health spending.


            APPENDIX: SOLVING THE FULL MODEL

  We solve the model with age-specific mortality numerically using the
following procedure.

  1. Begin with a guess for per capita consumption at each date.
  2. Guess a terminal value for the value function at each age in the final
year of the simulation, 2095; we calculate v from the hypothesis that future
variables have the same value as has been projected for 2095.
  3. Iterate backwards in time using the first order condition to determine
health spending at each age and each point in time.
  4. Use this time series for health spending by age to get health status, x
and hence age-specific mortality. Iterate forward on the population equation
to get the size of the population at each age and date.
  5. Finally, for each period, the distribution of the population, the guess for
per capita consumption, and the health spending level imply a total quantity
of resources used, while the level of per capita income implies a total
quantity of resources available. Let d be the T × 1 vector of discrepancies
in the resource constraint.
  6. Use a nonlinear equation solver (fsolve in Matlab) to find the time
series for consumption that makes the discrepancy vector equal to zero.

  We use a similar procedure when we solve the complete model starting
in 2000 and match the observed values of v in 2000 from the technology
estimates. We start with guesses for both c and b and calculate discrepancies
in both material balance and in the values of v in 2000. The nonlinear
equation solver then finds values for both c and b.
  A complete solution takes about 5 seconds using a Pentium M processor.
                 THE VALUE OF LIFE AND HEALTH SPENDING                          41

                                REFERENCES
Aldy, Joseph E. and W. Kip Viscusi, “Age Variations in Workers’ Value of Statistical
    Life,” December 2003. NBER Working Paper 10199.
Arthur, W. B., “The Economics of Risk to Life,” American Economic Review,
   March 1981, 71 (1), 54–64.
Ashenfelter, Orley and Michael Greenstone, “Using Mandated Speed Limits to
   Measure the Value of a Statistical Life,” Journal of Political Economy, February
   2004, 112 (1), S226–S267. Part 2.
Berndt, Ernst R., Anupa Bir, Susan H. Busch, Richard G. Frank, and Shaon-Lise T.
    Normand, “The Medical Treatment of Depression, 1991–1996: Productive
    Inefficiency, Expected Outcome Variations, and Price Indexes,” 2000. NBER
    Working Paper No. 7816.
Costa, Dora and Matthew Kahn, “Changes in the Value of Life, 1940–1980,” May
   2003. MIT mimeo.
Cutler, David M., Mark B. McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse, and Dahlia Rem-
   ler, “Are Medical Prices Declining? Evidence from Heart Attack Treatments,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1998, 113 (4), 991–1024.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Hiroyuki Chuma, “A Model of the Demand for Longevity and
    the Value of Life Extension,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1990, 98
    (4), 761–782.
Grossman, Michael, “On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health,”
    Journal of Political Economy, March/April 1972, 80 (2), 223–255.
Hall, Robert E., “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of Political
    Economy, April 1988, 96 (2), 339–357.
    , “Corporate Earnings Track the Competitive Benchmark,” November 2003.
    Stanford.edu/ rehall.
Hammitt, James K., Jin-Tan Liu, and Jin-Long Liu, “Survival is a Luxury Good:
   The Increasing Value of a Statistical Life,” July 2000. Harvard University
   mimeo.
Jones, Charles I., “Why Have Health Expenditures as a Share of GDP Risen So
   Much?,” July 2003. U.C. Berkeley mimeo.
Kaplow, Louis, “The Value of a Statistical Life and the Coefficient of Relative Risk
   Aversion,” July 2003. NBER Working Paper 9852.
Lee, Ronald D., “The Demographic Transition: Three Centuries of Fundamental
   Change,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2003, 17 (4), 167–190.
42                            HALL AND JONES


Lucas, Deborah, “Asset Pricing with Undiversifiable Risk and Short Sales Con-
   straints: Deepening the Equity Premium Puzzle,” Journal of Monetary Eco-
   nomics, 1994, 34 (3), 325–342.
Meara, Ellen, Chapin White, and David M. Cutler, “Trends in Medical Spending
   by Age, 1963–2000,” Health Affairs, July/August 2004, 23 (4), 176–183.
Newhouse, Joseph P., “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?,” Journal
   of Economic Perspectives, Summer 1992, 6 (3), 3–21.
Oeppen, Jim and James W. Vaupel, “Broken Limits to Life Expectancy,” Science,
   May 2002, 296 (5570), 1029–1031.
Rosen, Sherwin, “The Value of Changes in Life Expectancy,” Journal of Risk and
   Uncertainty, 1988, 1, 285–304.
Schelling, Thomas C., “The Life You Save May Be Your Own,” in Jr. Samuel
   B. Chase, ed., Problems in Public Expenditure Analysis, Washington D.C.:
   Brookings Institution, 1968, pp. 127–161.
Shapiro, Irving, Matthew D. Shapiro, and David W. Wilcox, “Measuring the Value
   of Cataract Surgery,” 1999. University of Michigan mimeo.
Shepard, Donald S. and Richard J. Zeckhauser, “Survival versus Consumption,”
   Management Science, 1984, 30, 423–439.
Usher, Daniel, “An Imputation to the Measure of Economic Growth for Changes in
   Life Expectancy,” in M. Moss, ed., The Measurement of Economic and Social
   Performance, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research, 1973.
Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy, “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Criti-
   cal Review of Market Estimates throughout the World,” Journal of Risk and
   Uncertainty, 2003, 27, 5–76.
