                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 DOES THE IMPACT OF MANAGED CARE ON SUBSTANCE
                ABUSE TREATMENT SERVICES VARY BY PROFIT STATUS?

                                              Jody Sindelar
                                             Todd Olmstead

                                          Working Paper 10745
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10745


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We acknowledge financial support from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA RO1-DA14471). The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Jody Sindelar and Todd Olmstead. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Does the Impact of Managed Care on Substance Abuse Treatment Services Vary By Profit Status?
Jody Sindelar and Todd Olmstead
NBER Working Paper No. 10745
September 2004
JEL No. I1

                                            ABSTRACT

We extend our previous research by determining whether, and how, the impact of managed care on
substance abuse treatment (SAT) services differs by facility ownership.

We use the 2000 National Survey of Substance Abuse Treatment Services that contains data on

service offerings and other characteristics of 10,513 SAT facilities. For each group of for-profit, not-

for-profit, and public facilities, we estimate the impact of managed care (MC) on the number and

types of SAT services offered (i.e., indicators of the quality of care). We use IVs to account for

possible endogeneity between facilities' involvement in MC and service offerings.

We find substantial differences in the magnitude and direction of the impact of MC by facility

ownership. On average, MC causes for-profits to offer approximately four (out of 26) additional

services, causes publics to offer approximately four fewer services, and has no impact on the number

of services offered by not-for-profits.

Our findings raise concerns that managed care may reduce the quality of care provided by public

SAT facilities by limiting the range of services offered. On the other hand, for-profit clinics are

found to increase their range of services; the societal impact of this is unclear for several reasons.

Jody Sindelar                                          Todd Olmstead
Yale School of Public Health                           Yale School of Public Health
Yale University School of Medicine                     Yale University School of Medicine
60 College Street                                      60 College Street
PO Box 208034                                          PO Box 208034
New Haven, CT 06520-8034                               New Haven, CT 06520-8034
and NBER                                               todd.olmstead@yale.edu
jody.sindelar@yale.edu
INTRODUCTION

       This paper extends our previous research by determining whether, and how, the impact of

managed care on service offerings varies by the profit status of the substance abuse treatment

facility. It adds to the literature on the impact of profit status on the provision of health care and

extends this literature to the relatively less studied area of substance abuse treatment. This topic

is important for several reasons. Substance abuse is an important and costly problem, harming

abusers as well as their families, friends, and society (ONDCP 2001, Harwood, Fountain and

Livermore 1998). Effective treatment can reduce many of these costs (IOM 1990, ONDCP

1996, National Consensus Development Panel on Effective Medical Treatment of Opiate

Addition 1998, NIDA 1999). In addition, managed care (MC) has been growing rapidly in the

substance abuse treatment (SAT) field, and there is some concern that MC’s emphasis on cost-

containment may result in fewer services offered, thus reducing treatment effectiveness

(Olmstead, White and Sindelar 2004, Alexander, Lemak and Campbell 2003). Reduced

effectiveness, in turn, could have a negative impact on society through increases in crime,

welfare dependency, and spread of infectious diseases.

       Substance abuse treatment is provided by a mix of for-profit (FP), not-for-profit (NFP),

and public providers. The majority of the providers in the SAT market are NFPs and the fewest

number are publics. However, publics tend to be larger in terms of people treated per clinic.

Characteristics of SAT facilities vary systematically by ownership type for several reasons,

including differences in mission, client mix, and opportunities and constraints imposed by their

profit status. For-profits, for example, tend to serve clients who have relatively fewer

comorbidities and are privately insured or able to pay for care out-of-pocket, while publics tend

to treat clients who have relatively more comorbidities and whose care is supported by




                                                                                                       3
government financing (Rodgers and Barnett 2000, Wheeler and Nahra 2000, Ettner et al. 2003).

These differences suggest that the impact of managed care may vary by profit status.

       This paper focuses on how managed care differentially affects the range of services

offered by providers with different ownership types. Range of services is a key measure of

treatment effectiveness (Olmstead, White and Sindelar 2004). Treatment effectiveness is

improved by the availability of a range of services, including social and medical services,

necessary to meet the wide spectrum of needs faced by drug-dependent individuals (McLellan et

al. 1993, Milby et al. 1996, McLellan et al. 1998, McLellan et al. 1999, Gould, Levine and

McLellan 2000, Marsh, D’Aunno and Smith 2000, Smith and Marsh 2002). While there is a

growing interest in the effects of MC on SAT generally, relatively few studies have focused on

the effects of MC on the number and type of SAT services offered, and none of these examine

whether and by how much the effect varies by the ownership type of the provider.

       This study presents empirical evidence on these issues. Data from more than 10,000

SAT facilities in the US are used in these analyses. We use the instrumental variables approach

to identify the effects of MC on SAT service offerings, thus going beyond pure association, as is

common in this literature, to causal effects. We examine the offerings of twenty-six different

services. Because our data comprise virtually the universe of SAT facilities, our statistical power

is high and our results are nationally generalizable. Our findings should be of interest to policy

makers, researchers, patients, public and private payers, clinics and clinicians.

RELEVANT SAT LITERATURE

       A substantial body of literature addresses differences across firms by profit status

generally (Hansman 1980, Weisbrod 1988, Kapur and Weisbrod 2002, and for a summary see

Steinberg 2004). The health care delivery system, in particular, is characterized by a mix of




                                                                                                     4
NFPs, FPs, and publics in a market. With this interesting mix of ownership types, there have

been substantial analyses of differences by profit status for various types of health care markets,

e.g. hospitals (see Newhouse 1970 for a classic), nursing homes (Hirth 1999), and hospice

(Lindrooth and Weisbrod 2004, Carlson, Gallo and Bradley 2004). However, there has been

relatively less analysis of the impact of profit status in the SAT delivery system. We discuss first

literature on facility ownership in the SAT market and then briefly review literature on MC in

SAT.

Facility ownership

       Research has shown that the profit status of SAT facilities is associated with differences

in clientele, access to care, and services offered. Considerable research has shown evidence of a

two-tiered substance abuse treatment system in which FPs cater to and serve clients that are

typically privately insured (or able to pay for care out-of-pocket) and have relatively fewer

comorbidities, while publics tend to treat clients whose care is supported by government

financing and who have relatively more comorbidities (Rodgers and Barnett 2000, Wheeler and

Nahra 2000, Ettner et al. 2003).

       The relationship between facility ownership and the SAT delivery system has been

examined in a number of studies. Friedmann et al. (2003) find that, compared to publics, FPs are

twice as likely to provide “treatment on demand” (wait time of 48 hours or less for treatment

entry), but seven times more likely to turn patients away (presumably because of their inability to

pay). Alexander, Nahra, and Wheeler (2003) find that publics and NFPs are more likely than

FPs both to treat a larger percentage of clients who are unable to pay and to offer clients reduced

fees for services rendered. In addition, they find that publics and NFPs are less likely than FPs to

shorten treatment periods for their clients because of inability to pay.




                                                                                                      5
       Several studies have shown that FPs are significantly less likely than publics to offer

comprehensive services, possibly because FP clientele have less need for these services

(Olmstead and Sindelar 2004, Friedmann et al. 2003, Friedmann, Alexander, and D’Aunno 1999,

Lee et al 2001). For example, in a recent study, Friedmann et al. (2003) find that FPs are

significantly less likely than publics to offer employment counseling, mental health care, routine

medical care, and physical examinations. In an earlier study, Friedmann, Alexander, and

D’Aunno (1999) found that FPs were less likely than publics to provide TB treatment,

HIV/AIDS treatment, and mental health services.

Managed care

       Many studies have found that MC in behavioral health markets is associated with a move

away from high-cost inpatient care to less-costly outpatient venues (Ettner et al. 2003, Ettner et

al. 2003, Sturm 2000, Steenrod et al. 2001, Frank and McGuire 1997). Lemak and Alexander

(2001) find that treatment intensity (months in treatment and number of therapy sessions

involved) is negatively affected by the stringency of MC (average number of visits per patient

authorized by MC), but unaffected by the scope of MC (number of different MC oversight

activities). In contrast, Ettner et al. (2003) find that MC is associated with longer treatment

episodes, more visits per episode, and better outcomes.

       Alexander, Nahra, and Wheeler (2003) find that outpatient substance abuse treatment

(OSAT) units with either relatively low or high MC penetration are more likely to support access

to care by: (1) providing care to a higher percentage of clients unable to pay, and (2) being less

likely to shorten treatment because of client inability to pay (OSAT units with midrange MC

penetration were least likely to support access to care). And Friedmann et al. (2003) find that




                                                                                                     6
MC involvement increases the likelihood of both treatment on demand and turning patients

away.

        D’Ambrosio et al. (2003) and Alexander and Lemak (1997) both find that MC is

associated with increased administrative costs to the provider. Alexander, Lemak, and Campbell

(2003) find that MC activity has increased among SAT providers affiliated with hospitals and

mental health centers (perhaps reflecting a desire on the part of MC organizations to purchase a

more comprehensive array of services from the same provider).

        Several studies focus on the relationship between MC and the number or type of services

offered at SAT facilities. Friedmann et al. (2003) find that MC is associated with greater

availability of mental health services and routine medical care (but not financial counseling,

employment counseling, or physical exams). Durkin (2002) finds that MC is associated with a

reduction in the likelihood of providing employment counseling and financial counseling, and an

increase in the likelihood of providing routine medical care and physical exams. Olmstead,

White, and Sindelar (2004) examine a broad array of 26 SAT services and find that: (1) MC

causes SAT facilities to offer, on average, approximately two fewer services overall, and (2) this

effect is concentrated primarily in tests for infectious diseases (i.e., TB, HIV/AIDs, and STDs).

        Finally, McNeese-Smith (1998) reports that 38% of surveyed SAT program directors in

LA County eliminated some services in response to MC, and Rivers (1998) reports that 20% of

surveyed SAT program directors in Miami-Dade County claimed that MC caused reduced

availability and accessibility of SAT services.




                                                                                                    7
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

      We provide a brief conceptual framework for examining how the impact of MC on SAT

service offerings may vary by facility ownership. We draw on several lines of research which

together suggest how the impact of managed care may vary by the profit status of the facility.

Organizational type in SAT

       Theories of why a mixture of ownership types exists in some industries and not others are

largely based on market failures, government failures, and voluntary failures (for a summary see

Steinberg, 2004). In health care, NFPs and publics are likely to develop due to their charitable

goals. In the case of SAT, they may also arise due to the market failure associated with negative

externalities from substance abuse. That is, addiction to illicit drugs often produces negative

externalities (e.g. crime and spread of disease), thus society should be interested in obtaining

effective treatment for drug users.

      Providers of different ownership types will have systematically varying goals, opportunities

and constraints based on their profit status. These differences can in turn produce differences in

client mix, pricing, funding, access to care, range of services offered and behavioral response to

MC.

      For-profit firms have the goal that is clearest to articulate, they desire to maximize profits

for their owners and investors. Thus, for-profit SAT organizations typically are more concerned

with efficiency. They may want to attract those clients who will be most profitable for the

organization, that is, those who have a favorable combination of relatively low treatment cost but

high fees paid. FPs may attract these most desirable clients by providing high quality at a price

prohibitively high for those of low income or those with less generous insurance coverage. FPs




                                                                                                       8
have financial advantages in that they can raise private equity and have fewer constraints on their

property rights and transactions (e.g., they can pay managers incentives based on profits).

       Not-for-profits’ goals are less easily summarized. They may have the goal of “doing

good,” possibly reflecting the mission of the board, founders or parent organization. Potential

donors to these NFPs presumably will have goals compatible with the organization, and they will

want to ensure that donations will be used for these causes (rather than be diverted to private

gain). Due to their goal of serving communities, NFPs generally are exempt from federal, state,

and local taxes on income, property, and purchases. Although NFPs do not have access to equity

capital (as do FPs) or to tax revenues (as do publics), they have access to tax-exempt bonds,

subsidized loans, and financial contributions that are tax-deductible to the giver (Gray and

McNerney 1986, Rosenau and Linder 2003). NFPs are subject to a non-distribution constraint,

which restricts the right to pay out organization profit to managers or directors.

       Public organizations have broad social goals and are often characterized as the “supplier

of last resort” due to their concern with making services available to all individuals, regardless of

their ability to pay (Kapur and Weisbrod 2000, Ballou and Weisbrod 2003, Hodgkin et al. 2004).

Public providers of SAT may have as their mission to treat the most needy and to treat as many

of those in need as the budget will allow. The revenue of publics is based largely on the political

budgeting process whereby tax revenues are allocated at the federal and state level (Kapur and

Weisbrod 2000, Ballou and Weisbrod 2003). Publics are also subject to a non-distribution

constraint.

       Thus, differences in profit status related to differences in constraints and opportunities are

likely to lead to differences in goals, behavior, client mix and organizational responses to MC.




                                                                                                    9
    Managed care contracting

        If a provider has a MC contract in place, this implies that both the managed care

organization (MCO) and the treatment facility came to terms on the MCO’s requirements. The

SAT facility had to have agreed to the prices offered and other terms (including UR, reporting,

etc.) of the MC contract. The decision to agree to the MC contract on the part of a provider

would be a function of the characteristics of the facility, including current services offered,

current price, and administrative ability to meet reporting and service requirements (Olmstead,

White and Sindelar 2004). Viewed from the other side, the MC organization will want to

contract with a treatment facility that either already offers, or is willing to offer the quality and

services that are required by the MC organization and is also willing and able to accept the price,

UR, and reporting requirements.

       In some cases, MC may not have any impact on services or price, as the facility either

already offers the required mix (a simple matching),1 or may have the market power to resist

changes. In other cases, MC’s pricing and administrative controls may lead to changes in price,

quality, services offered, costs, reporting requirements and other.

       However, because payment for SAT is made on a per diem or weekly basis, and is typically

independent of services offered, the MCO could readily impact the range of services offered.

Core services are counseling and urine toxicology. MC may require these services but not be

willing to pay for extensive services much beyond core requirements, e.g. medical testing for

disease or transportation assistance. The overall impact of MC may be to standardize treatment,

increase assessments for UR, and possibly reduce overall treatment quality if prices of MC are




1
 For discussions on selective contracting, see Lemak, Alexander, and D’Aunno (2001), Alexander, Nahra and
Wheeler (2003), and Alexander, Lemak and Campbell (2003).


                                                                                                            10
lower than the current prices accepted (Dranove and Satterthwaite 2000, Dranove, Satterthwaite

and Sindelar 1986, Glazer and McGuire 2002).

Differential impact of MC

        MC may operate in very different settings across ownership types due to differences in

mission, client mix, regulatory constraints, and facility financing. These differences may

mitigate or exacerbate the impact of MC on service offerings. One implication of this is that

facilities should be analyzed allowing for a differential response by ownership type. Facilities

that had relatively few services prior to MC may add services required by the MCO (e.g. types of

UR). Facilities that are offered a lower price by MC may reduce service offerings beyond core

services. MC may be unwilling to reimburse for services it deems either cost-ineffective or not

“medically necessary” for treating substance abuse (e.g., ancillary services such as employment

counseling, transportation assistance and testing for diseases).

       Public facilities tend to treat clients that have relatively more problems (including social,

economic, and health-related) and offer, on average, a wider range of SAT services than do for-

profit facilities (Olmstead, White, and Sindelar 2004, Friedmann et al. 2003, Lee et al. 2001,

Friedmann, Alexander and D’Aunno 1999). Publics also tend to see themselves as the “supplier

of last resort” (Hodgkin et al. 2004, Ballou and Weisbrod 2003, Kapur and Weisbrod 2000).

And public facilities have more governmental financing, specifically block grants that provide a

lump sum to the facility and expect a large number of clients to be treated (Wheeler and Nahra

2000, Rodgers and Barnett 2000). Although it is possible that MC would cause publics to offer

an even wider range of services—say, by requiring more types of assessments—we expect that

MC will cause publics to narrow their range of services for the following reasons. First, MC

may not reimburse for services that are either cost-ineffective, not “necessary” for substance




                                                                                                   11
abuse treatment (e.g., transportation assistance, child care), or covered by another part of the

health plan (e.g., medical services such as TB testing). Second, MC may reduce overall

reimbursement levels for offered services such that publics must offset lost revenues by

eliminating “noncore” services (e.g., ancillary social and medical services)

         Private for-profit facilities have tended to offer the fewest services and tend to serve

clients who are privately insured (or able to pay for care out-of-pocket) and have relatively fewer

comorbidities. Thus MC might result in more services offered at FPs as the “quality of care”

(here measured as number of services offered) is standardized across providers. Additional

assessments might be required for UR, for example. Services offered might also increase with

MC if there is a shift by private pay patients from inpatient facilities to outpatient facilities; more

intensive services may be required for those who would otherwise be treated on an inpatient

basis. The net impact of MC might be to encourage FPs to seek out new types of clients to make

more efficient use of excess capacity.2 On the other hand, MC could have no effect if it is just a

matching process, with FPs being most able to provide the reporting required by MC.

         Given that NFPs are a hybrid of FPs and publics, it is difficult to predict the effect of MC

on the range of services offered by NFPs. A reasonable conjecture is that the effect of MC on

NFPs will lie somewhere between its effect on FPs and publics. Thus, the net impact is an

empirical issue, one which we address.




2
  FPs typically have excess capacity, as compared to publics that typically operate at or over-capacity. Being profit-
maximizers, FPs should already be offering the optimal mix of services for their targeted client base. However, if
revenues are reduced by MC, FPs may need to cover fixed costs by expanding their customer base to serve clients
that offer a lower rate of return than previously considered acceptable. These new clients, in turn, will likely require
additional services (not currently offered) to be attracted to the FPs.


                                                                                                                     12
METHODS

Data

         Data on SAT facilities were obtained from the 2000 National Survey of Substance Abuse

Treatment Services (NSSATS), a national survey administered by the Substance Abuse and

Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) that collects information on the location,

characteristics, and use of SAT facilities and services in the US (USDHHS 2002b). The list

frame for the 2000 NSSATS is the Inventory of Substance Abuse Treatment Services (I-SATS),

a continuously-updated census of all known SAT facilities, both public and private, throughout

the US and its territories. Analyses were performed separately for facilities with public

ownership, private for-profit ownership, and private not-for-profit ownership.

         Of the original census of 14,622 SAT facilities deemed eligible for the survey, 13,749 (94

percent) completed the survey.3 Of these, we exclude facilities located in other US jurisdictions

(n = 120),4 owned by federal or tribal governments (n = 481), or offering detoxification services

only (n = 41). An additional 2,594 facilities are excluded due to missing data, resulting in a final

study sample comprising 10,513 SAT facilities.5

         We supplement the 2000 NSSATS data on facility characteristics with county-specific

data from the 2002 Area Resource File (USDHHS 2002a), a database containing information on

population and managed care activity in the US.6




3
  Facilities were deemed ineligible for the survey if they were not providing substance abuse treatment as of October
1, 2002 or treated incarcerated clients only.
4
  Other US jurisdictions include the territories of American Samoa and Guam, the Federated States of Micronesia,
the Republic of Palau, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands.
5
  Facilities are not missing data in a systematic fashion, so we do not expect any bias due to missing data.
6
  The 2002 Area Resource File uses the InterStudy County Surveyor Database for the number of HMO enrollees in
each county.


                                                                                                                  13
Outcomes

       The 2000 NSSATS records whether a facility offers each of twenty-six different SAT

services. Accordingly, we use twenty-seven outcome variables to measure service offerings at a

facility. The first outcome variable is the total number of services offered at the facility (ranging

from 1 to 26), while the remaining twenty-six outcome variables are binary indicators, each one

corresponding to the presence of a specific service at the facility. NSSATS groups the twenty-

six individual services into five categories: assessment, therapy/counseling, medical testing,

transitional, and other services. Table 1 lists each of the outcome variables used in this study.

       Table 1: Summary Statistics of Outcome Variables

Regressors

       We control for a wide variety of important facility and county-specific characteristics.

Facility characteristics include the presence of managed care, focus, setting, modality,

accreditation, licensure, size, types of payment accepted, and willingness to offer payment

assistance. Our measure of managed care is whether or not the facility has a relationship with a

managed care organization, MC, set to 1 if a facility has at least one agreement or contract with a

managed care organization to provide substance abuse treatment services, and 0 otherwise.

Facility foci include substance abuse, mental health, general health, mixed mental health and

substance abuse, and other. Settings include hospital, solo practice, and halfway house.

Modalities include hospital inpatient, non-hospital residential, outpatient, and

methadone/LAAM. Finally, types of payment accepted include cash, private health insurance,

Medicaid, Medicare, state-financed health insurance, and public funds (not including Medicaid

and Medicare).




                                                                                                    14
       County-specific characteristics include population size, population density (people per

square mile), metropolitan area, competition among facilities (measured using Herfindahl

indices), and managed care activity (measured using the number of Medicare managed care and

HMO enrollees in the county). Table 2 lists each of the regressors used in this study. We control

for these variables based on earlier studies and the conceptual framework.

       Table 2: Summary Statistics of Regressors

Estimation

       We first present descriptive data by facility ownership type (i.e., publics, FPs, and NFPs).

Facilities are further subdivided by the presence of managed care. Proportions are given for

categorical variables and means for continuous variables. By comparing the characteristics of

facilities with and without MC, we can get a sense of whether differential selection of facilities

into relationships with MC is likely to confound the relationship between MC and service

offerings.

       We then use a two-equation instrumental variables (IV) approach to estimate the effect of

MC on the outcome variables. This approach allows us to account for possible endogeneity

between a facility’s involvement in MC and service offerings. Endogeneity would be present,

for example, if managed care is attracted to facilities with an unobserved (to the analyst)

propensity to offer more (or fewer) services. For example, MC may be attracted to facilities with

administrative sophistication, a trait which is unobserved to the researcher but correlated with

both service offerings and MC. With valid instruments, the IV approach accounts for

endogeneity and produces consistent estimates of the causal effect of managed care on service

offerings (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993). The IV approach is used frequently in economic




                                                                                                     15
applications and is becoming increasingly common in healthcare evaluations (McClellan and

Newhouse 2000).

       We use the following 2-equation model:

(1)    Y = βX + γMC + ε

(2)    MC = αX + κZ + µ

where Y is the outcome variable under study (i.e., either total number of services at the facility or

presence of a specific service at the facility), MC is a dummy variable indicating the presence of

managed care at the facility, X is a vector of facility and environmental characteristics, ε is the

error term for equation (1) that captures unobserved determinants of Y, Z is a vector of

instruments that influence the presence of managed care but are uncorrelated with ε, and µ is the

error term for equation (2).

       When the outcome variable in (1) is total number of services, the two-equation system is

estimated using a full-maximum-likelihood ‘treatment effects’ model (Maddala 1983) that

considers the effect of an endogenously chosen binary treatment (managed care) on another

endogenous, fully-observed, continuous variable (number of offered services). When the

outcome variable in (1) is the presence of a specific service (a binary indicator), the two-equation

system is estimated using a maximum likelihood bivariate probit model (Maddala 1983). In both

models, facilities are clustered by county to account for possible spatial correlation amongst

facilities operating in the same geographic area.

       We estimate separate models for each group of facilities (publics, FPs, and NFPs).

Specifically, we estimate a treatment effects model for the total number of services and twenty-

six separate bivariate probit models, one for each of the twenty-six specific services. The same

explanatory variables are used across the different ownership types. By estimating separate



                                                                                                      16
regressions for each profit status, we allow the coefficients on all the independent variables to

differ by ownership type. Tables are presented giving the “predictive margins.”7

        The IV approach requires finding one or more variables to be used as instruments, Z, that

substantially affect MC but have no direct impact on Y. We use two different county-specific

instruments in our model: number of Medicare MC enrollees and number of HMO enrollees.

Given that we control for county population and density, the number of Medicare MC (or HMO)

enrollees is, in essence, a percentage.

        Both instruments plausibly satisfy the first correlation condition inasmuch as SAT

facilities in counties with a large number (“percentage”) of Medicare MC (or HMO) enrollees

are more likely to have agreements or contracts with managed care than their counterparts in

counties with relatively few Medicare MC (or HMO) enrollees. Similar county-specific

environmental factors (e.g., local tastes, state/local laws, demographics) could cause this

correlation. Spillover effects of many kinds could increase the favorable climate for managed

care in SAT. As for the second condition, it seems plausible that the number of Medicare MC

enrollees in a given county is unlikely to directly influence the service-offering decisions at SAT

facilities in that county. Medicare covers primarily those 65 or older and SAT facilities treat

very few elderly (approximately 1.5% of SAT clients are 65 or older). Similarly, there is likely to

be relatively little overlap between HMO enrollees and SAT clients (about 11 percent of the total

population in the US is drug dependent and only a fraction of them seek substance abuse

treatment).

        We assess formally the validity of our instruments by testing for the presence of bias due

to weak instruments and conducting a standard test of overidentification.


7
  Predictive margins measure the difference in the expected value of the outcome when the MC indicator is changed
from 0 to 1 and all other regressors are held constant at their original values.


                                                                                                               17
RESULTS

Descriptive data by facility ownership

       Table 1 shows that, for each ownership type, MC is associated with more total services

and an increased likelihood of offering most of the specific services. For example, MC is

associated with 2.2 more services in FPs, 1.2 more services in NFPs, and 1.0 more services in

publics. However, as shown in Table 2, facilities with and without MC differ systematically in

other important ways as well. For each ownership type, for example, facilities with MC

contracts are more likely to be larger, affiliated with a hospital, accredited, and to focus on both

substance abuse and mental health. These factors could be associated with the availability of

more services, thereby explaining the positive association between MC and services. Thus, we

need to control for relevant covariates when estimating the impact of MC on service offerings.

Moreover, MC is likely to be endogenously determined. That is, there may be unobserved

factors that affect both the availability of services and the presence of MC. We now turn to the

IV models.

IV specification controlling for facility characteristics

(a) Number of services

       When we control for observed covariates and use instrumental variables to account for

possible endogeneity, the impact of MC on total services varies in magnitude and direction by

facility ownership. Table 3 shows that, on average, MC significantly widens the range of

services offered at FPs by 3.8 services, has no significant impact on the total number of services

offered at NFPs, and significantly narrows the range of services offered at publics by 3.7

services. These findings are quite different from the associations portrayed in the raw data in

Table 1.




                                                                                                   18
                    Tables 3 and 3A: IV Models: Total Services – By Ownership

         F-statistics for both the FP and NFP specifications are above 10.0, indicating that there is

unlikely to be any bias due to weak instruments in these models (Staiger and Stock 1997).

Although there may be some bias due to weak instruments in the model for publics, this bias is

probably small inasmuch as the corresponding F-statistic is statistically significant and much

larger than 1.0 (Bound, Jaeger and Baker 1995). Importantly, all three models pass the standard

test of over-identification (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993, Kennedy 1998, Greene 2003),

adding reassurance that equation (1) is specified correctly and that both instruments are valid.8

(b) Specific services

         Table 4 displays the results for the IV models corresponding to specific services offered

by each ownership type. We report only the coefficients of MC and suppress the coefficients on

the control variables to focus on the key results.

         Table 4: Coefficients on Managed Care for Specific Services – By Ownership

         The differential impact of MC on the total number of services offered by FPs and publics

appears to be concentrated primarily in ancillary service offerings. That is, MC significantly

increases the likelihood that FPs offer ancillary services such as discharge planning, housing

assistance, transportation assistance, and referrals to other transitional services. In contrast, MC

significantly decreases the likelihood that publics offer ancillary services such as tests for

medical diseases (HIV, TB), HIV/AIDs education, employment training, child care, and referrals

to other transitional services.



8
 The test statistic is calculated as N times the uncentered R2 from regressing the IV residuals on all the instruments,
and is distributed as a chi-square with degrees of freedom equal to the number of instruments in excess of the
number of explanatory variables.




                                                                                                                     19
           The effect of MC on specific services offered by NFPs is mixed. On one hand, MC

significantly increases the likelihood that NFPs offer substance abuse assessment (though the

effect is very small), urine screens, relapse prevention groups and discharge planning. On the

other hand, MC significantly decreases the likelihood that NFPs offer outcome follow-up,

employment training, and tests for medical diseases (STDs, TB).

           MC does not appear to have a differential impact across ownership types on assessment,

therapy, or counseling services. Although MC significantly impacts the likelihood of offering

several of these types of services in certain cases, there is no systematic pattern by ownership

type. This is not surprising, however, given that these services form the necessary core of SAT

and so are offered by the vast majority of facilities regardless of ownership type or the presence

of MC.

DISCUSSION

           One possible explanation for the differential impact of MC across facility ownership

types is that MC results in standardization across facilities of different profit status. That is, in

the absence of MC, we observe that FPs offer the narrowest range of services, publics the widest,

and NFPs fall in the middle. MC could be a standardizing force making the service offerings

more similar across ownership types. Thus, for-profits add services while publics reduce them.

           Another possible explanation stems from the purported existence of a two-tiered

substance abuse treatment system, in which FPs typically serve “tier 1” clients while publics tend

to treat “tier 2” clients. Public facilities may respond to cuts in reimbursements by eliminating

“non-essential” ancillary services (e.g., employment training, HIV/AIDs education) with the goal

of being able to continue to treat large numbers of the needy.9 In contrast, FP facilities might



9
    This explanation is consistent with the “supplier of last resort” model of public healthcare organizations.


                                                                                                                  20
respond to revenue cuts by attracting those “tier 2” clients who may now be financially appealing

to them.10 FPs would need to offer additional services to attract these “tier 2” clients.

         There are other possible explanations as well. For example, it may be that public and

private SAT facilities have contracts with different types of MC organizations, which in turn

may have different goals. For example, managed care associated with state funding (e.g. block

grants) may want to reduce the range of services offered in order to treat as many people as

possible with limited funds. In contrast, private health insurance may have quality of care as a

more important goal, and may therefore require additional types of treatment to increase

effectiveness and offset other medical expenses.

         The move from inpatient to outpatient care associated with MC may also differentially

impact facilities. If, for example, FPs treat more clients who, in the absence of MC, would be in

inpatient care, then their client base would need a broader range of services in the presence of

MC. Note that FPs may be more likely to treat those who otherwise would have been in

inpatient care because their client base tends to have more generous coverage (which, in turn,

may be more likely to cover inpatient care but for MC controls).

         Empirically identifying which of the above reasons best explains the observed differential

impacts, however, is beyond the capability of our data and is also beyond the scope of our paper.

         The finding that MC significantly decreases ancillary service offerings at public SAT

facilities is consistent with the view that MC reduces payments to the provider and encourages

core services at the expense of ancillary (wraparound) services. This is also consistent with

Kapur and Weisbrod (2004) and Hodgkin et al. (2004), both of whom found that public

healthcare organizations respond to funding cuts by reducing quality of care, as opposed to

10
  Being profit-maximizers, FPs should already be offering the optimal mix of services for their targeted client base.
However, if revenues are reduced by MC, FPs may need to cover their fixed costs in the short run by expanding
their customer base to serve clients that offer a lower rate of return than previously considered acceptable.


                                                                                                                   21
turning away clients (i.e., publics view themselves as the “supplier of last resort”).11 It also

supports Alexander, Lemak, and Campbell’s (2003) speculation that as MC expands into the

public SAT sector, cost containment may reduce the range and type of services available to

vulnerable populations.

        That MC significantly increases ancillary service offerings at for-profit SAT facilities

stands somewhat in contrast to Durkin (2002) and Friedmann et al. (2003). Durkin (2002) found

that MC is associated with a reduction in the likelihood of providing employment counseling and

financial counseling, but an increase in the likelihood of providing routine medical care and

physical exams. Friedmann et al. (2003) found that MC is associated with greater availability of

mental health services and routine medical care, but not financial counseling, employment

counseling, or physical exams. However, since both of these studies use a one-equation logistic

model that does not account for the endogeneity between MC and service offerings, these results

may be biased.

        This study is subject to a number of limitations. First, NSSATS records managed care as

a binary variable. Thus, we do not know the intensity, strength, or types of MC mechanisms at

each facility. Second, we know only if a service is offered—we do not know whether the service

has been received, who receives it, nor the intensity nor quality of the service. It is important to

recognize, however, that using binary indicators of specific services and MC is a conservative

approach. That is, the relatively blunt nature of binary variables could bias against finding

significant results. Third, NSSATS does not collect data on client characteristics. Thus, we



11
  We consider the range of service offerings to be one component in the quality of care. Research shows that a
greater range of services increases the effectiveness of care (NIDA 1999, McLellan et al. 1998, McLellan et al.
1999). Payment to a SAT facility is not, however, typically explicitly determined by the number or range of
services offered, but rather payment is made on a per diem or weekly basis. Thus, the range of services may be
more akin to higher amenities or quality of care that are not paid for directly.



                                                                                                                  22
cannot test how much, if any, of the total differential impact of MC on FPs and publics is due to

a “two-tiered” SAT system, as speculated above, or to other factors (e.g., standardization).

Indeed, this is an important area for future research. Finally, there may be some bias in the

results for publics due to weak instruments. However, we expect this bias to be small given that

the corresponding F-statistic (in Table 3) is both significant and much larger than 1.0 (Bound,

Jaeger and Baker 1995).

       Although we recognize that the aforementioned NSSATS data limitations constrain our

analyses, offsetting these limitations is the fact that we use almost the entire universe of SAT

facilities in our study, including data on a wide range of specific service offerings. Thus, our

statistical power is high and our results are nationally generalizable. Further, although we have

only a crude measure of MC, we are able to move the literature forward by discovering the

interesting differential impacts of MC by provider profit status. This adds to both the SAT and

ownership type literatures. Although we cannot identify with certainty the specific mechanisms

underlying the observed differential impacts, we pave the way for future research to study such

mechanisms.

CONCLUSIONS

       This study shows that the impact of MC on SAT service offerings depends on facility

ownership. Specifically, MC significantly increases the number of services offered at private

for-profits, has no significant effect on the number of services offered at private not-for-profits,

and significantly decreases the number of services offered at public SAT facilities. Moreover, it

appears that the differential impact of MC across ownership types is concentrated in ancillary

service offerings (e.g., tests for medical diseases, employment training, housing assistance, child

care, referrals to other transitional services). Our findings can be interpreted as causal, subject to




                                                                                                    23
the above limitations, because they are derived from IV models that not only control for relevant

covariates but also adjust for potential endogeneity between MC and service offerings. The

study adds to the existing SAT literature by demonstrating that the impact of MC on SAT service

offerings differs in magnitude and direction by facility ownership, and by quantifying these

differential impacts. The study also adds to the empirical literature on mixed profit status

industries by extending the analyses to SAT.

       Our findings raise policy concerns because a reduced range of ancillary service offerings

in public facilities could result in unmet needs for SAT clients in these facilities. This, in turn,

could lead to worse treatment outcomes for those in SAT as well as an increase in the negative

externalities associated with drug abuse (e.g., unemployment, crime, spread of infectious

diseases). However, the impact on society of the increase in the range of services offered by FPs

is unclear. If, for example, FPs are attracting clients who would not otherwise have received

treatment elsewhere, then the effect of MC is beneficial to both the clients and society. On the

other hand, if FPs are cream-skimming the “healthier and wealthier” tier-2 clients from NFP and

public facilities, then this would leave NFPs and publics with a client base that is less able to pay

for services, possibly forcing these facilities to cut service offerings more than would otherwise

be the case.




                                                                                                       24
REFERENCES

Alexander, J., and C. Lemak. 1997. “The Effects of Managed Care on Administrative Burden in
      Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Units.” Medical Care 35 (5):1060-8.

Alexander, J., C. Lemak, and C. Campbell. 2003. “Changes in Managed Care Activity in
      Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment Organizations, 1995-2000.” Journal of
      Behavioral Health Sciences and Research 30 (4):369-81.

Alexander, J., T. Nahra, and J. Wheeler. 2003. “Managed Care and Access to Substance Abuse
      Treatment Services.” Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research 30 (2):161-75.

Ballou, J., and B. Weisbrod. 2003. “Managerial Rewards and the Behavior of For-Profit,
       Governmental, and Nonprofit Organizations: Evidence from the Hospital Industry.”
       Journal of Public Economics 87 (9-10):1895-20.

Bound, J., D. Jaeger, and R. Baker. 1995. “Problems with Instrumental Variables Estimation
      When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous Explanatory
      Variable is Weak.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 90 (430):443-50.

Carlson, M., W. Gallo, and E. Bradley. 2004. “Ownership Status and Patterns of Care in Hospice
       – Results from the National Home and Hospice Care Survey.” Medical Care 42 (5):432-
       8.

D’Ambrosio, R., F. Mondeaux, R. Gabriel, and K. Laws. 2003. “Oregon’s Transition to a
     Managed Care Model for Medicaid-Funded Substance Abuse Treatment: Steamrolling
     the Glass Menagerie.” Health and Social Work 28 (2) 126-36.

Davidson, R., and J. MacKinnon. 1993. Estimation and Inference in Econometrics. New York:
      Oxford University Press.

Dranove, D., and M. Satterthwaite. 2000. “The Industrial Organization of Health Care Markets.”
      In Handbook of Health Economics, vol. 1A, edited by A.J. Culyer and J.P. Newhouse,
      pp. 1093-35. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Dranove D., M. Satterthwaite, and J. Sindelar. 1986. “Preferred Provider Organizations:
      Injecting Price Competition into the Hospital Market.” Inquiry 23 (4): 419-431.

Durkin, E. 2002. “An Organizational Analysis of Psychosocial and Medical Services in
       Outpatient Drug Abuse Treatment Programs.” Social Service Review 76 (3):406-29.

Ettner, S., M. Argeriou, D. McCarty, J. Dilonardo, and H. Liu. 2003. “How Did the Introduction
        of Managed Care for the Uninsured in Iowa Affect the Use of Substance Abuse
        Services?” Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research 30 (1):26-40




                                                                                             25
Ettner, S., G. Denmead, J. Dilonardo, H. Cao, and A. Belanger. 2003. “The Impact of Managed
        Care on the Substance Abuse Treatment Patterns and Outcomes of Medicaid
        Beneficiaries: Maryland’s HealthChoice Program.” Journal of Behavioral Health
        Services and Research 30 (1):41-62.

Frank, R., and T. McGuire. 1997. “Savings from a Medicaid Carve Out for Mental Health and
       Substance Abuse Services in Massachusetts.” Psychiatry Services 48 (9):1147-52.

Friedmann, P., J. Alexander, and T. D’Aunno. 1999. “Organizational Correlates of Access to
      Primary Care and Mental Health Services in Drug Abuse Treatment Units.” Journal of
      Substance Abuse Treatment 16 (1):71-80.

Friedmann, P., S. Lemon, E. Durkin, and T. D’Aunno. 2003. “Trends in Comprehensive Service
      Availability in Outpatient Drug Abuse Treatment.” Journal of Substance Abuse
      Treatment 24 (1):81-8.

Friedmann, P., S. Lemon, M. Stein, and T. D’Aunno. 2003. “Accessibility of Addiction
      Treatment: Results from a National Survey of Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment
      Organizations.” Health Services Research 38 (3):887-03.

Glazer, J., and T. McGuire. 2002. “Multiple Payers, Commonality and Free-Riding in Health
       Care: Medicare and Private Payers.” Journal of Health Economics 21 (6):1049-1069.

Gould, F., M. Levine, and A.T. McLellan. 2000. “Treating the Substance-Abusing Patient in the
       Public Sector: ‘Medical Necessity’ Versus ‘Social Necessity and Social Responsibility’
       in the Philadelphia Target Cities Demonstration Project.” Journal of Substance Abuse
       Treatment 18 (1):75-7.

Gray, B., and W. McNerney. 1986. “For-Profit Enterprise in Health Care.” New England Journal
       of Medicine 314 (23):1523-8.

Greene, W. 2003. Econometric Analysis, 5th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

Hansmann, H. 1980. “The Role of Nonprofit Enterprise.” Yale Law Journal 89 (5):835-01.

Harwood, H., D. Fountain, and G. Livermore. 1998. The Economic Costs of Alcohol and Drug
      Abuse in the United States, 1992. Rockville MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse, NIH
      Publication No 98-4327.

Hirth, R. 1999. “Consumer Information and Competition Between Nonprofit and For-profit
        Nursing Homes.” Journal of Health Economics 18 (2):219-40.

Hodgkin, D., D. Shepard, Y. Anthony, and G. Strickler. 2004. “A Publicly Managed Medicaid
      Substance Abuse Carve-Out: Effects on Spending and Utilization.” Administration and
      Policy in Mental Health 31 (3):197-17.




                                                                                             26
Institute of Medicine. 1990. Treating Drug Problems—Volume 1: A Study of the Evolution,
        Effectiveness, and Financing of Public and Private Drug Treatment Systems. Washington
        DC: National Academy Press.

Kapur, K., and B. Weisbrod. 2000. “The Roles of Government and Nonprofit Suppliers in
       Mixed Industries.” Public Finance Review 28 (4):275-08.

Kennedy, P. 1998. A Guide to Econometrics, 4th ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lee, M.T., S. Reif, G.A. Rigger, H.F. Levin, and C.M. Horgan. 2001. “Access to Services in the
    Substance Abuse Treatment System. Variations by Facility Characteristics.” Recent
    Developments in Alcoholism, vol. 15, Services Research in the Era of Managed Care, edited
    by M. Gallanter, pp.137-56. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum

Lemak, C., and J. Alexander. 2001. “Managed Care and Outpatient Substance Abuse Treatment
      Intensity.” Journal of Behavioral Health Services and Research 28 (1):12-29.

Lemak C., J. Alexander, and T. D’Aunno. 2001. “Selective Contracting in Managed Care: The
      Case of Substance Abuse Treatment.” Medical Care Research and Review 58 (4):455-81.

Lindrooth, R. and B. Weisbrod. 2004. “Do Nonprofit and For-profit Hospices Really Differ? An
       Analysis of the Hospice Industry.” Medical University of South Carolina, Center for
       Health Economic and Policy Studies (CHEPS), Working Paper #005-04.

Maddala, G. 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. New York:
      Cambridge University Press.

Marsh, J., T. D’Aunno, and B. Smith. 2000. “Increasing Access and Providing Social Services to
       Improve Drug Abuse Treatment for Women with Children.” Addiction 95 (8):1237-47.

McClellan, M., and J. Newhouse. 2000. “Introduction: Overview of the Special Supplement
      Issue.” In Instrumental Variables Analysis: Applications in Health Services Research: A
      Special Supplement to HSR, edited by M. McClellan and J. Newhouse. Health Services
      Research 35 (5), Part II.

McLellan, A.T., I. Arndt, D. Metzger, G. Woody, and C. O’Brien. 1993. “The Effects of
      Psychosocial Services in Substance-Abuse Treatment.” JAMA 269 (15):1953-9.

McLellan, A.T., T. Hagan, K. Meyers, M. Levine, F. Gould, M. Bencivengo, J. Durell, and J.
      Jaffe. 1998. “Supplemental Social Services Improve Outcomes in Public Addiction
      Treatment.” Addiction 93 (10):1489-99.

McLellan, A.T., M. Levine, T. Hagan, K. Meyers, M. Randall, F. Gould, M. Bencivengo, and J.
      Durell. 1999. “Does Clinical Case Management Improve Outpatient Addiction
      Treatment?” Drug and Alcohol Dependence 55 (1-2):91-03.




                                                                                             27
McNeese-Smith, D.K. 1998. “Program Directors’ Views of the Effect of Managed Care on
     Substance Abuse Programs in Los Angeles County.” Psychiatric Services 49 (10):1323-
     9.

Milby, J., J. Schumacher, J. Raczynski, E. Caldwell, M. Engle, M. Michael, and J. Carr. 1996.
       “Sufficient Conditions for Effective Treatment of Substance Abusing Homeless Persons.”
       Drug and Alcohol Dependence 43 (1-2):39-47.

National Consensus Development Panel on Effective Medical Treatment of Opiate Addiction.
       1998. “Effective Medical Treatment of Opiate Addiction.” JAMA 280 (22):1936-43.

National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA), National Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of
       Health and Human Services. 1999. Principles of Drug Addition Treatment: A Research
       Based Guide. NIH Publication No. 99-4180. Washington, DC: National Institutes of
       Health.

Newhouse, J. 1970. “Toward a Theory of Nonprofit Institutions: An Economic Model of a
     Hospital.” American Economic Review 60 (1):64-74.

Office of National Drug Control Policy. 1996. “Treatment Protocol Effectiveness Study: A
       White Paper of the Office of National Drug Control Policy.” Journal of Substance Abuse
       Treatment 13 (4):295-20.

Office of National Drug Control Policy. 2001. The Economic Costs of Drug Abuse in the US,
       1992-1998. Publication no. NCJ-190636. Washington DC: Executive Office of the
       President.

Olmstead, T., and J. Sindelar. 2004. “To What Extent Are Key Services Offered in Treatment
      Programs for Special Populations?” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 27 (1):9-15.

Olmstead, T., W. White, and J. Sindelar. 2004. “The Impact of Managed Care on Substance
      Abuse Treatment Services.” Health Services Research 39 (2):319-45.

Rivers, J. 1998. “Services for Substance Abusers in a Changing Health Care System.” American
        Behavioral Scientist 41 (8):1136-56.

Rodgers, J., and P. Barnett. 2000. “Two Separate Tracks? A National Multivariate Analysis of
      Differences Between Public and Private Substance Abuse Treatment Programs.”
      American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse 26 (3):429-42.

Rosenau, P., and S. Linder. 2003. “Two Decades of Research Comparing For-Profit and
      Nonprofit Health Provider Performance in the United States.” Social Science Quarterly
      84 (2):219-41.

Smith, B., and J. Marsh. 2002. “Client-Service Matching in Substance Abuse Treatment for
       Women with Children.” Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment 22 (3):161-8.



                                                                                               28
Staiger, D. and J. Stock. 1997. “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments.”
        Econometrica 65 (3):557-86.

Steenrod, S., A. Brisson, D. McCarty, and D. Hodgkin. 2001. “Effects of Managed Care on
       Programs and Practices for the Treatment of Alcohol and Drug Dependence.” Recent
       Developments in Alcoholism, vol. 15, Services Research in the Era of Managed Care,
       edited by M. Gallanter, pp.51-71. New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum.

Steinberg, R. 2004. “Economic Theories of Nonprofit Organizations.” Prepared for The
       Nonprofit Sector: A Research Handbook, 2nd ed., edited by W. Powell and R. Steinberg.

Sturm, R. 2000. “Managed Care Risk Contracts and Substance Abuse Treatment.” Inquiry 37
       (2):219-25.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration,
       Bureau of Health Professions, National Center for Health Workforce Analysis. 2002a. Area
       Resource File. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
       Administration, Office of Applied Studies. 2002b. National Survey of Substance Abuse
       Treatment Services (N-SSATS), 2000: [United States] [Computer file]. ICPSR version.
       Arlington, VA: Synectics for Management Decisions, Inc. [producer]. Ann Arbor, MI:
       Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research [distributor].

Weisbrod, B. 1998. The Nonprofit Economy. Cambridge, MA and London: Harvard University
      Press.

Wheeler, J. and T. Nahra. 2000. “Private and Public Ownership in Outpatient Substance Abuse
      Treatment: Do We Have a Two-Tiered System?” Administration and Policy in Mental
      Health 27 (4):197-09.




                                                                                              29
Table 1: Summary Statistics of Outcome Variables1

                                                                                                        Ownership Type
                                                                     Full
                                                                    Sample          For Profit             Not for Profit            Public
                                                                                 MC = 0      MC = 1      MC = 0      MC = 1     MC = 0    MC = 1
Variable Name                Definition                            N = 10,513   N = 1,283   N = 1,630   N = 2,753   N = 3,694   N = 645   N = 508
Total Services               Total number of services offered        13.70       10.67       12.88       13.60       14.78       14.54     15.58
                             at SAT facility                         (4.76)      (4.44)      (4.59)      (4.68)      (4.51)     (4.54)    (4.51)
Assessment
 Subst abuse assessment      0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.93        0.91        0.97        0.87        0.97       0.92      0.98
                             offers substance abuse assessment       (0.25)      (0.28)      (0.18)      (0.34)      (0.17)     (0.27)    (0.15)
 Mental health assessment    0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.43        0.27        0.53        0.29        0.50       0.48      0.60
                             offers mental health assessment         (0.49)      (0.44)      (0.50)      (0.46)      (0.50)     (0.50)    (0.49)
Therapy/Counseling
 Family counseling           0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.78        0.64        0.90        0.67        0.85       0.74      0.85
                             offers family counseling                (0.42)      (0.48)      (0.30)      (0.47)      (0.36)     (0.44)    (0.36)
 Group therapy               0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.89        0.81        0.86        0.88        0.93       0.92      0.95
                             offers group therapy                    (0.31)      (0.39)      (0.35)      (0.33)      (0.25)     (0.27)    (0.22)
 Individual therapy          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.95        0.93        0.96        0.93        0.97       0.94      0.97
                             offers individual therapy               (0.22)      (0.25)      (0.19)      (0.26)      (0.18)     (0.24)    (0.16)
 Pharmaco therapy            0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.41        0.24        0.42        0.27        0.51       0.50      0.63
                             offers pharmaco therapy                 (0.49)      (0.42)      (0.49)      (0.45)      (0.50)     (0.50)    (0.48)
 Relapse prevention groups   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.78        0.65        0.76        0.79        0.82       0.77      0.81
                             offers relapse prevention groups        (0.42)      (0.48)      (0.43)      (0.41)      (0.39)     (0.42)    (0.39)
 Aftercare counseling        0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.78        0.72        0.86        0.71        0.83       0.70      0.83
                             offers aftercare counseling             (0.41)      (0.45)      (0.35)      (0.45)      (0.38)     (0.46)    (0.38)
Medical Testing
 Blood alcohol test          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.45        0.38        0.46        0.38        0.50       0.47      0.57
                             offers blood alcohol testing            (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.50)     (0.50)    (0.50)
 Drug/alcohol urine screen   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.79        0.72        0.78        0.79        0.83       0.79      0.80
                             offers drug/alcohol urine screening     (0.40)      (0.45)      (0.41)      (0.41)      (0.37)     (0.41)    (0.40)
 Hepatitis                   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.24        0.17        0.21        0.21        0.27       0.29      0.32
                             offers hepatitis testing                (0.42)      (0.37)      (0.41)      (0.41)      (0.44)     (0.46)    (0.47)
 HIV test                    0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.32        0.17        0.22        0.35        0.36       0.44      0.38
                             offers HIV testing                      (0.47)      (0.37)      (0.41)      (0.48)      (0.48)     (0.50)    (0.49)
 STD test                    0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.23        0.17        0.20        0.21        0.25       0.31      0.32
                             offers STD testing                      (0.42)      (0.38)      (0.40)      (0.41)      (0.43)     (0.46)    (0.47)
 TB screen                   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility      0.36        0.25        0.30        0.36        0.39       0.53      0.47
                             offers TB screening                     (0.48)      (0.43)      (0.46)      (0.48)      (0.49)     (0.50)    (0.50)




                                                                                                                                                    30
Table 1 (continued): Summary Statistics of Outcome Variables1

                                                                                                                                   Ownership Type
                                                                                                Full
                                                                                               Sample          For Profit             Not for Profit            Public
                                                                                                            MC = 0      MC = 1      MC = 0      MC = 1     MC = 0    MC = 1
Variable Name                           Definition                                            N = 10,513   N = 1,283   N = 1,630   N = 2,753   N = 3,694   N = 645   N = 508
Transitional
 Asst obtaining social srvcs            0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                      0.51        0.25        0.34        0.58        0.60       0.56      0.69
                                        offers assistance obtaining social                      (0.50)      (0.43)      (0.47)      (0.49)      (0.49)     (0.50)    (0.46)
                                        services
 Discharge planning                     0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                      0.82        0.66        0.78        0.82        0.87       0.83      0.88
                                        offers discharge planning                               (0.39)      (0.47)      (0.41)      (0.39)      (0.33)     (0.38)    (0.32)
 Employment training                    0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                      0.36        0.22        0.23        0.48        0.36       0.41      0.40
                                        offers employment training                              (0.48)      (0.42)      (0.42)      (0.50)      (0.48)     (0.49)    (0.49)
 Housing assistance                     0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                      0.30        0.12        0.17        0.40        0.34       0.32      0.37
                                        offers housing assistance                               (0.46)      (0.32)      (0.37)      (0.49)      (0.47)     (0.47)    (0.48)
 Referral to other trans srvcs          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                      0.84        0.69        0.81        0.86        0.88       0.86      0.88
                                        offers referrals to other transitional                  (0.37)      (0.46)      (0.39)      (0.35)      (0.33)     (0.34)    (0.33)
                                        services
Other services
 Case management                        0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.66         0.49        0.56        0.71        0.71       0.71      0.78
                                        offers case management                                 (0.47)       (0.50)      (0.50)      (0.46)      (0.46)     (0.45)    (0.42)
 Child care                             0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.10         0.01        0.03        0.13        0.13       0.13      0.11
                                        offers child care                                      (0.30)       (0.11)      (0.17)      (0.34)      (0.33)     (0.34)    (0.31)
 Domestic violence                      0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.34         0.34        0.38        0.31        0.35       0.27      0.34
                                        offers domestic violence                               (0.47)       (0.47)      (0.49)      (0.46)      (0.48)     (0.45)    (0.47)
 HIV/AIDS education                     0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.55         0.40        0.43        0.61        0.58       0.65      0.59
                                        offers HIV/AIDS education                              (0.50)       (0.49)      (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.49)     (0.48)    (0.49)
 Outcome follow-up                      0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.49         0.35        0.45        0.52        0.55       0.48      0.49
                                        offers outcome follow-up                               (0.50)       (0.48)      (0.50)      (0.50)      (0.50)     (0.50)    (0.50)
 Transportation assist                  0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.35         0.10        0.23        0.42        0.40       0.44      0.47
                                        offers transportation assistance                       (0..48)      (0.30)      (0.42)      (0.49)      (0.49)     (0.50)    (0.50)
 Acupuncture                            0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                     0.05         0.03        0.04        0.06        0.06       0.07      0.10
                                        offers acupuncture                                     (0.23)       (0.16)      (0.21)      (0.23)      (0.23)     (0.25)    (0.30)
              1
               Summary statistics are sample means with standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                               31
Table 2: Summary Statistics of Regressors1
                                                                                  Full                               Ownership Type
                                                                                 Sample           For Profit           Not for Profit            Public
                                                                                              MC = 0      MC = 1      MC = 0      MC = 1     MC = 0    MC = 1
Variable Name                  Definition                                       N = 10,513   N = 1,283   N = 1,630   N = 2,753   N = 3,694   N = 645   N = 508
MC                             0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility has             0.55          0           1           0           1          0         1
                               agreements or contracts with managed               (0.50)
                               care organizations to provide substance
                               abuse treatment services
Focus: substance abuse         0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if primary focus of         0.62        0.73        0.55        0.70        0.58       0.58      0.49
                               facility is substance abuse treatment              (0.48)      (0.44)      (0.50)      (0.46)      (0.49)     (0.49)    (0.50)
                               services
Focus: mental health           0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if primary focus of         0.09        0.06        0.12        0.08        0.09       0.10      0.10
                               facility is mental health services                 (0.29)      (0.24)      (0.32)      (0.27)      (0.29)     (0.31)    (0.30)
Focus: general health          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if primary focus of         0.02        0.00        0.01        0.01        0.03       0.01      0.02
                               facility is general health care                    (0.13)      (0.06)      (0.10)      (0.11)      (0.18)     (0.10)    (0.13)
Focus: mental health &         0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if focus of facility        0.24        0.17        0.31        0.16        0.28       0.27      0.37
       substance abuse         is a mix of mental health and substance            (0.43)      (0.38)      (0.46)      (0.37)      (0.45)     (0.44)    (0.48)
                               abuse treatment services
Focus: other                   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if primary focus of         0.02        0.03        0.01        0.04        0.02       0.04      0.02
                               facility is “other”                                (0.16)      (0.16)      (0.08)      (0.20)      (0.13)     (0.20)    (0.15)
Hospital: general              0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is located      0.10        0.01        0.05        0.05        0.19       0.07      0.15
                               in, or operated by, a general hospital             (0.30)      (0.12)      (0.22)      (0.22)      (0.39)     (0.25)    (0.35)
Hospital: psychiatric          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is located      0.02        0.01        0.06        0.01        0.02       0.04      0.03
                               in, or operated by, a psychiatric hospital         (0.15)      (0.08)      (0.23)      (0.07)      (0.15)     (0.20)    (0.17)
Hospital: other specialty      0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is located      0.01        0.00        0.01        0.00        0.01       0.01      0.01
                               in, or operated by, an “other” specialty           (0.08)      (0.03)      (0.10)      (0.05)      (0.09)     (0.10)    (0.09)
                               hospital (e.g., alcoholism, maternity, etc.)
Solo practice                  0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is a            0.05        0.26        0.13        0.00        0.00       0.00      0.00
                               private solo practice                              (0.22)      (0.44)      (0.34)      (0.00)      (0.00)     (0.00)    (0.00)
Halfway house                  0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility operates        0.14        0.06        0.05        0.23        0.17       0.07      0.07
                               a halfway house for substance abuse                (0.35)      (0.24)      (0.23)      (0.42)      (0.38)     (0.26)    (0.26)
                               clients
Any hospital inpatient         0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility offers          0.07        0.01        0.09        0.02        0.11       0.06      0.10
                               hospital inpatient substance abuse                 (0.25)      (0.12)      (0.29)      (0.15)      (0.31)     (0.24)    (0.30)
                               services
Any non-hospital residential   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility offers          0.27        0.11        0.15        0.46        0.26       0.25      0.18
                               non-hospital residential substance abuse           (0.44)      (0.31)      (0.36)      (0.50)      (0.44)     (0.43)    (0.39)
                               services
Any outpatient                 0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility offers          0.83        0.94        0.92        0.67        0.86       0.81      0.88
                               outpatient substance abuse services                (0.38)      (0.24)      (0.27)      (0.47)      (0.35)     (0.39)    (0.32)
Methadone/LAAM                 0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility                 0.09        0.18        0.09        0.06        0.08       0.11      0.09
                               dispenses methadone or LAAM                        (0.29)      (0.39)      (0.29)      (0.25)      (0.26)     (0.31)    (0.29)




                                                                                                                                                           32
Table 2 (continued): Summary Statistics of Regressors1
                                                                                               Full                               Ownership Type
                                                                                              Sample           For Profit           Not for Profit            Public
                                                                                                           MC = 0      MC = 1      MC = 0      MC = 1     MC = 0    MC = 1
Variable Name                       Definition                                               N = 10,513   N = 1,283   N = 1,630   N = 2,753   N = 3,694   N = 645   N = 508
Accredited                          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is                      0.33        0.09        0.34        0.21        0.49       0.29      0.36
                                    accredited by JCAHO or CARF or NCQA                        (0.47)      (0.29)      (0.47)      (0.41)      (0.50)     (0.45)    (0.48)
Licensed by state                   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is                      0.90        0.86        0.85        0.88        0.95       0.90      0.94
                                    licensed by a state substance abuse                        (0.30)      (0.35)      (0.85)      (0.33)      (0.23)     (0.30)    (0.23)
                                    agency
Admissions (log)                    Size of facility, measured by log of annual                 4.90        4.59        4.83        4.67        5.17       4.95      5.24
                                    admissions                                                 (1.28)      (1.25)      (1.30)      (1.26)      (1.24)     (1.28)    (1.10)
Accepts cash or self-               0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility accepts                 0.93        0.97        0.99        0.82        0.97       0.87      0.97
payment                             cash or self-payment for substance abuse                   (0.26)      (0.16)      (0.09)      (0.38)      (0.17)     (0.34)    (0.16)
                                    treatment
Accepts private health              0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility accepts                 0.71        0.47        0.93        0.44        0.89       0.63      0.91
insurance                           private health insurance for substance                     (0.45)      (0.50)      (0.25)      (0.50)      (0.31)     (0.48)    (0.29)
                                    abuse treatment
Accepts Medicaid                    0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility accepts                 0.54        0.17        0.46        0.40        0.75       0.59      0.86
                                    Medicaid for substance abuse treatment                     (0.50)      (0.37)      (0.50)      (0.49)      (0.43)     (0.49)    (0.35)
Accepts Medicare                    0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility accepts                 0.36        0.13        0.38        0.21        0.52       0.39      0.60
                                    Medicare for substance abuse treatment                     (0.48)      (0.33)      (0.48)      (0.41)      (0.50)     (0.49)    (0.49)
Accepts state-financed              0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility accepts                 0.37        0.10        0.37        0.22        0.54       0.36      0.66
health insurance                    state-financed health insurance for                        (0.48)      (0.31)      (0.48)      (0.42)      (0.50)     (0.48)    (0.48)
                                    substance abuse treatment
Receives public funds (not          0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility receives                0.66        0.25        0.26        0.79        0.79       0.93      0.90
Medicare, Medicaid)                 public funds (not Medicare or Medicaid) for                (0.47)      (0.43)      (0.44)      (0.41)      (0.41)     (0.25)    (0.30)
                                    substance abuse treatment
Offers payment assistance           0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility offers                  0.79        0.66        0.71        0.74        0.88       0.84      0.93
                                    payment assistance for clients receiving                   (0.40)      (0.47)      (0.45)      (0.44)      (0.32)     (0.37)    (0.26)
                                    substance abuse treatment
Metropolitan area                   0-1 dummy variable, = 1 if facility is located              0.77        0.85        0.84        0.81        0.74       0.63      0.51
                                    within a metropolitan area                                 (0.42)      (0.35)      (0.36)      (0.39)      (0.44)     (0.48)    (0.50)
Population density –                Log of the number of people in the county                   6.07        6.13        6.27        6.36        6.00       5.45      5.07
county (log)                        per square mile                                            (1.92)      (1.58)      (1.68)      (2.04)      (1.92)     (2.13)    (1.92)
Population – county (log)           Log of the county population                               12.61       12.82       12.82       12.93       12.47      11.93     11.49
                                                                                               (1.63)      (1.49)      (1.39)      (1.67)      (1.63)     (1.69)    (1.57)
Competition – county                Herfindahl Index in the county                              0.26        0.23        0.21        0.23        0.28       0.38      0.45
                                                                                               (0.28)      (0.23)      (0.21)      (0.25)      (0.29)     (0.33)    (0.33)
Medicare MC enrollees –             Log of Medicare managed care enrollees                      7.84        8.18        8.22        8.38        7.72       6.35      5.57
county (log)                        in the county                                              (3.27)      (3.01)      (2.88)      (3.26)      (3.25)     (3.47)    (3.41)
HMO enrollees –                     Log of HMO enrollees in the county                         10.70       11.03       11.15       11.08       10.60       9.31      8.83
county (log)                                                                                   (3.07)      (2.75)      (2.46)      (3.19)      (2.98)     (3.69)    (3.51)
             1
              Summary statistics are sample means with standard deviations in parentheses.




                                                                                                                                                                        33
Table 3: Total Services – Structural Equation Results

                                                     For Profit       Not for Profit        Public
                                                     N = 2,913         N = 6,447           N = 1,153
Variable Name                                      Coef     P_value   Coef     P_value   Coef     P_value
Managed care                                       3.818    0.000     -0.889   0.348     -3.725   0.001
                            †
Focus: substance abuse                             -0.351   0.666     0.587    0.087     -0.023   0.976
                        †
Focus: mental health                               -0.976   0.280     0.328    0.391     -0.495   0.577
                         †
Focus: general health                              0.246    0.830     2.436    0.000     2.801    0.011
                              †
Focus: mental & substance                          0.173    0.835     1.394    0.000     0.969    0.241
                  ‡
Hospital: general                                  1.271    0.019     -0.020   0.946     1.074    0.059
                      ‡
Hospital: psychiatric                              1.729    0.009     0.941    0.022     2.317    0.007
                           ‡
Hospital: other specialty                          -1.535   0.036     1.121    0.044     2.315    0.053
Solo practice                                      -0.526   0.013      N/A                N/A
Halfway house                                      1.074    0.017     0.063    0.758     0.357    0.511
Any hospital inpatient                             2.450    0.000     2.622    0.000     0.833    0.229
Any non-hospital residential                       3.361    0.000     2.960    0.000     2.240    0.000
Any outpatient                                     0.610    0.161     1.034    0.000     0.060    0.911
Methadone/LAAM dispensed                           3.542    0.000     2.277    0.000     1.997    0.000
Accredited                                         0.613    0.007     0.705    0.000     0.900    0.014
Licensed by state                                  1.123    0.000     0.716    0.002     1.070    0.050
Admissions (log)                                   0.346    0.000     0.326    0.000     0.525    0.000
Accepts cash or self-payment                       -0.742   0.296     -0.904   0.000     0.599    0.388
Accepts private health insurance                   -0.525   0.133     0.642    0.099     2.047    0.000
Accepts Medicaid                                   0.281    0.239     0.920    0.000     0.600    0.213
Accepts Medicare                                   0.251    0.282     0.545    0.002     0.262    0.503
Accepts state-financed health insurance            0.529    0.011     0.721    0.000     0.784    0.025
Receives public funds (not Medicare, Medicaid)     0.545    0.013     1.235    0.000     0.971    0.113
Offers payment assistance                          1.108    0.000     0.936    0.000     1.286    0.017
Metropolitan area                                  -0.133   0.663     -0.472   0.037     -0.453   0.347
Population density – county (log)                  0.052    0.498     0.239    0.006     0.249    0.119
Population – county (log)                          0.080    0.538     0.149    0.168     0.434    0.112
Competition – county                               0.722    0.199     -0.805   0.033     0.970    0.226
Constant                                           4.129    0.030     4.066    0.001     -0.209   0.945

F-statistic for instruments (statistic, p_value)   10.88    0.004     49.49    0.000     5.35     0.069
Test of overidentification (statistic, p_value)     1.12    0.289      2.57    0.109     0.23     0.633
  †
   excluded category is “other”
  ‡
   excluded category is “not a hospital”




                                                                                                   34
Table 3A: Total Services – Selection Equation Results

                                                   For Profit       Not for Profit        Public
                                                   N = 2,913         N = 6,447           N = 1,153
Variable Name                                    Coef     P_value   Coef     P_value   Coef     P_value
Medicare MC enrollments (log)                    0.049    0.015     0.066    0.000     0.016    0.533
HMO enrollments (log)                            0.024    0.183     0.066    0.000     0.045    0.036
                            †
Focus: substance abuse                           0.261    0.359     0.052    0.666     -0.034   0.904
                        †
Focus: mental health                             0.320    0.308     -0.169   0.216     -0.130   0.670
                         †
Focus: general health                            0.031    0.949     0.115    0.565     0.392    0.369
                              †
Focus: mental & substance                        0.519    0.082     0.092    0.484     0.010    0.973
                  ‡
Hospital: general                                -0.070   0.754     0.340    0.004     0.432    0.028
                      ‡
Hospital: psychiatric                            -0.023   0.933     0.332    0.048     -0.380   0.176
                           ‡
Hospital: other specialty                        0.332    0.418     0.167    0.560     0.150    0.686
Solo practice                                    -0.252   0.001      N/A                N/A
Halfway house                                    -0.116   0.507     0.164    0.007     0.077    0.635
Any hospital inpatient                           0.184    0.376     0.303    0.002     0.042    0.842
Any non-hospital residential                     0.114    0.326     -0.024   0.689     -0.028   0.825
Any outpatient                                   0.011    0.953     0.233    0.000     0.039    0.796
Methadone/LAAM dispensed                         -0.451   0.000     -0.200   0.037     -0.010   0.947
Accredited                                       0.486    0.000     0.287    0.000     -0.032   0.766
Licensed by state                                0.177    0.034     0.284    0.001     0.224    0.221
Admissions (log)                                 0.086    0.002     0.106    0.000     0.136    0.000
Accepts cash or self-payment                     0.153    0.551     0.222    0.022     0.058    0.797
Accepts private health insurance                 1.326    0.000     0.915    0.000     0.473    0.002
Accepts Medicaid                                 0.395    0.000     0.303    0.000     0.509    0.000
Accepts Medicare                                 0.190    0.015     0.135    0.009     -0.060   0.583
Accepts state-financed health insurance          0.379    0.000     0.278    0.000     0.359    0.000
Receives public funds (not Medicare, Medicaid)   -0.015   0.847     0.043    0.556     -0.353   0.044
Offers payment assistance                        -0.072   0.248     0.095    0.108     0.152    0.379
Metropolitan area                                -0.304   0.005     -0.052   0.544     -0.106   0.487
Population density – county (log)                0.056    0.082     -0.015   0.588     0.032    0.573
Population – county (log)                        -0.141   0.041     -0.226   0.000     -0.216   0.034
Competition – county                             -0.440   0.032     -0.197   0.144     -0.228   0.344
Constant                                         -0.940   0.210     -0.483   0.267     0.157    0.874
  †
   excluded category is “other”
  ‡
   excluded category is “not a hospital”




                                                                                                 35
Table 4: Effects of Managed Care on Individual Services†

                                  For Profit           Not for Profit              Public
                               Coef      Marginal*    Coef     Marginal*    Coef      Marginal*

Assessment
 Substance abuse assessment    0.355       0.020      0.616      0.024      0.950        0.030
                              (0.440)     (0.480)    (0.001)    (0.036)    (0.039)      (0.299)
Mental health assessment       0.477       0.126      0.374      0.093      0.078        0.016
                              (0.167)     (0.159)    (0.539)    (0.523)        .       (<0.001)

Therapy/Counseling
 Family counseling              0.973      0.269      -0.197     -0.048     0.606       0.161
                               (0.275)    (0.319)    (0.378)    (0.374)    (0.584)     (0.590)
 Group therapy                  0.478      0.057       0.194     0.017      0.422       0.034
                               (0.298)    (0.379)    (0.320)    (0.358)    (0.301)     (0.343)
 Individual therapy            -1.258      -0.196     -0.026     -0.001     0.562       0.039
                               (0.002)    (0.055)    (0.896)    (0.895)    (0.217)     (0.273)
 Pharmaco therapy               1.098      0.249      0.217      0.056      -1.012      -0.372
                              (<0.001)   (<0.001)    (0.617)    (0.605)    (0.019)     (0.012)
 Relapse prevention groups      1.268      0.362      0.490      0.140      0.044       0.015
                              (<0.001)   (<0.001)    (0.084)    (0.111)    (0.973)     (0.973)
 Aftercare counseling           0.950      0.173      -0.352     -0.074     0.347       0.089
                               (0.287)    (0.417)    (0.121)    (0.118)    (0.636)     (0.630)

Medical Testing
 Blood alcohol test             0.033      0.013      0.116      0.042       -1.228     -0.459
                               (0.930)    (0.930)    (0.874)    (0.873)     (0.006)     (0.002)
 Drug/alcohol urine screen      1.093      0.313      0.452      0.120       -0.292     -0.065
                              (<0.001)   (<0.001)    (0.070)    (0.095)     (0.803)     (0.809)
 Hepatitis                      0.388      0.028      -0.381     -0.062      -0.792     -0.202
                               (0.795)    (0.812)    (0.259)        .       (0.068)     (0.100)
 HIV test                       -0.062     -0.006     -0.539     -0.182      -1.487      -0.543
                                   .     (<0.001)    (0.134)    (0.150)    (<0.001)    (<0.001)
 STD test                       -0.093     -0.005     -0.630     -0.122      -0.930     -0.239
                                   .     (<0.001)    (0.011)    (0.041)     (0.227)     (0.288)
 TB screen                      0.826      0.107      -0.611     -0.189      -1.533      -0.549
                               (0.094)    (0.181)    (0.063)    (0.089)    (<0.001)    (<0.001)




                                                                                              36
Table 4 (continued): Effects of Managed Care on Individual Services†

                                                    For Profit                              Not for Profit                                  Public
                                              Coef            Marginal*                  Coef           Marginal*                  Coef            Marginal*

Transitional
 Asst obtaining social services               -0.105             -0.019                 -0.550            -0.217                  -0.286              -0.113
                                             (0.833)            (0.834)                (0.169)           (0.158)                 (0.615)             (0.617)
 Discharge planning                           1.185              0.407                   0.722            0.219                   -0.697              -0.162
                                            (<0.001)           (<0.001)                (0.013)           (0.025)                 (0.055)             (0.137)
 Employment training                          0.066              0.014                  -0.702            -0.250                  -1.023              -0.360
                                             (0.952)            (0.952)                (0.052)           (0.062)                 (0.020)             (0.017)
 Housing assistance                           1.064              0.137                  -0.441            -0.138                  -0.610             -0.186
                                            (<0.001)            (0.017)                (0.189)           (0.211)                 (0.293)             (0.311)
 Referral to other trans srvcs                0.910              0.331                  -0.055            -0.015                   -1.75             -0.562
                                             (0.070)            (0.065)                (0.846)           (0.845)                (<0.001)            (<0.001)

Other services
 Case management                               0.754             0.293                   0.249            0.093                   -1.544              -0.556
                                             (0.129)            (0.111)                (0.502)           (0.507)                (<0.001)            (<0.001)
 Child care                                    0.038             0.001                  -0.137            -0.040                  -1.604              -0.469
                                             (0.945)            (0.944)                (0.711)           (0.716)                (<0.001)            (<0.001)
 Domestic violence                            -0.506             -0.182                 -0.054            -0.018                  -0.770              -0.225
                                             (0.227)            (0.229)                (0.886)           (0.887)                 (0.502)             (0.531)
 HIV/AIDS education                            0.125             0.045                  -0.404            -0.153                  -1.536              -0.540
                                             (0.876)            (0.878)                (0.438)           (0.425)                (<0.001)            (<0.001)
 Outcome follow-up                            -0.511             -0.193                 -0.817            -0.313                  -1.273              -0.455
                                             (0.421)            (0.419)                (0.008)           (0.004)                (<0.001)            (<0.001)
 Transportation assist                        1.234              0.177                   0.044            0.016                   -0.184              -0.067
                                            (<0.001)            (0.003)                (0.907)           (0.906)                 (0.864)             (0.864)
 Acupuncture                                  0.186              0.012                  -0.468            -0.050                  1.600               0.284
                                                 .             (<0.001)                (0.330)           (0.441)                (<0.001)             (0.022)
         †
           Boldface entries are statistically significant (p_value < 0.100).
         * Marginal effects measure the change in the probability that a given service is offered for a discrete change in MC from 0 to 1. Marginal
         effects are calculated for a typical for-profit SAT facility comprising the following characteristics: primary focus is substance abuse, not
         affiliated with any type of hospital, not a solo practice, not a halfway house, no hospital inpatient services, no non-hospital residential
         services, offers outpatient services, methadone not dispensed, not accredited, licensed by the state, accepts cash or self-payment, accepts
         private insurance, does not accept Medicaid, does not accept Medicare, does not accept state-financed health insurance, does not receive
         public funds (not Medicaid or Medicare), offers payment assistance, and located in a metropolitan area in the Northeast. Marginal effects are
         calculated for typical not-for-profit and public SAT facilities comprising characteristics identical to for-profits except that they both accept
         Medicaid and receive public funds (not Medicaid or Medicare).




                                                                                                                                                     37
