NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FASTER, SMALLER, CHEAPER:
AN HEDONIC PRICE ANALYSIS OF PDAs
Paul D. Chwelos
Ernst R. Berndt
Iain M. Cockburn
Working Paper 10746
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10746
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

Research support from the National Science Foundation to the National Bureau of Economic Research (SES0219235) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Paul D. Chwelos, Ernst R. Berndt, and Iain M. Cockburn. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Faster, Smaller, Cheaper: An Hedonic Price Analysis of PDAs
Paul D. Chwelos, Ernst R. Berndt, and Iain M. Cockburn
NBER Working Paper No. 10746
September 2004
JEL No. C43, L63, O30
ABSTRACT
We compute quality-adjusted price indexes for Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs) for the period
1999-2004, using data on prices and characteristics of 203 models sold by 12 manufacturers. The
PDA market is growing in size, it is technologically dynamic with very substantial changes in
measured characteristics over time, and it has experienced rapid rates of product introduction.
Hedonic regressions consistently show prices to be positively related to processor performance,
RAM memory, permanent storage capacity, and battery life, as well as several measures of screen
size and quality. Features such as networking, biometric identification, camera, and cellphone
capability are also positively associated with price. Hedonic price indexes implied by these
regressions decline at an AAGR of 21.1% to 25.6% per year during this period. A matched model
price index computed from a subset of observations declines at 18.75% per year. Though these PDA
rates of price decline are lower than have been estimated for desktop and laptop PCs, consumers in
this "ultra-portable" segment of the computer market appear to have enjoyed substantial welfare
gains over the past five years.
Paul D. Chwelos
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, BC
V6T 1Z2
paul.chwelos@sauder.ubc.ca

Ernst R. Berndt
MIT
Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-452
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu

Iain M. Cockburn
Boston University School of
Management
595 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
cockburn@bu.edu

Faster, Smaller, Cheaper:
An Hedonic Price Analysis of PDAs
Paul D. Chwelos, Ernst R. Berndt, Iain M. Cockburn

I. Introduction
Personal digital assistants (“PDAs”) have become an increasingly significant
segment of the market for personal computing devices, accounting for almost 6% of
worldwide units shipped in 2003. Like other personal computing devices, PDAs have
undergone rapid technological change in recent decades. Since the introduction of the
Apple Newton in 1993, both the computational power and the storage capacity of PDAs
have grown by several orders of magnitude, and the variety and functionality of
peripherals and interface technology have increased dramatically. Although the
engineering design and marketing of PDAs have consistently emphasized simple
“organizer” functions (calendar, address book, memopad, etc.) PDAs are now capable of
running complex software applications and storing large amounts of data.
Leading edge PDA devices now have computational “horsepower” and storage
equivalent to the high-end laptop and desktop PCs of the mid 1990s, high resolution color
screens that rival those of standard PCs in terms of resolution and the faithfulness of
color reproduction, and high-bandwidth network connectivity. Notwithstanding these
dramatic improvements in performance and capacity over the past decade, nominal prices
for these devices have been flat, or have even trended downwards. Thus, like their less
portable cousins, PDAs have experienced very large declines in quality-adjusted prices –
implying substantial gains in welfare for consumers who value portable computing.
In this paper we document changes in prices and characteristics of PDAs over
time, and construct a preliminary quality-adjusted price index. We begin with a summary
of the historical development of PDA technology, then briefly review the literature on
measuring price change in computing platforms, emphasizing that focusing on portable
computers. Next we describe the data on PDAs used in this study, and the trends evident
in this marketplace. We conclude with an analysis of quality-adjusted price change in
this market, and the construction of a variety of preliminary hedonic price indexes for
PDAs.

1

II. A Short History of PDAs
Driven by innovation in microprocessors, storage and display technology, PDAs
have evolved in close parallel with desktop and laptop computers. Although the
commonly accepted definition of a PDA has evolved somewhat over time, most PDA
designs have been inspired by the vision of a small, light, easily transportable “stripped
down” computing device. This focus on portability raises unique design and engineering
challenges. “On-the-go” computing requires highly miniaturized, tightly integrated,
custom components, with a premium on robustness and low power consumption. Even
more than with laptops, PDA designs embody difficult trade-offs between incompatible
user-valued characteristics (speed/storage capacity/screen size versus size/weight/battery
life) and engineering constraints. Polsson (2002) provides a useful chronology of the
development of PDA technology and products. Here we offer a brief summary of the
evolution of PDA technology and the PDA market.
Current PDAs have their roots in the small, “pocket” or “palmtop computers” of
the early 1980s such as the Radio Shack TRS-80 Hand Held Computer and the Sharp PC1500 Hand Held Personal Computer. These relatively large early machines were made
by computer manufacturers and were meant to be very small personal computers. These
machines typically had QWERTY keyboards, minimal black-and-white displays (24
characters wide and a few lines high) and very modest processing power, but attempted
to provide PC-type applications.
An alternate vision of handheld computing emerged in the early 1990s, with a
smaller class of machines dubbed “pen-based computers.” These devices lacked a
keyboard, relying instead for user input on touch-sensitive screens and the ability to
interpret users’ handwriting, along with small numbers of function-specific buttons.
Marketing of these products emphasized mobile access to information, and the novelty of
the pen-based interface, two key features of current PDAs. The Apple Newton is
commonly identified as the “first PDA,” with the term “personal digital assistant” coined
by Apple CEO John Scully in 1992, just prior to the release of the Newton in 1993.
Other notable pen-based computers included the Casio Zoomer (1993) and Sharp
ExpertPad (1993). Yet another vision of handheld computers was put forward by
telecommunications companies, who visualized PDAs as “mobile communicators” that

provided portable wireless connectivity. Examples of early communicators included the
Eo Personal Communicator (1992), the Sony MagicLink (1994) and the Motorola Envoy
(1995).
Until 1996, the handheld market was highly fragmented, with incompatible
competing platforms designed to solve different problems. The introduction of Palm
Computing’s PalmPilot in 1996, however, caused the PDA market to settle on a de facto
definition of a PDA as a “connected organizer” whose essential characteristics consisted
of providing organizer capabilities that synchronized with a PC (Allen, 1999). Other
manufacturers such as Hewlett-Packard, Sharp, and Franklin quickly began producing
connected organizers, and within two years, nearly all hand-held computers provided this
functionality. Palm (since acquired by 3Com) licensed the Palm operating system to
other manufacturers, and the Palm OS quickly became the dominant operating system in
the PDA market, especially in the U.S., where 70% of PDAs sold in 2002 used the Palm
OS (Kort 2003).
However, the handheld market is highly dynamic, and the dominance of the Palm
“connected organizer” platform in the late 1990s and early 2000s has spurred innovation
in both the “palmtop computer” and “mobile communicator” platforms. The steadily
rising share of Windows-CE based PDAs signals a renewed focus on the conception of a
PDA as a palm-sized version of “standard” computers that runs very similar software
applications. While all Windows-based PDAs have the abilities of a connected organizer,
they frequently provide other PC-like capabilities and applications, such as email,
spreadsheets, word processors, and increasingly sophisticated games. Though unit
shipments of Palm-OS based PDAs are currently slightly higher than those of Windows
based PDAs (as of Q2 2004), Windows based PDAs outsell Palm based devices in dollar
terms due to their higher average price.
The “mobile communicator” began to evolve into the “smart phone” in the late
1990s, with the release of the first telephone with the capabilities of a connected
organizer, the Nokia 9000i communicator, in 1997. A growing number of manufacturers
– including Kyocera, Handspring, and Research in Motion – offer smart phones based on
the Palm OS, Windows CE, Symbian, and other proprietary operating systems. Although
smart phones are not currently competitive with PDAs in terms of price, battery life, and

other factors, the smart phone platform is expected to make significant inroads against
PDAs from 2004 onward.
The functionality of all platforms of handheld computers continues to evolve
rapidly, with steady increases in computing and storage power anticipated to continue
indefinitely. Additional new functionality, such as a digital camera, 802.11b wireless
LAN (WiFi) networking, Bluetooth networking, MP3 player capability, and biometric
security (fingerprint reader) continues to be added. A recent new category of features is
that which relies on location information, such as atlas software or global positioning
system (GPS) modules for PDAs, such as the Magellan system for the Palm series of
PDAs.

III. Measuring Computer Prices
Ongoing technological innovation has led economists to study price and quality
change in computing technology since the 1960s – pioneering studies include Knight
(1966) and Chow (1967). Over the subsequent decades, research has examined
mainframe computer processors, peripheral equipment, personal computers (PCs), and
portable or “laptop” PCs.1 This research has focused on quantifying the rate of change in
the price-performance ratio of computing technology through the construction of
“quality-adjusted” price indexes. The production and consumption of computing
technology are now so pervasive in the economy that computer price indexes have
measurable impacts on key macroeconomic statistics such as the consumer price index
(CPI), real GDP, and productivity growth rates.2
The traditional approach to measuring price variations in the face of quality
change is the matched-model technique. As with all approaches, observations on the
prices and attributes of a number of goods are made at periodic intervals. When the same
“model” (i.e., a product having exactly the same attributes) appears in two time periods,
any difference in the prices for the model must be due to pure price change, as there is no
quality change. Price indexes are constructed using the ratio of prices of the models that
are “matched” across time periods. However, product markets characterized by rapid
1

This literature is reviewed more thoroughly in Berndt (1991), Triplett (1989), Berndt and Rappaport
(2001), Triplett (2001), and Chwelos (2003).
2
Landefeld and Grimm (2000).

technological change have a high frequency of the introduction of new models and the
discontinuation of old models; in this setting, there will be relatively few “matches”
across time periods, and the matched model method becomes subject to a number of
biases due to non-random entry and exit of models. One important source of this bias is
sample selectivity induced by the exiting models: discontinued models will tend to be
those for which consumers’ valuations have fallen the most – see Pakes (2001).
The most common approach to dealing with quality change in economics is the
use of an hedonic function. The hedonic hypothesis proposes that a heterogeneous good
can be treated as an aggregation of homogenous attributes, i.e.,
P = h ( c)

(1)

where P is an n-element vector of prices of models of heterogeneous goods, c is a k x n
matrix of (homogeneous) attributes, and h(c ) is the hedonic function. Therefore, a
complex good such as an automobile can be treated as a collection of simple attributes
such as horsepower, fuel economy, number of seats, etc.
The use of hedonic methods dates back at least to Waugh (1928), who undertook
empirical work relating the price of asparagus bundles to their attributes (length, color,
number of stalks). The term hedonic was coined in Court (1939), in work addressing
automobiles. Griliches (1961) brought hedonic methods into the mainstream economic
measurement literature by updating Court’s work on automobiles, and considerably
extending hedonic methods.
Rosen (1974) showed that, in general, the hedonic function is an envelope
function of the users’ value function and the producers’ cost function. As with any
envelope function, the form of the hedonic function is independent of the forms of the
user preferences or producer costs underlying it; instead, it is determined by the
distribution of buyers’ preferences and sellers’ costs and strategic choices.
Triplett (1983, 1987) took the necessary step of extending index number theory
from goods space to characteristics space. He demonstrated that an hedonic price index
can be thought of as an approximation of an exact characteristics subindex provided that
the utility function is separable between the attributes of the heterogeneous good and the
quantities of other, homogeneous goods. Triplett suggests three criteria for evaluating the

characteristics to be included as explanatory variables in an hedonic multivariate
regression specification:
1. they are homogeneous economic variables;
2. they are building blocks from which heterogeneous goods are created; and
3. they are valued by both buyers and sellers.
In work on personal computers, a large variety of characteristics have been
included in hedonic regressions; however, nearly all researchers have attempted to
operationalize the performance (or “speed”) along with the quantity of secondary storage.
Performance has traditionally been measured using a variety of technical proxies (e.g.,
processor clock speed in MHz, processor word length) or, more recently, with
performance benchmarks, as in Chwelos (1999) and Nordhaus (2001).
Recent theoretical work continues to explore the theory underlying hedonic
functions and their use in constructing price indexes. Pakes (2001) generalizes the
interpretation of the hedonic function to allow for interpersonal differences in utility over
characteristics, as well as imperfect product market competition, thereby noting that the
observed hedonic function is the result of a complex market equilibrium. Thus we should
not apply either a consumer willingness-to-pay or producer marginal cost interpretation
to the estimated coefficients. Rather, he argues for the use of an hedonic function in
constructing “proper” price indexes, which provide an upper bound on the compensating
variation required to compensate consumers for a change in prices independent of the
form of the utility function. In this context, the estimated hedonic surface is simply used
to impute the prices of exiting goods, without regard to how the surface is shaped (i.e.,
the signs and magnitudes of the estimated coefficients).
Diewert (2001) provides an interpretation of the hedonic function based on
consumer theory, ignoring the producer side of the market. Using a representative agent
approach (i.e., all consumers have the same utility for characteristics), he derives a
variety of functional forms, and notes which of these are consistent with consumer theory
yet are sufficiently flexible to incorporate new characteristics. While there is no one
preferred functional form, he notes that the linear hedonic function is not consistent with
homothetic preferences.

Both Pakes (2001) and Diewert (2001) explore the similarities and differences
between the hedonic approach and the matched model approach, and both papers note
that the matched model suffers a number of biases (selection and new goods) when the
rate of technological innovation is high. However, given data of sufficient frequency
(quarterly or monthly), the matched model approach will produce an index that fairly
closely approximates an hedonic index (see Aizcorbe, Corrado, and Doms (2000) for
discussion and equivalent econometric versions of a matched-model index). Using
scanner data, however, Silver and Heravi (2002) find significant degradation of coverage
of current transactions in the sample used for matched model index construction, even
when monthly data are used. Furthermore, exiting models tended to have different rates
of price change than continuing models (as measured through the hedonic residual),
indicating that even high-frequency matched model approaches may suffer considerably
from selection bias.
In addition to bias, the variance of estimated indexes is important. While hedonic
indices do not suffer the selection bias that the matched model does, both hedonic and
matched model techniques have variance in their estimated price indexes due to
sampling. Furthermore, the hedonic indices introduce another source of variance,
estimation variance, resulting from the need to estimate the hedonic function. However,
preliminary empirical evidence suggests that sampling variance accounts for the majority
of variance in the hedonic estimates (Pakes, 2001).
In the context of hedonic price indexes, the term “new goods” has been used to
refer to two types of innovation. The first refers to new models of goods that are
introduced having different values of characteristics than existing goods in the
marketplace. For example, Dell may introduce a new model of PC that has more RAM
or a larger hard drive than previous models. The second meaning refers to the
introduction of new characteristics. The PC market has seen the introduction of
innovations such as the hard drive, portable models (i.e., laptops), CD-ROM, DVD
drives, and so on. As Diewert (2001) and Pakes (2001) point out, neither hedonic nor
matched model methods account for the welfare gains from the introduction of new
goods or characteristics that arise for those consumers whose valuation of a new good
exceeds its price. However, Diewert (2001) suggests functional forms that are capable of

handling the introduction of new characteristics. In principle, these “flexible” (e.g.,
quadratic or semi-log quadratic) hedonic functions also allow for the estimation of
reservation prices for new characteristics, and thus estimation of the welfare gains
resulting from the availability of new characteristics.

IV. Hedonic Price Analysis of Mobile Computers
Few economic studies have focused explicitly on mobile computing devices. A
number of papers have examined laptop computer pricing, but have not focused on
portability per se;. see Nelson, Tanguay, and Patterson (1994); Berndt, Griliches, and
Rappaport (1995); Baker (1997), Berndt and Rappaport (2001), Chwelos (1999), and
Chwelos (2003). To the extent that these studies have examined portability as a
characteristic, it typically has been operationalized in terms of weight or volume, and
confined to laptop and notebook computers rather than the full range of mobile
computing devices. A number of puzzling – and interesting – results have emerged from
this work: parameter estimates are unstable over time; the estimated rate of decline of
quality-adjusted prices was lower for mobile computers than for desktops until the late
1990s; and coefficients on characteristics were not equal across mobiles and desktops.
For purposes of comparison, we begin to address these questions through the construction
of a price index for a relatively unstudied class of (very) mobile computing devices:
PDAs. Future work will compare the results for PDAs to those for other mobile and
fixed computing platforms.
At least since Griliches (1971), and as reemphasized by Pakes (2001), it has been
recognized that hedonic regressions are only a “reduced form” representation of both
consumer and producer optimizing behavior. Hence coefficients cannot easily be
interpreted in terms of marginal valuation or marginal cost. Nonetheless, users of this
methodology in government statistical agencies and elsewhere appear to find parameter
instability troublesome. If it reflects only familiar “mechanical” specification problems
such as multicollinearity, measurement error, etc., then parameter instability may be dealt
with relatively easily with the standard prescription of “more and better data.” On the
other hand instability may also be generated by economically significant factors such as
failing to control for producer behavior, which presents a much more serious
methodological challenge. Absent a fully specified structural model of producer

behavior, some progress may be made in stabilizing parameter estimates by
instrumenting with variables that capture supply factors, such as semiconductor costs or
market concentration measures, or by otherwise accounting for observable aspects of
supplier behavior.3
In the PC market, one salient aspect of market dynamics is changing markups
over the lifecycle of generations of processor technology: much higher margins are
obtained on products incorporating a new generation of processor during their first few
quarters. It is therefore likely that more stable parameter estimates (and thus more
readily comparable price changes) could be obtained with a regression specification that
recognizes the product lifecycle explicitly. Chwelos, for example, found relatively stable
coefficients within periods of time corresponding to distinctive technology regimes (e.g.
32-bit processor, megabit DRAMs, monochrome LCD screens).
One way to address this problem within the standard hedonic framework is to use
regression specifications (indicator variables for “generations”, interacted with
characteristics such as CPU speed) to estimate “piece-wise” stable coefficients (Pakes
2001). We note, though, that this problem with unstable coefficients has thus far only
been observed in models computed at annual frequency. By re-estimating these models
using quarterly (or even monthly) data one would be able to evaluate “lifecycle” timing
and pricing dynamics much more precisely.
Mobile computers present a challenge for traditional hedonic analysis since, in
contrast to desktop computers their design is much less modular and much more
integrated. Informed observers have frequently pointed out that the “output” of a
computer is not necessarily additively separable on its component-level “inputs” –
doubling RAM or processor clock speed will not necessarily result in a doubling of
performance (or halving of execution time) in completing tasks; see, e.g., Cole et al.
(1986) and Dulberger (1989), and most recently Nordhaus (2001). Differences in
performance, therefore, may not be adequately captured by differences in the list of
components. Chwelos examined this issue using system “output” benchmark data as a
performance characteristic, as well as conventional “input” measures, such as clock
3

We note that though the number of distinct computer models sold remains high, the market has become
increasingly concentrated in terms of manufacturers. Product variety may also change in important ways
over the lifecycle of a technology generation.

speed, memory size etc.; he reports that (at least for desktop PCs) the more easily
observable input measures could, in combination, be used as adequate proxies.
In part this finding may reflect the scaling properties of the PC-compatible
architecture, but it may also reflect the nature of the product market. With intense
product market competition, many PC-compatible computers appear to be priced as the
sum of component costs, assembly costs, and a very small operating margin. With
homogenous technology and internal design, and highly competitive pricing, “true”
performance differences may not be reflected in pricing. By contrast, mobile computers
are more heterogeneous in design, contain more proprietary engineering, and rely less on
standardized modular subsystems. Thus component lists may be a significantly poorer
proxy for performance, and since mobile computers have historically been sold under less
intense pricing pressure and with higher margins, some of these performance differences
may be visible in pricing. Suggestive evidence in support of this can be seen in the large
and highly significant brand effects estimated in prior work involving mobile PCs.
In addition to this performance measurement issue, users’ valuations of the
characteristics of mobile computers may differ from that of desktops in other important
ways. Portability requirements mean that designers of mobile computers have to make
quite different trade-offs, which may be difficult to capture fully using simple proxy
variables. “Portability” is itself challenging to measure consistently over time. Prior
studies have used “footprint”, weight, volume, density, and other characteristics, but it is
not clear how well these capture portability. Further refinement and testing of these
measures are necessary. Furthermore, in minimizing size and weight, engineers have had
to solve a variety of challenges ranging from heat dispersion and power management to
resistance to mechanical and environmental shocks, miniaturization of components, etc.4
Compared to desktops, mobile computers may therefore have much more unobserved
variation in desired performance characteristics, above and beyond computation power
and storage capacity. These may include power consumption, battery efficiency,
reliability, ergonomic aspects of “usability”, and durability. Aesthetic aspects of product
4

Critical design and technology choices advances for mobile computers include: power source (internal
vs. external, weight and size, capacity, battery technology, e.g., alkaline, nickel cadmium, nickel metal
hydride, lithium ion, lithium polymer); processor (performance, word size, power consumption, variable
speed); heat dispersion (radiant, fan); input technology (stylus versus keyboard); and display type (size,
resolution, color, active/passive matrix, power consumption).

design also appear to be important to users. Again, some of this variation can be
captured by brand indicators, but there is no reason to assume that these would be stable
over time. Modeling this unobserved component of quality is a challenge, all the more so
when we consider PDAs and other handheld devices that may be built as closed systems
with proprietary technology, and are typically sold bundled with a range of software
applications in ROM.
We are aware of only one previous study, an undergraduate honors paper at
Northwestern University, that has constructed a price index for PDAs (Vonnahme
(2002)). Using the set of characteristics published in the buyer’s guides of “PocketPC
Magazine” and “Pen Computing Magazine,” PDAs were found to have declined in
quality-adjusted prices at an average rate of 14-18% per year over the period 1999
through the first quarter of 2002. However, the valuation of performance and mobility in
PDAs remains poorly understood. Indeed, the feature set of a PDA is evolving rapidly,
and definitions of what a PDA is and is not, especially versus related devices such as
smart phones and pagers, are unclear. Moreover, the very concept of “performance” in a
PDA has yet to be clearly defined.
However, several essential characteristics of PDAs have emerged: they are small,
portable, battery powered, and accomplish data input through a stylus and handwriting
recognition and/or a drastically miniaturized keyboard typically operated with one or two
thumbs, and include a calendar and personal information manager (contact information)
as core applications. PDAs are usefully distinguished from very small notebook
computers (mini-notebooks) that possess a QWERTY keyboard, typically ¾ sized, that
permits standard ten-finger typing. As discussed above, current models of PDAs may
also incorporate a number of other types of hardware functionality, such as a digital
camera, a cellular telephone, data or internet connectivity via cellular, wireless, and
Bluetooth networking, MP3 player capability, and biometric security via a fingerprint
reader. PDAs that include cellular telephone capability (or cellular telephones that
include PDA capabilities) are referred to as “smart phones”.

V. Data
The worldwide market for PDAs was estimated at 11.45 million units ($3.70
billion) in 2003, with 70% of units being purchased by individuals and 30% by

enterprises (Gartner 2004). For the current study, data on the characteristics and prices of
PDAs and smart phones for the years 1999-2004 were obtained from Gartner, Inc.5
Gartner collects data annually from PDA manufacturers, although the timing varies from
year to year. 6 Prices are supplied by manufacturers, and should thus be interpreted as
list rather than transaction prices. Use of internet shopbots reveals that, although there
exists considerable variability in transaction prices, there is no trend in the median price
on the internet versus MSRP over time; thus, our price indexes based on list prices should
not be biased.7
The Gartner data contained a number of missing characteristics, which were
“backfilled” using a variety of sources (product fact sheets, product reviews, vendor
listings, buyers’ guides, etc.). Excluding observations for which a price in US dollars
was not specified yielded us a total of 239 observations for which data on the complete
set of characteristics was obtained. The distribution of observations across years and
brands is presented in Table 1. Average values of key characteristics are presented in
Table 2.
Nominal prices for both PDAs and smart phones are dropping across the
timeframe, and, as expected, there are significant trends in terms of the performance and
form factor of both types of machines. Over the six years, we observe that PDAs have
become smaller, lighter, and provide more colors on albeit smaller screens. Smart phones
have likewise become smaller and lighter, as well as dramatically more colorful.
Increasing performance in both platforms is embodied primarily through the introduction
of new generations of central processing units (CPU’s) that are relatively more energy
efficient and operate at higher clock speeds (measured in MHz); likewise, the quantity of
all types of memory (RAM, ROM, and Flash ROM) increases significantly over time.
However, although performance has increased in both platforms, there remains a distinct
difference between PDAs and smart phones, with the former tending to have more

5

All of the machines in the “mini-notebook” category were eliminated from the sample; due to their
different cost trade-offs and user benefits than PDAs, this class of machine is more appropriately studied in
the class of portable PCs (i.e., notebook or laptop).
6
The period of observations is not exactly 12 months, and varies slightly from year to year. The actual
period between adjacent observations is 12, 10, 11, 14, and 7 months respectively.
7
See, for example, www.nextag.com for pricing histories of PDAs over time.

powerful processors, larger memories, and much longer battery lives.8 (A full description
of the variables used in this study is given in Table 4.)
As can be seen from Table 3, some characteristics have converged over time,
whereas others have diverged. Notably, the screen size, weight, volume, battery life, and
number of colors of PDAs have converged to a de facto standard of a unit with a 3.5-inch
screen supporting 65,536 colors (216) that weighs about 5.5 ounces in a volume of about 8
cubic inches and has a rated battery life of 8 hours. However, other characteristics have
diverged over time, with, for example, the variance in MHz, RAM, Flash, digital
cameras, and WiFi networking increasing over time. It appears that the characteristics
relating to human factors and portability have achieved a “sweet spot,” i.e., PDAs have
achieved a size and weight that fits well in an average human adult palm (as well as a
pocket) and is light enough to be carried easily. Other converging characteristics, such as
screen size, battery life, and number of colors appear to be at their maximum possible
value given the current state of display and battery technologies, subject to the constraints
of size, weight, and volume. In terms of capabilities – processing power, battery life,
colors, communications capabilities, operating systems, digital cameras, biometrics, etc.
– PDAs continue to exhibit enormous and perhaps increasing product variety.9 The range
of characteristics and prices available in the marketplace is strikingly large, much larger
than, for example, desktop PCs. Order-of-magnitude differences in the prices and
performance can be found between “value” (e.g., Palm Zire) and cutting edge PDAs (e.g.,
HP iPAQ h5550) sold in the same year.

VI. Preliminary Analysis: Regression Results
The base case specification for estimation of the hedonic function is a log-log
model using the explanatory variables outlined in Table 4. Exact singularity prevents all

8

The shorter battery life for smart phones reflects the power drain associated with using their cellular
telephone capabilities.
9
Interestingly, there are some types of product variety that are clearly welfare-enhancing, such as the
availability of models with and without digital cameras or WiFi networking. This type of product variety
allows consumers to choose the PDA with the feature set they find most desirable. However, there are
other types of product variety that are probably welfare-reducing, because they create confusion or
incompatibility. For example, the proliferation of types or standards for expansion slots (e.g., compact
flash types 1 and 2, secure digital, multi-media cards, smart media, etc.) creates difficulty in sharing
information between PDAs or between a PDA and a desktop, and can create a measure of lock-in to a
particular brand or platform.

of the indicator variables from being included, so several are dropped, making the
“default” or reference case PDA one that has an “MIPS 1” processor and a “Palm OS”.
Likewise, perfect collinearity between weight, volume, and density in the log-log
specification requires that one of the three be eliminated, and thus weight was dropped.
Finally, the total number of expansion slots is defined as the sum of the types of slots
included. A decision was made to employ the summary measure in place of identifying
each type of slot since there is little expected user value or producer cost difference
among the different types of slots.10 In addition to the characteristics outlined in Table 4,
indicator variables for the years 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004 were included in the
regression; 1999 is the omitted year.
In the base case regression, lnMHz and various processor indicator variables are
included, but there are no interactions involving clockspeed and processor type.
Regression results are given in Table 5. Recall from Table 1 that the number of PDA
observations per year is roughly constant at 34, but that the number of smart phone
observations grows from one in 1999 and 2001 to 17 in 2004.
Examination of the residuals indicates that there may be vendor effects. Column
2 introduces vendor indicators, although only a few are significant (the eliminated vendor
is Hewlett-Packard). However, a test of the joint restriction of no vendor effects is
soundly rejected (F18, 162 = 5.95, p < =.0001).
Given the differences in average characteristics across PDAs and smart phones
(see Table 2), we test for differences between phones and PDAs. First, note that the
dphone indicator variable is highly significant, indicating that smart phones are priced
above PDAs for the same level of performance. Given the additional functionality
associated with cellular capability, this finding may not be surprising; however, smart
phones are typically sold at a price that includes a 1-2 year service contract. This
contract represents a stream of liabilities associated with the phone, and these monthly
payments may be used to subsidize the purchase price of the smart phones. Thus, the
price effect of the dphone indicator is not clear a priori. To test for equality of parameter
values across the two platforms, we construct interaction terms between the dphone and
10

In addition, certain types of expansion slots, such as Sony’s “memory stick” are proprietary to individual
vendors, introducing further collinearity issues when vendor dummy variables are included in the
regression.

key performance characteristics: MHz, RAM, ROM, Flash, Pixels, Screen, Colors,
BatLife, Weight, and Volume. Parameter equality is strongly rejected (F10, 162 = 9.10, p <
=.0001).11 We thus split the sample into PDAs and smart phones; however, given the
limited data for smart phones (thirty-six observations across five years), hedonic analysis
is not feasible. Therefore, we restrict our analysis to the 206 observations for PDAs.
Column 3 presents the results of the regression including vendor indicators for the sample
of PDAs only. 12
The regression fit improves significantly, with an adjusted R2 = 0.8400. The
introduction of the vendor indicators and the restriction to only PDAs creates perfect
collinearity with the operating system indicators, as vendors only make PDAs for one
type of operating system; therefore, the dOtherOS indicator variable is also dropped.
Vendor indicators remain significant (F11, 138 = 5.52, p < =.0001). The year indicator
variables are negative, statistically significant, and increasing in absolute magnitude in
later years, indicating a negative price trend. Major drivers of price include battery type,
especially the later-generation technologies lithium polymer and lithium ion, although
battery life itself is insignificant after controlling for battery type. For communication
ports, all were insignificant except for USB and the Bluetooth and WiFi wireless ports in
later models. Neither weight nor volume is statistically significant, indicating that either
portability is not individually valued or that features and portability are inversely
correlated.
With regard to performance, the indicator variables for the different types of
processors are largely significant, indicating that these processors provide significantly
more value than the default “MIPS 1” processors present in the early Palm Pilot models.
Likewise, the coefficient on MHz is positive and statistically significant. Given the
limited variation of MHz within processor types, there may simply not be enough
variation to disentangle the impacts of clockspeed from processor generation. The

11

For space reasons, the individual coefficients are not presented in Table 5. Only the interactions between
dphone and weight, volume, and battery life are individually significant.
12
We tested for homoskedasticity using both the White and Cook-Weisberg tests. The full White test fails
to reject homoskedasticity ( 2196 = 201.69, p = 0.3752), whereas the Cook-Weisberg test does reject
homoskedasticity ( 21 = 6.42, p = 0.0113). Examination of the squared residuals did not indicate a strong
relationship with any of the characteristics or their products or squares, including time dummies.
However, given the Cook-Weisberg results, we adopt heteroskedasticity robust standard errors.

coefficients on the quantity of all three types of memory are positive and significant,
although ROM is only weakly so.
As a check on sensitivity to specifications, we tested an alternate specification in
which lnMHz is interacted with each of the processor types, instead of a separate lnMHz
and processor indicator variable. The two approaches were nearly identical in terms of
model fit, and coefficient estimates for other variables were little affected. Given the lack
of difference across the approaches, we opt for the conceptually simpler lnMHz plus
processor indicator variable approach.
The characteristics chosen for the hedonic regression reflect, in our judgment, the
essential sources of user value and producer cost in the PDA platform, as advised by
Triplett (1989). However, not all of the characteristics are statistically significant.
Column 4 of Table 5 presents a specification of the hedonic function with insignificant
regressors deleted using the stepwise approach. The results in columns 3 and 4 are very
similar, with a few additional characteristics becoming statistically significant: lnColors,
lnVolume, dProc_ARMv7, dcradle, and the Casio and IBM vendor indicators. Only one
previously significant characteristic is removed, the indicator for nickel-metal hydride
batteries.13 An F-test fails to reject the hypothesis that the year indicators are constant
across columns 3 and 4 (F4, 138 = 0.23, p <= 0.9598). Given the similarity across columns
3 and 4, it makes little difference which specification is used as the basis for constructing
price indexes, so we opt for the more inclusive specification in column 3 as we explore
parameter stability across years.
To test for parameter stability over time, we take three approaches. First, we
begin by estimating pairs of adjacent years and test whether additional years pool with
the pairs of years (i.e., that coefficients are stable across these years). Results indicate
that parameters are stable across 1999-2003; corresponding parameter estimates are
presented in column 1 of Table 6. The 2003-2004 pair of years is estimated separately
from 1999-2003 in column 2. Given the small number of observations in these
subperiods, as well as the number of parameters being estimated, we are not confident in

13

Nickel Metal Hydride batteries appeared in rechargeable devices (e.g., cell phones, laptops, PDAs)
briefly as an improvement over NiCad batteries, but were quickly replaced by Lithium-based batteries.

the stability of these regressions, especially the 2003-2004 subsample, in which
multicollinearity is also an issue (average VIF = 85.44).
Thus, we look for other approaches to exploring parameter stability over time that
allow for pooled estimation. The second approach constructs a “time” index that begins
at zero and increases by 1 in each year. This time index is interacted with the key
characteristics displaying time trends (i.e., MHz, RAM, ROM, Flash, Pixels, Screen,
Colors, BatLife, Weight, and Volume). Three interactions are significant, indicating that
the elasticity of market price with respect to RAM, Flash ROM, and Screen size is
changing over time. Of course, this approach implicitly assumes that the change in
parameter values over time can be captured with a simple linear trend; given that we have
no reason to assume this to be the case, we explore a third, more flexible alternative.
Our final approach to parameter stability over time is to construct interaction
terms between the aforementioned key characteristics and the indicator variables for the
years 2000 – 2004. This approach thus allows for a different elasticity valuation of each
characteristic in each year. Multicollinearity issues reduce the power of the tests
performed when all of these time indicator interaction terms are introduced
simultaneously, so we will follow a two-step procedure. First, we will introduce and test
the time indicators for each characteristic individually. Second, we will then test the
significance of the time indicators for each characteristic identified as significant in the
first stage when all of the time indicator interactions are estimated simultaneously.
When estimated individually in step one, the time indicator interactions with the
characteristics produce jointly significant sets of interaction terms for the characteristics
Flash ROM, ROM, Screen, BatLife, Weight, and Volume. When tested jointly in stage
2, Screen, BatLife, Weight, and Volume remain significant. The regression including
these four sets of time indicators is presented in column 4 of Table 6. Multicollinearity is
present in all of columns 2-4, as the average VIF exceeds 30 for each of these
specifications. While this will not bias our estimated price indexes, it does of course
increase the variance of the resulting indexes. We now turn to calculating price indexes
for PDAs.

VII. Hedonic Price Indexes for PDAs
Because we do not have comprehensive model-specific quantity or sales data, we
use unweighted price ratios in calculating price indexes. For purposes of comparison we
first construct a matched model price index, which is based on 68 of our 203 observations
(30.5%). As is seen in the first column of Table 7, the matched model price index
declines from 1.000 in 1999 to 0.3548 in 2004, an annual average growth rate (AAGR) of
–18.75%.14

By comparison, the hedonic price index using the indicator variable method

based on the pooled parameter estimates in Table 5 declines at a more rapid rate, with an
AAGR of –25.81%, while that based on the Table 6 time indicator specification
parameter estimates declines at a very similar rate of –25.95%. The approximately 7%
difference in AAGRs between the matched model and each of the hedonic indexes likely
reflects the selection bias in surviving models, i.e., that the matched model index
truncates the distribution of price changes and produces an upward-biased index (Pakes
2001). The positive and significant coefficient on the Age parameter across all
specifications in Table 5 indicates that surviving models are priced above the average for
the sample based on their objective characteristics. The matched model and hedonic
indexes diverge most widely across 2000-2002; during this period, surviving models
were unrepresentative of the average model in that they had: slower and less powerful
processors; smaller, less colorful, and lower-resolution screens; and less RAM and ROM
memory. In descriptive terms, the surviving models of this era were either the relatively
basic organizer-style PDA (e.g., Palm m100, Sharp Zaurus) or the wireless email-enabled
devices (e.g., RIM Blackberry 850), both of which fell behind the cutting edge in terms
of power, colors, performance, and battery technology.
Columns 4 and 5 of Table 7 present hedonic price indexes based on the
characteristics prices approach, whereas columns 6 and 7 use the “imputation” or
“hybrid” approach. The characteristics prices approach uses the actual prices in the base
period, and the hedonic estimates of prices in the reference period. The hybrid method
uses the actual prices where possible to calculate price relatives (i.e., the matched model
formula), and uses the hedonic function to estimate prices of unmatched models. For our
14

Of the 34 model observations in 1999, 17 survived as matched models into 2002; 14 of 34 survived from
2000 to 2001; 11 of 38 survived from 2001 to 2002; 6 of 34 survived from 2002 to 2003; 14 of 30 survived
from 2003 to 2004.

estimates, we construct both characteristics prices and hybrid indexes using both the
pooled results from Table 5 and the time indicator results from Table 6. The
characteristics prices and hybrid indexes span the range of –21 to –25% AAGR, and all
four fall between the matched model and the indicator variable estimates. We have a
preference for the hybrid relative to the other methods because it makes use of matched
models where available; we also prefer the time indicator specification because it does
not restrict the hedonic coefficients to be constant over time. Thus, our preferred price
index is the “Complete Hybrid Time Indicators”, presented in column 7, and which has
with an AAGR of approximately –21% over the six years in our sample.

VIII. Conclusion
In this paper we have examined the relation between prices, performance, and
features of an “ultraportable” computer technology -- the personal digital assistant. The
PDA platform was found to have undergone significant innovation in the period 19992004, with substantial performance improvements accompanied by declining average
nominal price for the models in our dataset. Quality-adjusted prices derived by hedonic
regression fell at an average annual rate of approximately 21% per year over this period.
A matched model index fell at a slightly lower, though still substantial rate.
These rates of decline in quality-adjusted prices suggest large welfare gains for
PDA purchasers. Nonetheless, at 20-25% per year, the rate of price decreases is
significantly lower than that seen in desktop and laptop computers, which by some
estimates was 30-40% per year during this period. Like other reduced form hedonic
analyses, our method cannot disentangle changes in component costs and producer
markups from changes in consumers’ marginal willingness to pay. But several features
of the PDA market suggest to us possible explanations for slower rates of decline in their
quality-adjusted prices relative to PCs.
Compared to other personal computing devices, PDA technology is less modular
and contains more proprietary components, produced in smaller volumes. Manufacturing
and component costs may therefore have been declining at slower rates than for PCs.
Compared with the “beige box” world of PCs, PDA product designs are more fluid, and
tend to emphasize more non-functional design features which are difficult to capture
using hedonic methods. And unlike the PC marketplace, a single dominant

software/hardware standard has not yet emerged, which may allow higher markups on
more differentiated products, and generate quite different producer behavior.
Interestingly, controlling for other characteristics, PDA quality-adjusted prices were
significantly lower for PDAs running the Windows CE operating system, suggesting a
relationship between network externalities and pricing.
PDAs stand at one extreme of a spectrum of “portability” of computing devices.
At the other extreme, desktop PCs are essentially fixed at a specific location. In the
middle lie laptop computers, which have become much smaller and lighter over time
since the first “luggable” models of the early 1980s, as well as “tablet PCs,” “subnotebooks,” and other devices.15 As an ultra-portable technology, better understanding of
the pricing of computer functionality embedded in PDAs is thus a first step towards
greater insight into the economics of portability.
Immediate items on our research agenda include updating the frequency of
price/characteristics observations to a quarterly basis, thereby constructing a price index
with more frequent periodicity to better illuminate product lifecycle issues. Work is also
ongoing to produce updated and comparable price indexes for desktop personal
computers as well as laptops, and to compare these three categories of computing
hardware. Ultimately, inter-category demand effects will be examined with the objective
of producing an “elasticity of portability” and an understanding of whether these classes
of computing hardware are substitutes or complements.

15

Arguably the first portable computer was the IBM 5100, introduced in 1975, or the Osborne in 1981, but
the Compaq was the first PC-compatible “portable” – actually a “luggable” at 28 pounds!

References
Aizcorbe, Ana, Carol Corrado, and Mark Doms (2000) “Constructing Price and Quantity Indexes
for High Technology Goods,” mimeo, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Baker, Terry A. (1997) “Quality-Adjusted Price Indexes for Portable Computers,” Applied
Economics, 29(9), pp. 1115-23.
Berndt, Ernst R. (1991) “The Measurement of Quality Change: Constructing an Hedonic Price
Index for Computers Using Multiple Regression Methods,” ch. 4 in The Practice of
Econometrics : Classic and Contemporary. Addison-Wesley: New York, NY.
Berndt, Ernst R., Zvi Griliches, and Neal J. Rappaport (1995) “Econometric Estimates of Price
Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990s,” Journal of Econometrics, 68(1), pp. 243268.
Berndt, Ernst R. and Neal J. Rappaport (2001) “Price and Quality of Desktop and Mobile Personal
Computers: A Quarter Century of History,” American Economic Review, 91(2), pp. 268273.
Bresnahan, T. F. and Gordon, R. J. (eds.) (1997) The Economics of New Goods, Studies in
Income and Wealth, Volume 58, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Shane Greenstein (1998) “The Economic Contribution of Information
Technology: Value Indicators in International Perspective.” OECD, Paris, France, June 4,
1998.
Chow, Gregory. C. (1967) “Technological Change and the Demand for Computers,” American
Economic Review, 57(5), pp. 1117-30.
Chwelos, Paul (1999) “Hedonic Approaches to Measuring Price and Quality Change in Personal
Computer Systems,” Dissertation, University of British Columbia.
Chwelos, Paul (2003) “Approaches to Performance in Measurement in Hedonic Analysis: Price
Indexes for Laptop Computers in The 1990'
s,” forthcoming in Economics of Innovation
and New Technology, 12(3).
Cole, Rosanne, Y.C. Chen, Joan A. Barquin-Stolleman, Ellen Dulberger, Nurhan Helvacian, and
James H. Hodge (1986) “Quality-Adjusted Price Indexes for Computer Processors and
Selected Peripheral Equipment,” Survey of Current Business, 66, 41-50.
Court, Andrew T. (1939) “Hedonic Price Indexes with Automotive Examples,” in: Roos C. F.,
(ed.), The Dynamics of Automobile Demand. New York, NY: The General Motors
Corporation, pp. 99-117.
Diewert, W. Erwin (2001) “Hedonic Regressions: A Consumer Theory Approach,” mimeo,
Department of Economics, University of British Columbia.
Dulberger, Ellen (1989) “The Application of a Hedonic Model to a Quality-Adjusted Price Index
for Computer Processors,” in Jorgenson D. W. and R. Landau (eds.) Technology and
Capital Formation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 37-75.
Gartner, Inc. (2003), “1Q03 Update: Global PDA Forecast Scenarios, 2002-2004”
Goolsbee, Austan, and Amil Petrin (2001), “The Consumer Gains from Direct Broadcast
Satellites and the Competition with Cable Television,” NBER Working Paper No. 8317.

Greenstein, Shane (1997) “From Super-minis to Super Computers: Estimating Surplus in the
Computing Market.” in Bresnahan, T. F. and Gordon, R. J. (eds.) The Economics of New
Goods. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 329-362.
Griliches Zvi (1961) “Hedonic Price Indexes for Automobiles: An Econometric Analysis of
Quality Change,” in The Price Statistics of the Federal Government, General Series No.
73. New York, NY: Columbia University Press, pp. 137-96.
Griliches Zvi (1971) “Hedonic Price Indexes Revisited,” Griliches Z., ed. Price Indexes and
Quality Change: Studies in New Methods of Measurement. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, pp. 3-15.
Hausman, Jerry (1999) “Cellular Telephone, New Products and the CPI,” Journal of Business and
Economic Statistics, 17(2), pp. 188-194.
Knight, Kenneth E. (1966) “Changes in Computer Performance: A Historical View,”
Datamation, 12(9), pp. 40-54.
Landefeld, J. Steven and Bruce T. Grimm (2000) “A Note on the Impact of Hedonics and
Computers on Real GDP,” Survey of Current Business, 80(12), pp. 17-22.
Nelson, Randy A., Tim L. Tanguay, and Christopher D. Patterson (1994) “A Quality-Adjusted
Price Index for Personal Computers,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12(1),
23-31.
Nevo, Aviv (2001) “New Products, Quality Changes and Welfare Measures Computed From
Estimated Demand Systems,” NBER Working Paper No. 8425.
Nordhaus, William (2001) “The Progress of Computing,” mimeo, Dept Economics, Yale
University.
Pakes, Ariel (2001) “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indices with an Application to PC’s,”
mimeo, Dept Economics, Harvard University.
Rosen, Sherwin (1974) “Hedonic Prices and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure
Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, 82(1), pp. 34-55.
Silver, Mick and Saeed Heravi (2002) “Why the CPI Matched Models Method May Fail Us:
Results from an Hedonic and Matched Experiment Using Scanner Data,” mimeo,
Department of Business, Cardiff University.
Trajtenberg, Manuel (1989) “The Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations, with an Application
to Computed Tomography Scanners,” Journal of Political Economy, 97(2), pp. 444-479.
Triplett, Jack E. (1983) “Concepts of Quality in Input and Output Price Measures: A Resolution
of the User Value-Resource Cost Debate.” In M. F. Foss (ed.). The U.S. National Income
and Product Accounts: Selected Topics. Vol. 47, NBER Studies in Income and Wealth.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, pp. 269-311.
Triplett, Jack E. (1987) “Hedonic Functions and Hedonic Indexes,” in Eatwell J., M. Milgate, and
P. Newman (eds.) The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics. Vol. 2. London:
MacMillan Press, pp. 630-634.
Triplett, Jack E. (1989) “Price and Technological Change in a Capital Good: A Survey of
Research on Computers.” in Jorgenson D. W. and R. Landau (eds.), Technology and
Capital Formation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 127-213.

Triplett, Jack E. (2001) Handbook on Quality Adjustment of Price Indexes for Information and
Communication Technology Products. Forthcoming, OECD Directorate for Science,
Technology and Industry: Paris, France.
Vonnahme, Kurt (2002) “Hedonic Price Indexes, Price Determining Features, and a Test for
Network Externalities in the Market for Personal Digital Assistants,” unpublished
undergraduate honors thesis, Northwestern University.
Waugh F. V. (1928) “Quality Factors Influencing Vegetable Prices,” Journal of Farm Economics,
10(2), pp. 185-96.

Table 1: Observations by Year, Brand, and Platform
PDAs
Vendor

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

Casio
Compaq
Dell
Handspring
Hewlett-Packard
IBM
Palm (3Com in 1999)
Psion
Research In Motion
Sharp
Sony
Toshiba

3
4

3
3

4
5

4
7

2

3

2

4

2
4
2
6
4
1
8

2
5
1
10
1
2
7

5
5
2
7
2
4

4
1

5

6

6

8

8

4

2

2

4

5
3

8
3

4
6

19
19
6
13
26
5
45
7
15
15
21
12

Total

34

38

34

30

33

203

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

1

3
1
1

1

1

1
1

2

34

Smart Phones
Vendor
Handspring
Kyocera
Motorola
Nokia
Palm
Qualcomm
Research In Motion
Samsung
Siemens
Sony Ericsson
Total

1999

2000

1

5
2
1

7
4
1
2

3
4
1
1
3
1
12
7
2
2

6

11

17

36

1

1

0

1

24

Table 2: Mean Characteristics by Year and Platform
PDAs
Characteristic

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

Nominal Price

$483.03

$439.53

$387.95

$400.29

$375.23

$362.42

$408.55

MHz

52.53

54.12

66.95

118.00

192.77

262.82

121.37

RAM (MB)

10.24

10.16

12.81

25.27

36.83

50.76

23.74

ROM (MB)

5.85

4.76

5.68

7.03

10.93

11.33

7.48

0.147

0.50

1.92

12.29

8.97

13.73

6.08

Pixels (display resolution)

83840.59

64528.24

52245.79

53987.06

84837.50

80938.79

69367.22

Display size (diag. inches)

4.78

4.29

3.600

3.37

3.34

3.29

3.79

11612.06

10023.00

15226.32

37589.29

56799.07

56600.36

30364.59

Flash ROM (MB)

Colors
Weight (ounces)

10.75

8.84

6.14

5.69

5.95

5.68

7.19

Volume (cubic inches)

19.88

14.91

9.20

9.36

9.09

8.36

11.82

Battery life (hours)

66.97

109.68

110.97

61.28

29.47

25.47

69.12

2001

2002

2003

2004

Total

Smart Phones
Characteristic

1999

Nominal Price

$650.00

$499.00

$557.67

$464.45

$398.11

$454.77

16.00

16.00

30.17

74.09

72.53

62.80

RAM (MB)

2.00

8.00

11.33

15.00

11.59

12.22

ROM (MB)

0.00

0.00

0.33

8.73

0.00

2.72

Flash ROM (MB)

0.00

0.00

3.17

13.27

10.47

9.53

Pixels (display resolution)

38400.00

38400.00

26880.00

57282.91

42279.53

44401.78

Display size (diag. inches)

3.69

3.50

2.92

3.44

3.28

3.28

Colors

2.00

2.00

769.00

36120.00

31593.88

26084.28

MHz

2000

Weight (ounces)

10.00

7.34

5.77

5.99

5.45

5.85

Volume (cubic inches)

22.57

12.04

9.82

11.37

9.88

10.74

6.00

5.00

2.88

4.44

4.73

4.38

Battery life (hours)

Table 3: Convergence of PDA Characteristics, Standard Deviation of Characteristics within Years
Characteristic

1999
210.03

2000
189.70

2001
115.94

2002
170.71

2003
183.26

2004
149.45

1999-2004
174.26

42.17

53.65

64.41

125.77

132.60

142.51

126.45

RAM (MB)

8.79

9.95

12.80

24.74

29.53

33.43

26.27

ROM (MB)

6.75

7.03

6.97

12.73

19.14

21.54

13.55

Flash ROM (MB)

0.50

1.28

3.06

14.60

12.67

14.75

11.23

62595.59

47877.74

33377.97

30302.92

41362.06

30100.03

44151.82

Nominal Price
MHz

Pixels (display resolution)

1.35

1.08

0.58

0.39

0.45

0.44

0.97

25337.50

23426.03

26866.88

32397.93

22655.69

22089.30

32344.49

8.38

4.40

1.87

1.08

1.31

1.10

4.44

Volume (cubic inches)

16.89

9.31

2.75

1.82

2.36

1.54

9.04

Battery life (hours)

91.73

152.59

173.93

116.27

89.31

85.45

128.03

Display size (diag. inches)
Colors
Weight (ounces)

Table 4: Variable Descriptions
Variable
dProc_ARMv5
dProc_ARMv7
dProc_ARMv9
dProc_ARMv11
dProc_M68x
dProc_MIPS1
dProc_MIPS2
dProc_O16
dProc_O32

dpalmOS
dotherOS
dwinOS
dIR
dserial
dUSB
drj11
dblue
dWiFi
dmemstik
dsdmmc
dcf
dsmartc
Slots
dbiometrics
dcamera
dcradle
dfront
dMP3
dpagerdata
dphone
dservice
dalk
Bat
dlipoly
dnimh
dbliion
MHz
RAM
ROM
Flash
Colors
Pix
Screen
dVendorX
Volume
Weight

Description
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the ARM v5 architecture standard
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the ARM v7 architecture standard
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the ARM v9 architecture standard
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the ARM v11 architecture standard
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the Motorola 68x architecture (e.g., DragonBall
family)
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the MIPS architecture (e.g., NEC VR 4111, 4121,
etc.)
0-1 Indicator for processor based on the MIPS architecture (e.g., NEC VR 4122)
0-1 Indicator for other 16-bit processor
0-1 Indicator for other 32-bit processor
0-1 Indicator for Palm operating system
0-1 Indicator for other operating system
0-1 Indicator for Windows (CE, Pocket PC) operating system
0-1 Indicator for infrared port
0-1 Indicator for serial port
0-1 Indicator for USB port
0-1 Indicator for rj11 (telephone) port
0-1 Indicator for Bluetooth wireless support
0-1 Indicator for WiFi (802.11b) wireless support
0-1 Indicator for Sony Memory Stick expansion slot
0-1 Indicator for Secure Digital or Multimedia Memory Card expansion slot
0-1 Indicator for Compact Flash expansion slot
0-1 Indicator for Smart Media expansion slot
The total number of expansion slots
0-1 Indicator for biometric (fingerprint reader) capability
0-1 Indicator for digital camera
0-1 Indicator for an included docking cradle
0-1 Indicator for a “frontier” model
0-1 Indicator for MP3 player
0-1 Indicator for cellular email/data capability
0-1 Indicator for cellular telephone capability
0-1 Indicator for price including a contract for wireless service
0-1 Indicator for disposable alkaline batteries
Claimed battery life in hours
0-1 Indicator for rechargeable lithium polymer battery
0-1 Indicator for rechargeable nickel metal hydride battery
0-1 Indicator for rechargeable lithium ion battery
Clock speed of the CPU, measured in millions of cycles per second
Quantity of random access memory measured in megabytes (MB)
Quantity of read-only memory measured in MB
Quantity of Flash memory (erasable programmable ROM) measured in MB
Number of colors/greyscales supported by the display
Number of pixels in the display
Screen size, measured diagonally, in inches
0-1 Indicator variable for vendor X, nineteen different vendors in total (see Table 1)
Volume of the PDA in cubic inches
Weight of the PDA in ounces

Table 5: Hedonic Regression Results

Huber-White robust standard errors are in parentheses

lnMHz
lnRAM
lnROM
lnFlash
lnPixels
lnScreen
lnColors
lnBatLife
lnWeight
lnVolume
dProc_ARMv5
dProc_ARMv7
dProc_ARMv9
dProc_ARMv11
dProc_M68x
dProc_MIPS2
dProc_O16
dProc_O32
dfront
dotheros
dwinos
dir
dserial
drj11
dusb
dblue
dwifi
lnSlots
dcradle
dbiometrics
dcamera
dpagerdata
dlipoly

Phones & PDAs
Base

Phones & PDAs
Vendors

PDAs
Vendors

PDAs
Significant

0.2830***
(0.0651)
0.1076**
(0.0482)
0.0341
(0.0248)
0.0619**
(0.0276)
0.0306
(0.0649)
0.1986
(0.2175)
0.0165*
(0.0090)
-0.0447
(0.0296)
0.3120**
(0.1385)
-0.0156
(0.1180)
0.4636***
(0.1462)
0.2672*
(0.1592)
0.3240***
(0.1129)
0.2145*
(0.1269)
0.6727***
(0.1539)
0.0257
(0.0872)
0.2592***
(0.0807)
0.8975***
(0.1619)
0.2137***
(0.0451)
0.4126***
(0.1326)
-0.2793**
(0.1087)
0.1132
(0.1148)
0.0766
(0.0482)
-0.2685*
(0.1494)
-0.0111
(0.0612)
0.1202*
(0.0641)
0.1695**
(0.0719)
0.0848
(0.0957)
0.0024
(0.0428)
0.1387
(0.1176)
0.1068
(0.0767)
0.2634*
(0.1586)
0.2697***

0.2308***
(0.0704)
0.1419***
(0.0495)
0.0378
(0.0351)
0.0528
(0.0334)
0.1220
(0.0820)
0.2014
(0.2493)
0.0127
(0.0108)
-0.0083
(0.0338)
0.1285
(0.1418)
0.0434
(0.1172)
0.5819***
(0.1973)
0.2447
(0.1965)
0.4302***
(0.1470)
0.3790**
(0.1734)
0.7793***
(0.2184)
-0.0457
(0.1048)
0.4065**
(0.1590)
0.9830***
(0.1763)
0.2116***
(0.0517)
0.3283
(0.2681)
-0.5128**
(0.2081)
0.1834
(0.1671)
0.1447**
(0.0552)
-0.1642
(0.1605)
-0.0003
(0.0764)
0.1145*
(0.0682)
0.1498*
(0.0770)
0.1878*
(0.1069)
0.0294
(0.0536)
0.1528
(0.1258)
0.2732**
(0.1127)
0.1702
(0.1614)
0.3840***

0.1645**
(0.0696)
0.1790***
(0.0400)
0.0666*
(0.0344)
0.0738**
(0.0331)
0.1623*
(0.0830)
0.2833
(0.2505)
0.0120
(0.0077)
0.0079
(0.0265)
0.0331
(0.1185)
0.1021
(0.1035)
0.6716***
(0.1828)
0.1837
(0.1706)
0.5448***
(0.1496)
0.4904***
(0.1661)
0.8573***
(0.2402)
0.0597
(0.1006)
0.3741***
(0.1388)
0.8012***
(0.1586)
0.0987**
(0.0386)

0.1335**
(0.0557)
0.1891***
(0.0375)
0.0674***
(0.0213)
0.0837***
(0.0239)
0.1638**
(0.0762)

-0.9506***
(0.1873)
-0.0387
(0.1501)
0.0890*
(0.0524)
-0.1160
(0.1366)
0.0922*
(0.0514)
0.1169*
(0.0611)
0.1647**
(0.0667)
0.2962***
(0.1109)
0.0779
(0.0530)
0.2071*
(0.1146)
0.2682**
(0.1070)
-0.1113
(0.1430)
0.3509***

0.0123*
(0.0067)

0.1477**
(0.0656)
0.7328***
(0.1410)
0.2600*
(0.1380)
0.5552***
(0.1186)
0.5229***
(0.1349)
0.8427***
(0.1689)
0.3642***
(0.0809)
0.8384***
(0.1169)
0.1006***
(0.0373)
-0.9243***
(0.1645)
0.1070**
(0.0412)
0.1127**
(0.0482)
0.1259**
(0.0550)
0.1775***
(0.0604)
0.2731***
(0.0932)
0.0931**
(0.0394)
0.2194**
(0.1020)
0.3327***
(0.0866)
0.3138***

dnimh
dbliion
dservicefees
d2000
d2001
d2002
d2003
d2004
Age
dphone
constant

(0.0928)
-0.1733
(0.1660)
0.2247**
(0.0893)
0.0553
(0.0988)
-0.1534***
(0.0504)
-0.3668***
(0.0747)
-0.7092***
(0.0974)
-1.0685***
(0.1111)
-1.1676***
(0.1114)
0.0942***
(0.0336)
0.3886***
(0.1109)
2.9188***
(0.6856)

Casio
Compaq
Dell
Handspring
IBM
Kyocera
Motorola
Nokia
Palm
Psion
Qualcomm
RIM
Samsung
Sharp
Siemens
Sony
Sony Ericsson
Toshiba
N
Adjusted R2
RMSE

Notes:

239
0.7403
0.2307

*** significant at the 1 percent level
** significant at the 5 percent level
* significant at the 10 percent level

(0.1215)
-0.0368
(0.1350)
0.2920***
(0.1018)
0.2368**
(0.0974)
-0.1318***
(0.0493)
-0.3579***
(0.0798)
-0.7307***
(0.1175)
-1.0823***
(0.1376)
-1.1548***
(0.1386)
0.0722**
(0.0330)
0.2688*
(0.1611)
1.9936*
(1.0097)
0.2074
(0.1405)
0.0309
(0.1346)
-0.0511
(0.1529)
-0.0758
(0.2415)
0.0930
(0.2190)
0.2678
(0.2815)
0.2670
(0.2851)
-0.5930**
(0.2777)
-0.2278
(0.1997)
0.0221
(0.1907)
0.1005
(0.2884)
0.0956
(0.1558)
-0.1199
(0.2146)
-0.0643
(0.1928)
0.3973**
(0.1686)
-0.4105*
(0.2437)
-0.4987
(0.3407)
0.0815
(0.1308)
239
0.7621
0.2208

(0.1050)
0.1423*
(0.0799)
0.3139***
(0.0887)
0.5030***
(0.1408)
-0.1666***
(0.0455)
-0.4282***
(0.0676)
-0.9067***
(0.0952)
-1.2510***
(0.1119)
-1.3215***
(0.1069)
0.0789***
(0.0283)
2.1905**
(0.9296)
0.1840
(0.1309)
0.0122
(0.1257)
-0.1199
(0.1512)
-0.6533**
(0.2540)
-0.3884
(0.2573)

(0.0798)
0.3143***
(0.0567)
0.4225***
(0.1085)
-0.1715***
(0.0411)
-0.4576***
(0.0568)
-0.9519***
(0.0731)
-1.3271***
(0.1066)
-1.4051***
(0.0886)
0.0830***
(0.0275)
2.5864***
(0.7524)
0.1738**
(0.0804)

-0.7286***
(0.1784)
-0.4052**
(0.1758)

-0.6310***
(0.2340)
0.0047
(0.1919)

-0.6679***
(0.1582)

0.2913*
(0.1507)

0.2485***
(0.0658)

-0.0307
(0.1961)
-0.9388***
(0.2877)

-0.9150***
(0.2259)

0.0411
(0.1237)
203
0.8400
0.1838

203
0.8470
0.1797

Table 6: Regressions using Time interactions

lnMHz
lnRAM
lnROM
lnFlash
lnPixels
lnScreen
lnColors
lnBatLife
lnWeight
lnVolume

1999-2003
0.1902**
(0.0761)
0.1807***
(0.0428)
0.0525
(0.0352)
0.0665**
(0.0325)
0.0937
(0.1305)
0.3781
(0.2758)
0.0153*
(0.0084)
0.0132
(0.0309)
0.0213
(0.1356)
0.0842
(0.1128)

dProc_ARMv5
dProc_ARMv7
dProc_ARMv9
dProc_ARMv11
dProc_M68x
dProc_MIPS2
dProc_O16
dProc_O32
dfront
dotheros
dwinos
dir
dserial
drj11
dusb
dblue
dwifi
lnSlots
dcradle
dbiometrics
dcamera
dpagerdata
dlipoly
dnimh

0.1489
(0.1665)
0.4297**
(0.1646)
0.3457*
(0.1776)
0.4150
(0.3088)
0.0539
(0.1094)
0.3146**
(0.1271)
0.6709***
(0.1468)
0.1170**
(0.0446)
-0.0206
(0.3014)
-0.8186***
(0.1819)
-0.1156
(0.1381)
0.0872
(0.0672)
-0.1052
(0.1333)
0.0635
(0.0556)
0.0368
(0.0739)
0.2072**
(0.0993)
0.2077
(0.1294)
0.0715
(0.0565)
0.1700
(0.1518)
0.1261
(0.1231)
-0.1090
(0.1526)
0.3779***
(0.1101)
0.1035

2003-2004
0.4403**
(0.1932)
-0.0292
(0.1206)
0.1762
(0.1529)
0.1654
(0.1682)
0.6600**
(0.2562)
3.3313**
(1.5062)
-0.0486
(0.0421)
0.2709**
(0.1094)
1.3624**
(0.6136)
-0.2752
(0.2292)
-0.4412
(0.4402)
-0.6259*
(0.3478)
-0.8167*
(0.4538)
-0.9720*
(0.5413)

-0.1157
(0.0914)
-3.9658***
(0.6750)
0.5161
(0.5851)
0.0991
(0.1482)
0.1941**
(0.0893)
0.0478
(0.0980)
0.0341
(0.1005)
-0.0949
(0.2872)
-1.0126**
(0.3900)
-0.4514*
(0.2480)
-0.3375
(0.3286)
-0.6644***
(0.2401)
0.9290
(0.5671)

Time
Interactions
0.1753**
(0.0690)
0.2212***
(0.0519)
0.0962***
(0.0317)
-0.0464
(0.0593)
0.2429***
(0.0783)
-0.1536
(0.3310)
0.0160**
(0.0073)
0.0326
(0.0267)
-0.0601
(0.1248)
0.1608
(0.1029)
0.5818***
(0.1964)
0.0691
(0.1740)
0.5339***
(0.1484)
0.4377**
(0.1746)
0.7967***
(0.2630)
0.1245
(0.0899)
0.3725***
(0.1384)
0.8083***
(0.1596)
0.0813**
(0.0388)

Time
Indicators
0.1177
(0.0753)
0.1685***
(0.0350)
0.0429
(0.0421)
0.1370***
(0.0357)
0.3384***
(0.0763)
0.9851***
(0.3452)
0.0158***
(0.0060)
-0.0677
(0.0420)
0.3934**
(0.1719)
-0.5840***
(0.1939)
0.6187***
(0.1863)
0.2896
(0.1777)
0.6340***
(0.1478)
0.5778***
(0.1720)
0.8490***
(0.2582)
0.3064**
(0.1212)
0.6023***
(0.1377)
0.8517***
(0.1367)
0.1033***
(0.0386)

-1.0438***
(0.2001)
-0.0541
(0.1293)
0.0411
(0.0508)
-0.0242
(0.1545)
0.0822*
(0.0426)
0.0964
(0.0603)
0.1888***
(0.0660)
0.3065***
(0.1059)
0.1119**
(0.0516)
0.1611
(0.1172)
0.2300**
(0.1079)
-0.0090
(0.1817)
0.3367***
(0.1028)
0.1225

-1.0884***
(0.1897)
-0.0518
(0.0994)
0.0683
(0.0502)
-0.2004
(0.1354)
0.0547
(0.0524)
0.1040*
(0.0582)
0.1133*
(0.0634)
0.2902***
(0.0948)
0.0831*
(0.0498)
0.0817
(0.1243)
0.2699**
(0.1199)
-0.0061
(0.1373)
0.2292**
(0.1002)
0.1294**

dbliion
dservicefees
d2000
d2001
d2002
d2003

(0.0673)
0.2917***
(0.0958)
0.5155***
(0.1384)
-0.1529***
(0.0487)
-0.3974***
(0.0699)
-0.8335***
(0.1095)
-1.2281***
(0.1345)

d2004
Age
constant
Casio
Compaq
Dell
Handspring

0.0731*
(0.0385)
2.8712**
(1.4318)
0.1139
(0.1276)
-0.0112
(0.1119)
-0.1183
(0.1778)
-0.2496**
(0.1047)

0.6523
(0.5856)

0.0855
(0.1375)
-0.2167
(0.1590)
-6.9873*
(4.1381)
0.3403
(0.2190)
-0.9222***
(0.3327)

IBM
Palm
Psion
RIM
Sharp
Sony
Toshiba
time_RAM
time_Flash
time_Screen
d2000_Screen
d2001_Screen
d2002_Screen
d2003_Screen
d2004_Screen
d2000_BatLifee
d2001_BatLife
d2002_BatLife
d2003_BatLife
d2004_BatLife
d2000_Weight
d2001_Weight
d2002_Weight

-0.2574***
(0.0946)
0.0779
(0.2076)
0.2720*
(0.1409)
0.0429
(0.1924)
-0.4765***
(0.1741)
0.0592
(0.1314)

-1.9709**
(0.7410)

-3.8458***
(0.7282)
0.7750**
(0.3575)

(0.0814)
0.3396***
(0.0878)
0.3949**
(0.1799)
-0.3869**
(0.1493)
-0.8517***
(0.2788)
-1.5323***
(0.3793)
-2.1247***
(0.4840)
-2.4090***
(0.6043)
0.0370
(0.0279)
1.7490**
(0.7810)
0.1816
(0.1268)
-0.0096
(0.1305)
0.0596
(0.1887)
-0.5930*
(0.3003)
-0.3172
(0.2975)
-0.4823
(0.2929)
0.1515
(0.1946)
0.2658*
(0.1590)
0.1625
(0.1881)
-0.9556***
(0.3348)
-0.0354
(0.1179)
-0.0243**
(0.0118)
0.0512**
(0.0208)
0.1918*
(0.1007)

(0.0615)
0.1736**
(0.0813)
0.4909***
(0.1475)
0.4359
(0.3300)
-0.0724
(0.3558)
-0.7010
(0.4229)
-3.0292***
(0.7904)
-3.3817***
(0.7377)
0.0281
(0.0331)
0.8000
(0.7908)
0.2718**
(0.1080)
0.1471
(0.1371)
-0.0034
(0.1972)
-0.4519
(0.3184)
-0.2453
(0.3109)
-0.4560
(0.2892)
-0.1877
(0.1933)
0.3047**
(0.1418)
-0.1954
(0.1940)
-1.0373***
(0.3042)
0.1074
(0.1338)

-0.3890
(0.3074)
-1.1074***
(0.2825)
-0.7465*
(0.3998)
0.0979
(0.5849)
0.4697
(0.5879)
-0.1066***
(0.0302)
-0.0407
(0.0399)
0.1133***
(0.0366)
0.1501*
(0.0901)
0.0992**
(0.0491)
-0.9928***
(0.3091)
-0.5139**
(0.2132)
-0.5520**

d2003_Weight
d2004_Weight
d2000_Volume
d2001_Volume
d2002_Volume
d2003_Volume
d2004_Volume
N
Adjusted R2
RMSE
VIF

170
0.8356
0.1827
12.34

63
0.9102
0.1504
85.44

203
0.8529
0.1762
34.03

(0.2588)
-0.6330
(0.5534)
-0.6995**
(0.2899)
0.9430***
(0.2955)
0.9506***
(0.2381)
0.5779**
(0.2301)
1.0873***
(0.4133)
1.1502***
(0.3068)
203
0.8753
0.1623
144.60

See notes to Table 5

Table 7: PDA Price Indexes
Indicator
Characteristics
Complete
Variable Characteristics
Prices
Prices
Hybrid
Time
Time
Pooled
Pooled
Indicators
Indicators

Complete
Hybrid
Time
Indicators

Year

Matched
Model

Indicator
Variable
Pooled

1999

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

1.000

2000

0.918

0.860

0.834

0.847

0.912

0.871

0.910

2001

0.761

0.609

0.589

0.613

0.646

0.653

0.672

2002

0.566

0.353

0.354

0.359

0.371

0.407

0.389

2003

0.428

0.262

0.260

0.269

0.313

0.304

0.323

2004

0.355

0.225

0.223

0.238

0.305

0.274

0.304

AAGR

-18.75%

-25.81%

-25.95%

-24.98%

-21.14%

-22.82%

-21.17%
6

Note: price indexes reflect adjustments for the difference in time periods between “annual” observations; see .

