                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 STEALTH COMPENSATION VIA RETIREMENT BENEFITS

                                         Lucian Arye Bebchuk
                                            Jesse M. Fried

                                         Working Paper 10742
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10742


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




This paper was prepared for the August 2003 symposium on promoting long-term value for public
shareholders co-sponsored by the Berkeley Business Law Journal and the Mercatus Center. A fuller account
of the role of camouflage and stealth compensation in the design of executive compensation is developed in
our forthcoming book, Pay without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation. For
financial support, we are grateful to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business, and to the
Boalt Hall Fund and U.C. Berkeley’s Committee on Research. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Stealth Compensation Via Retirement Benefits
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried
NBER Working Paper No. 10742
September 2004
JEL No. D23, G32, G34 G38, J33, J44, K22, M14

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper analyzes an important form of "stealth compensation" provided to managers of public
companies. We show how boards have been able to camouflage large amount of executive
compensation through the use of retirement benefits and payments. Our study highlights the
significant role that camouflage and stealth compensation play in the design of compensation
arrangements. Our study also highlights the significance of whether information about compensation
arrangements is not merely publicly available but also communicated in a way that is transparent and
accessible to outsiders.

Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Jesse M. Fried
University of California at Berkeley
friedj@law.berkeley.edu
                                    I. INTRODUCTION

        This paper focuses on an important form of “stealth compensation”
provided to managers of public companies. We show how designers of
compensation arrangements for these managers have been able to camouflage
large amount of executive compensation through the use of retirement benefits
and payments. Our study highlights the significant role that camouflage and
stealth compensation play in the design of compensation arrangements. Our study
also highlights the importance of ensuring that information about compensation
arrangements not only be placed in the public domain but also be communicated
in a way that is transparent and accessible to outsiders.
        We begin by discussing the critical role of outrage costs and camouflage in
the setting of executive compensation. Managers have considerable influence over
their pay and use their influence to extract pay that is both higher and less
performance sensitive than arm’s length bargaining with the board would
produce. The difference between what managers’ power enables them to receive,
and what they would receive under arm’s length bargaining, constitutes “rents.”
Managers’ ability to extract rents, however, is hardly unlimited. When a board
approves a compensation arrangement that favors managers at the expense of
shareholders, executives and directors will bear certain economic and social costs.
The magnitude of these costs will depend on how the arrangement is perceived by
outsiders whose views matter to the directors and executives. An arrangement
that is perceived as outrageous might reduce shareholders’ willingness to support
incumbents in a proxy contest or takeover bid, might lead to shareholder pressure
on managers and directors, and might embarrass directors and managers or harm
their reputations. The more outrage a compensation arrangement is expected to
generate, the more reluctant directors will be to approve it and the more hesitant
managers will be to propose it in the first place.
        The critical role of outsiders’ perception of executives’ compensation, and
the significance of outrage costs, explain the importance of “camouflage.” The
desire to minimize outrage gives designers of compensation arrangements a
strong incentive to try to obscure and justify—or, more generally, to camouflage—
both the level and performance-insensitivity of executive compensation.
Camouflage thus allows executives to reap benefits at the expense of shareholders.
More importantly, attempts to camouflage can lead to the adoption of inefficient
compensation structures that harm managers’ incentives and in turn company
performance, imposing even greater costs on shareholders.
        We discuss elsewhere how various forms of non-retirement compensation,
including bonuses, stock option plans, and executive loans, have been designed




                                        1
with an eye to camouflaging rents and minimizing outrage.1 In this paper, we
examine how retirement arrangements have often been designed in a way that
serves this goal. As disclosure requirements for executive salaries, bonuses, and
long-term compensation have become stricter, firms have increasingly turned to
postretirement payments and benefits as ways to compensate managers.
Postretirement value has been provided to executives through four main channels:
retirement pensions, deferred compensation, postretirement perks, and
guaranteed consulting fees. As we will explain these methods enable firms to
provide a substantial amount of performance-insensitive value in a less
transparent form than, say, salary. Firms have used these channels to make less
transparent both the total amount of compensation received by managers and the
extent to which pay is decoupled from managers’ own performance.
        Before describing outrage costs and camouflage in more detail and
discussing each of the four channels, we should note two attributes they all share.
First, these arrangements differ substantially from those that firms elect to provide
to other employees. Although firms often provide pensions and deferred
compensation to lower-level employees, they do so only to the extent that these
arrangements receive a tax subsidy. This pattern suggests that, absent such a
subsidy, pensions and deferred compensation are generally not efficient. Yet most
of the arrangements provided to executives do not enjoy similar tax advantages.
Furthermore, consistent with economists’ belief that in-kind benefits are
inefficient, firms do not generally provide retired employees with coverage for
specified consumption expenses. Such benefits are, however, given to high-level
executives. And although firms occasionally use retired employees as consultants
when the need arises, they generally do not guarantee lifetime consulting fees to
any employees other than executives.
        The second shared attribute of these various retirement payments is that
they all make it possible to obscure large amounts of performance-decoupled
compensation. As we shall see, firms do not have to disclose the value transferred
to executives through these channels in the same way that other forms of
compensation—such as salary, bonuses, and stock options—must be disclosed.




1  .See Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Jesse M. Fried, and David I. Walker, Managerial Power and
Rent Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation, 69 U. Chicago L. Rev. 751, 795-
837 (2002); Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried, Executive Compensation as an
Agency Problem, 17 J. Econ. Perspectives, 71, 81-87; Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M.
Fried, Pay Without Performance: The Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation
(Harvard University Press, forthcoming 2004), Chapters 9-14.



                                           2
Retirement payments hence offer what might be called “stealth compensation.”2
Indeed, the dollar figures used by the media in reporting compensation levels, and
by financial economists in their studies, usually do not include the large value
provided to executives through retirement benefits.
        The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Part II describes the
importance of outrage costs and camouflage in the setting of executive
compensation. Part III discusses the widespread use of supplemental executive
retirement plans (“SERPs”). It explains how SERPs differ from the pension
benefits provided to regular employees and how they can be used to camouflage a
significant amount of performance-insensitive compensation to executives. Part
IV discusses the deferred compensation arrangements offered to managers. It
describes how these plans differ from the 401(k) plans offered other employees
and how these plans, like SERPs, are used to provide a significant amount of
performance-decoupled pay to executives in a way that is largely hidden from
view. Part V considers the use of post-retirement perks and consulting contracts.
Part VI discusses the potential benefits to shareholders from increased
transparency of retirement arrangements. It also notes changes to the disclosure
requirements for retirement benefits that could make them more transparent. Part
VII concludes



                        II. OUTRAGE COSTS AND CAMOUFLAGE

     This Part explores the role and significance of outrage costs and camouflage
in the setting of executive compensation. Section A explains why outsiders’
perceptions, and the possibility of outrage, are of concern to boards when they
fashion pay packages for managers. Section B describes the key role of
camouflage in the design of compensation arrangements. Section C provides
empirical evidence on the effect of outrage and camouflage on managerial pay.




2 We borrow the term “stealth compensation” from Robert Monks, who used it to refer to
executives’ stock option compensation because that form of payment is not expensed on
the firm’s income statement. Robert A. G. Monks, The Emperor’s Nightingale: Restoring the
Integrity of the Corporation in the Age of Shareholder Activism (Boston: Addison-Wesley,
1999), 59–62.



                                           3
                     A. The Importance of Outsiders’ Perceptions
        As we discuss and document in great detail elsewhere, 3 top executives
have considerable influence on their own pay arrangements. Although directors
are supposed to negotiate with executives at arm’s length, they have both financial
and non-financial incentives to provide managers with pay arrangements that
favor managers at the expense of shareholders. A variety of psychological and
social factors acting on the directors reinforce these incentives to serve managers’
interests. And neither shareholder pressure nor market forces have been able to
effectively constrain managerial influence over pay.
        Managers have used their power to extract pay that is both higher and less
performance sensitive than arm’s length bargaining with the board would
produce. The difference between what managers’ influence enables them to
receive, and what they would receive under arm’s length bargaining, is called
“rents.” The rents captured by managers come in both the form of higher pay and
reduced pressure to generate value for shareholders.
        However, managers’ ability to extract these rents is hardly unlimited. When
a board approves a compensation arrangement that favors managers at the
expense of shareholders, executives and directors may bear certain economic and
social costs.    Although market forces, the need for board approval, and social
sanctions do not altogether prevent deviations from arm’s-length contracting, they
do, as we explain below, place some constraints on managers’ ability to obtain
favorable compensation packages, and the tightness of these constraints depends
on outsiders’ perceptions of these pay arrangements.
        In the face of these constraints, how far firms will go in favoring managers
will depend not only on how much contemplated arrangements will actually favor
executives be but also on how these arrangements will be perceived by outsiders.
Whether directors and managers are deterred from adopting a given
compensation arrangement depends on the extent to which it will be viewed by
relevant outsiders as unjustified or even abusive or egregious. We have broadly
referred to negative reactions by outsiders as “outrage,” even though some of
them may amount to criticism not reaching the level of outrage, and to the costs
that such reactions impose on managers and directors as “outrage costs.” 4 The
more widespread and strong these negative reactions are— that is, the greater the

3 See Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker, Managerial Power, supra note 1 at 764-783; Bebchuk
and Fried, Executive Compensation, supra note 1, at 73-75; Bebchuk and Fried, Pay
Without Performance, supra note 1, Chapter 2.
4 See Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker, Managerial Power, supra note 1, at 786-788; Bebchuk

and Fried, Executive Compensation, supra note 1, at 75-76; Bebchuk and Fried, Pay
Without Performance, Chapter 5.



                                         4
outrage—the larger the costs to directors and managers. When the potential
outrage costs are large enough, they will deter the adoption of arrangements that
managers would otherwise favor. Arrangements that are deterred in this way can
be regarded as ones that violate the “outrage constraint.”
       Why should perceptions—and, in particular, outrage—matter? To begin
with, the extent to which markets penalize managers and directors for the
adoption of particular arrangements depends on how these arrangements are
perceived. Consider the market for corporate control. This market may penalize
the adoption of arrangements by increasing the vulnerability of managers and
directors to a control contest. Such a penalty is likely to be significant only if the
firm adopts compensation arrangements that appear sufficiently outrageous.
Institutional investors may view such arrangements as a strong signal that the
executives or directors are relatively insensitive to shareholder interests. These
investors may become less likely to support the incumbents should a hostile
takeover or a proxy fight occur. In this manner, through the operation of the
market for corporate control, outrage over compensation can impose a penalty on
managers and directors.
       Consider also the labor market and the reputation of managers and
directors in this market. Reputational damage might have an adverse effect on the
future career prospects of managers and directors. It might also affect their current
business dealings with others outside the firm. Indeed, some outside directors join
boards partly for the prestige and connections that the posts provide, and gaining
a bad reputation could eliminate these benefits and impose costs instead.
Reputational losses to managers and directors will likely be significant, however,
only if their firms adopt compensation arrangements that generate sufficiently
negative reactions—that is, sufficient outrage. An arrangement that fails to serve
shareholders would be unlikely to impose such costs as long as it falls within the
range of what is perceived as conventional and legitimate.
       Indeed, we believe that arrangements that are perceived as abusive or
outrageous impose on executives greater costs than an analysis based solely on the
above market incentives suggests. That is, we believe that constraints on rent
extraction are somewhat tighter than suggested by an analysis of the (limited)
market penalties that outrageous compensation arrangements involve. As we have
explained elsewhere,5 directors are affected not only by “narrow” interests of a
homo economicus but also by various social and psychological factors (such as
collegiality, loyalty, and so forth) that pull them in the direction of favoring
executives. Similarly, there are social and psychological factors that increase the


5   See Bebchuk and Fried, Pay without Performance, supra note 1, Chapter 2.



                                            5
costs that managers and directors incur from adopting arrangements that are
viewed by outsiders as sufficiently outrageous.
        Managers and directors are likely to care about the extent to which relevant
social and professional groups view them with approval and esteem. Directors are
likely to prefer to avoid criticism or ridicule from the social or professional groups
whose opinions they value—even if such criticism or ridicule does not involve any
economic losses for them.6 As a result, even if the economic incentives provided
by the markets for corporate control and managerial labor would be insufficient to
deter managers from seeking certain outrageous compensation, fear of
embarrassment or criticism could discourage managers from doing so. When
former General Electric CEO Jack Welch made headlines by giving up much of the
retirement perks to which he was contractually entitled—including the free use of
a corporate jet and a New York apartment—he was undoubtedly seeking to
protect the approval and esteem he had earlier enjoyed at the expense of his
narrow economic interests.7
        Clearly, for outrage to impose significant costs, it must be sufficiently
widespread among a relevant group of observers. It is not enough for a small
group of researchers or arbitrageurs to identify a compensation scheme as
egregiously bad for shareholders. For executives or directors to be adversely
affected in a material way by market penalties or social costs, the outrage must be
shared by those outsiders whose views matter most to them: the institutional
investor community, the business media, and social and professional groups to
which directors and managers belong.



                                   B. Camouflage

       The main costs to directors and managers of adopting compensation
arrangements that favor managers, then, depend mainly not on how costly the
arrangements actually are to shareholders, but on how costly the arrangements are
perceived to be by important outsiders. Perceptions matter. This brings us to
another concept that is critical for understanding the compensation landscape:
camouflage.
       Because perceptions are so important, the designers of compensation plans
can limit outside criticism and outrage by dressing, packaging, or hiding—in

6 Jay W. Lorsch and Elizabeth M. MacIver, Pawns or Potentates? The Reality of America’s
Corporate Boards (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1989), 23–31.
7 See Matthew Brelis, “GE, Welch Agree to Slash His Perks: Retired CEO Will Retain

Office, Staff, Lose Many Benefits,” Boston Globe, September 17, 2002, D1.



                                          6
short, camouflaging—rent extraction. The more reasonable and defensible a
package appears, the more rents managers can enjoy without facing significant
outrage. Accordingly, under the managerial power approach, managers will
prefer compensation practices that obscure the total amount of compensation, that
appear to be more performance based than they actually are, and that package pay
in ways that make it easier to justify and defend.
        The greater the ability of plan designers to engage in camouflage, the more
they can be expected do so. Before 1992, the SEC required firms to report executive
compensation to the public but allowed them to do so in the format of their
choosing. Not surprisingly, firms took full advantage of their discretion to obscure
the amount and form of their pay. An SEC official describes the pre-1992 state of
affairs as follows:


    “The information [in the executive compensation section] was wholly
    unintelligible. . . . The typical compensation disclosure ran ten to fourteen
    pages. Depending on the company’s attitude toward disclosure, you might
    get reference to a $3,500,081 pay package spelled out rather than in
    numbers. That gives you an idea of the nature of the disclosures: it was
    legalistic, turgid, and opaque; the numbers were buried somewhere in the
    fourteen pages. Someone once gave a series of institutional investor
    analysts a proxy statement and asked them to compute the compensation
    received by the executives covered in the proxy statement. No two
    analysts came up with the same number. The numbers that were
    calculated varied widely.8”


     In 1992, the SEC tightened its disclosure rules by providing standards for how
information about executive pay must be presented. The standardized
compensation tables that firms now must use have made camouflage more
difficult. As we describe elsewhere, however, the 1992 disclosure requirements
have hardly brought an end to firms’ ability to camouflage the amount and form
of executive pay.9
       One might reasonably ask how, if rent extraction is camouflaged, any
observer (including this paper’s authors) can determine that executives are
enjoying rents. In theory, rent extraction could be camouflaged so well that it

8   Linda C. Quinn, “Executive Compensation under the New SEC Disclosure
Requirements,” in Seventh Annual Corporate Law Symposium: Executive Compensation,
University of Cincinnati Law Review 63 (1995): 770–771.
9 See Bebchuk and Fried, Pay Without Performance, supra note 1, Chapter 6-14.




                                         7
becomes absolutely undetectable. In fact, however, camouflage is successful as
long as the rent extraction is not apparent to those outside observers whose
outrage would be particularly costly for directors and managers, even if other
observers are aware that the executives are enjoying large rents.
       Thus, the notion of camouflage is consistent with the possibility that an
outsider might identify the hidden rents of a compensation arrangement. Such a
conclusion would simply reflect the observer’s judgment, not yet widely shared,
that the compensation program is distorted in favor of managers. In time, of
course, such conclusions might become widely accepted, in which case the rent
extraction will no longer be camouflaged. But a given form of rent extraction
might continue to be camouflaged long after it has been recognized by some
observers.



                         C. Outrage and Camouflage at Work

        Some critics of our earlier work argued that the idea of outrage costs, and
the related idea of camouflage, are not empirically testable.10 But this is not the
case. There is evidence that directors and executives are indeed influenced—in
compensation and other types of decisions—by strong outside criticism and
outrage. And there is evidence that they engage in camouflage.
        To begin with, there is evidence that shareholder precatory resolutions that
criticize managers’ high compensation have an impact. Although such resolutions
are nonbinding and generally fail to pass anyway, their appearance may shine a
critical light on problematic aspects of the firm’s executive compensation policies
and make them less opaque. Indeed, a study by Randall Thomas and Kenneth
Martin examined the effect of pay-related precatory resolutions during the mid-
1990s and found that they had a moderating influence on subsequent
compensation decisions.11 The study found that during the two-year period
following the passage of shareholder resolutions criticizing executive pay in
particular firms, total compensation (adjusted for industry) in those firms declined
by a statistically significant average of $2.7 million. In a subsequent study, the
researchers also found that higher negative votes on management-sponsored

10 See, for example, Kevin J. Murphy, “Explaining Executive Compensation: Managerial
Power vs. the Perceived Cost of Stock Options,” University of Chicago Law Review 69 (2002):
847–869; Holman W. Jenkins Jr., “Business World: Outrageous CEO Pay Revisited,” Wall
Street Journal, October 2, 2002, A17.
11 Randall S. Thomas and Kenneth J. Martin, “The Effect of Shareholder Proposals on

Executive Compensation,” University of Cincinnati Law Review 67 (1999): 1021–1065.



                                            8
proposals to ratify an option plan slowed the increase in CEO compensation in
subsequent years.12
        Another study, by Alexander Dyck and Luigi Zingales, documents the
effects of media scrutiny on corporate decisions in general. The authors found that
such attention leads firms to adopt more environmentally friendly policies, for
example. As for issues of corporate governance, they also found that media
attention reduces the amount of value that controlling shareholders siphon off.13
        A well-known example of how outside criticism affects governance
decisions involves the campaign of shareholder activist Robert Monks against the
directors of Sears. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, Monks urged the Sears
board to adopt various proposals to improve the firm’s dismal performance. In
April 1992, having been repeatedly ignored by the board, Monks took out an
advertisement in the Wall Street Journal titled “The Non-performing Assets of
Sears” and identified the directors by name. The presumably embarrassed
directors then adopted many of Monks’s proposals, generating an abnormal stock
price return (the change in stock price adjusted for overall stock market
movements) of almost 10 percent when the changes were announced.14
        Another example is the California State Pension Fund for Public
Employees’ (CalPERS) practice of identifying poorly run companies. For some
years, CalPERS put poorly performing firms on what it called its “focus list” and
suggested various ways to improve their corporate governance practices, such as
making compensation and nominating committees fully independent. In many
cases, firms placed on the list implemented some of the requested changes. Then,
in 1991, after several CEOs told CalPERS that being less antagonistic would be
even more effective, CalPERS decided to adopt a “kinder, gentler” approach that
did not involve public shaming. Absent the threat of adverse publicity, however,
firms approached by CalPERS were actually much less cooperative. The then-CEO
of CalPERS, Dale Hanson, said at the time, “It has shown us that a number of
companies won’t move unless they have to deal with the problem because it’s in




12 Kenneth J. Martin and Randall S. Thomas, “When Is Enough, Enough? Market Reaction
to Highly Dilutive Stock Option Plans and the Subsequent Impact on CEO
Compensation,” Journal of Corporate Finance (forthcoming)
13 Alexander Dyck and Luigi Zingales, “The Corporate Governance Role of the Media,”

working paper, Harvard Business School and the University of Chicago, 2002; and
Alexander Dyck and Luigi Zingales, “Private Benefits of Control: An International
Comparison,” Journal of Finance 59 (2004): 537-600.
14  Robert Monks and Nell Minow, Corporate Governance, 2nd ed. (Cambridge, MA:
Blackwell Publishing, 1995), 399-411.



                                         9
the public eye.” In 1992, CalPERS reinstated its policy of publicly shaming
uncooperative firms.15
       In fact, CalPERS’ policy of shaming has had a measurable effect on targeted
corporations. YiLin Wu found that firms put on CalPERS’ poor governance focus
list were subsequently more likely to reduce the number of inside directors on
their boards. These firms were also more likely to experience CEO turnover.16
Shaming also appears to have adversely affected the careers of inside directors
that left the targeted firms’ boards. They were much less likely than inside
directors departing nontargeted firms to land other board positions. As this study
makes clear, negative publicity—or outrage—does impose costs.
       Finally, and perhaps most importantly, there is substantial evidence of
camouflage activities. A testable implication of the camouflage idea is that when
compensation arrangements deviate from arm’s-length bargains, they should do
so in a way that makes the amount of pay or the insensitivity of pay to
performance less visible. This prediction is borne out by actual compensation
practices. As we have shown elsewhere, many common non-retirement
compensation practices—such as company loans and the structure of conventional
options—provide camouflage benefits. 17 And as we will explain below, the four
channels through which executives are paid after retirement also serve to obscure
a significant amount of compensation.



                             III. RETIREMENT PENSIONS

        Many employees are covered by pension plans that provide payments to
workers after retirement. At first glance, it seems only natural for firms to provide
such benefits to their executives. A closer look, however, raises serious questions
about whether the extensive use of executive pensions as a form of compensation
reflects arm’s-length bargaining. Section A describes the difference between
executive retirement pensions and the retirement benefits offered to ordinary
workers. Section B explains how the executive pensions are used to camouflage a
substantial amount of performance-decoupled executive pay.



15 Judith Dobrzynski, “CalPERS Is Ready to Roar, but Will CEOs Listen?” BusinessWeek,
March 30, 1992, 44.
16 YiLin Wu, “The Impact of Public Opinion on Board Structure Changes, Director Career

Progression, and CEO Turnover: Evidence from CalPERS’ Corporate Governance
Program,” Journal of Corporate Finance 10 (2004): 199.
17 See Bebchuk and Fried, Pay Without Performance, supra note 1, at Chapters 9-14.




                                         10
                          A. Differences from Regular Pensions
       Most of the pension plans used for employees are designed to be
“qualified” for favorable tax treatment. The firm gets a current deduction for
contributing funds to a qualified plan for employees—the same deduction it
would have received had it paid the amount of the contribution to workers in the
form of salary. Workers, however, do not pay income taxes on the pension money
until they retire and begin receiving payouts from the plan. In the meantime, the
funds invested by the firm grow tax-free. Neither the firm nor the employees must
pay any taxes while the plan’s investments increase in value. Thus, the plans
provide a tax benefit to employees at no cost to the firm.18
       Given the opportunity, boards might well prefer to offer executives
qualified retirement plans. A qualified pension plan, however, can use only about
$200,000 of annual compensation as the basis for determining benefits under the
plan. For example, a plan that promises to pay all retirees, annually, 50 percent of
the compensation earned during their last year of service cannot pay a retired
executive more than $100,000 annually, even if the executive earned $1 million of
compensation during that final year. As a result, firms cannot use qualified plans
to provide executives with pensions that are similar in size to their annual




18  To illustrate how the tax subsidy provided to a qualified plan operates, consider the
following examples involving a hypothetical firm and employee. Assume that both face a
40 percent tax rate on all of their income, including capital gains. And assume that both
are able to earn, between the preretirement period and retirement period, a pretax return
of 100 percent on their investments.
      Example 1: The employee invests for retirement outside a qualified plan. Suppose
the firm pays the employee $100 in the preretirement period. The firm deducts $100 from
its taxable income, reducing its tax liability by $40. The employee pays $40 in taxes, takes
the aftertax income of $60, and invests it. The $60 grows to $120 by the retirement
period—a gain of $60. This $60 gain triggers a tax liability of $24 (40 percent of $60),
leaving the employee with $96 ($60 + $36) when the employee retires.
      Example 2: The firm invests for the employee’s retirement under a qualified plan.
Now suppose the firm contributes the $100 to a qualified pension plan in the
preretirement period. The firm again deducts $100 from its taxable income, reducing its
tax liability by $40. The $100 grows to $200 by the time of the employee’s retirement—a
gain of $100. The $200 is distributed to the employee, who pays a tax of $80 (40 percent of
$200), leaving the employee with $120, or $24 more than in Example 1, in which the
employee had received $100 from the firm in the preretirement period and saved for
retirement. The gain to the employee does not come at the expense of the employer: in
both examples, the employer incurs an aftertax cost of $60 in the preretirement period.



                                            11
compensation. For this reason, most firms also provide executives with
nonqualified “supplemental” executive retirement plans (known as “SERPs”).19
        SERPs differ from typical qualified pension plans in two critical ways. First,
they do not receive the favorable tax treatment enjoyed by qualified plans; no
investment income goes untaxed under a SERP. The company pays taxes on the
income it must generate in order to pay the executive in retirement. If the money
had been distributed as salary, on the other hand, the executive who invested the
money for retirement would have had to pay taxes on any income generated. The
effect of the SERP, therefore, is to shift some of the executive’s tax burden to the
firm.20
        If the employee and the firm are subject to the same tax rate and are able to
earn the same pretax rate of return on their investments, a SERP cannot reduce the
total amount of taxes paid by the parties. For every dollar the employee’s tax
burden is reduced, the firm’s tax burden is increased by one dollar. Unlike a
qualified plan, the SERP would not reduce the parties’ total tax burden.21

19 Clark Consulting reports that approximately 70 percent of responding firms use SERPs.
Clark Consulting, “Executive Benefits: A Survey of Current Trends: 2003 Results,” 26.
20 A firm can shelter from taxation the investment income on funds set aside for financing

executive pensions by investing these funds in life insurance policies on the lives of its
executives and other employees. However, because of the fees that must be paid to the
insurance company, this tax-sheltering mechanism involves significant costs, which are
borne by the company rather than the executive. If, on the other hand, the executive
received the funds to begin with, the executive would also be able to shelter the
investment returns from taxation by purchasing a variable annuity, at no cost to the
company.
21   To illustrate the effect of a SERP on the tax burdens of the parties, consider the
following example and explanation, which builds on the examples provided in note 2.
Assume again that both the firm and the executive face a 40 percent tax rate on all of their
income, including capital gains. And assume that both are able to earn, between the
preretirement and retirement periods, a pretax return of 100 percent on their investments.
      Example 3: The firm invests for the executive’s retirement under a nonqualified plan.
Suppose a firm seeks to use a SERP to give an executive the same retirement payment that
it gives the employee in example 2 using a qualified plan. As in the case of the employee,
the firm sets aside $100 to fund the executive’s pension, which grows to $200 by the time
the executive retires. The $200 is distributed to the executive, who, like the employee,
pays a 40 percent tax on the retirement distribution—a tax of $80. This leaves the
executive, like the employee in example 2, with $120, $24 more than the employee in
example 1 made.
      Now consider the effect of the SERP on the firm. In examples 1 and 2, discussed in
note 2, the firm reduces its tax liability by $40 in the preretirement period when it pays the
worker $100 or contributes $100 to the worker’s qualified pension plan. In example 3, the
firm reduces its tax liability by $80 in the retirement period when it pays the executive
$200. However, the firm must add to its taxable income in the retirement period the $100



                                             12
        In reality, of course, the situation is more complicated.22 In many cases, the
total tax liability faced by the parties will be affected by whether the executive or
the firm saves for the executive’s retirement. Even if the firm and the executive are
able to earn the same return on their investments, they may face different tax
rates. Suppose, for example, that an executive investing personal funds for
retirement in the stock market is paying a low long-term capital-gains tax rate of
15 percent, while the firm pays taxes on the income generated for the executive’s
retirement at a corporate tax rate of 35 percent. In such a case, using SERPs would
be tax-inefficient and would increase the total amount of taxes paid by the two
parties. On the other hand, if the firm had no taxable earnings and was not
expected to pay taxes for a considerable amount of time, the reverse might be true:
shifting retirement savings from the executive to the firm might be tax-efficient.23
        Similarly, even if the firm and the executive face the same tax rate, the
investment returns available to the firm may be higher than those available to the
executive. For example, firms having difficulty raising capital may enjoy a higher
expected rate of return on new investments than the market generally. (This is
unlikely to be the case for companies with easy access to capital, as such
companies are unlikely to have unutilized investments with returns much higher
than the market.) If the firm has better investment opportunities, having it invest



gain on the funds it previously invested for the executive’s retirement, and this increases
the firm’s tax liability in the retirement period by $40. The net effect of the $200 payment
to the executive and the $100 gain is to reduce the firm’s tax liability by $40 during the
retirement period.
      Had the firm reduced its tax liability by $40 in the preretirement period, rather than
during the retirement period, it could have invested the $40 and earned a pretax return of
$40 (100 percent) by the retirement period. That $40 would also have been taxed at 40
percent, leaving the firm with $64. But by reducing its tax liability in the retirement
period, the firm has only an extra $40, $24 less. The firm is thus worse off than in example
2, in which it received the same $40 reduction in its tax liability in the preretirement
period. The $24 gain to the executive from the use of a nonqualified plan designed to put
the executive in the same position as an employee under a qualified retirement plan
comes at the expense of the firm.
22 For an explanation of the tax effects of using arrangements such as SERPs to defer

compensation under various scenarios, see Myron S. Scholes, Mark A. Wolfson, Merle
Erickson, Edward L. Maydew, and Terry Shevlin, Taxes and Business Strategy: A Planning
Approach, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002), 181–185
23 The tax efficiency of a SERP will also be affected by expected changes in the firm’s (or

the executive’s) tax rate change over time. For example, if the firm is losing money and
thus unable to get a current tax benefit by deducting executive compensation in the
current period, but is expected to be subject to a higher tax rate in the future, deferring an
executive’s compensation will be tax efficient, all else being equal.



                                             13
for the executive’s retirement will be efficient for both parties, even if their tax
rates are identical.
        However, there is no reason to believe that, absent a tax subsidy, it is
generally efficient to have the firm save for the executive. On the contrary, there
are good reasons to think that it is inefficient for many firms to save for their
executives’ retirement, given individuals’ low long-term capital-gains tax rate. It is
telling that firms providing SERPs to executives do not offer nonqualified
retirement plans to other employees. Consider the case where it is efficient for a
firm to provide a SERP to its executives because the firm has better investment
opportunities than they do. In such a case, it should also be efficient for the firm to
provide nonqualified retirement to its nonexecutive employees who supplement
their qualified pensions with personal retirement savings. However, firms rarely,
if ever, do so. This fact suggests that, absent the tax subsidy provided to qualified
plans, using nonqualified retirement benefits is commonly not an efficient way to
compensate employees. Yet in 2002, more than 70 percent of firms provided
nonqualified SERPs to their executives.24
        The second important difference between executive SERPs and qualified
pension plans for nonexecutive employees concerns the risk borne by the firm and
by the participant. Qualified pension plans offered to new lower-level employees
are usually based on a defined contribution. The firm commits to contribute a
specified amount each year. The value available to an employee upon retirement
depends on the performance of the plan’s investments. The risk of poor
investment performance falls entirely on the employee.
        In contrast, SERPs offered to executives are defined-benefit plans, which
guarantee fixed payments to the executive for life. All of the CEOs in the S&P
ExecuComp database have defined-benefit plans.25 These plans shift the risk of
investment performance entirely to the firm and its shareholders. No matter how
poorly the firm and its investments perform, the executive is guaranteed a
specified lifelong stream of payments.
        Given that arm’s-length negotiations with most employees lead to defined-
contribution arrangements, why should arm’s-length bargaining with executives
yield such a different result? If anything, there are reasons to believe that defined-
benefit plans should be more valuable to regular employees—and thus offer a
more efficient form of compensation—than they are to executives. Unlike most
executives, ordinary employees are unlikely to accumulate substantial wealth over
their lifetimes. They are likely to be more dependent on their pensions to meet

24Clark Consulting, “Executive Benefits: A Survey of Current Trends: 2003 Results,” 26.
25 Steven Balsam, An Introduction to Executive Compensation (San Diego, CA: Academic
Press, 2002): 175.



                                          14
their financial needs in retirement and therefore less able to bear the investment
risks associated with defined-contribution plans. In contrast, executives faced with
defined-contribution plans could easily insure themselves against poor investment
performance by using some of their already high salaries and option-based
compensation to buy fixed annuities that would provide them with guaranteed
payments. If only one of the two groups were to receive defined-benefit plans,
arm’s-length contracting would predict that group to be nonexecutive employees,
not executives.



                                B. Camouflage Benefits

       Although the efficiency benefits of providing executives with defined-
benefit SERPs are far from clear, such plans do considerably reduce the visibility
of a substantial amount of performance-insensitive compensation.
       SERP payments are usually based on years of service and preretirement
cash compensation. The higher the executive’s salary and the longer the period of
employment, the higher the payout. SERP payments—like salary—are therefore
largely decoupled from the executive’s own performance. Many firms have also
credited executives with years they did not actually serve, ratcheting up the final
payout under the plan’s formula.26
       In their annual public filings, firms must publish compensation tables
indicating the dollar value of different forms of compensation received by the
current CEO and the four other most highly paid executives of the firm. The
numbers in these tables are the most visible indicators of executive compensation
in public firms. They are easily accessible to the media and others reading the
public filings. Indeed, the standard databases of executive compensation, which
are used by both financial economists and compensation consultants, are based on
these numbers.
        If an executive’s pensions were structured as a defined contribution plan,
the firm’s annual contributions to the executive’s account would be reported in the
compensation tables. An important camouflage benefit of SERPs is that the annual
increase in the present value of an executive’s defined benefit plan—due to pay
raises and the addition of another year of service—is largely hidden from view:
firms are not required to include this increase in value in the compensation tables.
A person examining the compensation tables would not see the steady buildup in
value of an executive’s SERP.

26 See, for example, Mike Blahnik, “For CEO Pensions, Rank Has Its Privileges,” Star
Tribune (Minneapolis, MN), May 18, 2003, 1A.



                                        15
        Furthermore, and importantly, disclosure requirements require firms to
include in their annual compensation tables only amounts paid to their current
executives. Because the executives are no longer employed by the firm when the
pension payments begin, the payments need not be included in the published
tables. Thus, the value of an executive’s defined-benefit SERP never appears in the
place where the media and researchers collect most of their information about
executive compensation. And because the value of an executive’s pension payouts
is obscured, the performance insensitivity of such payments also gets little notice.
        Consider a situation in which a CEO serves a company for ten years and
then receives annually, for life, a payment that equals a large fraction of the salary
earned during the last year of service. In such a case, the total value of the pension
payments may in the end exceed the total value of the salary received during the
CEO’s actual tenure. Unlike the salary amounts, however, the value of the pension
payments will never appear in the firm’s published compensation tables.
        For example, when IBM CEO Louis Gerstner retired after about nine years
of service, he was entitled to a $1,140,000 annual pension beginning at age 60.27
The actuarial value of this annuity was of a similar order of magnitude as the
approximately $18 million in salary he received during his nine years as CEO. But
IBM was not required to include the pension in the compensation tables or even
place a dollar value on it.28
        Not surprisingly, SERP plans are designed and marketed specifically as
ways to increase compensation “off the radar screen of shareholders.”29 Indeed,
according to media reports, some directors have voted to adopt SERPs only after
being reassured that the amounts involved do not have to be reported to the
public.30
        To be sure, although neither the increase in value of the SERP plan before
retirement nor the amount of payments after retirement appears in the


27 See International Business Machines Schedule 14A (filed on March 12, 2001): 18.
28 To take another example, GE’s former CEO, Jack Welch, left his firm with an annual
pension of almost $10 million. See Paul Hodgson, “Golden Parachutes and Cushioned
Landings,” The Corporate Library (February 2003), 14. The large actuarial value of the
stream of promised pension payments never appeared in the firm’s compensation tables
29 Cynthia Richson, quoted in Liz Pulliam Weston, “Despite Recession, Perks for Top

Executives Grow,” Los Angeles Times, February 1, 2002, A1.
30 See Glenn Howatt, “HealthPartners Ex-CEO Reaped Board’s Favors: Secret Deals

Contributed to $5.5 Million Package,” Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN), January 17, 2003,
A1. The Star Tribune reported that the HealthPartners board adopted a SERP for the CEO
“after receiving assurances that the supplemental retirement plan wouldn’t have to be
reported to the public” and “rejecting a suggestion that awards in the plan be tied to
company performance.”



                                          16
compensation tables, the existence of SERPs, and the formulas under which
payouts are made, must be disclosed in the firm’s SEC filings.31 But it is difficult
for anyone without actuarial or financial training to estimate with precision the
value—and thus the cost to the company—of these future payments.32 As noted
above, firms are not required to supply, and usually do not provide, any estimate
of the dollar value of a particular executive’s defined-benefit pension plan. The
lack of easy access to the monetary values of these substantial benefits presumably
explains their absence from the standard databases used for research on executive
compensation.
       Indeed, it is often difficult even to figure out the total SERP liability of a
firm with respect to its executives as a group. A firm must report only one figure:
the sum of the liabilities associated with all of its employee pension plans that are
“unfunded” or “underfunded” (that is, plans for which the firm does not have
assets set aside to cover the plans’ liabilities fully).33 The Financial Accounting
Standards Board (FASB) does not require that liabilities associated with SERPs be
itemized separately.34 Thus, firms can simply report one number that represents
all the liabilities associated with underfunded qualified plans and unfunded
SERPs.
       Although they are not required to do so, some firms do report the total
obligations arising under SERPs. These figures can be staggering. In 2000, for
example, GE reported a $1.13 billion pension liability for all of its executives.35
Unfortunately, GE did not report what portion of this amount was due specifically
to its CEO and other top executives. Most companies do not even break down
pension liabilities into separate categories for executives and other employees.
       It is worth noting at least one way in which executives’ plans may not be as
advantageous to their beneficiaries as the plans of lower-level employees. Firms
using qualified plans are required, as a condition for favorable tax treatment, to set
aside assets to ensure that they can pay their liabilities under the plans. Given that
executives’ SERP plans would not qualify for the favorable tax treatment even if
they were so funded, firms do not bother funding SERP plans. Executives’

31 In addition, firms are required to file a letter with the Labor Department indicating the
number of executive pension plans and the number of participants. However, not all
firms comply with this requirement. Ellen E. Schultz, “Big Send-Off: As Firms Pare
Pensions for Most, They Boost Those for Executives,” Wall Street Journal, June 20, 2001, A1.
32 See Joann S. Lublin, “Executive Pay under the Radar,” Wall Street Journal, April 11,

2002, B7; and Anne Fisher, “Proxies: The Treasure Is Still Buried,” Fortune, June 8, 1998,
285.
33 Financial Accounting Standard no. 132 (revised 2003).
34 Financial Accounting Standard no. 87 (1985).
35 Schultz, “Big Send-Off, ” supra note 31.




                                            17
retirement benefits are thus at greater risk of nonpayment than the benefits of
ordinary workers—and Congress is considering legislation that would make it
difficult for firms to shelter executives from this risk.36
        In the past, however, firms facing financial problems have often purchased
insurance policies that guaranteed payment of executive retirement benefits,
transferred the money to a designated trust, or taken other steps to guarantee the
benefits against insolvency.37 Delta Airlines, for example, set up an executive-
protecting arrangement shortly after September 11, 2001, when the solvency of the
airline industry appeared to be in danger.38 Although putting the money beyond
the reach of the firm’s creditors triggers a tax liability for the executive, firms often
“gross up” the payment to cover part or all of that liability.39 It was reported in
1991 that approximately 50 major companies had set up fully guaranteed
executive pension plans.40 This practice may have been much more widespread;
many firms, fearing criticism that they are insulating managers from the effects of
their own failures, have failed to announce the existence of such guarantees.41



                              IV. DEFERRED COMPENSATION

       Deferred compensation is a second technique used to transfer large
amounts of mostly performance-insensitive value to executives without attracting
much shareholder attention. Many firms offer programs that permit executives, or
sometimes even require them, to defer receipt of compensation until some future
date. In the meantime, the deferred compensation “builds” according to a formula
devised by the firm. Executives do not pay taxes on the original compensation or
on the accumulated increase until they receive payment, which often occurs after

36  In June 2004, the U.S. House of Representatives passed the American Jobs Creation Act
of 2004, which penalizes firms using certain types of trusts to protect deferred
compensation from the firms’ creditors. The U.S. Senate passed a similar bill in May 2004.
37 Clark Bardes Consulting reported in 2001 that 86 percent of firms surveyed use security

devices to protect SERPs to the greatest extent possible. See Clark Bardes Consulting,
“Executive Benefits: A Survey of Current Trends: 2001 Results,” 33;
http://www.clarkconsulting.com/knowledgecenter/articles/benefits/20020305.pdf
(accessed June 23, 2004); Ron Suskind, “More Executives Get Pension Guarantees to
Protect against Takeovers, Failures,” Wall Street Journal, July 5, 1991, B1; and Theo Francis
and Ellen Schultz, “As Workers Face Pension Cuts, Executives Get Rescued,” Wall Street
Journal, April 3, 2003, C1.
38 Francis and Schultz, “As Workers Face Pension Cuts,” supra note 37.
39 Francis and Schultz, “As Workers Face Pension Cuts, ”supra note 37.
40 Suskind, “More Executives Get Pension Guarantees, ”supra note 37.
41 Suskind, “More Executives Get Pension Guarantees.,” supra note 37.




                                             18
they leave the company. At that time, the firm takes a tax deduction for the
amount paid. Most large companies have plans of this kind.42
        Deferred compensation plans can take different forms. Some firms require
that managers receiving salary in excess of $1 million, which would otherwise be
nondeductible under Section 162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, defer the
excess. Other firms have purely elective plans. Some arrangements permit deferral
of salary only, while others also allow deferral of long-term incentive
compensation and gains from the exercise of stock options or from the sale of
restricted stock. Companies frequently provide matching contributions, with the
amounts varying from firm to firm. At some companies, contributions are
awarded at the board’s discretion. At others, they are determined by formulas.43
        Plans also differ in how the deferred compensation is “invested,” that is,
how the amount owed to the executive at the end of the deferral period is
determined. Many companies provide a guaranteed rate of return (or a
guaranteed minimum rate) on the funds.44 Firms have often granted extra benefits
to executives by providing rates of return that are higher than the market rate. For
example, in 2001, at a time when one-year Treasury bills offered returns of 3.39
percent to 4.63 percent, both GE and Enron guaranteed executives a 12 percent
rate of return. Other firms have offered a market return plus a premium. For
example, Lucent has offered the return on the ten-year Treasury bill plus 5
percent.45 Congress is now considering legislation aimed at preventing firms from
providing executives with above-market returns in their deferred-compensation
plans. Although the adoption of such legislation would eliminate this particular
benefit to managers, deferred compensation plans would still provide executives
with significant other financial and camouflage advantages as we discuss below.
Section A identifies the differences between executive deferred compensation
arrangements and the 401(k) plans offered to other employees. Section B describes
the camouflage benefits of executive deferred compensation arrangements.




42  Clark Consulting reports that close to 93 percent of firms responding to a survey said
they had such plans in 2002. Clark Consulting, “Executive Benefits,” supra note 19, at 2.
43 26. For example, when Sears Roebuck & Co. executives postpone bonuses and long-

term incentive pay, they receive an additional contribution equal to 20 percent of the
amount deferred. Ellen E. Schultz and Theo Francis, “Well-Hidden Perk Means Big
Money for Top Executives,” Wall Street Journal, October 11, 2002, A1, A9.
44 Liz Pulliam Weston, “Despite Recession,” A1, supra note 29.
45 Lublin, “Executive Pay under the Radar,” supra note 32..




                                           19
                           A. Differences from 401(k) Plans
        Deferred-compensation arrangements appear analogous to the familiar
401(k) plans used by many employees. But, just as SERPs differ from the qualified
retirement plans offered to lower-level employees, there are some important
differences between executives’ deferred compensation and 401(k) plans.
        To begin with, the 401(k) plans give workers an opportunity to put money
in designated investment instruments; whatever the investments, employees get
the same pretax returns they would receive by investing in similar instruments
outside the 401(k) plan. In contrast, executives’ deferred-compensation
arrangements often provide higher returns than those available in the market.
        In addition, 401(k) plans are given a tax subsidy, while executive deferred-
compensation plans are not. Under a 401(k) plan, a fraction of the employee’s
salary is placed in a tax-deferred account. The firm may also make a separate
contribution to the account. As in a qualified retirement arrangement, the funds
are invested and grow tax-free. Neither the firm nor the employee pays taxes on
the income and capital gain generated in the account. Employees do not pay taxes
on the contributions or the increase until they withdraw the funds. The employer,
on the other hand, gets a deduction for both its contribution and the employee’s
contribution to the 401(k) plan. By placing current compensation in a 401(k)
account, the employee gains the benefit of tax deferral without the employer’s loss
of a tax deduction.46


46 To illustrate how the tax subsidy provided to a 401(k) operates, consider the following
examples involving a hypothetical firm and employee. As in the SERP examples found in
note 2 (examples 1 and 2), assume that both the firm and the employee face a 40 percent
tax rate on all of their income. Assume also that both are able to earn, between the
preretirement and retirement periods, a pretax return of 100 percent on their investments.
     Example 4: The employee saves outside the 401(k) plan. Suppose the firm pays the
employee $100 in the preretirement period. The firm deducts $100 from its taxable
income, reducing its tax liability by $40. The employee pays $40 in taxes, and invests the
aftertax income of $60 in an ordinary, nonqualified investment account. By the retirement
period, the $60 grows to $120—a gain of $60. The employee pays a tax of $24 on the gain
(40 percent of $60), leading to an aftertax gain of $36. The employee is thus able to
withdraw a total of $96 ($60 + $36).
     Example 5: The employee saves under a 401(k) plan. Now suppose that the employee
contributes $100 of compensation income to a 401(k) account. The firm again deducts $100
from its taxable income, reducing its tax liability by $40. The $100 grows to $200 by the
time the employee withdraws the funds from the 401(k) account. The employee pays a tax
of $80 (40 percent of $200), leaving the employee with $120—$24 more than in example 4,
where the employee received $100 from the firm in the preretirement period and saved
the money outside the 401(k) plan. The $24 gain to the employee does not come at the
expense of the employer. In both example 4 and example 5, the employer pays the



                                           20
       Firms could provide deferred compensation to executives through 401(k)
plans. However, there are limits on how much money can be contributed annually
to a 401(k) account. For the tax year 2004, employees covered by such a plan
ordinarily cannot defer more than $13,000 of compensation.47 In order to provide
executives with amounts exceeding this limit, firms implement deferred-
compensation arrangements outside the tax-advantaged framework of 401(k)
plans. Executives’ deferred compensation is therefore not based solely, or even
primarily, on 401(k) plans.
       Rather than contribute a portion of the executive’s compensation to an
account where the investment grows tax-free, the firm simply withholds part of
the executive’s pay and credits the executive each year with a prespecified return
on the money, allowing it to “grow” over time. The withheld compensation, along
with the appreciation credited to it by the firm, is paid to the executive at a later
date.
       The company pays taxes on the income it must generate in order to pay the
executive the promised buildup of the deferred compensation. If, on the other
hand, the deferred compensation had been distributed when it was originally
owed the executive, the executive would have invested the money and paid taxes
on any income or capital gains subsequently generated. Thus, as in the case of a
SERP, the effect of executive deferred compensation is to shift some of the
executive’s tax burden to the firm.48
       If the employee and the firm are subject to the same tax rate and are able to
earn the same pretax rate of return on their investments, executive deferred
compensation, like a SERP, cannot reduce the parties’ joint tax burden. While
every dollar of deferred compensation lowers the executive’s taxes, it boosts the
firm’s taxes by one dollar. Like a SERP, and unlike qualified 401(k) and retirement
plans, deferred-compensation plans for executives provide no tax-efficiency
benefit when the firm and the executive share the same tax rate and investment
opportunities.49



employee $100 in the preretirement period, thereby reducing its taxable income by $100
and its tax liability by $40.
47 Internal Revenue Code, sec. 402(g)(1)(B).
48 A company can shelter from taxation investment income on funds set aside for

financing executive pensions by investing these funds in insurance policies on the lives of
its executives and other employees, but this will impose other costs on the firm. See note
_.
49 To illustrate the effect of executive deferred-compensation arrangements on the tax

burdens of the parties, consider the following example and explanation, which refer to
examples 4 and 5 provided in note 29.



                                            21
        As in the case of SERPs, of course, there will be many cases in which
deferred compensation outside 401(k) plans can increase or reduce the total
amount of value available to the executive and the firm.50 The firm and the
executive may face different tax rates. Even if the firm and the executive face the
same tax rate, the investment returns available to the firm may be higher than
those available to the executive (although, as we noted in our discussion of SERPs,
this is unlikely to be the case for companies with easy access to capital). However,
there is no reason to believe that, absent the tax subsidy provided by qualified
plans, there is generally a benefit to the parties when the firm defers the
executive’s compensation. In many cases, the tax burden on the firm is greater

      Example 6: The firm offers the executive deferred compensation outside a 401(k)
plan. Assume, as in examples 4 and 5, that both the firm and the executive face a 40
percent tax rate on all of their income, including capital gains. And assume that both are
able to earn, between the preretirement and retirement periods, a pretax return of 100
percent on their investments.
      Suppose the firm seeks to use deferred compensation to give an executive the same
(100 percent) return that the firm provides the employee in example 5 using a 401(k) plan.
As in the case of the employee, the firm sets aside $100, which grows to $200 by the time
the executive withdraws the deferred compensation and the buildup credited to the
designated amount of deferred compensation. The $200 is distributed to the executive.
Like the employee, the executive pays 40 percent tax on the retirement distribution—a tax
of $80. This leaves the executive, like the employee in example 5, with $120, or $24 more
than the employee saving on his own ended up with in example 4.
      Now let us consider the effect of the executive’s deferred compensation arrangement
on the firm. In examples 4 and 5, the firm reduces its tax liability by $40 in the
preretirement period when it pays the worker $100 or contributes $100 to the worker’s
qualified pension plan. In example 6, the firm reduces its tax liability by $80 in the
retirement period when it pays the executive $200. However, the firm must add to its
taxable income in the retirement period the $100 generated to boost the executive’s
withdrawal payout from $100 to $200—which in turn increases the firm’s tax liability by
$40. The net effect of the $100 gain and the $200 payment to the executive is to reduce the
firm’s tax liability by $40 during the retirement period. The firm is thus worse off than in
example 2, where it received the same reduction in its tax liability in the preretirement
period.
      Had the firm reduced its tax liability by $40 in the earlier period, it could have
invested the $40 and earned a pretax return of $40 (100 percent) by the retirement period.
The $40 would have been taxed at 40 percent, leaving the firm with $64. By reducing its
tax liability in the retirement period, the firm has only an extra $40, or $24 less. Thus, the
$24 gain to the executive from the use of a deferred-compensation arrangement designed
to put the executive in the same position as an employee under a qualified 401(k) comes at
the expense of the firm.
50 For an explanation of the tax effects of deferred compensation under various scenarios,

see Scholes, Wolfson, Erickson, Maydew, and Shevlin, Taxes and Business Strategy, supra
note 22, at 181–185.



                                             22
than the tax benefit to the executive, increasing the total tax that the two parties
pay to the government.
       Consider, for example, the case in which an executive of a profitable
company is promised a return that is linked to a stock index. If the executive
invests the money in shares of a stock index fund, the gains will be taxed at the
long-term federal capital-gains rate, which in the highest bracket is 15 percent (as
of 2004).51 If, instead, the firm invests the money—in those shares, other
investments, or its own business—the gains could be taxed at the marginal
corporate rate of 35 percent.52
       Thus, it is puzzling that over 90 percent of firms offer deferred-
compensation programs to their executives.53 As in the case of SERPs, there are
good reasons to think that, in many firms, such programs are not an efficient form
of compensation. It is curious that firms offering nonqualified deferred-
compensation arrangements to executives do not offer such nonqualified plans to
other employees. After all, if nonqualified deferred compensation is an efficient
form of compensation for the executives of certain firms—say, because the firms
have better investment opportunities than the executives—nonqualified deferred
compensation should also be an efficient form of compensation for the
nonexecutive employees of these firms. But firms rarely, if ever, provide
nonexecutive employees with the option of nonqualified deferred-compensation
arrangements in addition to their 401(k) plans. This pattern suggests that, in most
cases, offering nonqualified deferred compensation to an executive does not
increase the joint wealth of the executive and the firm.




51  Internal Revenue Code sec. 1
52 Internal Revenue Code sec. 11. As in the case of SERPs, a firm can reduce the tax cost of
deferred compensation by using company-owned life insurance. Under this strategy, the
firm uses aftertax dollars to buy insurance on the lives of its executives and other
employees. Part of the premium is invested, increasing the “cash value” of the policy. The
policy is then cashed out when funds are needed to pay deferred compensation. The tax
savings come from life insurance policies’ capacity to shelter from taxes the buildup of the
cash value. However, because the insurance company charges fees, the use of a life
insurance policy to avoid taxes gives rise to transaction costs. A 1996 study found that 70
percent of the 1,000 largest firms did not use insurance for funding deferred
compensation, which suggests that these costs can be quite high. See Christopher Drew
and David Cay Johnston, “Special Tax Breaks Enrich Savings of Many in the Ranks of
Management,” New York Times, October 13, 1996, sec. 1, 1.
53 Clark Consulting, “Executive Benefits,” supra note 19, at 2.




                                            23
                                 B. Camouflage Benefits

        While it is far from clear that deferred-compensation arrangements provide
efficiency benefits, their camouflage value is substantial. The compensation being
deferred must be reported in the compensation tables in the year in which it
would otherwise have been received. However, the substantial benefits that have
been conferred by the deferred-compensation plan—the tax-free (and sometimes
above-market) buildup over time—are not evident to outsiders.
        Even assuming that the nominal rate of return used by a deferred-
compensation arrangement is no higher than the market rate, the effective interest
rate earned by executives is higher than it appears because of the substantial tax
benefits. Executives must pay taxes on investment income earned outside
deferred-compensation arrangements, but investing within such plans provides
them—at the expense of the firm—with a tax-free buildup. Thus, as long as the
rate of return in deferred-compensation arrangements is above the executive’s
after-tax rate of return, the executive makes substantial gains that do not show up
in the compensation tables. The New York Times reported, for example, that CEO
Roberto Goizueta of Coca-Cola was able to defer taxes on $1 billion of
compensation and investment gains over a 17-year period.54 Coca-Cola picked up
the tab, paying taxes on the earnings needed to cover the returns credited to
Goizueta’s deferred-compensation account.55
        Furthermore, while 401(k) plans offer lower-level workers returns
equivalent to those available in the bond or stock markets, many deferred-
compensation arrangements have provided executives with substantially higher
returns. These executives have thus received investment income that was not only
tax-free for them (at the expense of the firm) but also above-market. The benefits
from these above-market returns have also been hidden to a significant extent.
        The SEC requires firms to include in the compensation table for each
executive the above-market interest earned that year on deferred compensation. In
the case of a guaranteed interest rate, “above-market” interest is defined as returns
in excess of 120 percent of the applicable federal rate (AFR) used by the IRS at the
time the guaranteed interest rate is set, multiplied by the amount of deferred
compensation. By exploiting the SEC’s definition of “above-market rate,” firms
have sometimes been able provide its executives with rates of return that are


54“Tax Deferred Pay for Executives,” New York Times, October 18, 1996, A36.
55 According to Coca-Cola’s annual reports to shareholders, it paid taxes on its income in
every year of Goizueta’s tenure except 1992



                                           24
higher than those they could get on their own without including this benefit in the
compensation tables.
        The threshold used by firms for “market” long-term rates of return is
especially generous because boards can reset interest rates whenever doing so
benefits executives. If market interest rates and the AFR rise so that the current
guaranteed rate is not especially attractive, the firm can simply adopt a new,
higher, guaranteed rate. As long as the reset rate is lower than 120 percent of the
new, higher AFR, the additional interest accruals need not be reported in the
compensation tables. If, however, market interest rates and the AFR fall, the firm
can continue to pay at the old guaranteed rate, which is now above market. And
because the AFR used for the disclosure threshold is that prevailing when the
guaranteed interest rate was initially set, no matter how low market rates drop,
the above-market interest paid to the executive never appears in the compensation
tables.
        Finally, even benefits that have come from rates of return exceeding the
SEC’s threshold are unlikely to be fully reflected in the compensation tables. The
reporting requirement ends when the executive retires, but the executive often has
often had the option to continue enjoying the above-market rates after retirement.
Such a stream of postretirement benefits—which could be quite substantial in
value—would never appear in the firm’s publicly filed compensation tables.
        As in the case of SERPs, deferred-compensation plans could expose
executives to the risk of firm bankruptcy. While 401(k) plans must be backed by
their assets, which cannot be seized by the firm’s creditors, deferred-compensation
arrangements are simply a promise by the firm to pay compensation in the future.
The executives owed this compensation are unsecured creditors who may not be
paid in full if the firm becomes insolvent. As in the case of SERPs, Congress is
considering legislation that would make it difficult for firms to shield executives
from this possibility. To date, however, firms have often taken steps to insulate
executives from insolvency risk. Many firms have used “security devices,” such as
trusts, to ensure that funds will be available to the executives. In addition, firms
have usually permitted executives to withdraw deferred compensation at any
time—such as when inside information suggests that a firm is about to fail. Shortly
before Enron filed for bankruptcy, for example, its executives withdrew millions
of dollars of deferred compensation.
        For executives and their friends on the board, SERPs and deferred
compensation have been very useful. They have provided a means for channeling
large amounts of performance-insensitive compensation in a way that, under
current disclosure regulations, has not been highly visible to outsiders. As one
compensation analyst pointed out: “The disclosure of the myriad executive




                                        25
compensation plans—pension, supplemental executive retirement plans, deferred
compensation, split-dollar life insurance—is not adequate in answering a
fundamental question: What is the projected value of these plans to the executive
upon his retirement?”56


        V. POST-RETIREMENT PERKS AND CONSULTING CONTRACTS

       We now turn to consider the use of post-retirement perks and consulting
contracts to convey a significant amount of performance-decoupled value to
executives in a way that is not transparent to shareholders. Section A describes
some of the perks provided to executives and explains why they are unlikely to
result from arm’s length bargaining between the parties. Section B examines the
use of post-retirement consulting agreements.



                                      A. Perks

       Many compensation contracts promise executives a substantial stream of
perks after retirement. For example, many executives receive a certain number of
hours of corporate aircraft use annually for themselves, and sometimes for their
families and guests as well. Some executives have even received unlimited lifetime
use of corporate aircraft.57 Other perks that often follow the executive into
retirement include chauffeured cars, personal assistants, financial planning, home-
security systems, club memberships, sports tickets, office space, secretarial help,
and cell phone service.58 Outgoing IBM CEO Louis Gerstner, for example, was
given access to apartments, planes, cars, home-security services, and financial
planning. Terrence Murray, former CEO of FleetBoston, received 150 hours of
company aircraft use, a chauffeured car, an office, office assistants, financial
planning, and a home-security system.
       Another common benefit is giving contributions to charities designated by
the retiring executive. FleetBoston gave retiring CEO Murray the ability to direct
$3.5 million of the firm’s charitable contributions to Murray’s favorite



56  Gretchen Morgenson, “Executive Pay, Hiding Behind Small Print,” New York Times,
February 8, 2004, sec. 3, 1.
57 The Corporate Library, “The Use of Company Aircraft,” special report (2001).
58 Lublin, “Executive Pay under the Radar”; and Gary Strauss, “CEOs Cash In after

Tenure,” USA Today, April 25, 2002, money section, 1B



                                        26
institutions.59 And Ford promised retiring CEO Jacques Nasser to endow a
scholarship in his name at the educational institution of his choice (in addition to
providing Nasser a new car each year, financial-planning assistance, an office, and
an assistant).60
        Most of these perks cost the company more than may be apparent at first
glance. Consider retiree use of corporate jets, now a common perk. Although the
marginal cost of allowing a retired executive to use the company jet may appear
limited,61it can run quite high. Consider the use of a company plane for a flight
from New York to California and then back several days later. Because the New
York–based aircraft and flight crew will return to the East Coast after dropping
the retired executive off, the actual charge to the company is two round trips: a
total of eight takeoffs and landings and approximately 20 hours of flying time,
most likely costing—for fuel, maintenance, landing fees, extra pilot and crew fees
and incidentals, and depreciation (an aircraft’s operating life is reduced for every
hour it flies and, more important, for every takeoff and landing)—at least
$50,000.62 Henry R. Silverman, CEO of Cendant, was promised lifetime use of the
corporate aircraft or, if the plane was in use, an equivalent chartered plane at a
direct cost of thousands of dollars per hour.63
        Firms usually do not provide postretirement perks to nonexecutive
employees. There is good economic logic to avoiding such in-kind compensation.
Promising a retiring employee $10,000 a year for certain travel expenses is less
efficient than providing $10,000 in cash. The reason is straightforward. If the
retiree views travel as the best way to spend $10,000, the cash and the travel
coverage will have identical utility. However, cash is superior if there are any
possible circumstances in which the retiree would prefer spending some or all of
the money on goods or services other than travel, because the retiree will receive
greater utility at the same cost to the firm.
        A retiree’s needs and preferences are likely to change over time. Thus,
economic logic suggests that if in-kind retirement benefits are provided, they

59 See
http://contracts.corporate.findlaw.com/agreements/fleetboston/murray.emp.2001.10.10
.html (accessed May 12, 2004).
60 Joann S. Lublin, “Many Former Chief Executives Get Lush Perks and Fat Fees for

Limited ‘Consulting’ Work,” Wall Street Journal, September 13, 2002, B1.
61 This misperception led one compensation consultant to label jet use as “an efficient

way of delivering something of value to the executive.” Yale D. Tauber, quoted in Lublin,
“Executive Pay under the Radar.”
62 We thank Marc Abramowitz and Yitz Applbaum for useful discussions on the cost of

operating corporate jets.
63 The Corporate Library, “The Use of Company Aircraft,” supra note 57.




                                           27
should not be provided for long periods. Yet such long-term, in-kind benefits are
often provided to retired CEOs: for example, Louis Gerstner of IBM received use
of a plane, cars, offices, and financial planning services for ten years.
       Although postretirement perks are unlikely to be an efficient form of
compensation, they offer an effective means of camouflaging compensation. The
value of postretirement perks is not reported when they are agreed to, and the
firm incurs costs only after the executive has left, at which point any value
provided is no longer included in the salient compensation tables. Postretirement
perks thus offer yet another way of providing additional value to executives
without ever having to include the benefits in compensation tables or even place a
dollar value on them.



                               B. Consulting Contracts

        Like perks, consulting contracts provide substantial value to retired
executives. They usually offer the retiring CEO an annual fee for “being available”
to advise the new CEO for a specified amount of time per year. Approximately 25
percent of CEOs negotiate a postretirement “consulting” relationship with their
old firm.64
        For example, AOL Time Warner is paying retired CEO Gerald M. Levin $1
million a year to serve as an adviser for up to five days a month.65 In 2000, retiring
Carter-Wallace CEO Henry Hoyt was promised annual payments of $831,000 for a
similar monthly obligation.66 Verizon co-CEO Charles Lee negotiated a $6 million
consulting contract for the first two years of his retirement. Delta Airlines CEO
Ronald Allen’s 1997 retirement package provided him with a seven-year, $3.5
million consulting deal under which, according to Delta’s public filings, he was
“required to perform his consulting services at such times, and in such places, and
for such periods as will result in the least inconvenience to him.”67 Allen or his
heirs will be entitled to the annual fee of $500,000 even if he is totally disabled or
dies.68
        These consulting arrangements provide flat, guaranteed fees for the retired
executive’s “being available” rather than payment for work actually done, and for


64 Ira Kay, cited in Strauss, “CEOs Cash In after Tenure,” supra note 58.
65 Lublin, “Many Former Chief Executives Get Lush Perks,” supra note 60.
66 Strauss, “CEOs Cash In after Tenure,” supra note 58.
67 Strauss, “CEOs Cash In after Tenure,” supra note 58.
68 Joann S. Lublin, “How CEOs Retire in Style,” Wall Street Journal, September 13, 2002,

B1.



                                          28
a good reason: companies generally make little use of the availability for which
they pay generously. For better or worse, new CEOs are usually not inclined to
seek advice from their predecessors.69 Allen, for example, reportedly “rarely talks”
with the new Delta chief executive, Leo Mullin. Even compensation consultants
acknowledge that retired executives add little if any value to the firm under these
arrangements. According to Frank Glassner, CEO of Compensation Design Group,
most of these consulting contracts are merely a way of increasing the severance
payment to the departing executive. According to another executive compensation
expert, Alan Johnson, “Most former CEOs are doing very little for what they’re
getting paid… Usually, the demands [from new management] are miniscule.”
       Like postretirement perks, the consulting payments to retired executives
never find their way into the compensation tables because they are provided when
the executive is no longer an officer. However, in contrast to postretirement
benefits, these contracts enable boards to provide retired executives with cash
rather than in-kind benefits.70 Retirement consulting fees are essentially a cash
severance payment, turned over in installments, disguised as compensation for
postretirement work.
       If these fees are just a form of cash severance, what is the advantage of
packaging them as consulting agreements? Besides ensuring that the payments are
kept out of the compensation tables, dressing them up as consulting fees obscures
their nature as severance payments that essentially increase the total
compensation received by executives for their preretirement work. Some
observers might believe that the outgoing CEO will in fact provide valuable
advice to new management, and therefore view the payments as legitimate
consideration for postretirement services. Needless to say, these consulting
agreements do not tie the retired executive’s pay to any personal contribution to
shareholder value either before or after retirement.




69  The examples and quotations in this paragraph are taken from Lublin, “How CEOs
Retire in Style.”supra note 68.
70 Of course, there are cases where even these outlays are hidden by the provision of in-

kind value rather than cash. For departing CEO Hugh McColl’s continuing “advice and
counsel,” Bank of America is providing him or members of his family with 150 hours of
flying time on corporate aircraft. See Strauss, “CEOs Cash In after Tenure.” This perk has
a value of $500,000 or more.



                                           29
                                   VI. TRANSPARENCY

     We wish to conclude by briefly discussing the policy implications of our
study. We argue elsewhere for reforms that would increase shareholder power. 71
But shareholders do already have some power. This power is in part why the
outrage constraint matters. The greater outsiders’ understanding of compensation
arrangements, the tighter the outrage constraint. Improving the transparency of
compensation arrangements is therefore desirable.
     Financial economists have paid insufficient attention to transparency because
they often focus on the role of disclosure in getting information incorporated into
market pricing. It is widely believed that information can be reflected in stock
prices as long as it is known and fully understood by even a limited number of
market professionals.
       In the case of executive compensation, there is already significant
disclosure. As we have discussed, SEC regulations require detailed disclosure of
the compensation of a company’s CEO and of the four most highly compensated
executives other than the CEO. In our view, however, is it important to recognize
the difference between disclosure and transparency, and it is transparency that
should receive more attention.
       The main aim of requiring disclosure of executive compensation is not to
enable accurate pricing of the firm’s securities. Rather, this disclosure is primarily
intended to provide some check on arrangements that are too favorable to
executives. This goal is not well served by disseminating information in a way that
makes the information understandable to a small number of market professionals
but opaque to others.
       The ability of plan designers to favor managers depends on how
compensation arrangements are perceived by a wide group of investors and other
outsiders. Because of market forces and social dynamics, managers and directors
are concerned about disapproval (threatened or actual) from institutional
investors or other reference groups, such as the business press or popular media.
We have seen that compensation designers often seek to make the amount of pay,
or the extent to which pay is decoupled from performance, less transparent. For
disclosure to constrain compensation effectively, the disclosed information must
reach more than just a select group of market professionals and arbitrageurs. Raw
facts buried in a mountain of technical disclosure probably will not suffice. The
salience of disclosure and degree of transparency are important.



71   See Bebchuk and Fried, Pay Without Performance, supra note 1, Chapter 16.



                                            30
       Thus, public officials and governance reformers should consider measures
to ensure that compensation arrangements are and remain transparent. As far as
retirement benefits are concerned, companies could be required to place a dollar
value on all forms of compensation and to include these amounts in the
compensation tables contained in company disclosures. Thus, for example,
compensation tables could be required to include the amount by which the
expected value of the executive’s promised pension payments increased during
the year. Companies could also be required to place a monetary value on any tax
benefit that accrues to the executive at the company’s expense (for example, under
deferred compensation arrangements)—and to report this value. These measures
could provide shareholders with a more accurate picture of total executive
compensation. They also could eliminate distortions that might arise when
companies choose particular forms of compensation for their camouflage value
rather than for their efficiency.



                                VII. CONCLUSION

        This paper has explained how retirement benefits and payments have been
used to camouflage the payment of large amounts of performance-insensitive
compensation to executives of public companies. Our study has highlighted the
significant role that camouflage and stealth compensation play in the design of
compensation arrangements, as well as the significance of whether information
about compensation arrangements is communicated in a way that is transparent
and accessible to outsiders. With respect to retirement benefits, firms could be
required to report annually the monetary value by which the expected value of an
executive’s promised pension payments increased during the year. Firms could
also be required to report annually the monetary value of any tax benefit that
accrues to an executive at the company’s expense under deferred compensation or
other tax-shifting arrangement. By making it more difficult to camouflage pay
through retirement benefits, such a requirement could contribute to improving
compensation arrangements.




                                       31
