                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           WORLD   EQUILIBRIUM WITH OIL PRICE INCREASES:
                      AN INTERTEMPORAL ANALYSIS




                       Nancy Peregrim Marion
                         Lars   E.O. Svensson




                       Working Paper No. 10714




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                           February 1983




Phe research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                         NSER Working Paper #1074
                                                             February 1983


                    World Equilibrium with Oil Price Increases:
                             An Inter temporal Analysis

                                     A38 TRACT



         This   paper examines the effect of OPEC price increases on the welfare

of a group of oil—Importing industrial countries. It also studies how

taxes or subsidies on oil Imports or capital flows could alter the group's

welfare. The analysis is conducted using a general—equilibrium model that

describes the behavior of two actors, OPEC and the oil—importing bloc called

Industria. The analysis is explicitly intertemporal and takes into account

endogenous changes in saving, investment and employment.

        We show that Industria'g welfare is affected not only by direct oil

terms of trade effect, but also by changes in the world rate of interest

(intertemporal terms of trade effects) and, for rigid wages, changes in

employment. Thus Industria      gains from the intertemporal terms of trade
effect   if it is a net borrower and the world rate of Interest falls. Precise

conditions for whether the world rate of interest falls or rises are given.

        We also show that Industria may    gain    from subsidizing oil imports

rather   than taxing them, in particular if       wages are rigid, and that it may

gain   from restricting international capital mobility.

Nancy Peregrlm Marion                            Lars E.0. Svensson
Department of Economics                          Institute for International
Dartmouth College                                  Economic Studies
Hanover, New Hampshire 03755                     5—10691 Stockholm, Sweden
                                                 46—8—16 30 75
(603) 646—2511                                         and
                                                 National Bureau of Economic Research
                                                 (Visitor 1982—83)
                                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                 (617)   868—3900
1.   Introduction

     This paper examines the effect of OPEC price increases on the

welfare of a group of oil importers. It also studies Iww taxes or

subsidies on oil imports or capital flows could alter the group's

welfare.

     The analysis is conducted using a general—equilibrium model that

describes the behavior of two actors, OPEC and a large oil-importing bloc
                  1/
called Industria.    The analysis is explicitly interteinporal and takes

into account endogenous changes in saving, investment and employment.

     There is by now an extensive literature on the macroeconomic

effects of oil price increases. However, this literature mostly relies

on a static, small—economy analysis that maintains fixed values for

world interest rates and traded—goods prices when oil prices increase.

Such a partial—equilibrium and nonintertemporal approach is limiting
                       2/
and could be misleading.

     Two general—equilibrium models of the world economy within an

intertemporal framework have been developed, one by Sachs (1982) and

one by Dixit (1981) ,   but   their models and emphases differ from ours.

     Sachs relies on a simulation model to analyze the effects of oil

price increases on such variables as output and prices, capital accumu-

lation, the real interest rate and employment. He also studies the

scope for fiscal and monetary policies in moderating output declines.

We rely on a theoretical construct rather than on a simulation model.

Our use of the duality method, much inspired by Dixit and Norman (1980)

allows us to use rather general specifications for preferences and
                                         2




technology instead of special functional forms, and it makes for easily

derived and interpreted results. Our focus is also different. We are

concerned primarily with the welfare effects of oil price increases.

Our calculations show that these welfare effects encompass more than

just the loss of current income due to higher import bills, Of course,

we, too, will be interested in how OPEC price increases change interest

rates and employment, since those changes have implications for Industria's

welfare. In addition, we are interested in how Industria might use

specific tax/subsidy policies to improve its welfare.

       Turning to Dixit's work, we note that his model contains an exogenously—

given oil stock, competitive oil pricing by OPEC and the Hotelling rule

which relates present and future oil prices to each other. The model is

used to examine the effect of changes in the stock of oil on wages,

interest and oil prices. It also offers a fascinating look at how the

income distribution effects depend on the endowments of capital, labor

and oil. Dixit assumes all oil revenues and nothing else is invested

 (hence present capitalists and workers save nothing) and that full

employment prevails. In contrast, our model specifies exogenous oil

prices, enabling us to distinguish between the impact of present and

future oil price increases on a host of real variables, including pro-

duction, consumption, saving, investment, employment and trade balances.

we, too, are concerned about welf4re effects, but our goal is to measure

these    effects taking into account the interactions between oil markets,
international capital flows and       employment   variations.
        Our results   show that a rigorous calculation of Industria's changed welfare
must    take into account not only the lost income due to the decline in
                                  3




Inaustria's present and future oil terms of trade, but the change in

the real rate of interest. A fall in interest can improve Industria's

welfare if it becomes a future net exporter of final goods to OPEC.

This fall in interest, what we call an improvement in Industria's

intertemporal terms of trade, can moderate the fall in welfare resulting

from the deterioration in the oil terms of trade.

     Since the analysis of welfare effects depends crucially on how the

interest rate responds to oil price increases, the factors that influence

its response are carefully examined. We find that the change in interest

depends partly on the size of OPEC's present marginal propensity to

consume relative to Industria's, on whether or not factors of production
                  3/
are "cooperatnre,"—  on how severely current production contracts and on

the nature of the oil price increase—whether it is temporary, permanent

or expected to occur in the future. We are able to qualify precisely

wider what conditions the interest rate might fall)"

     The welfare effects of oil price increases are calculated under

conditions of both real wage flexibility and rigidity in Industria. We

find that in the latter case, oil price increases unambiguously cause

greater welfare losses since employment falls and the intertemporal terms

of trade may improve very little or even worsen.

     The model provides a rich variety of other results as well. For example,

one can assess the effects of oil price increases on oil imports, consumption,

investment, wages or employment, and the trade balances in the present and

in the future. Among other things, it is shown that when factors are

cooperative, permanent and future oil price increases have an uncertain

Impact in investment in Industria; they have a direct negative effect through
                                  4




decreased profitability, but they also stimulate investment by inducing

a fall in the rate of interest. If flexible, real wages fall in the

present when there are OPEC price increases, but they may actually rise

in the future, even if labor and oil are cooperative, should investment

increase sufficiently due to the fall in interest.

      In addition to assessing the effects of oil price increases, the

paper examines the general—equilibrium effects of taxes    or subsidies

on oil imports and on capital flows. This analysis is motivated by the

fact that for given oil prices, oil importers may be able to alter the

intertemporal terms of trade in their favor. For instance, the oil—

importing bloc can increase its welfare by subsidizing oil imports at

present and taxing them in the future.   It can also improve its welfare

by imposing an impediment to international capital flows, namely taxing

capital imports from OPEC.

      The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 specifies how Industria

and OPEC are modeled and how the world equilibrium is defined. In

Section 3, the welfare effects on Industria are derived under assumptions

of full employment, flexible wages and perfect capital mobility. Section

4 deals with the determination of the interest rate and Section 5 with

the effect of OPEC price increases on the trade balance and on wages.

Section 6 introduces rigid wages and variable employment. Section 7 con-

siders the welfare effects of tariffs/subsidies on Industria's oil imports.

Section B looks at the case where Industria restricts capital movements

by taxing borrowing from OPEC. Section 9 presents some concluding

cormuents.
                                                   S




 2.      Industria, OPEC and World Equilibrium

         Consider a world of two countries, Industria and OPEC. There are

 two dates, indexed t = 1 and 2, which are called the present and the

 future. At each date final goods and oil are produced. Industria

 produces and exports the final goods, using as inputs imported oil and

 domestic capital and labor. Industz-ia does not produce any oil, nor

 can it store oil. OPEC produces and exports only oil, at zero cost of

production, to satisfy any quantity Industria demands. Both OPEC and

Industria consume only final goods. At each date final goods and oil

are traded at relative prices set by OPEC. The two countries can also

borrow and lend from each other on a world credit market with an endog-

enously—determined rate of interest. In the present, neither country

has inherited debt from the past.

        Let us look at Industria, modeling first its production side. We

let x =     ft(kt   t z) denote its well-behaved concave production func-

tion at date t, where xt is output of final goods, kt the stock of capital,

      the employment level, and               the oil input. We shall represent the

production side with the help of the GDP functions yt(1 qt, kt, 2t)

                                                       {x — qtt
            t      t       t         t                  t          t    t t               t
defined by Y Cl, q        k ,   9,       ) = max              z   x    f (k ,   tt   ,   z

where tq is the price of oil in terms of final goods in period t. —5/                         The
first    argument of the GDP functions, the price of final goods, is set

equal to unity since we shall use final goods as the numeraire.

       We let 4,    Y,   Y and yt denote the patials of the GDP functions

with respect to the arguments 1, qt1 kt, and t, respectively. Using

standard properties of GD? functions, we know that under competitive

conditions, final goods supply, demand for oil and the demand price for
labor in terms of final goods can be given by


 (2.1)        x
                  t    t
                      Y ,    z
                                 t   =
                                           t
                                         -Y ,    and   w
                                                           t      y
                                                                   t.
                       1                   q


         Next we specify Industria's investment behavior. Industria can

use present final goods for investment in order to increase its future

capital stock. Hence we have k2 = k1 +                            i1,     where i1 is investment in

the present and k1 is the present capital stock, which is predetermined

and exogenously given. There is no investment in the future.

         Industria has access to a competitive world credit market with a

final goods discount factor iS Cone over one plus the final goods rate of

interest). The equilibriwn level of investment maximizes the excess of

the   present value of future GDP over the cost                             of present investment, i.e.

the investment (demand) function Il(q2, 6,                              k1, 92) solves the optimization

problem max1{6Y2(l, q2, k1 +                    i1,   £2) —       i1If.     It follows that the invest-

ment function fulfills the first—order condition



(2.2)        6y(l, q2, k1 + 11(42,                    6,    k',    i2)      £2) = 1,




that is, the present value of the future marginal product of capital

equals    unity, the       price of present investment goods.

        Next we consider Industria's employment behavior. We assume initially

that labor is fixed in total supply                        at each date        and that flexible wages

ensure a given (full) employment level                                at each date. This full em-

ployment assumption will be relaxed in Section 6.

        This completes the discussion of the supply side. Let                             us now deal
                                                    7




 with Industria's demand side. Regarding weifare and demand, we assume

 that       Industria can be represented by a well—behaved utility function
    1            2
 U(c    ,    c       ) ,   where c1 and c2 are consumption of final goods in the present
 and future, We let EU, 6, u) be the corresponding (present value)

expenditure function defined by EU, 6, u) =                     rnin(c'   +   6c2:   U(c1, c2)> u}.t"

 The expenditure function gives the minimum present value of expenditure

on consumption, measured in present final goods, required to reach a

given utility level.

            By standard properties of expenditure functions, the partials of

the expenditure function with respect to its first two argunients are

equal to the Hicksian compensated demand functions for present and future

final goods. That is,



(2.3)                  c1 =        and    c2 =


            Industria's          intertemporal budget constraint can now be given by



(2.4)                  EU, 6, u) +       Iiq2,   6, 9?) =

                       11(1, q1, i1) +      612l,   q2, I(q2, 6, Q2)     9?




where we have suppressed the given capital stock k1. The budget con-

straint states that the present value of expenditure on consumption and

investment                 equals the   present value of GD? in the present and the       future.
It can       be        understood as expressing the welfare level u as an            implicit

function             of oil prices, the discount factor, and           employment levels.

Given       this welfare level, output of final goods, oil imports, wages and
                                                  B




 conswnption in the present arid the future are given by (2.1) and (2.3),

 and present investment is given by the investment function.

         The budget constraint can alternatively be written as equating the

 present value of expenditure on consumption to national wealth, W,

defined as W = (Y1         —    Ii)    + 6Y2, the sum of present GDP, net of invest-

ment, arid the present value of future GDP.

        Let us now look        at OPEC. We            assume that OPEC sets oil prices q1 and

        and supplies the world market (Industria) with the amount of oil it

demands. Since we disregard any costs of producing oil, as well as oils

exhaustibility, OPEC wealth, W°, is simply the present value of total

oil output, q1z1 + 6q2z2.              With regard to welfare and demand, as for

Industrja, we let OPEC be represented by the expenditure function E°(1, 6, u°)

where u° is OPEC's welfare level, and the partials                       and £'are OPEC's

consumption at the two dates, with




(2.5)        col =    o
                     E1
                          and c
                                  o2
                                       =
                                             o
                                            E5.



        OPEC's intertemporal budget constraint is



(2.6)
              o           o
             E (1, 6, ii ) =      q
                                       11
                                        z
                                                22_
                                            + ôq z r
                                                           0
                                                           W




which states that the present value of OPEC's consumption expenditure

equals the present value of oil output at the two dates, i.e. OPEC's

wealth. The budget constraint expresses OPEC's welfare level as an im-

plicit function of oil prices, the discount factor, and                    Industria's oil

imports.
                                                                9




         Let us    next      look          at a world           equilibrium, where the oil market and

the final goods market clear at each date. Due to Walras' Law, we

can disregard one of the market equilibria, and we choose to disregard

the future final goods market. Consequently, a world equilibrium can

be represented by the two countries' budget constraints, (2.4) and (2.6);

equilibrium in the oil markets at the two dates,



              — Y1                    1                     2                2
(2.7)                    =        z         and —      '1           =    z
                    q                                       q


where Industria's oil demand equals OPEC's supply; arid equilibrium in

the present final goods market,



(2.8)
              E1
                     +    4+                      =                 =



where    world consumption and investment of present final goods equal
Iridustri&s        supply. For exogenous oil prices q1 and q2                          and   given   (full)
employment levels                         and 2 equations (2.4) and (2.6) — (2.8) detcrmine

the two countries' welfare levels, u and u0, the discount factor 6, and

Industria's oil imports, l                                  z2.

         Industria's      trade balances in the present and                      the   future, b1 and
        can also   be calculated               since they are merely the excess of GD? over

domestic absorption at each date. We find that



(2.9)        b1                       —           -l                    and

              2               2
                                                  7/
             b      =     Y           —
                                            E6.
                                         10



From (2.4) and the homogeneity of the expenditure function it follows
that trade is balanced over time in             present   value terms • but not
necessarily    at each date, i.e.



(2.10)           +   6b2   =       0.




3.      Welfare Effects

        Let us first look at the effects of oil price increases on Industria's

welfare under conditions of wage flexibility arid constant (full) employ-

ment levels at each date. Differentiating the budget constraint (2.4)

and manipulating terms, we find that the change in Industria's welfare,

du, is given by



(3.1)        Edu = -z'dq1      —
                                    ôz2dq2 +   b2dô,


where E is the partial of the expenditure function with respect tin

the   welfare level and represents the inverse of the marginal utility of

wealth, which is positive. The expression EudU can be interpreted as a

wealth—equivalent welfare change.

        Equation (3.1) indicates that Industria's welfare is affected by

changes in the oil terms of trade that occur              each period,   —z1dq1 and —   z2dq2,
and by changes in the intertemporal terms of trade, b2dô. Oil price

increases deteriorate Industria's oil terms of trade and worsen its welfare,

but they may improve the intertomporal terms of trade, for instance if

the discount factor increases (the rate of interest falls) and Industria
                                      11




has a future trade surplus (and hence a deficit — a net debtor position —

in   the   present).     we also note that the degree of substitutability in

production between oil, capital and        labor    has no direct (first—order)

effect on Industria's welfare.

      Equation (3.1) provides a rigorous measure of the general—equilibrium

effects on the rest of the world of oil price increases, in contrast

to many     studies    which merely evaluate these effects by looking at the

changed oil bill. We see that the change in the intertemporal terms of

trade must also be included in the calculation, since it has an important

effect on Industria's welfare as well.



4.    The    Discount    Factor

      In order to determine more completely the effects of oil price

increases on Industria's welfare, we must examine the determinants of

the endogenous change in the discount factor. Since the present final

goods market always clears, we know that any disturbance which creates

an incipient excess supply of present final goods must lead to an

increase in the discount rate (a fall in the real rate of interest) to

stimulate present spending.

      To make the discussion clearer, we first look at the effect on the

discount factor of a temporary oil price increase, where only the present

oil price increases (dq1 > 0 and dq2 =        0).     We next examine the effect

of a future oil price increase (dq1 =       0,     dq2 >   0).   Given the model's

linearity, we then also know the effect on the discount factor of a

permanent     oil price increase, where both present and future oil prices
                                              12




increase (dq', dq2 >0).

        To calculate the effect on the discount factor of a temporary

oil price increase, we differentiate the market equilibrium conditions

for oil and present final goods, (2.7) and (2.8). After some substitutions
                          8/
and manipulations,— we get



                                        —
(4.1)          dó = [x1        +
                                   (C         C)z'   —
                                                         Cq1z1 )dq1/A 0,
                      (—)               (+)                 (—)


where A > 0 is required for stabilityY-"

        According to (4.1) , a temporary oil price increase has an uncertain

impact on the discount factor. The ambiguity arises because the oil

price increase reduces both production and consumption of present final

goods.

        The   bracketed expression in (4.1) can be viewed as the change in
the excess supply of present final goods due to the exogenous increase
in present oil prices. The first terra in brackets is the production
effect. It tends to lower excess supply. The reason is straightforward.
An increase in today's oil price reduces the demand for oil inputs,
since    the own    price substitution effect is always negative, and reduced
oil   inputs depress current output since oil has a positive marginal
              10/
product.

        The second term in brackets reflects a transfer effect in consumption.

Industria reduces its consumption of present final goods because it faces

a deterioration in today's oil terms of trade. OPEC, meanwhile, increases

its consumption. if, consistent with the empirical regularities of the

1970s, we assume that Industria's marginal propensity to consume present
                                      13



 goods out of wealth exceeds OPEC'S (C1 >            )   ,   there   is a net drop in

 world consumption of present final goods. This transfer effect tends

 to increase excess supply.

        Finally, the last term in brackets shows the fall in OPEC income

 and consumption caused by Industria's reduced oil imports.

           We conclude that a temporary oil price increase will cause an

incipient excess supply of present final goods and increase the discount

factor if the drop in world consumption dominates the drop in production.

        Les us next look at the effect on the discount factor of a future

oil price increase. Again, differentiating the market equilibrium

conditions and manipulating, we get




                    [—i +( — 5)5z2 — l
(4.2)        d3 =                             (z +                       0.
                                                         zI1)]dq3'A>
                     (—)   (+)                 C—)       (+) (—)



An increase in the future oil price creates an incipient excess supply

of present final goods since it lowers consumption and investment but

does not affect production. Consequently, the discount factor must

in crease.

        The bracketed expression in (4.2) is the change in the excess supply

of   present final goods (at constant discount factor) caused by the increase
in the future oil price. It      is   positive. The reasons are several.
First, investment demand for present final goods falls if capital                and

labor are cooperative. This follows because a future oil price increase
will lower future oil inputs, which under the cooperative assumption
will decrease the future marginal product of capital and hence present
                                     14



.nvestment U,
•




        Second, there is a transfer effect due to the change in the future
oil terms of trade. It leads to reduced consumption for present final
goods by the same argument used for a temporary oil price increase.
        Third, there is a drop in OPEC consumption due to the fall in

future oil imports. A future increase in oil prices reduces the demand

for future oil inputs directly and also has an indirect effect. If

oil and capital are cooperative, investment falls and future oil demand

will fall because the marginal product of oil will be less with a
                                   12/
smaller future capital stock.

        Hence, the fall in both investment and consumption give rise to

an incipient excess supply of present final goods, so the discount

factor must increase in response to the higher future oil price.

        In order to determine the effect on the discount factor of a

permanent oil price increase, we merely sum the right—hand sides of

(4.1) and (4.2). All terms contribute to creating an incipient excess

supply except the production effect. If the latter is dominated, the

discount      factor rises for a permanent oil price increase.
        Henceforth, we assume that a rise in the discount    factor is the

'normal'      case, both for temporary and permanent oil price increases,
and we know that the discount factor unambiguously rises for a future
oil,   price increase.

        Our   analysis of how the discount factor responds to permanent oil
price    increases supports some of the simulation results obtained by

Sachs (1982) ,     but   it offers a richer understanding of the phenomena at

hand.     Since it   is based on an analytical general—equilibrium model, one
                                            15




that     incorporates the supply side and capital accumulation as well as

the demand side and a general specification of preferences, we can

easily isolate the various pressures on the discount factor when oil

prices change. We see that these pressures arise from both the supply

and demand sides of the market forpresent final goods. Moreover, the

final outcome depends importantly on our assumptions that Cl) capital

and oil are cooperative and that (2) OPEC's marginal propensity to

consuire present final goods is less than Industria's.

         Taking into account our knowledge about the effects of oil price

increases     on the discount factor, we can say                something further   about

the change in Industria's welfare. If Industria is                     initially a net

borrower     from OPEC, and will thus have a future trade surplus (b2 >                  0)

Industria     will get an     intertemporal terms of trade gain in welfare when
oil    prices increase which can moderate its static oil terms of trade

losses.




5.       The Trade Balance and Wage Response

         We can use our results about the effects of oil price increases

on the discount factor and Industria's welfare to calculate the change

in Industria's present trade balance. We merely differentiate (2.9),

which after some manipulations yields



              d11 = —z1dq1 —            (-z1dq1 — óz2dq2 + b2d6)
 (5.1)                             C
                                   12                 >
                                — iqdq — i6dó              0.
                                              16


         Oil   price increases have an uncertain impact on Industria's trade

  balance because they may reduce its absorption as well as its GOP. The

  first term on the right—hand side of (5.1) is the fall in GOP caused by

  the deterioration in Industria's oil terms of trade,
                                                                      It worsens the
 trade balance, The second term represents the change in Industria's

 consumption caused by its changed welfare. If oil price increases

 reduce Industrja's welfare, its consumption of present final goods will

 decline,  improving the trade balance. The third term is an intertempora],
 consumption substitution effect. it worsens the trade balance since
 the rise in the discount factor increases Industria's consumption of
 present final goods. The last two terms show the total change in
 investment, which may rise or fall when oil and capital are cooperative.
We conclude that a necessary and sufficient
                                            condition for Industria's

trade balance to deteriorate is for the drop in GOP and the rise in

absorption due to the increase in the discount factor to dominate.
        We also note that the smaller is OPEC'S
                                                            marginal propensity to
consume in the present and the smaller is                OPEC's intertemporal substi-
tution    in consumption, the more likely it is that Industria's present

trade balance will deteriorate,'_Y Indeed, in
                                                            the limiting case where
OPEC    consumes nothing in the present, Industria's trade balance
unambiguously      deteriorates,           We can best   eee this by observing that
OPEC's trade balance is the negative of Industria's, and
                                                         in the limiting

case where OPEC's present consumption is zero, OPEC's trade balance is

merely b =      q'z'.        Diferentiating bC gives



(5.2)       dboX   —   —db
                             1
                                 =   z dq1 + q1dz1
                                      1.
                                            17



which is positive if OPEC's oil revenues increase in the present. Thus

in this limiting case, both a temporary and a permanent oil price increase

deteriorate Industria's trade balance, whereas a future oil price increase

has no impact.      Indeed,        in the limiting case, the present trade balance

is   independent of the discount factor.
        Finally, let us also examine the wage response to oil price
increases   when the discount factor also increases. Differentiating (2.2)

we find that for dgt > 0,            d& >0,


(5.3)       dw1 =    1    1
                               C 0, and
                    Ydq

(5.4)       dw2 =
                    Ydq2
                               +             = Ydq2    +
                                                           Y,I1dq2     +
                                                                           YkIdS        0
                    (—)             (+)          1—)       (+) (—)         (4) (+)



We see from 15.3) that the present wage unambigously falls if labor and
                           1
                                                                                 14/
oil are cooperative                C 0) ,   which we have always assumed. We see

from (5.4) that the change in future wages is ambiguous. The future

oil price increase, at constant discount factor, unambiguously decreases

future wages, directly when labor and oil are cooperative (Y C 0) and

indirectly through a decrease in investment, if capital and oil, and

labor and capital are cooperative "Lk                          C     0).-" However,         an

increase in the discount factor, at constant oil prices1 increases

investment, which increases wages if capital and labor are cooperative.

We hence note the interesting possibility that the future wage rate

could be pushed up by an oil price increase, in spite of labor                         and oil
being cooperative.
                                             18



6.      Rigid Wages and       Variable Employment
        So   far we have    assumed flexible      wages and full employment in
Industria.          In this section we shall examine the consequences of rigid
real    wages and changes in employment (unemployment)              in the present, with
flexible      wages   and full    employment in the     future.
        If the      present wage   is     fixed in terms of present final goods,     the
level    of employnEnt is         given   by the condition that the demand price for
labor, 4, equals the          wage,     w1. This   condition determines    the   present

employment function L1(w1,              q1, k1) , which hence   fulfills




(6.1)
                1             1 11 1
                       q1 • k , L (w , q • k 1)) = w 1

        The change in the present employment level in response to an oil

price increase will be given by



(6.2)          dL1     Jdq1   <   0.
                        q



Employment falls under our assumption that labor and oil are cooperative,
                                                                                     16/
and we note that this variation in employment is due to rigid wages.

        To examine the effects on welfare, the discount factor, the trade

balance, etc. , when wages are rigid, we could now go through the same

exercise as in Sections 3—5, taking into account that employment is now

endogenous.         However, a simpler way to understand how variable employ-
ment alters our        earlier    results is to find the effects, at constant oil
prices, of the change in employment given by (6.2). The effects of
changes      in oil   prices with endogenous changes in employment will simply
be the sum      of   the effects of oil price changes at full employment and
the effects of the employment change at constant oil prices.
        Hence, let us differentiate our system with constant oil prices
                                              19



and   with full employnent in the             future1   but with present employment
falling by       dL1 as in (6.2). Differentiating               the budget   constraint (2.4),

we   get


(6.3)         E du =          b2dó +
                 U
                                         ()

Industria's      welfare is directly influenced by the decrease in present

GDP,    w'di1,   which we call the (wealth equivalent) enployxnent effect (on

welfare).        Industria's welfare is also influenced by a change in the
intertemporal terms of trade, but since oil prices are constant, there
are no static oil terms of trade effects.
        In order to determine completely the employment effect on welfarr.
we must deterniine its effect on the discount factor. Hence, we differ-

entiate the equilibrium conditions for the oil markets and the present

final goods market, (2.7) and (2.8), to get



(6.5)         d6 [4—                   — CYzt]dL'/A<       0.

                       (+)                     (+)



        Equation      (6.5)    indicates that a fall in employment decreases the
                        17/
discount      factor.          The reason is that supply of final goods falls in
the present only,            whereas   the drop in world consumption of final goods
is   spread over both periods.             Hence the discount factor must decrease
to prevent any        excess demand.

       It   follows   that Industria faces a deterioration in its jnterteniporal
                                          20


terms    of trade. Combined with the adverse employment effect, Industria's

welfare unambiguously deteriorates when employment falls.

        If we try to determine the change in industria's present trade

balance by differentiating (2.9), it appears ambiguous, since the fall

in employment will worsen it but the decrease in the discount factor

will improve it. If we look instead at OPEC's present trade balance,

where bOl =    q1z'   —
                          E,   we see that it changes by



(6.6)        dbOl = —db1 =                —               +
                                q1z,dt1       C?1J_b2do       q1zdZ1

                      + 6q2zId6) —
                                          E5d6


The drop in Industria's employment reduces Industria's demand for oil

inputs (oil and labor are cooperative) and consequently OPEC's oil

production falls by q14dL'. If OPEC's marginal propensity to consume

in the present and its intertemporal stthstitution in consumption are

both small, or if OPEC consumes no final goods in the present, then

the production effect dominates, and OPEC's trade balance worsens while

Industria's improves.

        Combining our results of a fall in present employment at constant

oil prices with our previous results of an increase in oil prices at

full    employment, we can make the following statement: a given oil price
increase causes a smaller rise in the discount factor when wages are
rigid in the present period rather than            flexible.      The discount factor
may even    remain unchanged or decrease.' When               present   wages are rigid,
a given oil price also causes a greater drop in Industria's welfare, and
                                        21



 its   trade balance is likely to deteriorate less.



 7.     Tariffs/Subsidies on Oil Imports

        As we have shown in Sections 3 and 4, oil price increases change

 Industria's welfare by altering the oil terms of trade and the inter—

 temporal terms of trade. Recognizing this, Industria may wish to

pursue tariff policies that alter the terms of trade in its favor. Since

OPEC fixes the relative price of oil at each date, Industria can               do
nothing      about turning the oil terms of trade in its favor. However, it
may be    able to improve its intertemporal terms of trade through specific
tariff policies.         In this section, we consider the welfare consequences

of    Industria imposing tariffs or subsidies on oil imports under the
restrictive assumption that OPEC does          not   retaliate. In   the   next section,
we examine the consequences of Industria imposing a tax on capital

imports.

       Let   t and t2
              1                         .            ..
                          denote the tariffs/subsidies per unit 01]. import in

the present and future, respectively. With q1 and q2 denoting the relative

prices of oil at the two dates, Industria's domestic relative prices of

oil at the two dates will be (q1 + t1) and (q2 + t2). Positive values

for t1 and        t2 signify import tariffs,   negative values import subsidies.

Not   to burden our terminology too much, let us henceforth refer to t1
and t2 as (net) tariffs only, implicitly interpreting negative values
as subsidies.
       Let the initial situation be one of zero tariffs, and assume flexible
wages and full employment. If Industria then imposes small tariffs, the
                                         22



welfare    effects can be calculated by differentiating a modified budget
                                                                               19 /
constraint for Industria that takes tariff revenues into account.
We find that


(7.1)        Edu = b2d6,


that    is, Industria's welfare change depends only on the change in its
intertemporal terms of trade.
        To find the effect of tariffs on the discount factor, we first make
the    simplifying assumption that OPEC consumes only in the future. Then,
                                                                               20/
by differentiating modified market equilibrium conditions, we get



(7.2)        d6 =   [x16t1   —
                                 i1dt2]/A,
                     q            q


still assuming zero initial tariffs.

        We see that a small tariff increase on oil imports in the present

period reduces output by x1dt1 but has no effect on demand. Hence the

discount factor must fall to prevent any excess demand for present final

goods. Consequently, Industria will suffer a deterioration in its

intertemporal terms of trade and a welfare loss if             it taxes   present oil

imports.     Somewhat surprisingly, Industria should subsidize rather than
tax    oil imports in the present to          improve its welfare.
        iegarding changes in future tariffs, note that a small increase

would decrease investment (11dt2 < 0) when oil and capital are cooperative,

and the discount factor would have to increase to maintain equilibriu.'n
                                         23



in   the market for present final goods. A tax on future oil imports thus

improves      Industria's     welfare.   Hence, under the restrictive assumption

that oil prices are exogenous, Industria should subsidize present oil

imports and tax         future ones.
        Let   us    also briefly look at these issues when there are rigid wages
and   variable      employment in the present. The change in employment given
a change in the present tariff is


(7.3)                = L1dt1.
                        q
                        (—)



A small subsidy Cdt1 <          0) increases employment whereas a small tariff

decreases it. From the analysis in Section 6 it follows that a subsidy

which increases employment improves Industria's welfare. We conclude

that rigid wages in the present provide a separate case for Industria to

subsidize      its present oil imports.


B.      Restricted Capital Mobility
        So far we have assumed that there is perfect mobility of financial

capital between Industria and OPEC, in the sense that the two countries

have access to the same competitive world credit market with the same

rate of interest. We shall now deal with the case when there are some

impediments         to international capital movements. We   again assume full

employment         and that OPEC consumes only in the future.
        We choose to represent the impediments to international capital
mthility by having Industria impose a small tax on interest payments to
                                                      24




OPEC. This tax draws a wedge between Industria's hone rate of interest,

r', and     the   world, i.e. OPEC's, rate of interest, r, such that r' >                          r.
Equivalently, the tax draws a wedge, I >                            0,   between OPEC'S discount
                                                           21/
factor, 6,        and Industria's,            6   —   T.         We assume that the tax revenues

are distributed to Industria's consumers in a lumpsum                              way.   Then, assuming

full    employment and an initial zero tax level, we differentiate a
modified budget constraint with respect to a small tax (dt > 0) , getting
Edu     =   b2do3YThat is, Industria's welfare change depends only on changes

in   the intertemporal terms of trade.
        Differentiating a modified market                         equilibrium condition with respect

to   a small tax Cdt >         0)    gives


(8.1)          d6   =               +
                                        Idt]          A1 > o.
                        LE1dT
                         (+)            (+)



The    small tax on interest paid to OPEC reduces Industria's absorption of
present final goods.                Under the restrictive assumption that oil prices
remain unchanged, it           follows            that the world discount factor increases
and Industria's         welfare indeed improves when it                      imposes a small tax on
interest payments. —
                          24/

        When   wages are rigid and                 employment is variable in the present, the
imposition        of a tax on interest has no effect on employment.                         Consequently,

we conclude that Industria can improve its welfare by taxing capital

imports even when present wages are rigid.

        We might ask whether we can rank oil tariffs/subsidies and capital

import taxation in terms of their effect on Industria's welfare. For full
                                25



employment, we might compare the right—hand sides of (7.2) and (8.1).

Without further specifying the parameters it cannot be said which policy

would have a larger effect on the discount factor and hence on welfare,

although intuition might lead us to think that capital import taxation

would be a more direct way of influencing the discount factor. Note,

though, that if there are presently rigid wages, a present oil subsidy,

in contrast to capital import taxation, does affect employment and have an

additional influence on Industria's welfare. If the enployment effect

is strong enough, subsidies on present oil imports will have a larger effect

on Industria's welfare than taxes on capital Imports.



9.   concluding Remarks

     Under the assumption that factors of production are cooperative,

we have shown that OPEC price increases deteriorate Industria's oil

terms of trade but they may improve its intertemporal terms of trade

if interest rates fall and Industria is a net borrower in the present.

We have also established precise conditions under which interest rates

may, in fact, fall. The analysis also indicates that OPEC price increases

may increase or decrease present investment in Industria, that Industria's

trade balance is likely to deteriorate, that current wages will fall but

future wages may rise or fall depending on the change in investment.

     If wages are rigid in Industria, oil price increases decrease

employment when factors are cooperative. The fall in the rate of

interest is then reduced or even reversed compared to the case with

flexible wages. Industria's welfare deteriorates more and its trade
                                       26



 balance   deteriorates less.

        We have also shown that for given oil prices, oil importers can

 improve their welfare by subsidizing present oil imports and taxing

 future oil imports or by taxing capital imports from OPEC.

        We should also mention some limitations of the analysis. Since

our model is designed to concentrate on certain general—equilibrium

interrelationships, especially the effects of oil price increases or

tax policies on Industria's welfare, a two-country framework is adequate.

However, in focussing on just two blocs — OPEC versus the oil importers —

the   model abstracts from intra—bloc differences. Some implications of

these   intra-bloc differences are analyzed in Dixit (1981) and in Marion
and   Svensson   (1982). Our   model   also ignores the special feature of oil
as an exhaustible resource ard the nature of OPEC's pricing decision.
The relative price of oil in terms of final goods is treated as        exogenous.
While this is acceptable given the questions being asked, the welfare

implications of changes in oil prices that are optimally set by OPEC need

to be studied as well.

       While these issues provide important areas for further research, the

principal concern of this paper is to analyze some important general—

equilibrium interrelationships in detail and so to increase our under-

standing of the effects of oil price increases and tax       policies on
important macroeconomic variables. In spite of including endogenous
international capital flows, capital accumulation in Industria, and
an   endogenous world rate of interest, we have nevertheless been able
to   derive fairly clear—cut results, both     under conditions of full
employment and unemployment. Our analysis has also made explicit the
precise qualifications of these results.
                                            F—i




                                        FOOTNOTES

*     We    appreciate helpful comments from Avinash Dixit, Assaf Razin, an

anonymous       referee and participants      in the Workshop on Open Economy

Macroeconomics          held   at the Institute for International Economic Studies

in Stockholm August of 1981. we gratefully acknowledge financial support

from       the Research Foundations of Svenska Handeisbanken and Torsten
and    Ragnar Sèderberg.




       _!./calling the oil—importing bloc Industria is inspired by Calvo

and Findlay (1978).


                 explicitly intertemporal but partialequilibrium analyses

of the effects of oil price increases,              see Bruno (1982)   ,   Marion   (1981)

Obstfeld       (1980)   ,   Sachs (1981) and Svensson (1981) .   For a general—

equilibrium analysis within the monetary approach to the balance of

payments and hence without an explicitly intertemporal framework, see

Schmid (1976)


       —"Throughout our analysis we will maintain the assumption that

capital, labor and oil are cooperative in Industria, in the technical

sense that their cross partials in the production functions are positive.

This assumption makes sense for this level of aggregation, and it is not

very restrictive. The definition of cooperation is different from the

usual definitions of complementarity or substitutability in production

which make reference to the sign of the partial of the demand for a

factor with respect to the price of another factor at a given output

level. See Berndt and Wood (1979) for a thorough discussion of such
                                     F—2



 }Iicksian   complementarity/substitutabjiity between energy and other
 factors.    Factors can be }licksian substitutes yet cooperative in our

 sense. This is indeed the case with the specific separable technologies

discussed by Berndt and Wood where x = f[g(k, e), h(Z, in)) and f(.),

g() and h(') are linearly homogenous, e is the energy input, and in            is
the input of non—energy materials.

      A frequent assumption in the literature is weak separability between

oil and a capital—labor composite factor. Then we have x = f[v(k, Z)             ,   z)
where f(S) and v(S) are linearly homogenous. It is readily checked that

in this case capital, labor and oil are cooperative in our sense.

     _±_"There is evidence that world interest rates fell during the

1973—1979 period. See Sachs (1981, pp. 223—35)

     --'See Dixit and Norman (1980) or Varian (1978) for a discussion

of the properties of GOP, or revenue, functions.


               Dixit and Norman (1980) or Varian (1978) for a discussion of

the properties of expenditure functions.


              can be seen from inspection of (2.9), Industria's present

trade surplus is equal to GOP (Y1) minus domestic absorption (E1 +         Ii)
Alternatively, the trade surplus represents the excess of domestic

saving (Y1 —          over investment (Ii). Furthermore, since        = x' -
                E1)
we can write the trade surplus as exports (x1 —          - Il)   minus imports
                                                    Li
(q1z1). Since there is no initial debt and hence no interest payments

in the present, the present trade surplus is also equal to the current—

account surplus and represents the net accumulation of foreign assets.
                                                      F-3


                 the differentiation we use (3.1) and we also use (2.6) to

get E°du° = z1dq1 + 6z2dq2 — b266                       + qdz'    +   6q2dz2.    We define       as

Industrias marginal propensity to consume present final goods out of

wealth, where C' = E
                                                                      ol
                                             We define OPEC's MPC as C , where C
                                                                                 ci     0                0
                                                                                                      lu/Eu
                                                                                    = E
               w            lu/Eu'                                                           W


We assume that consumption is normal in both periods, so that 0 <—C1
                                                                   WV


ccj    .
      2'Here A is the derivative of world excess demand for present goods
with respect to the discount factor. If oil prices are given, oil markets
are always in equilibrium, and the discount factor                         adjusts to clear       the
market for present final goods, then a necessary and sufficient condition

for stability is A >           0.     That is, a rise in the discount factor (a fall in

the rate of interest) increases excess world demand for present final goods

(decreases net saving). Note that A is                      given by
          o                1                     2     ol 221
      +        + 61   +        —
                                      ol.
                                    C.1.
                                            )b       + C óq Zkto.       The first three terms

represent the intertemporal substitution effects and the                            investment
effect    of a discount factor change. They are all positive.                           (The con-

sumption cross substitution effects are positive since there are only

two consumer goods, present and future final goods.) The investment

substitution effect is positive since I =                         -             > 0; investment

always increases with the discount factor. The fourth term is a transfer

effect. It is positive under the plausible assumptions that Industria

has a current trade deficit (and hence a surplus in the future, with

b2 > 0)    , and that OPEC's marginal propensity to consun present final

goods     is   less than Industria's (C —                   C   > 0).    The last term is also

positive       since an   increase in investment due to an increase in the discount

factor
           (I > 0) leads to an increase in future oil imports (zId6 > 0)
                                                                 F—4




under         our assumption that capital and oil are cooperative. Hence all
terms         are indeed positive, and there                               is no conflict between the assumption
of      stability and our other assumptions.


                       terms of the GOP function we                               have z1          Y1
                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                           0 by convexity
                                                                                          c;

of the GOP function                      in                     and x' = Yq           = —Y   = qz 1 S 0 since
                                              prices,                                     qq     q
by zero homogeneity                      of Y in prices, 1'                        +qY =0. In terms of the
                                               q                            cil           <N
production function we have
                                                           q
                                                                =     1/fZZ        0 andx1= f/f
                                                                                             Z qZZ
                                                                                                   SO since
f      <0.
    zz —

                       have, by differentiating (2.2) ,                                    = — Yq/Y             =       —                     <0

if f2    kz
              >0.

                       have
                                k
                                     =    - 2qk       =
                                                                kz zz >0, if kz
                                                  11    o
         -'0PEC's present trade balance is bca = q z — E1.                                                      Differentiating,

we find that

ol =              (z1dg1 + q1dz1)             —                         + ôz2dq2 — b2dä +               qldzl       +       óq2dz2) -   E5d6.
                                                   C1(z1dq1
                         (+)                                                          (+)                                               (+) (+)


                                                          the more likely it is that dbOl>                                  0 and hence      db1< 0.
The smaller is                      and
                                              E5,
                       have              =
                                              f/f1              < 0    if f >        0.        An increase in the oil

price reduces oil inputs which reduces the marginal product of labor.

                       have              =
                                              Lk
                                                      -
                                                           ff/f2              > 0 if                      >   o.


          'Note          that by differentiating (6.1) ,                                       = —Y/Y           < 0 if                C 0.


          !Z/"The proof is as follows. The present GDP function fulfills
                            1)
 Y
    1
        =x —qz.
            1.1
              1
                Hencew =i=x—qz>Oandweet           1         1          1



 4      — w1       —           — 0.          Since 0 C                 C 1 and 0      C            C 1 and w1,               4 > a,
                                             F-s


we get x2 —
             1       1 —   olil                .

                  Cw         q       > 0. Since we are investigating the case of

an employment decrease, dL1 C           0.
      'Sachs'          (1982) simulation results also indicate that real wage

rigidity may reduce or even reverse the fall in short-term interest rates

caused by an oil price increase.


       "Thc budget constraint is E(l, 5, u) + 11(q2 +                                t2, 5)        Y(1, q1+t1) +
 2       2
6Y (1, q +t •
                  2 I12
                      (q     +t 2 .6)) +t11
                                          z +             22 ,where
                                                         Stz                       the last two terms

represent the tariff revenues. Differentiation gives

Edu + b2d5 + t1dz1 + St2dz2.            By assumption, t1 =                   t2     0 initially.

      'Differentiating the market equilibrium conditions gives

AdS    x1dt' — 11dt2 —       C1    (t1z1dt1 +       St2z2dt2      +   6t2z211dt2).           The terms in
        q       q             W        q                 q                    kq
parentheses drop out by the assumption of zero initial tariffs. The

term A equals E16 +           +        + C t2zI1 > o.

      —
      21/ It     can be shown that T =       (r I   —   r)rS/(l   +   r   I
                                                                              ). Having Industria

impose a tax on interest payments to OPEC is formally equivalent to

imposing a (present value) tax t per unit of future net exports, b2.

The tax decreases the relative price between future and present final

goods, i.e. the discount factor, from 6 to 5 - T, and gives rise to
(present value) tax revenues it2. what we have here is just an intertem-

pora]. example of Lerner's classic theorem on the equivalence between

import and export taxes. In our framework, taxing present capital imports,

—b1, is equivalent to taxing the corresponding future capital exports,

b2. We refer to Marion and Svensson (1981) for details.

      'The budget constraint is E(1, S -                     , u)      +      11(g2,   6 —    t}
Y(1,   q1) +      (6 —   t)Y2(l,   q2, 11(q2, 6 —        ii)   + Tb2, where the last term

 is the present value of the tax revenues. Differentiating gives
Eudu = b2d6 + Tab2. But T = 0 initially.

       "Here, A =        + I + (1 —   (r/5Hcb2 >   0. The term —
                    E1                                             (T/6)cb2
is   due to the fact that an increase in the discount factor causes a

change in the future trade balance which leads to a negative tax revenue

effect on welfare that reduces excess demand. This is the analogue of

the usual "tariff multiplier" in standard trade theory. Since 6 — T > 0,

the term (1 - (TIcS)) is clearly positive, hence so is A.


            a somewhat different context, Dixit (1981) shows that a

tariff levied by the oil-importing country on present oil imports with

the aim of cutting back its oil dependence reduces the present value

price of future goods (6) and harms the oil importer if it remains a

net exporter of industrial goods in the future, i.e. if b2 > 0.
                                               R- 1



                                           References


 Berndt, E. and   D.   Wood (1979) , "Engineering and Econometric Interpretations of

 Energy—capital Complementarity," American Economic Review 69, 342-254

 Bruno, M. (1982), "Adjustment and        Structural C%ange Under Raw Material     Price
 Shocks," Scandinavian Journal of Economics 84, 199—221.

 Calvo,   C. and R. Findlay (1978)   ,   "On the Optimal Acquisition of Foreign
                                                                                Capital
 Through Investment of Oil cport Revenues," Journal
                                                              of International Economics 8,
 5 13—524.                                                                     -




 Dixit,   A. (1981), "A Model of Trade in Oil and Capital," Woodrow Wilson School

Discussion Paper No. 16,


Dixit, A. and V. Norman (1980) , Theory of International Trade, London:

Cambridge University Press.


Marion, N.?. (1981) ,    "Nontraded Goods, Oil Price Increases and the Current

Account," NBER Working Paper No. 759, forthcoming        in   Journal of International
Economics.



Marion, N.?. and L.E.O. Svensson (1981), "World equilibrium with oil price

increases: an intertemporal analysis," lIES Seminar Paper No. 191.


______ and ______ (1982), "Structural Differences and Macroeconomic Adjustment

to Oil Price Increases in A Three—Country Model," NBER Working Paper No. 839.
                                                     K- 2




 Obstfeld, M. (1980), "Intermediate Imports, the Terms of Thade, and the Dynamics

 of   the Exchange Rate and           the   Current Account," Journal of International
 Economics 10, 461—480.

 Sachs,    J. (1981) ,       "The   Current Account and     Macroeconomic   Adjustment in the
 l970s,"   Brookings Papers on Economic Activity I, 201—268.


___________ (1982)       ,
                             "Energy and Crowth Under Flexible Exchange Rates; A
Simulation    Study,"        in J. Bhandari and B. Putnam, eds., The International

Transmission of Economic Disturbances Under Flexible
                                                                     Exchange Rates, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.


Schmid, N. (1976), "A Model of Trade in Model, Goods and Factors,"                    Journal of
International    Economics 6, 347—361.


Svensson, L.E.0, (1981), "Oil Prices and A Small Oil-Importing Economy's

Welfare and Trade Balance; An Interteruporal Approach," tIES Seminar Paper

No. 184. Revised version forthcoming in Quarterly Journal of Economics.


Varian, H.R. (1978) •         Microeconomic Analysis, New York: Norton & Co.
