NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISAGGREGATING EMPLOYMENT PROTECTION:
THE CASE OF DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION
Christine Jolls
J.J. Prescott
Working Paper 10740
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10740
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

Thanks to Josh Angrist, David Autor, Ian Ayres, John de Figueiredo, Thomas DeLeire, Lawrence Katz, Anup
Malani, Thomas Miles, Paul Oyer, and seminar participants and discussants at the American Economics
Association Annual Meeting, the Harvard Labor Economics Workshop, the Harvard Law and Economics
Seminar, the Society of Labor Economists’ Annual Meeting, the University of Virginia Law and Economics
Seminar, the American Law and Economics Association Annual Meeting, and the NBER Summer Institute
for helpful comments. We are also grateful to Jerry Ling, Jane Maschka, and Charlotte Sanders for
outstanding research assistance; to David Autor and Mark Duggan for providing us with their state-level
Social Security Administration data and state unemployment rate series; and to Harvard Law School
librarians Deanna Barmakian, Maura Burns, and Mindy Kent for extensive help in locating historical state
laws governing employment discrimination against individuals with disabilities. J.J. Prescott also
acknowledges financial support from the John M. Olin Center at Harvard Law School. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Christine Jolls and J.J. Prescott. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Disaggregating Employment Protection: The Case of Disability Discrimination
Christine Jolls and J.J. Prescott
NBER Working Paper No. 10740
September 2004
JEL No. I18, J18, J21, J23, J71, J78, K31
ABSTRACT
Studies of the effects of employment protection frequently examine protective legislation as a whole.
From a policy reform perspective, however, it is often critical to know which particular aspect of the
legislation is responsible for its observed effects. The American with Disabilities Act (ADA), a 1990
federal law covering over 40 million Americans, is a clear case in point. Several empirical studies
have suggested that the passage of the ADA reduced rather than increased employment opportunities
for individuals with disabilities. To the extent this is true, it is crucial to credibly disentangle the
different features of this complex and multi-faceted law. Separately evaluating the distinct aspects
of the ADA is important not only for determining how the law might best be reformed if some
aspects of it produce negative employment effects, but also for improving our understanding of the
potential consequences of ADA-like provisions in race and other civil rights laws. This paper
exploits state-level variation in pre-ADA legal regimes governing disability discrimination to
separately estimate the employment effects of each of the ADA's two primary substantive provisions.
We find strong evidence that the immediate post-enactment employment effects of the ADA are
attributable to its requirement of "reasonable accommodations" for disabled employees rather than
to its potential imposition of firing costs for such employees. Moreover, the pattern of the ADA's
effects across states suggests, contrary to widely discussed prior findings based on national-level
data, that declining disabled employment after the immediate post-ADA period reflects other factors
rather than the ADA itself.
Christine Jolls
Harvard Law School
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cjolls@nber.org
J.J. Prescott
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
jprescott@stanfordalumni.org

I.

Introduction
A large literature examines the effects of employment protection on employment levels and other

labor market outcomes for protected workers. In much of this literature, “employment protection” is
taken to be a simple unitary measure. Thus, for instance, in studying the effects of employment
protection on European and Asian unemployment, recent papers by Nickell (1997), Blanchard and
Wolfers (2000), and Besley and Burgess (2004) measure the level of protection or labor regulation using
single-dimension measures from OECD or other data sources. Similarly, Oyer and Schaefer (2000) study
the effects of employment protection on employment levels and other labor market outcomes in the
United States by examining the overall effect of a multi-faceted antidiscrimination law, the Civil Rights
Act of 1991. In many areas, the fact that effects are identified from a single change in the legal regime
means that there is no separate source of variation for identifying which particular components of the new
regime may be primarily responsible for the observed effects; in other cases there are simply not enough
sources of variation to disaggregate the separate components of “employment protection.” Such
limitations on the empirical findings are unfortunate, however, because it is difficult to evaluate potential
policy reforms without an understanding of the specific sources of observed labor market effects.
The growing literature on the employment effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990
(ADA) is a clear case in point. Several recent empirical studies have suggested that the ADA, a law that
broadly regulates the treatment of individuals with disabilities in the workplace and elsewhere, has
reduced the employment of individuals with disabilities (DeLeire 2000, 2003; Acemoglu and Angrist
2001). To the extent this is true—a closely debated question to which we will return in our empirical
analysis—it is critical from a policy perspective to determine which specific features of the ADA may be
primarily responsible for the negative employment effect. While DeLeire (2003:259-60) suggests that
those interested in improving disabled employment opportunities “should reconsider their support of the
ADA as the vehicle for achieving that goal,” policy reform targeted to embracing and preserving the
ADA—a law passed virtually unanimously by both houses of Congress and signed with enthusiasm by a
Republican president—but improving the law’s efficacy appears far more promising from a practical

1

standpoint than policy reform premised on the broad conclusion that the ADA should be abandoned as a
means of helping individuals with disabilities. If empirical work on protective legislation such as the
ADA is to have genuine policy relevance, it is critical to determine the specific source of the observed
labor market effects of the legislation.
Despite the voluminous literature on the employment effects of the ADA, the question of why the
ADA might have a negative effect on disabled employment has received essentially no systematic
empirical attention. If the ADA’s provisions render individuals with disabilities more costly to employ
but—because of the difficulty of enforcing prohibitions on discrimination in hiring (Donohue and
Heckman 1991)—do not effectively prevent employers from refusing to hire these individuals in the first
place, then it is unremarkable that the law could be found to reduce rather than increase disabled
employment. But almost no empirical attention has been devoted to the question of just why the ADA
might increase the costs of, and thereby cause the disemployment of, individuals with disabilities.
Two central provisions of the ADA seem most likely to increase the cost of employing disabled
individuals. First, the ADA mandates that employers provide “reasonable accommodations” to
individuals with disabilities—such as purchasing special equipment or altering workplace structures or
procedures—unless such accommodations would create “undue hardship” for the employer. Such
mandated accommodations impose obvious costs, though the precise magnitude of these costs may be
uncertain (Blanck 1996). Second, by prohibiting discriminatory discharge on the basis of disability, the
ADA creates “firing costs” associated with the employment of individuals with disabilities. These costs
reflect the anticipated expenses (litigation and otherwise) of terminating disabled employees even for
lawful reasons; such costs arise because the legal system must now be convinced that the termination was
not discriminatory. Unlike prohibitions on discriminatory failure to hire, prohibitions on discriminatory
termination are likely to give rise to a significant amount of litigation by employees (Donohue and
Heckman 1991). The ADA, in potentially generating these firing costs, parallels other civil rights
statutes, such as Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Age Discrimination in Employment Act
of 1967. The large existing literature on Title VII’s effects contains competing suggestions on whether

2

the law has increased (contrary to the firing costs prediction) or decreased (consistent with the firing costs
prediction) employment levels of protected workers (Chay 1998; Heckman and Payner 1989; Donohue
and Siegelman 1991). In light of the existing empirical uncertainty about the validity of the firing costs
account, an empirical investigation of the role of firing costs under the ADA is an important next step in
this literature.
Because the ADA imposed both a reasonable accommodations requirement and potential firing
costs at the same time (upon its initial enactment), existing studies comparing disabled employment levels
before and after the ADA—including the studies by DeLeire and by Acemoglu and Angrist—are not
well-suited to separating out the effects of the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement and its
potential imposition of firing costs.1 The present study seeks to isolate and evaluate the two distinct
explanations for reduced disabled employment after the ADA by exploiting the substantial state-level
variation in disability discrimination regimes that existed prior to the ADA’s enactment. During the preADA period, some states’ disability discrimination regimes tracked the ADA in both requiring reasonable
accommodations for disabled workers and subjecting employers to a “traditional antidiscrimination
prohibition” (forbidding discrimination on the basis of disability in hiring, firing, and terms and
conditions of employment), with its associated firing costs. During the same period, other states imposed
traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions but departed from the eventual approach of the ADA in not
requiring employers to make reasonable accommodations. Finally, a third group of states imposed no
limits whatever on private employers’ treatment of disabled workers in the pre-ADA period. By
separately evaluating the effects of the ADA—with its dual imposition of a reasonable accommodations
requirement and a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition with its accompanying firing costs—on

1

Acemoglu and Angrist briefly attempt to examine the issue of the relative role of the two distinct types of legal
requirements by testing whether “separation rates” for disabled workers fell during the post-ADA period; they find
no discernible effect on separation rates and therefore tentatively suggest that negative effects of the ADA may
result primarily from the law’s reasonable accommodations requirement. However, as Acemoglu and Angrist
emphasize, the separation rate information is “plagued by considerable measurement error,” and this noise may
explain their failure to find an effect of the ADA on separation rates. In contrast to Acemoglu and Angrist, Baldwin
and Schumacher (2002) find that the relative rate of involuntary job changes for disabled compared to nondisabled
workers fell between 1990 and 1993, although again accuracy of measurement may be affecting these results.
Overall, separation rate data does not seem to be a reliable way to disaggregate the employment effects of the
ADA’s distinct provisions.

3

disabled employment in each of these three distinct state groups, we are able to provide a measure of the
relative importance of the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement and its traditional
antidiscrimination prohibition in driving the disabled employment effects of the ADA’s enactment.
We estimate that in the years just after its enactment the ADA produced approximately a 10
percent decline in disabled employment in states in which the law’s reasonable accommodations
requirement was an innovation, compared to states in which a similar requirement existed at the state
level prior to the ADA’s enactment. By contrast, we consistently find little to no effect of the ADA’s
enactment on disabled employment in states in which the law’s traditional antidiscrimination prohibition,
with its associated firing costs, was an innovation, compared to states with similar preexisting
prohibitions. Our results therefore suggest that the reasonable accommodations requirement of the ADA,
rather than its imposition of firing costs, played the central role in the ADA’s near-term employment
effects.
The state-law variation in pre-ADA disability discrimination regimes not only allows us to
disaggregate the relationship between the ADA’s enactment and post-ADA employment patterns, but also
provides a new source of variation for probing the robustness of the causal relationship asserted by some
studies between the ADA and the employment trends observed over the 1990s (DeLeire 2000, 2003;
Acemoglu and Angrist 2001). As the significant scholarly debate over the ADA’s employment effects,
culminating in a recent book-length treatment by Dennis Stapleton and Richard Burkhauser (2003),
clearly illustrates, a perennial concern with any study of outcomes before and after the implementation of
a new federal program is that concurrent unmeasured changes other than the passage of the new law—
including shifts in the economic, social, and technological environment—may be the actual causes of the
observed changes in outcomes. Our research, by separately studying the effects of the ADA in those
states that had similar regimes in place prior to the ADA’s enactment, in those states in which the ADA
was an innovation only with respect to imposing a reasonable accommodations requirement, and in those
states in which the ADA was a complete innovation, provides an important new lens on the voluminously
debated question of the causal relationship between the ADA and declines in disabled employment over

4

the 1990s (DeLeire 2000, 2003; Acemoglu and Angrist 2001; Stapleton, Houtenville and Goodman 2001;
Bound and Waidmann 2002; Beegle and Stock 2003; Kruse and Schur 2003; Stapleton and Burkhauser
2003). Our results clearly support a causal relationship between the ADA and declines in disabled
employment in the years immediately following the law’s enactment, but beyond that period our
findings—contrary to the existing work by DeLeire and by Acemoglu and Angrist—indicate that disabled
employment declines do not appear to be causally linked to the ADA. In particular, while relative
disabled employment was lower in those later years than in the period immediately before the ADA’s
enactment, we find no difference in the employment reduction between states in which the ADA was and
was not an innovation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data used in our
empirical analysis. Section III presents our basic approach and results. Section IV describes a variety of
robustness checks. Section V offers a concluding discussion.

II.

Data
A.

Pre-ADA State-Law Regimes

Tables 1, 2, A1, and A2 report the results of our detailed legal research into state disability
discrimination regimes prior to the ADA. We rely on primary sources (the actual text of statutes and
judicial decisions) and, as described in the tables, have traced statutory provisions through all of their preADA amendments and code sections. We have also read all of the pre-ADA reported case law, which
provides judicial interpretations of states’ statutory provisions, plus unreported case law available on
Westlaw. The judicial opinions turn out to be a crucial source for us because a number of states imposed
reasonable accommodations requirements by judicial decision rather than by statutory provision, and
because in a few states (most notably Michigan) case law holdings significantly illuminated the meaning
of ambiguous or even conflicting statutory provisions that would otherwise have been read differently.
As Tables 1 and 2 reveal, states in the pre-ADA period had varying statutory and judicial regimes
governing private employers’ treatment of disabled workers. The largest group of states tracked the ADA

5

in mandating some form of traditional antidiscrimination prohibition (forbidding discrimination on the
basis of disability in hiring, firing, and terms and conditions of employment), with its associated firing
costs, but differed from the ADA in not imposing a reasonable accommodations requirement; these states
are listed in Table 1, and we refer to them throughout as the “protection without accommodation” states.
A second group of states, listed in Table 2, imposed substantive requirements parallel to those ultimately
imposed by the ADA; we refer to these states as the “ADA-like” states. Finally, a third group of states
(consisting of Alabama, Arkansas, and Mississippi), which we term the “no protection” states, set no
limits whatsoever on private employers’ treatment of disabled workers prior to the ADA’s enactment.
We address below concerns that there are only three states in this group and that all of them are from the
southern United States.2 No states in the pre-ADA period imposed reasonable accommodations
requirements without having traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions.3

B.

Disability Status and Other Individual Data

For the disability status of individuals—as well as for other variables such as employment levels
and various demographic and other controls—we draw on the March Current Population Survey (CPS).
Throughout, we refer to data by its year of observation (the year preceding the March survey), and we
restrict attention to individuals aged 21 through 58. Variables and summary statistics for the years 1988
to 1998 are reported in Table 3.

2

All three of the “no protection” states did appear to prohibit disability discrimination by public employers (akin to
the employment provisions of the federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973), but they did not prohibit such discrimination
by private employers. Naturally, given our interest in this paper in examining the effects of the ADA, we focus on
the pre-ADA state-law regimes governing private employers.
3
Although this research is the first to employ a comprehensive dataset based on original legal sources for state-level
disability discrimination regimes, other studies have made some use of data on these state-level regimes. Acemoglu
and Angrist (2001) briefly use state-law information as an instrument in their empirical analysis and, in so doing,
restrict attention to a limited number of pre-ADA state-law regimes that provided for “misdemeanor charges or civil
penalties” in the event of an employer violation. We do not characterize state regimes along the dimension of
whether or not such sanctions were available because the ordinary set of sanctions—money damages along with
nonmonetary relief such as reinstatement—did not vary significantly across the 47 states with pre-ADA disability
discrimination regimes. Beegle and Stock (2003) also use state-law information in their empirical analysis and,
instead of examining the ADA’s effect across states, examine the effects of the state-law enactments themselves; we
discuss their approach and results at some length in section III below.

6

The CPS variable for disability requires some discussion.4 The CPS definition of disability
comes from the March income supplement and reflects the subject’s answer to the question, “Does
[respondent] have a health problem or a disability which prevents him/her from working or which limits
the kind or amount of work he/she can do?” Under the ADA, meanwhile, an individual is disabled if he
or she has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits a major life activity, has a record of
such an impairment, or is regarded as having such an impairment. An affirmative answer to the CPS
question certainly does not map perfectly or even that closely onto the ADA’s definition of disability
(Schwochau and Blanck 2000:299-300).
The reasons that the CPS and ADA definitions may diverge are several. First, individuals who
answer the CPS question affirmatively may be incorrectly reporting health conditions or impairments that
limit work—perhaps because they are unable to find work—and may not in fact be truly impaired (see
Kreider and Pepper 2002). Second, only certain types of genuine impairments that may limit work have
been deemed by the Supreme Court to be covered by the ADA (Sutton v. United Airlines, 527 U.S. 471
(1999)). Third, alongside these respects in which the CPS measure may be broader than the ADA
measure, the CPS measure may be narrower in not including those with a record of impairment or who
are regarded as impaired, but who are not actually impaired.5
While the CPS measure would clearly provide a poor basis for some empirical conclusions—such
as the absolute number of people protected by the ADA at a given point of time—the estimates we report
are not vulnerable on this ground because our approach uses the CPS measure to assess changes in
employment levels after the ADA’s enactment. Burkhauser, Daly, Houtenville, and Nargis (2002)
provide evidence from National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) data that employment changes over time
for populations defined by work limitations (as under the CPS) are not significantly different from

4

Burkhauser and Daly (2002:219-20) describe varying approaches to the definition of disability. As Acemoglu and
Angrist (2001) note, while the CPS disability question seems to refer to the individual’s status at the time of the
March survey, the question actually serves as a lead-in question for a series of questions about disability income in
the preceding year.
5
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) claims data (available at
http://www.eeoc.gov/stats/ada.html) suggest that about 15 percent of EEOC claims under the ADA involve the
“record” and “regarded as” prongs of the ADA’s disability definition.

7

employment changes over time for populations defined by impairments (closer to the ADA’s approach).
Thus, we think that the CPS disability question has enough overlap with the definition of disability under
the ADA that studying how those who answer “yes” to the survey question were affected by the ADA in
terms of their employment levels allows one to learn something important about the effects of the law on
disabled employment.6
The most important potential concern with the use of the CPS measure of disability or, indeed,
the use of any survey-based measure of disability for purposes of examining pre- and post-ADA
employment levels of individuals with disabilities is that the ADA’s enactment could itself have altered
the composition of the group responding “yes” to the disability survey question. Kruse and Schur (2003)
describe several routes by which the passage of the ADA could alter the nature of the group of individuals
answering “yes” to a disability survey question such as the one in the CPS. If such changes occurred,
then apparent disemployment effects of the ADA could actually be effects of the law on the nature of the
population being counted as disabled. In section IV below, we closely examine the time trend in
affirmative answers to the CPS disability question, and, consistent with prior work on the prospect of
such composition bias (Acemoglu and Angrist 2001:935; Beegle and Stock 2003:855-56), we do not find
evidence that compositional changes are driving our findings.7

III.

Empirical Approach and Results
The ADA was enacted in July of 1990, so throughout the empirical analysis we compare

employment levels in two-year periods starting in 1990 to employment levels in the two-year period
immediately preceding 1990. Because the ADA did not go into effect until two years after its enactment,
it is possible that effects lagged behind the 1990 enactment date; alternatively, the time immediately
6

In the future, the CPS is likely to include disability-related questions that map more closely onto the ADA’s
definition (see Kruse and Hale 2003:6-9). No matter how precise this information, however, it will obviously not be
available for either the time period in which the ADA was passed or for the years prior to the ADA’s enactment. In
this light, use of the CPS measure from the pre-ADA and immediate post-ADA periods is a reasonable step in
seeking to measure the effects of the ADA on disabled employment.
7
The CPS was redesigned between the 1993 and 1994 surveys, corresponding to observation years 1992 and 1993.
Acemoglu and Angrist (2001:925, 951) offer analysis suggesting that the redesign does not materially affect an
understanding of the ADA’s employment effects.

8

following enactment might have witnessed the largest employment effects as employers in the “protection
without accommodation” and “no protection” states—while facing new potential costs of employing
disabled workers down the road—were not yet restricted by ADA (or ADA-like) provisions and thus
could, for instance, discharge or refuse to hire someone because of the person’s need for reasonable
accommodations without incurring any sort of legal risk during this period. Extensive enactment-period
media coverage of the ADA suggests that many managerial employees in fact learned of the ADA right at
the point of its enactment.8 With respect to our “pre-ADA” period of 1988-1989, because the ADA
actually received widespread media coverage as early as the latter half of 1989—when the law was
already widely anticipated—our use of 1988-1989 as the period against which to measure the law’s
effects will, if anything, tend to bias our estimates against finding an effect of the ADA, as employers’
behavior conceivably could have been affected as early as the second half of 1989.9

A.

Univariate Results

Mean employment levels across our three state groups provide a first view of the basic effect of
the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement and its traditional antidiscrimination prohibition,
with its associated firing costs, on disabled employment after the ADA’s enactment. Table 4 reports the
mean employment levels in weeks per year for disabled and nondisabled workers, before (1988-1989) and
after (all subsequent pairs of years) the passage of the ADA, separately for each of our three state groups:
the “protection without accommodation” group, containing states with traditional antidiscrimination
8

A search of the Lexis-Nexis News Group File for mentions of the ADA in 1990 yielded 965 hits.
During the latter half of 1989, media sources frequently referred to the certain or virtually certain passage of the
ADA the following year. In the legal literature, for instance, Chatoff (1989) stated that the ADA “inevitably will”
become law, while Gardner (1989) wrote that Congress “seems almost certain to enact” the ADA “in the very
foreseeable future.” In the popular media, Shapiro (1989) stated of the ADA that “President Bush . . . guaranteed
the bill’s passage with his support,” while Calkins (1989) quoted a disability advocate’s confident declaration that
“for the first time ever, people with disabilities will have civil rights protection under federal law equal to the
protection already afforded to members of minority groups and to women.” Of particular interest are industry
periodicals targeted to employers and their managerial employees; in this category, Romeo (1989) reports in an
article in Nation’s Restaurant News that at a meeting of the National Restaurant Association the “Americans with
Disabilities Act was mentioned several times”; that a member of the Association’s Human Resources Committee
stated that the law “will affect us in the very near future”; and that another Association official stated that the “ADA
seems certain to pass.” Similarly, an editorial entitled “Accommodating Disabled Workers in the Construction
Industry,” published in October of 1989 in the Engineering News-Record, stated that passage of the ADA “seems
certain to follow.”

9

9

prohibitions but no reasonable accommodations requirements prior to the ADA’s enactment; the “ADAlike” group, with states that had both traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions and reasonable
accommodations requirement prior to the ADA’s enactment; and the “no protection” group, containing
states that imposed no restrictions on private employers’ treatment of disabled workers prior to the
ADA’s enactment. We use two-year windows before and after the change in the legal setting (similar to
Katz 1998 and Autor, Donohue, and Schwab 2002).
Table 4’s top panel compares disabled versus nondisabled employment levels before and after the
ADA in “protection without accommodation” states with disabled versus nondisabled employment levels
before and after the ADA in “ADA-like” states. Because the absence or presence of a pre-ADA
reasonable accommodations requirement is the dimension along which the two state groups differ, this
first comparison provides a measure of the effect of the ADA’s imposition of a reasonable
accommodations requirement. As Table 4 shows, in “protection without accommodation” states, where
the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement was an innovation, disabled employment declined by
1.35 weeks per year in 1990-1991 compared to 1988-1989, while nondisabled employment showed a far
smaller decline of 0.23 weeks per year; by contrast, in “ADA-like” states, in which the substantive
requirements of the pre-ADA state-level regimes tracked those of the ADA, disabled employment
actually increased by 0.83 weeks per year in 1990-1991 compared to 1988-1989, while nondisabled
employment was virtually unchanged (a decline of 0.03 weeks per year).
Taking the difference between the two within-state-group differences for 1990-1991 compared to
1988-1989, the mean-based difference-in-difference-in-difference (DDD) estimate for the change in
disabled employment generated by the imposition of a reasonable accommodations requirement is –1.98
weeks per year (column 3 of Table 4). Given the base number of weeks employed for disabled workers
prior to the ADA’s enactment—16.25 in the “protection without accommodation” states and 18.22 in the
“ADA-like” states—the drop of 1.98 weeks represents over a 10 percent decline in disabled employment.
The evidence of declining relative disabled employment in “protection without accommodation” states
compared to “ADA-like” states continues in 1991-1992 and 1992-1993, and then disappears in 1993-

10

1994 and subsequent pairs of years—the first suggestion of a near-term but not long-term effect of the
ADA. We discuss this timing pattern in further detail below. Notice the reassuring fact that in all of the
near-term post-ADA comparisons, nondisabled employment—in contrast to disabled employment—is
relatively stable between the pre- and post- ADA periods in both the “protection without accommodation”
and the “ADA-like” states.
The bottom panel of Table 4 compares “no protection” states, with no pre-ADA legal restrictions
on private employers’ treatment of disabled workers, to “protection without accommodation” states, with
only traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions prior to the ADA’s enactment. This comparison thus
provides a measure of the effect of imposing a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition (an innovation in
the “no protection” states but not in the “protection without accommodation” states). Our mean-based
DDD estimate for the implementation of such a prohibition bounces between negative and positive over
the 1990-1991 through 1997-1998 “after” periods and is always small in magnitude and statistically
indistinguishable from zero. The mean-based results in Table 4 provide a first suggestion that the ADA’s
reasonable accommodations requirement, rather than its potential imposition of firing costs, is the main
source of a near-term negative effect of the law on disabled employment.

B.

Regression Framework

Our regression analysis employs a straightforward DDD specification like that used, for example,
in Gruber (1994) and Collins (2003). All regressions take the form:
Yijt =

β0 + β1Xijt + β2ADAt + β3DISi + β4LPj + β5NPj + β6(ADAt * DISi)
+ β7(ADAt * LPj) + β8(ADAt * NPj) + β9(DISi * LPj) + β10(DISi * NPj)
+ β11(ADAt * DISi * LPj) + β12(ADAt * DISi * NPj),

(1)

where Y is weeks worked; i indexes individuals, j indexes states, and t indexes years; X is a vector of
demographic and state-level economic characteristics; ADA is a dummy variable equal to 1 in the postADA period; DIS is a dummy variable equal to 1 for disabled individuals; LP is a dummy variable equal
to 1 for states offering limited protection in the form of a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition prior

11

to the ADA’s enactment (the “protection without accommodation” state group); and NP is a dummy
variable equal to 1 for states in the “no protection” state group. The LP and NP dummy variables
measure effects relative to those in the “ADA-like” group.10
The coefficients of interest in equation (1) are the coefficients on the triple interaction terms,
ADAt * DISi * LPj and ADAt * DISi * NPj. The coefficient β11 on the first of these terms measures the
change between the pre- and post-ADA periods in disabled versus nondisabled outcomes in “protection
without accommodation” states (those with traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions but no reasonable
accommodations requirements prior to the ADA) relative to this same change in “ADA-like” states (those
with both reasonable accommodations requirements and traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions prior
to the ADA). In other words, β11 tells us how relative disabled outcomes changed in states in which the
ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement, but not its traditional antidiscrimination prohibition,
was new (the “protection without accommodation” group) compared to how these outcomes changed in
states in which neither substantive requirement of the ADA was new (the “ADA-like” group).
Our approach here does not assume that the enactment of the ADA made no difference at all in
states that had substantively comparable pre-ADA protections (the “ADA-like” states); among other
things the enactment of the federal statute made available Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
(EEOC) enforcement and altered other procedural aspects of pre-existing disability discrimination law,
such as the availability of federal court adjudication (see generally Neuborne 1977), and these changes
may have influenced disabled outcomes. Effects of the federal regime that are identical across states are
permissible within a DDD framework, although such effects cannot be identified.

10

Instead of looking at such relative effects, one could examine separate effects within each of the three state
groups. In that model the coefficients of interest would be ADAt * DISi * LPj , ADAt * DISi * NPj , and ADAt * DISi
* ADj , where AD is a dummy variable equal to 1 for states in the “ADA-like” group. Table A3 reports results from
specifications that omit ADAt * DISt and instead estimate the coefficient on ADAt * DISi * ADj. In these
specifications, the coefficients on ADAt * DISi * LPj and ADAt * DISi * NPj measure overall effects rather than
effects relative to the “ADA-like” states. Returning to the original specification reflected in equation (1), because
there are three (nonoverlapping) groups of states in our study, several of the interactions between the dummy
variables are always zero (in particular, LPj * NPj, ADAt * LPj * NPj, DISi * LPj * NPj, and ADAt * DISi * LPj * NPj),
and thus these drop out of equation (1).

12

Of course, if the ADA had differential effects across the “protection without accommodation” and
“ADA-like” groups for reasons unrelated to the substantive legal provisions in effect in these groups, then
our estimate of β11 would pick up those additional effects along with the effect of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement. If, for example, states in the “ADA-like” group tended to be
systematically more vigorous in accepting and enforcing civil rights claims brought by disabled
individuals than states in the “protection without accommodation” group, then β11 would measure not
only the effect of imposing a reasonable accommodations requirement but also the effect of
supplementing moderate or limited enforcement of disability discrimination law in the “protection
without accommodation” states with the more robust procedures provided by the ADA. Any attempt to
control directly for cross-state variation in pre-ADA enforcement behavior using the number of
discrimination charges brought under the various state laws would be confounded by the significant
endogeneity of charge rates and the employment level (our dependent variable). Acemoglu and Angrist
(2001) address this endogeneity issue in their use of discrimination charge data by instrumenting for state
charge rates with a variable for whether the state had a particular type of pre-ADA disability
discrimination law (one providing for “misdemeanor charges or civil penalties”), but that approach is not
open to us here given the role the state-law information already plays in our analysis.
Nonetheless, we think it is quite unlikely that our estimate of β11 will be picking up enforcement
differences that could confound the effect on disabled employment of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement. The timing of the state-law enactments suggests that the “ADA-like”
states are not the systematically more aggressive, pro-disabled-worker states; in most cases the states that
had reasonable accommodations requirements prior to the ADA’s enactment were those that instituted
disability discrimination regimes relatively late in the game, while the “protection without
accommodation” states were those “early to the party” in protecting civil rights of disabled workers (see
date columns in Tables 1 and 2). Thus, if anything, our estimate of β11 will tend to understate the
potential disemployment effect for disabled workers of imposing a reasonable accommodations

13

requirement, given the most plausible direction of any pre-ADA enforcement differences between the two
state groups.
While β11 measures the effect of imposing a reasonable accommodations requirement, equation
(1) also provides us with a direct measure of the effect of simultaneously imposing both a reasonable
accommodations requirement and a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition. The coefficient β12
measures the change between the pre- and post-ADA periods in disabled versus nondisabled outcomes in
“no protection” states (those with no pre-ADA restrictions on employers’ treatment of disabled workers)
relative to this same change in “ADA-like” states, and the difference in legal regimes between those two
groups is the absence (in the former) versus the presence (in the latter) of a reasonable accommodations
requirement and a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition prior to the ADA. Thus the difference in the
two groups’ outcomes (β12) is a measure of the effect of imposing both of these provisions with the
enactment of the ADA; it then follows that the difference β12 – β11, which is also reported in our tables,
measures the effect of imposing just a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition.
All of the regressions reported below contain controls for individual i’s age, race, sex, educational
attainment, marital status, union membership, and receipt of disability benefits, and for the state
unemployment rate (except where precluded by fixed effects, as noted below) and the interaction of
disability with the state unemployment rate. By the nature of the DDD methodology, our approach
controls for national time trends in employment, the general effect of disability on employment, stategroup specific employment effects, and interactions of each of these factors with the others. Many of our
regressions also include state, year, and state*year fixed effects, although in those specifications we are
unable to identify the effects of the state unemployment rate and of the ADAt, LPj, and NPj variables
from above and their interactions with each other. Importantly, because all of our regressions include the
interaction of disability with the state unemployment rate, our approach controls for the possibility that
individuals with disabilities may face especially poor employment prospects when unemployment rates
are high—an important control given the early 1990s recession immediately following the ADA’s
enactment (Kruse and Schur 2003).
14

C.

Regression Results

The top panel of Table 5 reports the results of the basic specification in equation (1). Consistent
with the findings in Table 4, the estimate for β11, the effect of imposing a reasonable accommodations
requirement, is clearly negative for the post-ADA year pairs 1990-1991, 1991-1992, and 1992-1993, with
estimates ranging from –1.54 to –2.51 weeks per year. Thus, as before, imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement seems to produce in the neighborhood of a 10 percent decline in disabled
employment in the near-term aftermath of the ADA’s enactment. Meanwhile, again parallel to the results
in Table 4, the estimate for β12 – β11, the effect of imposing a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition,
over the post-ADA years 1990-1991, 1991-1992, and 1992-1993 is small in magnitude, inconsistent in
sign, and never statistically significant. Thus, our results once again suggest that the reasonable
accommodations requirement of the ADA, rather than its traditional antidiscrimination prohibition, was
the source of a short-term negative effect of the law on disabled employment. The second panel in Table
5 shows that our results are unchanged when state, year, and state*year fixed effects are included, and the
top panel of Table A4 verifies that the results are unchanged when state, state*year, and state*disability
fixed effects (to control for compositional changes) are included.
Our basic finding of a significant negative employment effect of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement contrasts with the conclusions of a recent paper by Beegle and Stock
(2003), whose results also point in a direction opposite that of DeLeire (2000, 2003) and Acemoglu and
Angrist (2001). Beegle and Stock use Census data for 1970, 1980, and 1990 to study the effects of the
enactment of state laws governing disability discrimination in the pre-ADA period (whereas we examine
the effects of the ADA across different groups of states characterized by their varying pre-ADA legal
regimes). Beegle and Stock find no significant effect of the enactment of reasonable accommodations
requirements (in contrast with our finding) and no significant effect of the enactment of disability
discrimination law in general (in contrast with the findings of DeLeire and of Acemoglu and Angrist).

15

The difference between Beegle and Stock’s results and those of others (including us) is
attributable, we think, to a combination of the relatively imprecise information on state laws used by
Beegle and Stock and some features of their econometric approach.11 Regarding information on state
laws, as detailed above, we obtained information exclusively from primary sources and traced laws
through all of their pre-ADA amendments and code provisions. By contrast, Beegle and Stock rely on
secondary sources, which in some cases prove to be inaccurate and in any event do not allow them to
identify the year of a law’s enactment (just the year when the law is first referred to in the secondary
source in question). The imprecision in the information about state laws will affect Beegle and Stock’s
empirical analysis when the dating errors cross decade markers, as they do in a number of cases.12 This
noise in the coding of the state-law explanatory variable will tend to bias estimates toward zero (see
Autor, Donohue, and Schwab 2002:28), and this may help to explain the difference between Beegle and
Stock’s findings and the results obtained by us, DeLeire, and Acemoglu and Angrist.

11

An additional difference between Beegle and Stock’s analysis and ours is that most of their regressions include
year and disability*year fixed effects; incorporating disability*year fixed effects proves to have a dramatic effect on
their results. In our analysis, by contrast, the bottom panel of Table A4 shows that adding year and disability*year
fixed effects to our basic specification has little effect on our results.
12
For instance, Beegle and Stock, relying on a secondary source, state that Arkansas had a law, §20-14-303,
prohibiting private sector disability discrimination by 1987. However, this statute did not, in 1987, cover
employment discrimination, although it did cover private sector discrimination in other areas, such as access to
restaurants and other public places. (The full text of the statute is available in the AR-STANN87 historical
legislative database on Westlaw.) In alphabetical order, other states that are incorrectly classified by Beegle and
Stock in terms of the decade in which private sector employment discrimination laws relating to disability were
enacted include Colorado, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Missouri, North Carolina, Oregon, and Rhode Island. Of this
group, Colorado and Louisiana are misclassified as to both the decade in which a traditional antidiscrimination
prohibition was enacted and the decade in which a reasonable accommodations requirement was enacted; Missouri,
North Carolina, and Rhode Island are misclassified as to the decade in which a traditional antidiscrimination
prohibition was enacted; and Massachusetts and Oregon are incorrectly classified as to the decade in which a
reasonable accommodations requirement was enacted. See Tables 1 and 2 below for state law enactment
information.
Hotchkiss (2002) also makes some use of the pre-ADA state disability discrimination regimes, and differs from
Beegle and Stock in relying on primary legislative materials rather than secondary sources. However, she
nonetheless incorrectly categorizes a substantial number of states, in many instances probably because a state statute
prior in time to the one she located also regulated disability discrimination in employment; these errors may
contribute to her finding of a limited effect of the ADA’s enactment across state groups. States miscategorized by
Hotchkiss, in terms of date of enactment, include Alaska, California, Colorado, Hawaii, Illinois, Massachusetts,
New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina, South Dakota, Texas, and Virginia. (In the case of Alaska, California,
and South Dakota, Hotchkiss explicitly notes that “exact original coverage [is] not available.”) Some of the dating
errors will not affect Hotchkiss’s empirical results; she examines the effects of state laws enacted between 1981 and
1991, and, thus, a dating error outside this period will not affect her results. However, in the case of six states—
Alaska, Hawaii, Massachusetts, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Texas—the dating error affects the
classification of states over the 1981-1991 period.

16

Apart from the imprecision in Beegle and Stock’s characterization of state-law regimes, their
empirical methodology may be less well-suited than ours to pinning down accurately the employment
effects of reasonable accommodations requirements and traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions
imposed by disability discrimination law. Beegle and Stock employ a framework in which some states
have promulgated a particular law during a given time period while others have not, and in which changes
in outcomes across the two groups of states are then compared. In that setting, a risk always exists that
adjustments in the relative labor market outcomes in the different states reflect not the policy shifts under
study but rather some set of underlying state-level social or economic changes that simultaneously
caused, or at least occurred contemporaneously with, the changes in the state laws (see Besley and Case
2000). As Beegle and Stock note, “[i]f laws were disproportionately passed in states where the disabled
were [already] faring better, we would expect the laws to have smaller effects and our empirical results to
underestimate the negative impact of the legislation (relative to random assignment of the laws, including
states where the negative impact of the laws would be larger).” Examining the enactment of the ADA
against a background of a well-established diversity of state law, by contrast, reduces the concern about
this sort of omitted-variables bias because there is less reason to fear that the degree to which the ADA
was an innovation in a given state is correlated with state-specific social or economic changes, given that
virtually all of the state laws in question were enacted well before the ADA (see Tables 1 and 2).
Returning to our empirical results, the 93-94 through 97-98 columns of Table 5 show that in this
period neither imposing a reasonable accommodations requirement nor imposing a traditional
antidiscrimination prohibition had a statistically significant effect on disabled employment; estimates for

β11 range from –0.60 to 0.70, while those for β12 – β11 range from –0.25 to 0.87. In other words,
beginning in 1993-1994 and going forward the ADA’s enactment had statistically indistinguishable
effects across the three state groups. What is especially striking about these later “post-ADA” years is
that it is precisely in 1993-1994 that the estimated coefficient on the term ADAt*DISi, measuring the
common effect of the ADA across states, becomes negative and statistically significant; therefore, from
1993-1994 forward, movements in relative disabled employment were downward and similar in

17

magnitude across all three state-law regimes—a sharp contrast with the clear differential pattern, based on
pre-ADA state legal regimes, in the early years after the ADA’s enactment. The bottom panel of Table 5
underlines the point by showing that in a specification that simply ignores state-law information entirely
(by setting NPj = LPj = 0 in equation (1)), the estimated coefficients on ADAt*DISi in 1993-1994 and
forward are quite similar to the estimated coefficients on these variables in the top and middle panels, in
which the separate effects of being in the “protection without accommodation” and “no protection” state
groups are not restricted to zero.
Thus, our results for 1993-1994 and forward, while consistent with existing findings of a
persistent decline in disabled employment over the 1990s relative to the pre-ADA period, reveal the
absence of any link between the degree of employment effects in this later period and the degree to which
the ADA was actually a legal innovation relative to pre-ADA state law. Our findings appear to deny
earlier studies attributing declining disabled employment in 1993-1994 and forward to the ADA’s
enactment the obvious theoretical explanations for their conclusions, as we find no evidence that either
the imposition of a reasonable accommodations requirement or the firing costs potentially associated with
a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition can explain the decline in disabled employment in 1993-1994
and forward.
The juxtaposition of a clear state-group pattern, in a predictable direction, in the immediate postADA period (through 1992-1993) and no state-group differences in the later years raises some questions
about the longevity of any negative employment effects of the ADA. It seems plausible in light of our
findings that the apparent negative effect of the ADA on disabled employment in 1993-1994 and
subsequent years reflects not the impact of the ADA itself but, rather, other contemporaneous changes
disproportionately affecting individuals with disabilities. Otherwise, it is not immediately clear why the
magnitude of the disabled disemployment effect after the ADA (in 1993-1994 and forward) would have
no relationship to the degree to which the ADA was a legal innovation in a given state, when such a
relationship clearly existed in the immediate post-enactment period. Just below we discuss reasons that

18

the ADA’s imposition of a reasonable accommodations requirement might have had only a short-term
negative effect on disabled employment.

D.

Discussion

Our results indicate that in the near-term after the ADA’s enactment, the law’s reasonable
accommodations requirement, but not its traditional antidiscrimination prohibition with its potential firing
costs, had a significant negative effect on disabled employment. The significant negative effect of the
reasonable accommodations requirement on disabled employment in the period just after the ADA’s
enactment may reflect the fact that many accommodations, including physical alterations to the workplace
and modification of workplace policies, impose obvious but often one-time costs on employers – costs
that may well have been exaggerated or particularly salient in employers’ minds just after the ADA’s
enactment.13 Employers might naturally have responded to such perceived costs by curtailing their hiring
of disabled workers, particularly in the period between the ADA’s enactment and effective dates because
in that period curtailed hiring on account of accommodation costs would not have been illegal in the
states in which the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement was an innovation. Further reasons
that the effect of the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement on disabled employment could have
been more negative in the short term than in the medium and long term include the ADA’s important
symbolic effect and the resulting changes in attitudes over time; the possibility that reasonable
accommodations could ultimately increase the flow of qualified disabled applicants following a shortterm reduction as disabled individuals responded to the ADA by pursuing more education (see Jolls
2000); and declining accommodation costs in response to technological changes and judicial refinements
of the ADA’s requirements. The conclusion that the true employment effects of the ADA are short-term

13

While some observers have pointed to evidence that accommodation costs may often be modest (Blanck 1996),
measurement issues and skewed samples of accommodations suggest that relatively limited weight should be
attached to such evidence (Stein 2000:1677). In any event it is quite clear that some legally mandated
accommodations—for instance, the need to hire readers for blind employees, as specified by federal regulations (see
29 CFR § 1630.2(o))—are in fact extremely costly for employers.

19

rather than permanent effects is consistent with Kirchner (1986), who emphasizes that the consequences
of laws such as the ADA may differ significantly over different time horizons.14

IV.

Further Robustness Checks
This section further probes the robustness of our basic finding in Tables 4 and 5 that in the years

just after the ADA’s enactment, the imposition of the law’s reasonable accommodations requirement, but
not its traditional antidiscrimination prohibition, produced a significant decline in disabled employment.
We also examine the possible role of composition effects and preexisting state-group specific
employment trends in our analysis.

A.

Robustness to the Timing of State-Law Enactment

The upper left-hand panel of Table 6 shows the results (for post-ADA years 1990-1991, 19911992, and 1992-1993) of estimating the basic fixed-effects specification from the middle panel of Table 5
on a subsample of observations from states in which the state-level pre-ADA disability discrimination
regime was already in place prior to 1980. We perform this check on the theory that these early
enactors—which, as noted earlier, are predominantly “protection without accommodation” states—may
have differed systematically in their degrees of “civil rights orientation,” and thus in their enforcement
environments, from the later enactors. The fact that in two of the three regressions the estimate of β11
becomes even more negative than in Table 5 provides some support for our suggestion above that the
estimates based on the full 50-state sample may actually understate the effect of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement. However, some degree of caution is warranted in interpreting these results
because only three states in the “ADA-like” group (Colorado, Oregon and Washington) had their preADA regimes in place prior to 1980. Subject to the caveat just noted, the robustness of our estimate of
14

With respect to the short-term employment effects of the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement, a more
positive account than the one given in the text is that negative employment effects were themselves reasonable
accommodations to the scheduling needs of disabled workers (see Tolin and Patwell 2003). Given that we observe
declines in weeks worked, not hours worked per week, however, and that the decline is limited to the immediate
post-ADA period, it seems difficult to view the negative employment effects as the fact, rather than the potential
consequence, of mandated accommodation.

20

β11 in a sample of states with more uniform enactment dates also responds to the possible concern that, if
there are either lags or bursts in state law effectiveness shortly after a state law is put on the books, then
our 50-state results could be confounded by the different average enactment dates across the “protection
without accommodation” and “ADA-like” state groups. Our estimate of β12 – β11, the effect of imposing
a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition, is also quite stable across the broader (all states) and narrower
(pre-1980 enactors only) samples.

B.

Robustness to Variation in Employer-Size Coverage Thresholds

As shown in Tables 1 and 2, pre-ADA state legal regimes varied significantly in the numerical
employer-size thresholds they established for coverage by the state legal regime. To mitigate any concern
with bias from these significantly varying thresholds, we re-estimated the basic fixed-effects specification
from the middle panel of Table 5 using only observations from states with employer-size coverage
thresholds of 15 employees (the ultimate ADA threshold) or higher. (Only one state, Delaware, had a
threshold of greater than 15 employees.) Our results, reported in the upper right-hand panel of Table 6,
again point to a negative effect of imposing a reasonable accommodations requirement and essentially no
effect of imposing a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition. The fact that controlling for variation in
employer-size coverage thresholds does not affect our basic finding provides some further support for our
earlier suggestion that “protection without accommodation” and “ADA-like” states are not differentially
affected by the ADA’s enactment because of a difference in the general civil-rights orientation of these
two state groups, as such a difference in general civil-rights orientation would probably tend to correlate
at least to some degree with a more versus less aggressive approach to the coverage of small employers.

C.

Robustness to Alternative Measures of Disability Benefits

At around the time the ADA was enacted, the generosity of federal disability benefits was
increasing substantially (Bound and Waidmann 2002). Higher disability benefit levels provide an
independent ground for reduced disabled employment because higher benefit levels reduce disabled

21

individuals’ need or desire for wage-based income. The increase in the number of disabled individuals
receiving disability benefits, as well as the decrease in weeks worked for individuals with disabilities,
over the 1990s are readily apparent from the summary statistics reported in Table 3.
While all of the regressions reported thus far contain controls for disability benefits, the shift in
federal disability benefit levels is actually of less concern for our study than for prior studies that compare
overall disabled employment outcomes before and after the ADA’s enactment (DeLeire 2000, 2003;
Acemoglu and Angrist 2001) because our DDD framework examines disabled employment levels in one
group of states relative to disabled employment levels in other state groups, and thus changes in federal
benefits levels are not as likely to matter for our results. Still, changes in federal disability benefits could
affect our analysis if for some reason the resulting changes in disabled individuals’ need or desire for
wage income (and thus their work incentives) differed systematically across our three state groups. Autor
and Duggan (2003), for instance, note that work incentives depend on the relationship between disability
benefit levels and wages, and thus states experiencing smaller wage increases (or larger wage declines)
would tend to have more individuals receiving federal disability benefits, and thus not seeking and
obtaining employment, at any given federal level of these benefits. If wage levels across states were for
some reason correlated with pre-ADA state-law disability discrimination regimes, then the effects of
changes in federal disability benefits generosity (mediated through the Autor-Duggan mechanism) might
be captured by, and therefore bias, our results.
The regressions reported thus far control for disability benefits receipt using a dummy variable
for whether individuals received federal disability benefits through either the Disability Insurance (DI)
program or the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.15 Because, however, the measure of
disability benefits receipt in the March CPS is not ideal, we perform additional robustness checks using
state-level DI and SSI applications and receipts in the population from Social Security Administration
records. The lower panel of Table 6 reports the results of re-estimating the basic fixed-effects

15

The CPS provides information on receipt of benefits from the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
(OASDI) and SSI programs. However, because our sample does not include individuals 59 and older, OASDI
benefits should be exclusively from the DI program.

22

specification from the middle panel of Table 5 using, respectively, the percent of the state population
receiving disability benefits interacted with the disability status dummy variable (left-hand panel) and the
percent of the state population applying for disability benefits interacted with the disability status dummy
variable (right-hand panel). (Including state fixed effects means we cannot separately identify main
effects of the new disability benefits variables.) Our results for the effects of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement versus a traditional antidiscrimination prohibition are, once again, quite
consistent with our benchmark estimates from Table 5.

D.

Robustness to Variation in Economic Environment

As noted above, our basic specification controls for variation in states’ economic environments
by including state unemployment rate and the interaction of disability and state unemployment rate.
However, as a further check on the possibility that unobservable economic variation across states might
be influencing our results, we re-estimated the basic fixed-effects specification from the middle panel of
Table 5 without state unemployment rate information; if removing these controls does not affect our
results, then it seems unlikely that further unobservable economic differences are playing an important
role. The results, shown in the upper panel of Table A5, are quite similar to those in the benchmark
specification reported in Table 5.

E.

Geographic Robustness

We noted earlier that, while both the “protection without accommodation” and “ADA-like”
groups are large and well-balanced across the country, the “no protection” group consists of only three
states, all of which are from the southern United States (Alabama, Arkansas, and Mississippi). Our
estimate of the effect of the ADA’s reasonable accommodations requirement will not be affected by the
limited geographic diversity of the “no protection” group because that effect is identified solely from the
comparison of employment changes in the “protection without accommodation” group with similar
changes in the “ADA-like” group; but our estimate of the effect of the ADA’s traditional

23

antidiscrimination prohibition, based on a comparison of “no protection” and “protection without
accommodation” states, could be distorted by this aspect of the pre-ADA state legal landscape. In
particular, if some unobserved shock occurred in the southern region of the country between the pre- and
post-ADA periods, and that shock differentially affected disabled and nondisabled workers, then our
estimate of β12 – β11 could capture the effect of this unobserved shock in addition to any effect caused by
the enactment of the ADA.
A straightforward strategy to alleviate the concern about a possible “southern trend” is simply to
re-estimate equation (1) on just the southern states from each of our three state groups. The “protection
without accommodation” group in this regression includes Georgia, Kentucky, South Carolina, and
Tennessee, while the “ADA-like” group contains Louisiana and North Carolina. (The “no protection”
group is, as before, Alabama, Arkansas, and Mississippi.) Although, not surprisingly, the precision of our
estimates falls with the sharp reduction in sample size, the lower panel of Table A5 shows that the results
of estimating the basic fixed-effects specification from the middle panel of Table 5 on the nine-state
southern sample follow the same basic pattern as the results from the full 50-state sample.

F.

Composition of the Disabled Group

As noted earlier, an important question that arises with the use of a survey-based disability
measure, such as the CPS measure used in our analysis, is the possibility of law-driven changes in the
composition of the group answering the survey question affirmatively. If the group of individuals
identifying themselves as disabled in response to the CPS survey question changed in shape or size as a
result of the ADA’s enactment, then measured changes in disabled employment levels between the preand post-ADA periods may capture differences in the nature of the group answering “yes” to the survey
question rather than employer-side effects of the new legal regime. Kruse and Schur (2003:49), for
instance, find evidence from Survey of Income and Program Participation data of higher numbers of
individuals reporting severe limitations in 1993 than in 1991, and it would not be surprising for those with
severe limitations to have lower chances of employment.

24

An important advantage of the framework we employ is that changes over time in the shape or
size of the group of individuals identifying themselves as disabled in response to the CPS question will
not affect our analysis unless these changes vary with the pre-ADA legal regime of the state in which an
individual lives. While nationwide changes certainly seem plausible, state-varying changes are less
likely. This is not to say that they are inconceivable, however; one obvious possibility is that legal reform
may make disability more socially accepted and thus lead more people to identify themselves as disabled.
If this were the case, then changes in disability identification with the ADA could be more substantial in
states in which the ADA was a more significant innovation.
For state-group specific changes in individuals’ identification as disabled to confound our results,
one of three things would have to be the case. First, significant innovation through the ADA in the
“protection without accommodation” and “no protection” states could for some reason have made
individuals with worse employment prospects than those who identified as disabled prior to the ADA
more likely to identify themselves as disabled. This could produce an apparent disemployment effect for
disabled workers in the states in which the ADA was a significant innovation. However, if anything one
would think it would be those closest to the line between disability and nondisability, and thus those with
relatively good employment prospects, who might switch from identifying as nondisabled to identifying
as disabled in a state in which the ADA was a significant innovation (say because the innovation made
disability more socially acceptable). Put another way, it seems rather difficult to tell a story in which
those who are severely limited switch from answering the CPS question “no” to answering it “yes” when
the ADA constitutes a significant innovation in their state, while those who are less severely limited do
not exhibit a similar change.16
The second possibility for a confounding effect on our results is that individuals with reasonably
good employment prospects became less likely in the wake of significant legal innovation through the
ADA in “protection without accommodation” or “no protection” states to identify themselves as disabled,

16

Even if it is the case (as suggested by Kruse and Schur 2003:49) that the proportion of disabled individuals who
report severe disabilities has increased on a nationwide basis in the post-ADA years, it is unclear how this effect
could plausibly be correlated with the degree to which the ADA was a significant legal innovation in a given state.

25

precisely because the reform helped them to obtain and retain jobs (see Kirchner 1986:83). Again, this
could produce an apparent disemployment effect for disabled workers in states in which the ADA was a
significant innovation. If the legal reform did lead to a decline in the reporting of disability, then the
proportion of disabled individuals should either shrink or grow more slowly in “protection without
accommodation” and “no protection” states than in “ADA-like” states. Figure 1 graphs the proportion of
disabled individuals over time across our three state groups from 1988 to 1998, while Figure 2 presents
corresponding fourth-order polynomial trend lines. Over this period it does not appear that disability rates
declined in states in which the ADA was a significant innovation (states in the “protection without
accommodation” and “no protection” groups) relative to the “ADA-like” states. With respect to the “no
protection” states, measuring changes between 1988 and the post-ADA years 1990-1993, Figure 1 shows
that the proportion of individuals answering the CPS disability question affirmatively increased more in
the “no protection” states than in the “ADA-like” states for year pairings 1988-1991 and 1988-1993,
while this proportion increased more in the “ADA-like” states than the “no protection” states for year
pairings 1988-1990 and 1988-1992. With respect to the “protection without accommodation” states,
meanwhile, Figure 1 reveals that over 1990 and 1991 (relative to 1988) the proportion of individuals
answering the CPS disability question affirmatively increased more in the “ADA-like” states (implying
slower growth in the “protection without accommodation” states); but precisely the same trend was
apparent in 1989, even before the ADA was enacted. In 1992 and 1993 (the other years in which we find
a negative effect of the ADA on disabled employment in “protection without accommodation” states
relative to “ADA-like” states), by contrast, Figure 1 shows that disability rates are virtually identical
across the two state groups, as they also were in the 1988 start year.
A final possibility with respect to the composition of the disabled group, suggested by the work
of Autor and Duggan (2003), is that states in which the ADA was a significant legal innovation also for
some reason happened to be states that were experiencing smaller wage increases or larger wage declines
around the time of the ADA’s enactment; as described above, individuals in such states would both tend
to be more likely to identify as disabled (to get federal disability benefits) and tend to be more likely not

26

to be employed (again to be eligible for federal disability benefits). This effect could produce a spurious
correlation between the ADA’s enactment and employment effects across states if for some reason statelevel wage changes were correlated with pre-ADA state disability discrimination regimes. The regression
results reported above (Tables 5 and 6), however, show that our results are robust to a range of controls
for disability benefits receipts and applications. In sum, although we cannot entirely rule out an effect on
our results of changes in the composition of the group responding affirmatively to the CPS disability
question, our basic finding of a negative near-term effect of the ADA’s reasonable accommodations
requirement on disabled employment does not appear to be driven by such changes.

G.

Preexisting State-Group Specific Trends in Disabled Employment

Our conclusion that declining disabled employment in “protection without accommodation”
states relative to “ADA-like” states in the near-term post-ADA period reflects the ADA’s imposition of a
reasonable accommodations requirement obviously rests on the premise that the observed pattern of
effects did not predate the ADA “experiment.” Figure 3 graphs disabled employment trends in the
“protection without accommodation” and “ADA-like” states from 1987, the first observation year in
which the general disability status question was asked in the CPS, to 1992, the last year in which disabled
employment in the two state groups moved in significantly different ways. (As the results reported above
suggest, convergence between the two state groups began in 1993. As the earlier results from Table 4
also show, nondisabled employment was relatively stable in both state groups over the relevant period, so
Figure 3 focuses on disabled employment.) These data paint a reassuring picture in which disabled
employment moved roughly in tandem across the two state groups prior to 1990 and then diverged
markedly in 1990-1992 (see Figure 3). A longer pre-ADA window would obviously be preferable, but
the available data point to a genuine break in trend upon the ADA’s enactment.

27

V.

Conclusion
This paper uses pre-ADA state-law variation to disaggregate the disabled employment effects of

the two central provisions of the ADA, its reasonable accommodations requirement and its traditional
antidiscrimination prohibition with associated firing costs. Our effort to disaggregate the ADA’s effects
in this way reflects a desire to evaluate policy reforms more tailored and more politically realistic than the
broadscale recommendation that the ADA be abandoned (see DeLeire 2003). However, our empirical
approach ultimately yielded a more profound challenge to the existing literature suggesting ongoing
negative employment effects of the ADA. Our results suggest that while the ADA’s reasonable
accommodations requirement had a significant negative effect on disabled employment in the near-term
after the ADA’s enactment, the law may well have had no causal link to the declines in disabled
employment through much of the 1990s.

28

References
“Accommodating Disabled Workers in the Construction Industry.” 1989. Engineering News-Record,
223(9):72.
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua D. Angrist. 2001. “Consequences of Employment Protection? The Case
of the Americans with Disabilities Act,” Journal of Political Economy, 109:915–957.
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan. 2003. “The Rise in Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:157–205.
-----, John J. Donohue III, and Stewart J. Schwab. 2002. “The Costs of Wrongful Discharge
Laws,” M.I.T. Department of Economics Working Paper No. 02–41.
Baldwin, Marjorie L. and Edward J. Schumacher. 2002. “A Note on Job Mobility Among Workers with
Disabilities,” Industrial Relations, 41:430–441.
Beegle, Kathryn and Wendy Stock. 2003. “The Labor Market Effects of Disability Discrimination
Laws,” Journal of Human Resources, 38(4):806–859.
Besley, Timothy and Robin Burgess. 2004. “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?
Evidence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119:91–134.
----- and Anne Case. 2000. “Unnatural Experiments? Estimating the Incidence of Endogenous Policies,”
Economic Journal, 110:F672–F694.
Blanchard, Olivier and Justin Wolfers. 2000. “The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of
European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,” Economic Journal, 110:C1–C33.
Blanck, Peter David. 1996. Communicating the Americans with Disabilities Act, Transcending
Compliance: 1996 Follow-up Report on Sears, Roebuck and Co. Washington, DC: Annenberg
Washington Program.
Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann. 2002. “Accounting for Recent Declines in Employment Rates
Among the Working-Aged Disabled,” Journal of Human Resources, 37(2):231–250.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Mary C. Daly, Andrew J. Houtenville and Nigar Nargis. 2002. “Self-Reported
Work-Limitation Data: What They Can and Cannot Tell Us,” Demography, 39(3):541–555.
-----. and Mary C. Daly. 2002. “U.S. Disability Policy in a Changing Environment,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 16:213–24.
Calkins, Phil. 1989. “A Legal Revolution,” Worklife (Mar. 22), 21.
Chatoff, Michael A. 1989. “Judge Me By What I Can Do,” The National Law Journal (Oct. 2), 13.
Chay, Kenneth. 1998. “The Impact of Federal Civil Rights Policy on Black Economic Progress:
Evidence from the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972,” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, 51:608–32.
Collins, William J. 2003. “The Labor Market Impact of State-Level Antidiscrimination Laws, 1940–
1960,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56:244–272.
DeLeire, Thomas. 2000. “The Wage and Employment Effects of the Americans with Disabilities Act,”
Journal of Human Resources, 35:693–715.
-----. 2003. “The Americans with Disabilities Act and the Employment of People with Disabilities,” in
The Decline in Employment of People with Disabilities (David C. Stapleton and Richard V.
Burkhauser, eds.).
Donohue, John J., III, and James J. Heckman. 1991. “The Law and Economics of Racial Discrimination
in Employment: Re-Evaluating Federal Civil Rights Policy,” Georgetown Law Journal,
79:1713–1735.

29

----- and Peter Siegelman. 1991. “The Changing Nature of Employment Discrimination
Litigation,” Stanford Law Review, 43:983–1033.
Gardner, John E. 1989. “Federal Labor Law Preemption of State Wrongful Discharge Claims,”
University of Cincinnati Law Review, 58:491–558.
Gruber, Jonathan. 1994. “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American Economic Review,
84:622–641.
Heckman, James J. and Brook Payner. 1989. “Determining the Impact of Federal Antidiscrimination
Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks: A Study of South Carolina,” American Economic
Review, 79:138–177.
Hotchkiss, Julie L. 2002. “A Closer Look at the Employment Impact of the Americans with Disabilities
Act” (mimeo).
Jolls, Christine. 2000. “Accommodation Mandates,” Stanford Law Review, 53:223–306.
Katz, Lawrence F. 1998. “Wage Subsidies for the Disadvantaged,” in Richard B. Freeman and Peter
Gottschalk, eds., Generating Jobs: How to Increase Demand for Less-Skilled Workers. New
York, NY: Russell Sage.
Kirchner, Corinne. 1986. “Looking Under the Street Lamp: Inappropriate Uses of Measures Just
Because They Are There,” Journal of Disability Policy Studies, 7:78–90.
Kreider, Brent and John V. Pepper. 2002. “Disability and Employment: Reevaluating the Evidence in
Light of Reporting Errors,” Center for Retirement Research Working Paper No. 2002–06.
Kruse, Douglas and Thomas Hale. 2003. “Disability and Employment: Symposium Introduction,”
Industrial Relations, 42:1–10.
----- and Lisa Schur. 2003. “Employment of People with Disabilities Following the ADA,” Industrial
Relations, 42:31–66.
Neuborne, Burt. 1977. “The Myth of Parity,” Harvard Law Review, 90:1105–1131.
Nickell, Stephen. 1997. “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe versus North America,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11:55–74.
Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer. 2000. “Litigation Costs and Returns to Experience,” American
Economic Review, 92:683–705.
Romeo, Peter. 1989. “New NRA Programs Tackle Host of Industry Issues,” Nation’s Restaurant News,
23(40):4.
Schwochau, Susan and Peter David Blanck. 2000. “The Economics of the Americans with Disabilities
Act, Part III: Does the ADA Disable the Disabled?” Berkeley Journal of Employment and Labor
Law, 21:271–313.
Shapiro, Joseph P. 1989. “Liberation Day for the Disabled,” U.S. News and World Report, 107(11):20.
Stapleton, David, Andrew Houtenville and Nanette Goodman. 2001. “Have Changes in Job
Requirements Reduced the Number of Workers with Disabilities?” (mimeo).
----- and Richard V. Burkhauser. The Decline in Employment of People with Disabilities. Kalamazoo:
W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2003.
Stein, Michael Ashley. 2000. “Empirical Implications of Title I,” Iowa Law Review, 86:1672–1690.
Tolin, Tom and Martin Patwell. 2003. “A Critique of Economic Analysis of the ADA,” Disability
Studies Quarterly, 23:130–142.

30

Table 1: Pre-ADA State Laws Prohibiting Disability Discrimination –
“Protection Without Accommodation” States
In the states listed in this table, pre-ADA statutory or judicial law imposed traditional antidiscrimination
prohibitions but no reasonable accommodations requirements on private employers:

Alaska
California
Connecticut
Florida
Georgia
Hawaii
Illinois
Indiana
Kansas
Kentucky
Maine
Maryland
Michigan
Missouri
Montana
Nebraska
Nevada
New Hampshire
New Jersey
New York
North Dakota
Ohio
Oklahoma
South Carolina
South Dakota
Tennessee
Texas
Utah
West Virginia
*

Statutory Section(s)

Traditional
Antidiscrimination
Prohibition –
Date Adopted

Reasonable
Accommodations
Requirement –
Date Adopted

EmployerSize
Threshold for
Coveragea

18.80.220(a)(1)*
Govt. 12940(a), 12994*
46a-60(a)(1)*
760.10(1)*
34-6A-4(a)
378-2(1)
68:1-103(Q), 2-102(A)*
22-9-1-3(l)
44-1009(a)(1)
207.150(1)
5:4572(1)(A)
49B:16(a)*
37.1102(2), 1202(1)
213.055.1(1)*
49-2-303(a), 49-4-101*
48-1104
613.330(1)
354-A:8(I)
10:5-4.1, -12(a), -29.1
Exec. 296(1)(a)
14-02.4-03
4112.02(A)
25:1302(A)
43-33-530
20-13-10, 23.7, 23.8
8-50-103(a)
Civ. Art. 5221k:5.01*
34-35-6(1)(a)(i)
5-11-9(a)(1)*

1969†
1973†
1973†
1977
1981
1975†
1971
1975
1974
1976
1973
1974
1976†
1978
1974†
1973
1971†
1975
1972†
1974
1983
1976
1981
1983
1986
1976†
1975†
1979
1981

n/a
n/a ‡
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a‡
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a‡
n/a
n/a‡
n/a
n/a

1
5
3
15
15
1
15
6
4
8
1
15
4
6
1
15
15
6
1
4
10
4
15
1
1
n/ab
15
15
12

Original statutory section differed from statutory section in effect immediately prior to the ADA: See Table
A1 for details.
†
Substantive amendment(s) subsequent to adoption: See Table A1 for details.
‡
Potential ambiguity over the existence of a reasonable accommodations requirement: See Table A2 for legal
description and effect on our results of alternative characterizations.
a
Number of employees, as of 1989. The column lists the number of individuals a firm had to employ before it
was subject to coverage by the state’s disability discrimination law.
b
Neither statutory nor judicial law provided an employer-size threshold for coverage.

Table 2: Pre-ADA State Laws Prohibiting Disability Discrimination –
“ADA-Like” States
In the states listed in this table, pre-ADA statutory or judicial law imposed both traditional
antidiscrimination prohibitions and reasonable accommodations requirements on private employers:

Arizona
Colorado
Delaware
Idaho
Iowa
Louisiana
Massachusetts
Minnesota
New Mexico
North Carolina
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Rhode Island
Vermont
Virginia
Washington
Wisconsin
Wyoming
*

Statutory Section(s)

Traditional
Antidiscrimination
Prohibition –
Date Adopted

Reasonable
Accommodations
Requirement –
Date Adopted

EmployerSize
Threshold for
Coveragea

41-1463(B)
24-34-402(1)(a)*
19:723(b), 724(a), 724(e)(2)
67-5909(1)
601A.6(1)(a)*
46:2254(A), (C)
151B:4(16)*
363.03:1(2), (6)
28-1-7(A), (J)*
168A-4, 5(a)*
659.425(1)
43:955(a), (b)
28-5-7(1)*
21:495(a)(1), 495d(6)*
51.5-41(A), (C)*
49.60.180
111.321, 322(1), 34(1)(b)*
27-9-105(a), (d)

1985
1977
1988
1988
1972
1980
1972†
1973
1973†
1973†
1973†
1974
1973†
1973
1975
1973
1965†
1985

1985
1977b
1988
1988
1987‡, c
1980
1983
1983†, d
1983
1985
1979
1985c
1986
1981
1985
1978c
1981‡
1985

15
1
20
10
4
15
6
1
4
15
6
4
4
1
n/ae
8
1
2

Original statutory section differed from statutory section in effect immediately prior to the ADA: See Table
A1 for details.
†
Substantive amendment(s) subsequent to adoption: See Table A1 for details.
‡
Potential ambiguity over the timing of adoption of a reasonable accommodations requirement: See Table A2
for details.
a
Number of employees, as of 1989. The column lists the number of individuals a firm had to employ before it
was subject to coverage by the state’s disability discrimination law.
b
Statutory language is somewhat ambiguous but is clarified by an administrative regulation, 3 CCR 708-1, Rule
60.2(C).
c
Judicial interpretation: Iowa—Cerro Gordo County Care Facility v. Iowa Civil Rights Comm’n, 401 N.W.2d
192 (Iowa 1987); Pennsylvania—Jenks v. Avco Corp., 940 A.2d 912 (Pa. Super. 1985); Washington—Holland v.
Boeing Co., 583 P.2d 621 (Wash. 1978). In the case of Washington, the 1978 decision briefly mentions the
existence of an administrative regulation requiring reasonable accommodations, but this regulation plays only a
minor role in the court’s opinion.
d
Applicable only to employers with 50 or more employees.
e
Neither statutory nor judicial law provided an employer-size threshold for coverage.

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics
Nondisabled

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Age
White
Post-High School
Working
Weeks Worked
Weekly Wage
SSI/DI
Obs.

36.9
87.8%
44.5%
87.5%
40.8
$397
1.32%
67,907

37.1
87.1%
45.5%
87.4%
40.8
$422
1.39%
74,616

37.2
87.0%
45.8%
87.2%
40.6
$433
1.38%
74,980

37.3
86.7%
50.0%
87.1%
40.4
$447
1.31%
74,192

37.5
86.1%
51.8%
86.8%
40.3
$462
1.54%
73,525

37.6
85.5%
53.6%
87.0%
40.5
$481
1.61%
70,999

37.8
84.3%
54.3%
87.3%
40.9
$508
1.66%
70,686

38.1
86.4%
54.0%
87.6%
41.3
$561
1.59%
61,300

38.2
86.3%
54.4%
88.0%
41.6
$572
1.60%
62,088

38.5
86.2%
55.0%
88.3%
42.0
$595
1.43%
62,338

38.6
86.3%
55.6%
88.4%
42.2
$625
1.27%
63,137

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Disabled
Age
White
Post-High School
Working
Weeks Worked
Weekly Wage
SSI/DI
Obs.

42.5
42.5
42.2
42.2
42.1
42.6
43.0
43.2
43.2
43.8
44.0
83.7% 83.5% 82.6% 83.5% 83.6% 81.0% 79.5% 80.8% 80.9% 82.0% 80.6%
23.3% 23.6% 25.7% 28.5% 30.8% 31.3% 32.1% 32.9% 34.0% 34.9% 35.6%
45.0% 45.8% 43.4% 43.2% 42.7% 40.8% 40.8% 39.7% 40.2% 37.4% 36.6%
16.4
17.2
15.9
15.9
15.8
15.1
14.7
14.8
15.0
14.0
13.8
$307
$308
$314
$335
$317
$347
$376
$435
$396
$366
$469
32.98% 31.67% 34.33% 35.29% 37.66% 38.55% 38.10% 40.24% 42.41% 45.07% 44.68%
4,396
4,884
5,025
5,100
5,311
5,307
5,336
4,680
4,775
4,655
4,579

Notes: Descriptive statistics are unweighted. Data are for individuals aged 21-58 and are reported by observation year (the year preceding the survey).
“SSI/DI” reflects the percentage of individuals who received federal disability benefits through either the Disability Insurance (DI) program or the
Supplemental Security Income (SSI) program.

Table 4: Means Analysis by State, Time, and Disability Status
“Protection Without Accommodation” States versus “ADA-Like” States
88-89 90-91 91-92
Protection Without Accommodation States
Disabled workers

16.25

(0.29)

Time Diff.

14.90

(0.27)

-1.35

(0.39)

Nondisabled workers

40.68

(0.06)

Time Diff.

40.45

(0.06)

-0.23

(0.09)

Group-Time Diff.

-1.12

(0.40)

ADA-Like States
Disabled workers

18.22

(0.43)

Time Diff.

19.05

(0.42)

0.83

(0.60)

Nondisabled workers

41.50

(0.09)

Time Diff.

41.47

(0.09)

-0.03

(0.13)

Group-Time Diff.

0.86

Group-Time-State Diff.

14.67

(0.26)

-1.57

(0.39)

40.23

(0.06)

-0.46

(0.09)

-1.12

(0.40)

19.26

(0.42)

1.04

(0.60)

41.48

(0.09)

-0.02

(0.13)

1.05

92-93
14.34

(0.26)

-1.91

(0.39)

40.19

(0.06)

-0.49

(0.09)

-1.42

(0.40)

17.79

(0.42)

-0.43

(0.60)

41.75

(0.09)

0.25

(0.13)

-0.68

(0.61)

(0.61)

(0.61)

-1.98

-2.17

-0.74

(0.73)

(0.73)

(0.73)

93-94
14.43

(0.26)

-1.82

(0.39)

40.48

(0.07)

-0.20

(0.09)

-1.62

(0.40)

16.51

(0.40)

-1.71

(0.59)

42.04

(0.09)

0.54

(0.13)

-2.25

(0.60)

0.62

(0.72)

94-95
14.47

(0.27)

-1.78

(0.39)

40.94

(0.07)

0.25

(0.09)

-2.03

(0.41)

15.79

(0.40)

-2.43

(0.59)

42.36

(0.09)

0.86

(0.13)

-3.29

(0.60)

1.26

(0.72)

95-96
14.33

(0.28)

-1.92

(0.40)

41.26

(0.07)

0.58

(0.09)

-2.50

(0.41)

15.97

(0.42)

-2.25

(0.60)

42.55

(0.10)

1.05

(0.13)

-3.30

(0.61)

0.80

(0.74)

96-97
14.00

(0.27)

-2.25

(0.40)

41.64

(0.07)

0.96

(0.09)

-3.21

(0.41)

15.98

(0.43)

-2.24

(0.61)

42.81

(0.09)

1.31

(0.13)

-3.55

(0.62)

0.35

(0.74)

97-98
13.48

(0.27)

-2.77

(0.40)

42.02

(0.07)

1.34

(0.09)

-4.10

(0.41)

14.65

(0.43)

-3.57

(0.61)

43.04

(0.09)

1.54

(0.13)

-5.11

(0.62)

1.00

(0.74)

“No Protection” States versus “Protection Without Accommodation” States
88-89

90-91

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

No Protection States
Disabled workers

12.19

(0.88)

Time Diff.
Nondisabled workers

10.40

(0.81)

-1.79

(1.19)

39.89

(0.27)

Time Diff.

39.96

(0.26)

0.07

(0.38)

Group-Time Diff.

-1.85

(1.25)

11.39

(0.85)

-0.80

(1.23)

40.22

(0.26)

0.32

(0.38)

-1.12

(1.28)

11.11

(0.84)

-1.08

(1.22)

40.34

(0.27)

0.45

(0.38)

-1.53

(1.27)

10.57

(0.86)

-1.62

(1.23)

40.75

(0.27)

0.85

(0.38)

-2.47

(1.29)

11.58

(0.93)

-0.61

(1.28)

41.01

(0.28)

1.12

(0.38)

-1.73

(1.33)

11.41

(0.90)

-0.78

(1.26)

41.55

(0.28)

1.66

(0.38)

-2.44

(1.32)

10.64

(0.91)

-1.55

(1.26)

41.94

(0.28)

2.05

(0.39)

-3.60

(1.32)

10.70

(0.93)

-1.49

(1.28)

42.03

(0.28)

2.14

(0.39)

-3.63

(1.34)

Protection Without Accommodation States
Disabled workers

16.25

(0.29)

Time Diff.
Nondisabled workers
Time Diff.
Group-Time Diff.

Group-Time-State Diff.

14.90

(0.27)

-1.35

(0.39)

40.68

(0.06)

40.45

(0.06)

-0.23

(0.09)

-1.12

14.67

(0.26)

-1.57

(0.39)

40.23

(0.06)

-0.46

(0.09)

-1.12

14.34

(0.26)

-1.91

(0.39)

40.19

(0.06)

-0.49

(0.09)

-1.42

14.43

(0.26)

-1.82

(0.39)

40.48

(0.07)

-0.20

(0.09)

-1.62

(0.40)

(0.40)

(0.40)

(0.40)

-0.73

-0.01

-0.11

-0.85

(1.31)

(1.34)

(1.33)

(1.35)

14.47

(0.27)

-1.78

(0.39)

40.94

(0.07)

0.25

(0.09)

-2.03

(0.41)

0.30

(1.39)

14.33

(0.28)

-1.92

(0.40)

41.26

(0.07)

0.58

(0.09)

-2.50

14.00

(0.27)

-2.25

(0.40)

41.64

(0.07)

0.96

(0.09)

-3.21

(0.41)

(0.41)

0.06

-0.40

(1.38)

(1.38)

13.48

(0.27)

-2.77

(0.40)

42.02

(0.07)

1.34

(0.09)

-4.10

(0.41)

0.48

(1.40)

Notes: Means reflect average weeks worked by state group, category of worker (disabled versus nondisabled), and
time period. All estimates are weighted using CPS survey weights. Standard errors are reported beneath mean
estimates. See Tables 1 and 2 and the text for the states in each group.

Table 5: Basic Regression Results

Basic Specification

Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP –
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP
Specification with State,
Year, and State*Year
Fixed Effects
Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP –
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

90-91 91-92 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98

1.23

1.67

0.51

-0.99

-1.92

-1.46

-1.23

-2.67

(0.63)
[0.93]

(0.78)
[0.96]

(0.51)
[0.98]

(0.52)
[0.88]

(0.49)
[0.82]

(0.61)
[0.92]

(0.70)
[0.93]

(0.58)
[0.88]

-2.14

-2.51

-1.54

-0.08

0.70

0.12

-0.60

0.02

(0.69)
[1.07]

(0.73)
[1.04]

(0.68)
[1.10]

(0.76)
[1.04]

(0.68)
[0.98]

(0.79)
[1.05]

(0.88)
[1.07]

(0.74)
[0.99]

-2.63

-1.96

-1.12

-0.37

1.57

0.44

-0.56

0.24

(0.86)
[1.21]

(0.94)
[1.24]

(0.87)
[1.23]

(1.22)
[1.19]

(1.44)
[1.33]

(1.19)
[1.30]

(0.87)
[1.05]

(0.68)
[1.07]

-0.49

0.55

0.42

-0.25

0.87

0.32

0.04

0.22

(0.71)
[0.98]

(0.76)
[0.57]

(0.96)
[0.98]

(1.24)
[1.00]

(1.38)
[1.17]

(1.11)
[1.07]

(0.80)
[0.76]

(0.68)
[0.82]

90-91 91-92 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98

1.33

1.72

0.55

-0.96

-1.89

-1.41

-1.19

-2.68

(0.77)
[0.59]

(0.82)
[0.72]

(0.80)
[0.43]

(0.69)
[0.48]

(0.67)
[0.48]

(0.77)
[0.58]

(0.79)
[0.70]

(0.74)
[0.50]

-2.22

-2.56

-1.54

-0.06

0.76

0.14

-0.61

0.11

(0.84)
[0.62]

(0.85)
[0.63]

(0.88)
[0.50]

(0.81)
[0.64]

(0.79)
[0.57]

(0.88)
[0.69]

(0.89)
[0.78]

(0.81)
[0.58]

-2.76

-2.03

-1.17

-0.36

1.59

0.44

-0.55

0.27

(0.96)
[0.66]

(1.07)
[0.82]

(1.05)
[0.79]

(1.06)
[1.18]

(1.22)
[1.49]

(1.21)
[1.07]

(0.90)
[0.78]

(0.90)
[0.52]

-0.53

0.53

0.37

-0.30

0.83

0.29

0.06

0.16

(0.69)
[0.44]

(0.65)
[0.60]

(0.88)
[0.85]

(0.94)
[1.17]

(1.11)
[1.42]

(1.05)
[0.95]

(0.65)
[0.57]

(0.68)
[0.48]

Specification Omitting StateLaw Variables, but Including
State, Year, and State*Year
Fixed Effects

90-91 91-92 92-93 93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98

Coeff. on ADA*DIS

-0.14

0.24

-0.29

-0.94

-1.29

-1.29

-1.65

-2.65

(0.39)
[0.37]

(0.48)
[0.53]

(0.47)
[0.46]

(0.37)
[0.36]

(0.34)
[0.28]

(0.36)
[0.32]

(0.38)
[0.33]

(0.36)
[0.33]

No. of Observations

292,562 291,149 286,796 283,860 274,988 265,866 266,478 266,838

Notes: The dependent variable is weeks worked per year. The pre-ADA period is 1988-1989. The post-ADA
period is as stated. Robust standard errors clustered on state-disability interactions are in parentheses below
coefficient estimates, and robust standard errors clustered on state-disability-year interactions are in square
brackets below coefficient estimates. All regressions are OLS regressions, employ CPS survey weights, and
include the individual control variables listed in the text plus controls for state unemployment rate (in regressions
without state, year, and state*year fixed effects) and the interaction of disability and state unemployment rate. See
equation (1) for further details.

Table 6: Robustness Checks
(1) Sample Includes Only Observations
from Pre-1980 Enactors

(2) Sample Includes Only Observations from
High-Employer-Size-Threshold States

90-91 91-92 92-93
2.95

2.65

-0.17

(1.29)
[0.74]

(1.75)
[1.99]

(2.17)
[1.00]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

-3.80

-3.54

-1.07

(1.37)
[0.85]

(1.79)
[2.02]

(2.25)
[1.12]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

-4.38

-2.97

-0.43

(1.41)
[0.79]

(1.88)
[2.03]

(2.27)
[1.20]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP – -0.58
(0.70)
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP
[0.48]

No. of Observations

0.58

0.64

(0.86)
[0.66]

(0.97)
[0.96]

192,885 191,815 188,956

(3) Specification with State-Level Disability
Benefits Receipt Information

90-91 91-92 92-93
0.48

1.14

0.99

(0.93)
[1.25]

(0.73)
[0.97]

(0.87)
[0.70]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

-1.40

-2.47

-1.93

(1.16)
[1.39]

(0.99)
[1.10]

(1.16)
[1.11]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

-1.93

-1.52

-1.62

(1.11)
[1.30]

(1.02)
[1.07]

(1.11)
[0.98]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP – -0.53
(0.93)
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP
No. of Observations

1.28

0.68

(0.78)
[0.70]

(0.85)
[0.81]

(0.85)
[0.59]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

-2.03

-2.41

-1.43

(0.88)
[0.76]

(0.90)
[0.74]

(0.91)
[0.54]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

-2.54

-1.55

-0.01

(1.61)
[0.75]

(1.67)
[0.81]

(1.38)
[0.79]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP – 0.50
(1.46)
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP
[0.43]

No. of Observations

0.86

1.42

(1.52)
[0.53]

(1.23)
[0.74]

292,562 291,149 286,796

0.31

[0.71]

(1.04)
[1.11]

93,566

92,864

91,464

(4) Specification with State-Level Disability
Benefits Application Information

90-91 91-92 92-93
1.00

0.95
(1.00)
[0.75]

90-91 91-92 92-93
1.45

1.95

1.23

(0.79)
[0.69]

(0.86)
[0.81]

(0.88)
[0.68]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

-1.78

-1.99

-0.92

(0.87)
[0.76]

(0.88)
[0.74]

(0.91)
[0.62]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

-1.82

-0.68

0.93

(1.87)
[0.81]

(1.89)
[0.79]

(1.67)
[1.01]

Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP – -0.03
(1.73)
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP
[0.55]

No. of Observations

1.31

1.85

(1.77)
[0.67]

(1.57)
[1.00]

292,562 291,149 286,796

Notes: The dependent variable is weeks worked per year. The pre-ADA period is 1988-1989. The post-ADA period is
as stated. Robust standard errors clustered on state-disability interactions are in parentheses below coefficient
estimates, and robust standard errors clustered on state-disability-year interactions are in square brackets below
coefficient estimates. All regressions are OLS regressions, employ CPS survey weights, and include state, year, and
state*year fixed effects. Control variables are as stated in Table 5. In the upper panel of the present table, columns (1)(3) use observations from states in which the state-level pre-ADA disability discrimination regime was in place prior to
1980; columns (4)-(6) use observations from states with ADA-like employer-size thresholds. See Tables 1 and 2 for
details on employer-size thresholds; observations from Tennessee and Virginia, whose pre-ADA statutory and judicial
law did not specify an employer-size threshold, are not included in the samples used in column (4)-(6). In the lower
panel, columns (1)-(3) replace individual receipt of disability benefits with the percent of the state population receiving
disability benefits interacted with disability status; columns (4)-(6) replace individual receipt of disability benefits with
the percent of the state population applying for disability benefits interacted with disability status. Fixed effects
included in these regressions preclude inclusion of the percent of the state population receiving or applying for
disability benefits alone.

Figure 1: Percentage of Individuals Reporting Disability
By State Group
10.0%
9.5%
9.0%

"No Protection"
State Group

8.5%

Percentage
Reporting
Disability

8.0%

"Protection Without
Accommodation"
State Group

7.5%
7.0%
6.5%

"ADA-Like" State
Group

6.0%
5.5%
5.0%
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

Year

Figure 2: Percentage of Individuals Reporting Disability
By State Group – Trendlines
10.0%
9.5%
9.0%

"No Protection"
Group Trendline

8.5%

Percentage
Reporting
Disability

8.0%

"Protection Without
Accommodation"
Group Trendline

7.5%
7.0%
6.5%

"ADA-Like" Group
Trendline

6.0%
5.5%
5.0%
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

Year

Note: All trendlines are fourth-order polynomials.

1996

1997

1998

Figure 3: "ADA-Like" and "Protection Without Accommodation"
State Disabled Employment Trends
20

18

"ADA-Like" State
Group

Disabled
Employment 16
(Weeks/Year)

"Protection
Without
Accommodation"
State Group

14

12
1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

Year

Figure 4: "ADA-Like" and "Protection Without Accommodation"
State Disabled Employment Trendlines
20

18

"ADA-Like" Group
Trendline
Disabled
Employment 16
(Weeks/Year)

"Protection Without
Accomodation"
Group Trendline

14

12
1987

1988

1989

1990

Year

Note: All trendlines are fourth-order polynomials.

1991

1992

Table A1: Pre-ADA State Laws Prohibiting Disability Discrimination by
Private Employers – Original Statutory Sections and Substantive
Pre-ADA Amendments
Substantive Pre-ADA Amendments

Protection
Without
Accommodation
States

Original Statutory
Section(s)

Date of
Amendment(s)

Nature of
Amendment(s)

Alaska

18.80.220(1)

1987

Broadened coverage to mental as well
as physical disability

California

Lab. 1420(a)

1975

Broadened coverage to “medical
conditions” as well as physical
disability

31-126(a)

1978; 1979

Florida

13-261(1)
(later 23.167(1))

n/a

Hawaii

n/a

1981

Illinois

38:65-23(1) (later 48853-3(a))

n/a

n/a

Maryland

49B:19(a)

n/a

n/a

Michigan

n/a

1980

Missouri

296.020(1)

n/a

Montana

1974 S.L. ch. 77, sec. 3
(later 64-306(a))

1975

Broadened coverage to mental as well
as physical disability and broadened
scope of liability

Nevada

n/a

1973; 1981

Added protection for use of guide dogs
(1973); broadened coverage to “aural”
as well as “physical” and “visual”
handicaps (1981)

New Jersey

n/a

1978

Broadened coverage to mental as well
as physical disability and broadened
scope of liability

Tennessee

n/a

1986; 1987

Art. 4419e(f) (later Hum.
Res. Code 121.003(f))

1983

5-11-9(a)

n/a

Connecticut

Texas
West Virginia

(continues on next page)

Broadened coverage to mental
retardation (1978) and mental disorders
(1979) as well as physical disability
n/a
Broadened scope of liability

Broadened scope of liability
n/a

Broadened scope of liability (1986);
corrected omission of private employers
from 1986 amendment (1987)
Broadened scope of liability
n/a

Table A1 (Continued): Pre-ADA State Laws Prohibiting Disability Discrimination by
Private Employers – Original Statutory Sections and Substantive
Pre-ADA Amendments
“ADA-Like”
States

Original Statutory
Section(s)

Substantive Pre-ADA Amendments
Date of
Amendment(s)

Nature of
Amendment(s)

24-34-306(1)(a)

n/a

n/a

105A.7(1)(a)

n/a

n/a

149:24K

1983

n/a

1987; 1989

4-33-7(A)

1987

Broadened coverage to “medical
conditions” as well as physical and
mental disabilities

168-6

1985

Made various revisions to liability
provisions

n/a

1979

Broadened scope of liability

Rhode Island

28-5-7(A)

1981

Broadened coverage to mental as well
as physical disability

Vermont

21:498(a)

n/a

n/a

Virginia

40.1-28.7 (later 51.0141(A),(C))

n/a

n/a

Wisconsin

111.32(5)(a), 111.36(4)
(later 111.325)

1967; 1975; 1981

Colorado
Iowa
Massachusetts
Minnesota
New Mexico
North Carolina
Oregon

Broadened scope of liability
Altered definition of “undue hardship”
(1987); refined definition of
reasonable accommodations (1989)

Rephrased and clarified prohibitions
(1967, 1975, 1981)

Notes: The original statutory section often differs from the source reported in Tables 1 and 2 because states
frequently renumbered their statutes in this period. The substantive amendments reported in this table are
amendments to pre-ADA statutory sections imposing traditional antidiscrimination prohibitions or reasonable
accommodations requirements, and do not reflect changes in other statutory sections of states’ disability
discrimination laws.

Table A2: Effects of Alternative Characterizations of Pre-ADA State Laws
Prohibiting Disability Discrimination by Private Employers
State

Legal Description

Effect on Results for Post-ADA
Years 90-91, 91-92, and 92-93

California

Prior to 1981, Cal. Govt. § 12994 expressly
stated that accommodations were not required.
In 1981, the section was amended to provide that
an employer shall not be required “to make any
accommodation for an employee who has a
physical handicap that would produce undue
hardship to the employer.” There is no pre-ADA
caselaw indicating whether the 1981 amendment
was meant to impose affirmatively a requirement
of reasonable accommodations unless such
accommodations would be an undue hardship.

Categorizing California as an “ADA-like” state,
rather than a “protection without accommodation”
state, does not alter the basic pattern of our results.
Our estimates of β11 (the effect of imposing a
reasonable accommodations requirement) are
somewhat smaller in magnitude and slightly less
precise. Our estimates of β12 – β11 (the effect of
imposing a traditional antidiscrimination provision)
remain insignificant in all years.

Delaware

Law prohibiting disability discrimination by
private employers was not enacted until 1988.

Categorizing Delaware as a “no protection” state,
rather than an “ADA-like” state, has virtually no
effect on our estimates of β11 (the effect of imposing
a reasonable accommodations requirement). Our
estimates of β12 – β11 (the effect of imposing a
traditional antidiscrimination provision) remain
insignificant in all years.

Idaho

Law prohibiting disability discrimination by
private employers was not enacted until 1988,
and the statutory language is somewhat
ambiguous as to the existence of a reasonable
accommodations requirement.

Categorizing Idaho as a “no protection” state or a
“protection without accommodation” state, rather
than an “ADA-like” state, has virtually no effect on
our estimates of β11 (the effect of imposing a
reasonable accommodations requirement). Our
estimates of β12 – β11 (the effect of imposing a
traditional antidiscrimination provision) remain
insignificant in all years.

Iowa

The Iowa Supreme Court adopted a reasonable
accommodations requirement in 1987 as a
freestanding interpretation of the statutory
language, but earlier courts had mentioned and
applied administrative regulations requiring
reasonable accommodations.

This change cannot affect our results (because the
timing of state law adoption does not enter into our
categorization of states).

Michigan

Limited accommodation provision, not expressly
requiring reasonable accommodations, was
adopted in 1976. Administrative decisional law,
summarized in Wardlow v. Great Lakes Express
Co., 339 N.W.2d 670 (Mich. Ct. App. 1983),
adopted a reasonable accommodations
requirement, but in 1986 the Michigan Supreme
Court, in Carr v. General Motors Corp., 389
N.W.2d 686 (Mich. 1986), adopted a conception
of the Michigan statute inconsistent with the
administrative decisional law’s reasonable
accommodations requirement.

Categorizing Michigan as an “ADA-like” state,
rather than a “protection without accommodation”
state, reduces the absolute magnitude of our
estimates of β11 (the effect of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement) by about 10%, while
the precision of the estimates generally improves.
Our estimates of β12 – β11 (the effect of imposing a
traditional antidiscrimination provision) remain
insignificant in all years.

(continues on next page)

Table A2 (continued): Effects of Alternative Characterizations of Pre-ADA State Laws
Prohibiting Disability Discrimination by Private Employers
State

Legal Description

Effect on Results for Post-ADA
Years 90-91, 91-92, and 92-93

Pennsylvania

Pennsylvania’s reasonable accommodations
requirement was imposed only by an
intermediate court, rather than by the state’s
highest court.

Categorizing Pennsylvania as a “protection without
accommodation” state, rather than an “ADA-like”
state, does not alter the basic pattern of our results.
Our estimates of β11 (the effect of imposing a
reasonable accommodations requirement) are
somewhat smaller in magnitude and slightly less
precise. Our estimates of β12 – β11 (the effect of
imposing a traditional antidiscrimination provision)
remain insignificant in all years.

South Dakota

Limited accommodation provision, not expressly
requiring reasonable accommodations, was
adopted in 1986.

Categorizing South Dakota as an “ADA-like” state,
rather than a “protection without accommodation”
state, improves the precision of our estimates of β11
(the effect of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement), with little effect on
their magnitudes. Our estimates of β12 – β11 (the
effect of imposing a traditional antidiscrimination
provision) remain insignificant in all years.

Texas

Remedy provisions refer to reasonable
accommodations (Civ. Art. 5221k:6.01(d) and
7.01(f)).

Categorizing Texas as an “ADA-like” state, rather
than a “protection without accommodation” state,
does not alter the basic pattern of our results. Our
estimates of β11 (the effect of imposing a reasonable
accommodations requirement) are somewhat
smaller in magnitude and also somewhat less
precise. Our estimates of β12 – β11 (the effect of
imposing a traditional antidiscrimination provision)
remain insignificant in all years.

Wisconsin

The Wisconsin legislature adopted a
reasonable accommodations requirement in
1981, but in the preceding period some
Wisconsin lower courts judicially imposed a
reasonable accommodations requirement (e.g.,
Teggatz v. Labor & Industry Review Comm’n,
1978 WL 3436 (Cir. Ct. Wisc.)), while others
did not impose such a requirement (e.g.,
Samens v. Labor & Industry Review Comm’n,
1981 WL 11474 (Cir. Ct. Wisc.)).

This change cannot affect our results (because the
timing of state law adoption does not enter into our
categorization of states).

Table A3: Basic Regression Results – Overall State-Group Effects

Specification with
ADA*DIS*AD

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

90-91

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

-0.91

-0.84

-1.03

-1.08

-1.21

-1.34

-1.84

-2.64

(0.41)
[0.57]

(0.55)
[0.57]

(0.65)
[0.63]

(0.60)
[0.60]

(0.46)
[0.53]

(0.51)
[0.53]

(0.53)
[0.56]

(0.51)
[0.56]

-1.40

-0.29

-0.61

-1.33

-0.34

-1.02

-1.80

-2.42

(0.58)
[0.77]

(0.57)
[0.80]

(0.70)
[0.74]

(1.08)
[0.79]

(1.34)
[1.05]

(1.02)
[0.96]

(0.61)
[0.62]

(0.59)
[0.75]

1.23

1.67

0.51

-0.99

-1.92

-1.46

-1.23

-2.67

(0.63)
[0.93]

(0.78)
[0.96]

(0.51)
[0.98]

(0.52)
[0.88]

(0.49)
[0.82]

(0.61)
[0.92]

(0.70)
[0.93]

(0.58)
[0.88]

Specification with
ADA*DIS*AD and State,
Year, and State*Year
Fixed Effects

90-91

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

-0.90

-0.84

-0.99

-1.02

-1.12

-1.27

-1.79

-2.58

(0.33)
[0.39]

(0.44)
[0.46]

(0.53)
[0.54]

(0.47)
[0.47]

(0.32)
[0.41]

(0.39)
[0.42]

(0.37)
[0.44]

(0.39)
[0.40]

-1.43

-0.31

-0.63

-1.32

-0.30

-0.99

-1.74

-2.41

(0.29)
[0.57]

(0.44)
[0.69]

(0.65)
[0.69]

(1.07)
[0.80]

(1.40)
[1.02]

(0.89)
[0.96]

(0.46)
[0.54]

(0.44)
[0.63]

1.32

1.72

0.55

-0.96

-1.89

-1.41

-1.19

-2.68

(0.59)
[0.44]

(0.72)
[0.82]

(0.43)
[0.80]

(0.48)
[0.69]

(0.48)
[0.67]

(0.58)
[0.77]

(0.70)
[0.79]

(0.50)
[0.74]

292,562

291,149

286,796

283,860

274,988

265,866

266,478

266,838

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*AD

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*AD

No. of Observations

Notes: Results duplicate the first two panels of Table 5 except that state-group effects are overall effects for each
state group rather than effects in the "protection without accommodation" and "no protection" groups relative to
"ADA-like" states. ADA*DIS*AD replaces ADA*DIS in all regressions in this table. The dependent variable is
weeks worked per year. The pre-ADA period is 1988-1989. The post-ADA period is as stated. Robust standard
errors clustered on state-disability interactions are in parentheses below coefficient estimates, and robust standard
errors clustered on state-disability-year interactions are in square brackets below coefficient estimates. All
regressions are OLS regressions and employ CPS survey weights. Control variables are as stated in Table 5.

Table A4: Alternative Fixed Effects Specifications
Specification with State,
State*Year, and
State*Disabled Fixed Effects
Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP –
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

90-91

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

1.07

1.26

-0.06

-1.13

-1.84

-1.32

-1.02

-2.32

(0.55)
[0.46]

(0.66)
[0.51]

(0.42)
[0.59]

(0.52)
[0.50]

(0.51)
[0.51]

(0.60)
[0.56]

(0.72)
[0.54]

(0.48)
[0.50]

-2.10

-2.53

-1.74

-0.21

0.63

0.05

-0.72

0.00

(0.63)
[0.53]

(0.64)
[0.55]

(0.51)
[0.67]

(0.62)
[0.60]

(0.56)
[0.59]

(0.69)
[0.63]

(0.79)
[0.62]

(0.58)
[0.55]

-2.48

-1.65

-0.50

0.03

1.86

0.75

0.12

0.83

(0.63)
[0.72]

(0.79)
[0.80]

(0.82)
[0.89]

(1.20)
[0.90]

(1.44)
[0.94]

(1.08)
[1.01]

(0.83)
[0.75]

(0.64)
[0.77]

-0.38

0.89

1.24

0.24

1.23

0.70

0.84

0.83

(0.44)
[0.61]

(0.60)
[0.72]

(0.88)
[0.85]

(1.14)
[0.84]

(1.32)
[0.85]

(0.88)
[0.89]

(0.53)
[0.61]

(0.47)
[0.66]

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

-2.13

-2.52

-1.51

-0.08

0.70

0.12

-0.56

0.05

(0.69)
[1.04]

(0.74)
[1.03]

(0.70)
[1.07]

(0.78)
[1.03]

(0.69)
[0.97]

(0.79)
[1.05]

(0.89)
[1.06]

(0.75)
[0.98]

-2.66

-1.94

-1.14

-0.38

1.55

0.47

-0.62

0.19

(0.87)
[1.18]

(0.94)
[1.23]

(0.87)
[1.14]

(1.23)
[1.21]

(1.43)
[1.36]

(1.19)
[1.33]

(0.87)
[1.09]

(0.69)
[1.02]

Specification with Year,
Disabled, and Year*Disabled 90-91
Fixed Effects
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP –
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

No. of Observations

-0.54

0.58

0.37

-0.30

0.85

0.35

-0.05

0.14

(0.71)
[0.94]

(0.76)
[0.95]

(0.96)
[0.87]

(1.27)
[1.04]

(1.39)
[1.21]

(1.11)
[1.11]

(0.81)
[0.80]

(0.71)
[0.76]

292,562

291,149

286,796

283,860

274,988

265,866

266,478

266,838

Notes: The dependent variable is weeks worked per year. The pre-ADA period is 1988-1989. The post-ADA
period is as stated. Robust standard errors clustered on state-disability interactions are in parentheses below
coefficient estimates, and robust standard errors clustered on state-disability-year interactions are in square
brackets below coefficient estimates. All regressions are OLS regressions, employ CPS survey weights, and
include the fixed effects specified in the table. Control variables are stated in Table 5. In the upper panel of this
table, the fixed effects preclude the estimation of the coefficients on ADA, LP, NP, ADA*LP, ADA*NP, DIS*LP,
and DIS*NP from the basic specification in equation (1). In the lower panel, the fixed effects preclude the
estimation of the coefficients on ADA, DIS, and ADA*DIS from this specification.

Table A5: Additional Robustness Checks
(1) Specification Omitting
State-Level Unemployment
Variables
Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP –
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP
No. of Observations
(2) Sample Includes Only
Observations from
Southern States
Coeff. on ADA*DIS

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP

Coeff. on ADA*DIS*NP –
Coeff. on ADA*DIS*LP

No. of Observations

90-91

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

1.34

1.72

0.57

-0.98

-1.91

-1.41

-1.14

-2.44

(0.54)
[0.75]

(0.57)
[0.76]

(0.31)
[0.76]

(0.46)
[0.68]

(0.49)
[0.68]

(0.59)
[0.77]

(0.70)
[0.78]

(0.44)
[0.72]

-2.22

-2.56

-1.53

-0.08

0.73

0.13

-0.63

0.05

(0.63)
[0.85]

(0.64)
[0.85]

(0.51)
[0.88]

(0.64)
[0.81]

(0.58)
[0.79]

(0.70)
[0.87]

(0.77)
[0.89]

(0.54)
[0.81]

-2.77

-2.03

-1.20

-0.30

1.76

0.55

-0.34

0.65

(0.61)
[0.95]

(0.72)
[1.03]

(0.72)
[1.03]

(1.16)
[1.05]

(1.45)
[1.20]

(1.00)
[1.19]

(0.73)
[0.89]

(0.48)
[0.90]

-0.55

-0.53

0.34

-0.22

1.02

0.42

0.29

0.60

(0.43)
[0.68]

(0.53)
[0.78]

(0.76)
[0.81]

(1.15)
[0.91]

(1.40)
[1.07]

(0.90)
[1.00]

(0.42)
[0.60]

(0.38)
[0.66]

292,562

291,149

286,796

283,860

274,988

265,866

266,478

266,838

90-91

91-92

92-93

93-94

94-95

95-96

96-97

97-98

0.32

0.93

0.06

-0.81

-1.56

-0.74

-1.05

-4.08

(1.02)
[1.49]

(0.69)
[1.06]

(0.57)
[0.29]

(0.56)
[0.23]

(0.49)
[0.64]

(0.83)
[0.28]

(0.98)
[1.10]

(1.05)
[1.36]

-1.33

-1.75

-1.78

-0.85

0.59

0.04

0.86

3.50

(1.26)
[1.59]

(1.06)
[1.18]

(1.17)
[0.93]

(1.07)
[1.29]

(0.99)
[0.73]

(1.42)
[0.85]

(1.52)
[1.35]

(1.46)
[1.49]

-1.68

-1.21

-0.69

-0.43

1.69

-0.05

-0.79

1.70

(1.18)
[1.53)

(0.99)
[1.17]

(0.90)
[0.76]

(0.97)
[1.07]

(1.03)
[1.43]

(1.28)
[0.83]

(1.01)
[1.05]

(1.15)
[1.33]

-0.35

0.54

1.09

0.42

1.10

-0.10

-1.64

-1.81

(0.94)
[0.58]

(1.05)
[0.65]

(1.22)
[1.12]

(1.21)
[1.64]

(1.30)
[1.34]

(1.47)
[1.13]

(1.29)
[0.84]

(1.21)
[0.72]

41,793

41,786

41,157

40,813

39,169

37,612

37,832

37,593

Notes: The dependent variable is weeks worked per year. The pre-ADA period is 1988-1989. The post-ADA
period is as stated. Robust standard errors clustered on state-disability interactions are in parentheses below
coefficient estimates, and robust standard errors clustered on state-disability-year interactions are in square
brackets below coefficient estimates. All regressions are OLS regressions, employ CPS survey weights, and
include state, year, and state*year fixed effects. Control variables are as stated in Table 5 minus state
unemployment rate and the interaction of disability and state unemployment rate in the upper panel. The southern
states used in the lower panel are as stated in the text.

