                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MULTI-PERIOD CORPORATE FAILURE PREDICTION
                            WITH STOCHASTIC COVARIATES

                                              Darrell Duffie
                                               Ke Wang

                                          Working Paper 10743
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10743


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We are grateful for helpful discussions with Takeshi Amemiya, Susan Athey, Richard Cantor, Roger Stein,
Brad Effron, Robert Geske, Michael Gordy, Aprajit Mahajan, Staurt Turnbull, and Frank X. Zhang; for
insightful comments from seminar participants at Oxford University, Beijing University, Singapore
Management University, Stanford University, SUNY Buffalo, Tsinghua University, The University of
California at Berkeley, The University of Tokyo, The University of Houston, and from participants in the
Moody’s and NYU Inaugural Credit Risk Conference and The Bachelier World Congress; for excellent
research assistance from Leandro Saita; and for a supporting grant from Moody’s. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Darrell Duffie and Ke Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Multi-Period Corporate Failure Prediction with Stochastic Covariates
Darrell Duffie and Ke Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 10743
September 2004
JEL No. C41, G33, E44

                                            ABSTRACT

We provide maximum likelihood estimators of term structures of conditional probabilities of
bankruptcy over relatively long time horizons, incorporating the dynamics of firm-specific and
macroeconomic covariates. We find evidence in the U.S. industrial machinery and instruments
sector, based on over 28,000 firm-quarters of data spanning 1971 to 2001, of significant dependence
of the level and shape of the term structure of conditional future bankruptcy probabilities on a firm's
distance to default (a volatility-adjusted measure of leverage) and on U.S. personal income growth,
among other covariates.Variation in a firm's distance to default has a greater relative effect on the
term structure of future failure hazard rates than does a comparatively sized change in U.S. personal
income growth, especially at dates more than a year into the future.

Darrell Duffie
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
duffie@stanford.edu

Ke Wang
Faculty of Economics
The University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku
Tokyo, 113-0033
Japan
kewang@e.u-tokyo.ac.jp
1    Introduction
We provide maximum likelihood estimators of term structures of conditional
corporate bankruptcy probabilities. Our contribution over prior work is to
exploit the dependence of failure intensities on stochastic covariates, as well
as the time-series dynamics of the covariates, in order to estimate the likeli-
hood of failure over several future periods (quarters or years). We estimate
our model for the U.S. industrial machinery and instrument sector, using
over 28,000 firm-quarters of data for the period 1971 to 2001. We find evi-
dence of significant dependence of the level and shape of the term structure
of conditional future failure probabilities on a firm’s distance to default (a
volatility-adjusted measure of leverage) and on U.S. personal income growth,
among other covariates. Variation in a firm’s distance to default has a greater
relative effect on the term structure of future failure hazard rates than does
a comparatively sized change in the business-cycle covariate, U.S. personal
income growth, especially at dates more than one year into the future.
    The estimated shape of the term structure of conditional failure prob-
abilities reflects the time-series behavior of the covariates, especially lever-
age targeting by firms and mean reversion in macroeconomic performance.
The term structures of failure hazard rates are typically upward sloping at
business-cycle peaks, and downward sloping at business-cycle troughs, to a
degree that depends on corporate leverage relative to its long-run target.
    A firm’s failure intensity is assumed to depend on both firm-specific and
macroeconomic state variables. Stochastic evolution of the combined Markov
state vector Xt causes variation over time in the failure intensity λt = Λ(Xt ).
The firm exits for other reasons, such as merger, acquisition, or privatization,
with an intensity αt = A(Xt ). The total exit intensity is thus αt + λt .
    We specify a doubly-stochastic formulation of the point process for failure
and other forms of exit under which the conditional probability at time t of
corporate survival (from failure or other exit) for s years is
                      R                        
                        − tt+s (λ(u)+α(u)) du
       p(Xt , s) = E e                        Xt ,                           (1)

and under which the conditional probability of failure within s years is
                   Z t+s R                             
                          − tz (λ(u)+α(u)) du
     q(Xt , s) = E       e                    λ(z) dz Xt .               (2)
                      t



                                       1
This calculation of q(Xt , s), demonstrated in Section 2, reflects the fact that,
in order to fail at time z, the firm must survive until time z, avoiding both
failure and other forms of exit, which arrive at a total intensity of λ(u)+α(u).
    While, as explained in Section 1.1, there is a significant prior literature
treating the estimation of one-period-ahead bankruptcy probabilities, for ex-
ample with logit models, we believe that this is the first empirical study of
the conditional term structure of failure probabilities over multiple future
time periods that incorporates the time dynamics of the covariates. The sole
exception seems to be the practice of certain banks and dealers in structured
credit products of treating the credit rating of a firm as though a Markov
chain, with ratings transition probabilities estimated as long-term average
ratings transition frequencies.1 It is by now well understood, however, that
the current rating of a firm does not incorporate much of the influence of the
business cycle on failure rates (Nickell, Perraudin, and Varotto (2000), Kav-
vathas (2001), Wilson (1997a), Wilson (1997b)), nor even the effect of prior
ratings history (Behar and Nagpal (1999), Lando and Skødeberg (2002)).
There is, moreover, significant heterogeneity in the short-term failure prob-
abilties of different firms of the same current rating (Kealhofer (2003)).
    We anticipate several types of applications for our work, including (i) the
analysis by a bank of the credit quality of a borrower over various future
potential borrowing periods, for purposes of loan approval and pricing, (ii)
the determination by banks and bank regulators of the appropriate level of
capital to be held by a bank, in light of the credit risk represented by its
loan portfolio, especially given the upcoming Basel II accord, under which
borrower default probabilities are to be introduced for the purpose of deter-
mining the capital to be held as backing for a loan to a given borrower, (iii)
the determination of credit ratings by rating agencies, and (iv) the ability to
shed some light on the macroeconomic links between business-cycle variables
and the failure risks of corporations.
    Absent a model that incorporates the dynamics of the underlying covari-
ates, it seems difficult to extrapolate prior models of one-quarter-ahead or
one-year-ahead default probabilities to longer time horizons. While one could
seperately estimate models of fixed-horizon failure probabilities for each of
various alternative time horizons, it is statistically more efficient to incor-
porate joint consistency conditions for failure probabilities at various time
horizons within one model.
  1
      See, for example, Duffie and Singleton (2003), Chapter 4.


                                             2
   The conditional survival and failure probabilities, p(Xt , s) and q(Xt , s)
respectively, depend on:
    • a parameter vector β determining the dependence of the failure and
      other-exit intensities, Λ(Xt ) and A(Xt ), respectively, on the covariate
      vector Xt , and

    • a parameter vector γ determining the time-series behavior of the un-
      derlying state vector Xt of covariates.
    The doubly-stochastic assumption, stated more precisely in Section 2, is
that, conditional on the paths of the underlying state variables determining
failure and other-exit intensities for all firms, these exit times are the first
event times of independent Poisson processes with the same (conditionally
deterministic) intensity paths.2 In particular, this means that, given the path
of the state-vector process, the merger and failure times of different firms are
conditionally independent.
    A major advantage of the doubly-stochastic formulation is that it al-
lows decoupled maximum-likelihood estimations of β and γ, which can then
be combined to obtain the maximum-likelihood estimators of the survival
and failure probabilities, p(Xt , s) and q(Xt , s), and other properties of the
model, such as probabilities of joint failure of more than one firm. We show
that, because of the doubly-stochastic assumption, the maximum likelihood
estimator of the intensity parameter vector β is the same as that of a con-
ventional competing-risks duration model with time-varying covariates. The
maximum likelihood estimator of the time-series parameter vector γ would
depend of course on the particular specification adopted for the time-series
behavior of the state process X. Our approach is quite flexible in that re-
gard. For examples, we could allow the state process X to have GARCH
volatility behavior, to depend on hidden Markov chain “regimes,” or to have
jump-diffusive behavior. For our specific empirical application to the U.S.
machinery and instrument sector, we have adopted a simple Gaussian vector
auto-regressive specification for the firm-specific leverage variables and the
macroeconomic growth variables, and we show that, in our setting, a con-
ventional maximum-likelihood estimator for the associated parameter vector
γ can be used. A further advantage of this methodology is that it allows
   2
    One must take care in interpreting this characterization when treating the “internal
covariates,” those that are firm-specific and therefore no longer available after exit, as
explained in Section 2.

                                            3
straightforward maximum-likelihood estimation of the term structure of fail-
ure probabilities, by simply substituting the maximum-likelihood estimators
for β and γ into (2). Asymptotic confidence intervals for the term structures
of failure probabilities can then be obtained by the usual “Delta method,”
as explained in Appendix C.
    The doubly-stochastic assumption is overly restrictive in settings for which
failure or another form of exit by one firm could have an important direct
influence on the failure or other-exit intensity of another firm. This influence
would be anticipated to some degree if one firm plays a relatively large role in
the marketplace of another. Tests for this property developed in Das, Duffie,
and Kapadia (2004) are not yet conclusive, with currently available data, as
discussed in Section 3.1. Our empirical results should therefore be treated
with caution.
    In our study of the U.S. industrial machinery and instrument sector be-
tween 1971 and 2001, we find that corporate failure probabilities depend
significantly on both firm leverage and business-cycle covariates. We use
a volatility-corrected measure of leverage, distance to default, that has be-
come a standard default covariate in industry practice (Kealhofer 2003). We
illustrate the degree of dependence of long-horizon failure probabilities on
the time-series behavior of the covariates, principally through the effects of
mean reversion, long-run means, and volatilities of distances to default and
of national income growth.
    Our methods also lead to a calculation at time t of the conditional prob-
ability P ({T ∈ [t, u]} ∪ {q(Xu , s) > q} | Xt) that the failure time T of a given
firm is before some given future time u, or that the firm’s s-year failure prob-
ability at time u will exceed a given level q. This and related calculations
could play a role in credit rating, risk management, and regulatory applica-
tions. The estimated model can be further used to calculate probabilities of
joint failure of groups of firms, or other properties related to failure corre-
lation. In our doubly-stochastic model setting, failure correlation between
firms arises from correlation in their failure intensities due to (i) common
dependence of these intensities on macro-variables and (ii) correlation across
firms of changes in leverage and other firm-specific covariates.
    Our econometric methodology may be useful in other subject areas re-
quiring estimators of multi-period survival probabilities under exit intensities
that depend on covariates with pronounced time-series dynamics. Examples
might include the timing of real options such as technology switch, mort-
gage prepayment, securities issuance, and labor mobility. We are unaware

                                        4
of previously available econometric methodology for multi-period event pre-
diction under stochastic covariates. That is, while there has been extensive
research on multi-period event prediction (for example, baseline-hazard du-
ration models) including default,3 and while there is a separate literature
on event intensity estimation, we are not aware of prior work that estimates
multi-period event probabilities with intensities that depend on stochastic
time-varying covariates.

1.1     Related Literature
A standard structural model of bankruptcy timing assumes that a corpora-
tion fails when its assets drop to a sufficiently low level relative to its liabili-
ties. For example, the prototypical models of Black and Scholes (1973), Mer-
ton (1974), Fisher, Heinkel, and Zechner (1989), and Leland (1994), take the
asset process to be a geometric Brownian motion. In these models, a firm’s
conditional failure probability is completely determined by its distance to
default, which is the number of standard deviations of annual asset growth
by which the current asset level exceeds the firm’s liabilities. This failure
covariate, using market equity data and accounting data for liabilities, has
been adopted in industry practice by Moody’s KMV, a leading provider of
estimates of failure probabilties for essentially all publicly traded firms. (See
Crosbie and Bohn (2002) and Kealhofer (2003).) Based on this theoretical
foundation, it seems natural to include distance to default as a covariate.
    In the context of a standard structural default model of this type, Duffie
and Lando (2001) show that if the distance to default cannot be accurately
measured, then a filtering problem arises, and the failure intensity depends
on the measured distance to default and also on other covariates that may
reveal additional information about the firm’s conditional failure probability.
    More generally, a firm’s financial health may have multiple influences
over time. For example, firm-specific, sector-wide, and macroeconomic state
variables may all influence the evolution of corporate earnings and leverage.
Given the usual benefits of parsimony, the preliminary model of long-horizon
failure probabilities estimated in this paper adopts two failure covariates,
only, distance to default and U.S. personal income growth. (Other macroe-
conomic performance measures could be used, as discussed in Section 3.2.)
   3
   For multi-period default prediction in a setting with constant intensities, see for ex-
ample Philosophov and Philiosophov (2002).



                                            5
Given distance to default, the choice of a second covariate calls for a tradeoff
between variables that are more directly tied to the firm’s marketplace (such
as sector performance measures), and variables that capture information that
is not largely explained by distance to default.
    Prior empirical models of corporate failure probabilities, reviewed by
Jones (1987) and Hillegeist et al. (2003), have relied on many types of covari-
ates, both fixed and time-varying. Prior work has not, however, attempted
to estimate failure probabilities over multiple time periods in a manner that
exploits the time-series behavior of the covariates.
    The first generation of empirical corporate failure analysis originated with
Beaver (1966), Beaver (1968a), Beaver (1968b), and Altman (1968), who
applied multivariate discriminant analysis. Among the covariates in Altman’s
“Z-score” is a measure of leverage, defined as the market value of equity
divided by the book value of total debt. Our distance to default covariate is
essentially a volatility-corrected measure of leverage. In work independent of
ours, Bharath and Shumway (2004) use a standard Cox proportional hazard
model to confirm that distance to default is indeed a dominant covariate,
while still finding some role for additional covariates, as do we.
    A second generation of empirical work is based on qualitative-response
models, such as logit and probit. Among these, Ohlson (1980) used an “O-
score” method in his year-ahead failure prediction model.
    The latest generation of modeling is dominated by duration analysis.
Early in this literature is the work of Lane, Looney, and Wansley (1986) on
bank failure prediction, using time-independent covariates.4 These models
typically apply a Cox proportional-hazard model. Lee and Urrutia (1996)
used a duration model based on a Weibull distribution of failure time. They
compare duration and logit models in forecasting insurer insolvency, finding
that, for their data, a duration model identifies more significant variables
than does the logit model.
    Duration models based on time-varying covariates include those of Mc-
Donald and Van de Gucht (1999), in a model of the timing of high-yield bond
failures and call exercises.5 Related duration analysis by Shumway (2001),
Kavvathas (2001), Chava and Jarrow (2002), and Hillegeist, Keating, Cram,
and Lundstedt (2003) predict bankruptcy.6
  4
    Whalen (1991) and Wheelock and Wilson (2000) also used Cox proportional-hazard
models for bank failure analysis.
  5
    Meyer (1990) used a similar approach in a study of unemployment duration.
  6
    Kavvathas (2001) also analyzes the transition of credit ratings.

                                        6
    Shumway (2001) uses a discrete duration model with time-dependent co-
variates. Computationally, this is equivalent to a multi-period logit model
with an adjusted-standard-error structure. In predicting one-year failure,
Hillegeist, Keating, Cram, and Lundstedt (2003) also exploit a discrete du-
ration model. By taking as a covariate the theoretical probability of failure
implied by the Black-Scholes-Merton’s model, based on distance to default,
Hillegeist, Keating, Cram, and Lundstedt (2003) find, at least in this model
setting, that distance to default does not entirely explain variation in failure
probabilities across firms. Accounting-based and macroeconomic variables
are also relevant. Our results confirm this conclusion for our data, and ex-
tend the analysis to multiple period prediction. Further discussion of the
selection of covariates for corporate failure prediction may be found in Sec-
tion 3.2.
    Moving from the empirical literature on corporate failure prediction to the
statistical methods available for this task, typical econometric treatments of
stochastic intensity models include those of Lancaster (1990) and Kalbfleisch
and Prentice (2002), which provide likelihood functions in settings similar to
ours.7 In their language, our macro-covariates are “external,” and our firm-
specific covariates are “internal,” that is, cease to be generated once a firm
has failed. These sources do not treat large-sample properties, nor indeed
do large-sample properties appear to have been developed in a form suitable
for our application. For example, Berman and Frydman (1999) do provide
asymptotic properties for maximum-likelihood estimators of stochastic inten-
sity models, including a version of Cramèr’s Theorem, but treat only cases
in which the covariate vector Xt is fully external (with known transition dis-
tribution), and in which event arrivals continue to occur, repeatedly, at the
specified parameter-dependent arrival intensity. This clearly does not treat
our setting, for a firm typically disappears once it fails.8
   7
     For other textbook treatments, see Andersen, Borgan, Gill, and Keiding (1992), Miller
(1981), Cox and Isham (1980), Cox and Oakes (1984), Daley and Vere-Jones (1988), and
Therneau and Grambsch (2000).
   8
     For the same reason, the autoregressive conditional duration framework of Engle and
Russell (1998) and Engle and Russell (2002) is not suitable for our setting, for the updating
of the conditional probability of an arrival in the next time period depends on whether
an arrival occured during the previous period, which again does not treat a firm that
disappears once it fails.




                                             7
2         Econometric Model
This section outlines our probabilistic model for corporate survival, and the
estimators that we propose. The following section applies the estimator to
data on the U.S. industrial machinery and instrument sector.

2.1         Conditional Survival and Failure Probabilities
Fixing a probability space (Ω, F , P ) and an information filtration {Gt : t ≥ 0}
satisfying the usual conditions,9 let X = {Xt : t ≥ 0} be a time-homogeneous
Markov process in Rd , for some integer d ≥ 1. The state vector Xt is
a covariate for a given firm’s exit intensities, in the following sense. Let
(M, N) be a doubly-stochastic non-explosive two-dimensional counting pro-
cess driven by X, with intensities α = {αt = A(Xt ) : t ∈ [0, ∞)} for M and
λ = {λt = Λ(Xt ) : t ≥ 0} for N, for some non-negative real-valued measur-
able functions A( · ) and Λ( · ) on Rd . Among other implications, this means
that, conditional on the path of X, the counting processes M and N are
independent Poisson processes with conditionally deterministic time-varying
intensities, α and λ, respectively. For details on these definitions, one may
refer to Karr (1991) and Appendix I of Duffie (2001).
    We suppose that a given firm exits (and ceases to be observable) at τ =
inf{t : Mt + Nt > 0}, which is the earlier of the first event time of N,
corresponding to failure, and the first event time of M, corresponding to exit
for some other reason. In our application to the U.S. industrial machinery
and instrument sector, the portion of exits for reasons other than failure is
far too substantial to be ignored.
    The main idea is that, so long as the firm has not exited for some reason,
its failure intensity is Λ(Xt ) and its intensity of exit for other reasons is
A(Xt ).
    It is important to allow the state vector Xt to include firm-specific failure
covariates that cease to be observable when the firm exits at τ . For sim-
plicity, we suppose that Xt = (Ut , Yt ), where Ut is firm-specific and Yt is
macroeconomic. Thus, we consider conditioning by an observer whose in-
formation is given by the smaller filtration {Ft : t ≥ 0}, where Ft is the
σ-algebra generated by

                       {(Us , Ms , Ns ) : s ≤ min(t, τ )} ∪ {Ys : s ≤ t}.
    9
        See Protter (1990) for technical definitions.

                                                 8
   We now verify that the observer’s time-t conditional probabilities p(Xt , s)
and q(Xt , s) of survival for s years, and of failure within s years, respectively,
are as shown in (1) and (2). The firm’s failure time is the stopping time
T = inf{t : Nt > 0, Mt = 0}.

Proposition 1. On the event {τ > t} of survival to t, the Ft -conditional
probability of survival to time t + s is
                           P (τ > t + s | Ft) = p(Xt , s),
where p(Xt , s) is given by (1), and the Ft -conditional probability of failure by
t + s is
                          P (T < t + s | Ft) = q(Xt , s),
where q(Xt , s) is given by (2).

Proof: We begin by conditioning instead on the larger information set Gt ,
and later show that this does not affect the calculation.
   We first calculate that, on the event {τ > t},
      P (τ > t + s | Gt ) = p(Xt , s),                                         (3)
and
      P (T < t + s | Gt ) = q(Xt , s).                                         (4)
The first calculation (3) is standard, using the fact that M + N is a doubly-
stochastic counting process with intensity α + λ. For the second calculation
(4), we use the fact that, conditional on the path of X, the (improper)
density, evaluated at any time z > t, of the failure time T , exploiting the
X-conditional independence of M and N is, with the standard abuse of
notation,
      P (T ∈ dz | X) = P (inf{u : Nu =
                                     6 Nt } ∈ dz, Mz = Mt | X)
                     = P (inf{u : Nu =6 Nt } ∈ dz | X)P (Mz = Mt | X)
                               Rz                          Rz
                        = e−    t   λ(u) du
                                              λ(z) dz e−   t    α(u) du
                               Rz
                        = e−    t
                                    (α(u)+λ(u)) du
                                                     λ(z) dz.
From the doubly-stochastic property, conditioning also on Gt has no effect
on this calculation, so
                                    Z t+s R
                                             z
      P (T ∈ [t, t + s] | Gt , X) =      e− t (α(u)+λ(u)) du λ(z) dz.
                                       t

                                               9
Now, taking the expectation of this conditional probability given Gt only,
using the law of iterated expectations, leaves (4).
    On the event {τ > t}, the conditioning information in Ft and Gt coincide.
That is, every event contained by {τ > t} that is in Gt is also in Ft . The
result follows.
    One can calculate p(Xt , s) and q(Xt , s) explicitly in certain settings, for
example if the state vector X is affine and the exit intensities have affine
dependence on X, as shown in various cases by Duffie, Pan, and Singleton
(2000), Duffie, Filipović, and Schachermayer (2003). In our eventual applica-
tion, our specification of the dependence of the intensities on Xt is non-linear,
which calls for numerical solutions of p(Xt , s) and q(Xt , s), as we shall see
in Section 3. Fortunately, this numerical calculation is done after obtaining
maximum-likelihood estimates of the parameters of the model.

2.2    Maximum Likelihood Estimator
We turn to the problem of inference from data.
    For each of n firms, we let Ti = inf{t : Nit > 0, Mit = 0} denote the
failure time of firm i, and let Si = inf{t : Mit > 0, Nit = 0} denote the
censoring time for firm i due to other forms of exit. We let Uit be the firm-
specific vector of variables that are observable for firm i until its exit time
τi = min(Si , Ti ), and let Yt denote the vector of environmental variables
(such as business-cycle variables) that are observable at all times. We let
Xit = (Uit , Yt ), and assume, for each i, that Xi = {Xit : t ≥ 0} is a Markov
process.(This means that, given Yt , the transition probabilities of Uit do not
depend on Ujt for j 6= i, a simplifying assumption.) Because, in our current
implementation of the model, we observe these covariates Xit only quarterly,
we take Xit = Xi,k(t) = Zi,k(t) , where k(t) denotes the last (integer) discrete
time period before t, and where Zi is the time-homogeneous discrete-time
Markov process of covariates for firm i. This means that Xi is constant
between periodic observations, a form of time-inhomogeneity that involves
only a slight extension of our basic theory of Section 2.1. We continue to
measure time continuously, however, because we wish to allow the use of
information associated with the intra-period timing of exits.
    Extending our notation from Section 2.1, for all i, we let Λ(Xit , β) and
A(Xit , β) denote the failure and other-exit intensities of firm i, where β is a
parameter vector, common to all firms, to be estimated. This homogeneity
across firms allows us to exploit both time-series and cross-sectional data,

                                       10
and is traditional in duration models of failure such as Shumway (2001).
This leads to inaccurate estimators to the degree that the underlying firms
are actually heterogeneous in this regard. We do, however, allow for hetero-
geneity across firms with respect to the probability transition distributions
of the Markov covariate processes Z1 , . . . , Zn of the n firms. For example,
some firms may have different target leverage ratios than others.
    We assume that the exit-counting process (M1 , N1 , . . . , Mn , Nn ) of the
n firms is doubly-stochastic driven by X = (X1 , . . . , Xn ), in the sense of
Section 2.1, so that the exit times τ1 , . . . , τn of the n firms are X-conditionally
independent, as discussed in Section 1. There is some important loss of
generality here, for this implies that the exit of one firm has no direct impact
on the failure intensity of another firm. Their failure times are correlated
only insofar as their exit intensities are correlated.
    The econometrician’s information set Ft at time t is that generated by

                     It = {Ys : s ≤ t} ∪ J1t ∪ J2t · · · ∪ Jnt ,

where
               Jit = {(1Si <s , 1Ti <s , Uis ) : t0i ≤ s ≤ min(Si , Ti , t)}
is the information set for firm i, and where t0i is the time of first appearance
of firm i in the data set. For simplicity, we take t0i to be at the end of a
discrete time period and deterministic, but our results would extend to treat
left-censoring of each firm at a stopping time, under suitable conditional
independence assumptions. It would be enough, for example, that the left-
censoring times are (Ft )-stopping times, which leaves our likelihood functions
unaffected.
     In order to simplify the estimation of the time-series model of covariates,
we suppose that the environmental discrete-time covariate process {Y1 , Y2, . . .}
is itself a time-homogeneous (discrete-time) Markov process.
     Conditional on the current combined covariate vector Zk = (Z1k , . . . , Znk ),
we suppose that Zk+1 has a joint density f ( · | Zk ; γ), for some parameter vec-
tor γ to be estimated. Despite our prior Markov assumption on the covariate
process {Zik : k ≥ 1} for each firm i, this allows for conditional correla-
tion between Ui,k+1 and Uj,k+1 given (Yk , Uik , Ujk ). We emphasize that this
transition density f ( · ) is not conditioned on survivorship.
     As a notational convenience, whenever K ⊂ L ⊂ {1, . . . , n} we let
fKL( · | Yk , {Uik : i ∈ L}; γ) denote the joint density of (Yk+1 , {Ui,k+1 : i ∈
K}) given Yk and {Uik : i ∈ L}, which is a property of (in effect, a marginal

                                            11
of) f ( · | Zk ; γ). In our eventual application, we will further assume that
f ( · | z; γ) is a joint-normal density, which makes the marginal density func-
tion fKL ( · | y, {ui : i ∈ L}) an easily-calculated joint normal.
     For additional convenient notation, let R(k) = {i : τi > k} denote the
set of firms that survive to at least period k, let Ũk = {Uik : i ∈ R(k)},
Si (t) = min(t, Si ), S(t) = (S1 (t), . . . , Sn (t)), and likewise define Ti (t) and
T (t). Under our doubly-stochastic assumption, the likelihood for the infor-
mation set It is

      L(It ; γ, β) = L(Ũ, Y ; γ) × L(S(t), T (t); Y, Ũ, β),                           (5)

where
                          k(t)
                          Y
         L(Ũ, Y ; γ) =          fR(k+1),R(k) (Yk+1, Ũk+1 | Yk , Ũk ; γ),             (6)
                          k=0

and
                                              n
                                              Y
         L(S(t), T (t); Y, Ũ; β) =                 Git (β),                            (7)
                                              i=1

for
                                                                                  !
                                    Z     Hi
         Git (β) = exp −                       (A(Zi,k(s) ; β) + Λ(Zi,k(s) ; β)) ds
                                        t0i

                                                                                   
                          × 1Hi = t + A(Zi,Si ; β)1Si (t)<t + Λ(Zi,Ti ; β)1Ti (t)<t ,

where Hi = min(Si (t), Ti (t)) = min(τi , t).
    Because the logarithm of the joint likelihood (5) is the sum of separate
terms involving γ and β respectively, we can decompose the overall maximum
likelihood estimation problem into the separate problems

         sup L(Ũ, Y ; γ)                                                               (8)
          γ


and

         sup L(S, T ; Y, Ũ, β).                                                        (9)
          β



                                                        12
   Further simplification is obtained by taking the parameter vector β de-
termining intensity dependence on covariates to be of the decoupled form
β = (µ, ν), with

      λit = Λ(Xit ; µ);                  αit = A(Xit ; ν).                                 (10)

(This involves a slight abuse of notation.) This means that the form of de-
pendence of the failure intensity on the covariate vector Xit does not restrict
the form of the dependence of the other-exit intensity, and vice versa. An
examination of the structure of (9) reveals that this decoupling assumption
allows problem (9) to be further decomposed into the pair of problems
            n         R Hi
            Y     −              Λ(Xi (u);µ) du
                          t0
      sup         e        i                      (1Hi 6= Ti + Λ(Xi (Ti ); µ)1Hi =Ti )     (11)
       µ
            i=1

and
            n             R Hi
            Y         −          A(Xi (u);ν) du
                           t0
      sup         e         i                     (1Hi 6= Si + A(Xi (Si ); ν)1Hi =Si ) .   (12)
       ν
            i=1

We have the following result, which summarizes our parameter-fitting algo-
rithm.

Proposition 2. Solutions γ ∗ and β ∗ of the respective maximum-likelihood
problems (8) and (9) collectively form a solution to the overall maximum-
likelihood problem

      sup L(It ; γ, β).                                                                    (13)
      γ,β

Under the parameter-decoupling assumption (10), solutions µ∗ and ν ∗ to the
maximum-likelihood problems (11) and (12), respectively, form a solution
β ∗ = (µ∗ , ν ∗ ) to problem (9).

In our particular empirical application, as explained in Section 3, each of
these optimization problems is solved numerically. The decomposition of
the MLE optimization problem given by Proposition 2 allows a significant
degree of tractability that is crucial for numerically feasible evaluation of the
likelihood and estimation of the parameters.
    Under the usual technical regularity conditions, given a maximum-likelihood
estimator (MLE) θ̂ for some parameter θ, the maximium-likelihood estimator

                                                          13
(MLE) of h(θ), for some smooth function h( · ), is h(θ̂). Thus, under these
technical conditions, the maximum likelihood estimators of the survival prob-
ability q(Xt , s) and the failure probability p(Xt , s) are obtained by (1) and
(2) respectively, using the maximum likelihood estimators for β = (µ, ν) and
γ to determine the probability distributions underlying these expectations.
    Under further technical conditions, an MLE is consistent, efficient, and
asymptically normal, in the sense that the difference between the maximum-
likelihood estimator and the “true” data-generating parameter, scaled by the
square root of the number of observations, converges weakly to a vector whose
distribution is joint normal with mean zero and a well-known covariance
matrix (Amemiya 1985). In our case, it is apparent that a consistency result
would require that both the number n of firms and the number k(t) of periods
of data become large in this sense. We defer precise consistency conditions
to future research.


3     Empirical Analysis
This section describes our data set, specific parameterizations of our covari-
ate processes and intensity models, our parameter estimates, some of their
properties, and some of the substantive conclusions regarding the behavior
of conditional term structures of failure hazard rates. We are particularly
interested in the sensitivity of these term structures of failure hazard rates
to firm-specific and macroeconomic variables.

3.1    Data
We use three main data sources. Quarterly balance sheets and income state-
ments for each firm in our sector are from Compustat. Stock-market capi-
talization data are from the Center of Research in Security Prices (CRSP).
Both of these databases are available online from Wharton Research Data
Services. The third source is the National Economic Accounts of The Bureau
of Economic Analysis, from which we get quarterly business-cycle variables.
    Our target set of firms consists of those publicly-traded companies that
are recorded in the Compustat industrial database as a member of the in-
dustrial machinery and instrument sector (2-digit SIC code 35). Limiting
our focus to one sector mitigates some, but clearly not all, of the indus-
try effects documented in Chava and Jarrow (2002). This particular sector is


                                      14
chosen mainly for the fact that among all sectors, it has the largest number of
bankruptcies recorded in the Compustat database during our sample period,
1971 to 2001. Also, failures in this sector are not concentrated within a short
time period, as is the case, for examples, in the banking and oil-and-gas sec-
tors. A concentration of bankuptcies within a short time period would limit
our ability to identify dependence of failure intensities on macroeconomic
variables.
    Specifically, we include all firms of this sector for which the data necessary
to construct our covariates are available from Compustat and CRSP, with
exceptions to be noted. In all, 870 such firms existed during our sample
period, of which 332 remain “active” as public firms, as of the end of our
sample period, the end of 2001.
    Of the remaining 538 firms, 70 failed, filing for bankruptcy under Chapter
11 or Chapter 7 of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Coverage by Compustat of
the remaining 468 firms was discontinued for other reasons, such as merger,
acquisition, leveraged buyout, privatization, or ceasing to provide data.10
Exits are recorded by month in the Compustat annual file (item AFTNT33
and item AFTNT34), and are assumed for purposes of our estimation to
occur at the end of the relevant month. Approximately 80% of the non-
failure exits in our sample were due to merger and acquisition activities.
    Among our sample of 870 firms, 50 firms existed before the January, 1971
beginning of our sample period. As explained earlier, start dates are non-
informative in our model. That is, with our probabilistic specification of
exit times, “left-censoring” does not call for an adjustment to the likelihood
function. In practice, however, there is likely to be some influence on failure
intensities, given our other covariates, on survival time. One might estimate
this effect with a baseline hazard rate, which would call for a left-censorship
adjustment for the firms that existed before our sample period. There may
also be calendar-time effects that we do not capture, for example due to
changes over time in the costs of raising new capital, as suggested by Fama
and French (2004).
    Our sample period begins at the first quarter of 1971, and ends11 at the
fourth quarter of 2001. Although CRSP stock-price data are available from
1925, and Compustat quarterly coverage of public firms begins in 1962, only
  10
    The alternative forms of exit can be determined from Compustat item AFTNT35.
  11
    We include Compustat and CRSP variables from the fourth quarter of 1970 in order
to estimate the failure intensity during the first quarter of 1971. Likewise, lagged-quarter
variables are used to fit the covariate time-series.


                                            15
since 1972 has Compustat reported quarterly data on short-term liabilities,
a relatively important determinant of our distance-to-default covariate.12 In
any case, of the 1, 283 failures in all industries recorded in Compustat, only
9 are reported to have occured before 1971. Our decision to include only
post-1971 data was also followed by Shumway (2001) and Vassalou and Xing
(2003).
    The doubly-stochastic assumption is overly restrictive in the presence of
strong contagion effects, by which failure by one firm leads directly to a
significant increase in the likelihood of failure of other firms. This would
be the case, for example, if failure by a leading firm in an industry causes
a significant weakening of other firms in the industry, above and beyond
the default correlation induced by common and correlated covariates, which
we have already incorporated within our formulation. In the U.S. machinery
and instruments sector during our study period, there were normally at most
three to five corporate failures in a year, and we have no evidence suggest-
ing significant direct failure contagion. Das, Duffie, and Kapadia (2004) test
for the doubly-stochastic property among all U.S. industries. While they
reject the joint hypothesis of correctly measured default probabilities and
the doubly-stochastic property, they provide some evidence that the default
probability data that they obtained from Moodys, based on only firm-specific
covariates, may have been responsible for this rejection, given the missed
correlating effects of macroeconomic variables. Moreover, they test for, and
find no evidence of, clustering of defaults in excess of that suggested by the
doubly-stochastic property. In summary, while the doubly-stochastic prop-
erty is without doubt restrictive and ignores some contagion effects that are
likely to be present, there is as yet no empirical evidence suggesting that it
leads to significant distortions in default probability estimates. For our pur-
pose of consistent and efficient multi-period default probability estimation,
moreover, the doubly-stochastic property provides a framework that would
not be easily relaxed without significant loss of tractability.13
  12
     The quality of pre-1971 Compustat data seems somewhat unreliable. For example,
pre-1971 liability data for many companies are missing.
  13
     With the large number of mergers and other exits in our data, one must also consider
the relevance of the doubly-stochastic assumption for merger and acquisition timing. We
leave this question for future consideration.




                                           16
3.2    Covariates
We have examined the dependence of estimated failure and other-exit in-
tensities on several types of firm-specific, sector-wide, and macroeconomic
variables. These include:

  1. Distance to default, which, roughly speaking, is the number of standard
     deviations of quarterly asset growth by which current assets exceed a
     standard measure of current liabilities. As explained in Section 1.1, this
     covariate has theoretical underpinnings in the Black-Scholes-Merton
     structural model of default probabilities. Our method of construction
     of this covariate, based on market equity data and Compustat book
     liability data, is along the lines of that used by Vassalou and Xing
     (2003), Crosbie and Bohn (2002), and Hillegeist, Keating, Cram, and
     Lundstedt (2003). Details are given in Appendix A.

  2. Personal income growth. As a measure of macroeconomic performance,
     we use U.S. personal income growth. Data on quarterly national per-
     sonal income (seasonally adjusted) is obtained from the Bureau of Eco-
     nomic Analysis’ National Economic Accounts database. Personal in-
     come growth is measured in terms of quarterly percentage changes. Our
     selection of personal income growth as a representative macroeconomic
     covariate is pragmatic; we found it to be more contemporaraneously
     and significantly correlated with failure rates than GDP growth rates.
     While one-quarter-lagged GDP growth rate has a significant and neg-
     ative role as a failure covariate if used as the sole macroeconomic co-
     variate, it has no significant role if used together with personal income
     growth. Prior studies find correlation between macroeconomic condi-
     tions and failure, using a variety of macroeconomic variables. (See
     Allen and Saunders (2002) for a survey.) For example, McDonald and
     Van de Gucht (1999) used quarterly industrial production growth in
     the U.S. as a covariate for high-yield bond failure. Hillegeist, Keat-
     ing, Cram, and Lundstedt (2003) exploit the national rate of corporate
     bankruptcies, in a baseline-hazard-rate model of default. Fons (1991),
     Blume and Keim (1991), and Jonsson and Fridson (1996) document
     that aggregate failure rates tend to be high in the downturn of business
     cycles. Pesaran, Schuermann, Treutler, and Weiner (2003) use a com-
     prehensive set of country-specific macro variables to estimate the effect
     of macroeconomic shocks in one region on the credit risk of a global

                                     17
       loan portfolio. Keenan, Sobehart, and Hamilton (1999) and Helwege
       and Kleiman (1997) model the forecasting of aggregate year-ahead U.S.
       default rates on corporate bonds, using, among other covariates, credit
       rating, age of bond, and various macroeconomic variables, including
       industrial production, interest rates, trailing default rates, aggregate
       corporate earnings, and indicators for recession.

   3. Sector earnings performance, measured as the sector average across
      firms of the ratios of earnings to assets. When used as the only environ-
      mental covariate, sector earnings performance is indeed a statistically
      significant covariate for failure intensity (although not for other-exit
      intensity). When included as an additional covariate together with dis-
      tance to default and personal income growth, however, sector earnings
      performance does not appear to play a significant role.

   4. Firm earnings performance, defined as the ratio of net income (Com-
      pustat item 69) to total assets (item 44). In contrast to distance to de-
      fault, this earnings covariate comes solely from accounting data. Since
      there is a lag in recording a firm’s accounting data, we lag earnings by
      one period in order to ensure that it is observable at the beginning of
      the quarter. (Because of this, firms enter our study only at the second
      quarter after their first appearance in our database.) When there are
      occassionally missing data for net income, we substitute values from the
      most immediately available past quarters. Earnings is complementary
      to distance to default, and a traditional predictor for bankruptcy since
      Altman (1968). When not appearing together with distance to default,
      earnings is a significant failure covariate in both logit and duration
      models, as shown by Shumway (2001).14 Our definition of earnings is
      that used by Zmijewski (1984), and close to the profitability covariates
      defined by Altman (1993), the ratio of retained earnings to total assets,
      and the ratio of earnings before interest and taxes to total assets.

   5. Firm Size. We measure firm size as the logarithm of a firm’s book
      value of total assets (Compustat item 44). Firm size may control for
      unobserved heterogeneity across firms, since big firms and small firms
      may have different market power, management strategies, or borrowing
  14
    Another robustly significant factor according to Shumway’s paper is leverage ratio,
but that has been incorporated in distance to default


                                          18
                      Table 1: Covariate summary statistics

 Covariate                       median    mean    st. dev.     min      max    no. obs.
 Distance to default               3.74     4.40     3.67      −3.89    73.50    28,612
 Firm size                         4.06     4.30     1.95       0.30    12.28    28,612
 Firm earnings performance         0.01    −0.01     0.12     −12.78     1.19    28,612
 Sector earnings performance       1.39     1.30     0.57      −1.49     2.65       124
 Personal income growth            1.74     1.88     0.95      −1.38     4.39       124



       ability, all of which may affect the risk of failure. For example, it might
       be easier for a big firm to re-negotiate with its creditors to postpone the
       repayment of debt, or to raise new funds to pay the old debt. In a “too-
       big-to-fail” sense, firm size may negatively influence failure intensity.
       The statistical significance of size as a determinant of failure risk has
       been documented in Shumway (2001).15

   Some summary statistics of the covariates that we use are reported in
Table 1. While Appendix B reports estimates of a failure-intensity model
incorporating all of the covariates shown in Table 1, in order to maintain
a parsimonious multi-period model our estimator of the term structure of
conditional failure hazard rates is based on a two-covariate model, including
only personal income growth and, firm by firm, distance to default.


3.3     Covariate Time-Series Models
In this subsection, we specify particular parametric time-series models for the
covariate processes that we use to estimate term structures of conditional
failure probabilities, and then provide the associated maximum-likelihood
estimates.
    With our current formulation, we have an extremely high-dimensional
state-vector, consisting of one macroeconomic covariate, personal income
growth, Yt , and the distance to default, Dit , for each firm i of the n firms that
existed during our sample period, of which there are 870. Unrestricted by
additional structure, this presents an unwieldy time-series model to estimate.
  15
    In Shumway (2001), size is defined as the logarithm of a firm’s market capitalization,
relative to the total size of the NYSE and AMEX market.


                                           19
After preliminary examination of various feasibly estimated alternatives, we
have opted for a simple specification in which each of Yt , D1t , . . . , Dnt is a uni-
variate first-order auto-regressive Gaussian process, allowing for correlation
among their innovations.
   Specifically, personal income growth in quarter k, Yk , is assumed to satisfy
         Yk+1 − Yk = κY (θY − Yk ) + σY k+1 ,                                    (14)
where 1 , 2 , . . . is an independent sequence of standard normal variables, and
φ = (θY , κY , σY ) is a parameter vector to be estimated. Here, θY is the long-
run mean, κY is the mean-reversion rate, and σY is the standard deviation
of the innovations.
    Similarly, for each firm i, for the quarters in which this firm appears in
our sample,
         Di,k+1 − Dik = κD (θDi − Dik ) + vwi,k+1,                                (15)
where {wik : k ≥ 1} is an independent sequence of standard normals, κD is a
mean-reversion parameter common to all firms, v is an innovations standard-
deviation parameter common to all firms, and θDi is a long-run mean16 pa-
rameter that is specific to firm i. The parameters v and κD characterize
the degree of volatility and mean reversion in this leverage-related variable.
Volatility arises from uncertainty in earnings performance and in the revalu-
ation of assets and liabilities. Mean-reversion arises from leverage targeting,
by which corporations commonly pay out dividends and other forms of distri-
butions when they achieve a sufficiently low degree of leverage, and conversely
attempt to raise capital and retain earnings to a higher degree when their
leverage introduces financial distress or business inflexibility, as modeled by
Leland (1998) and Collin-Dufresne and Goldstein (2001). We assume homo-
geneity of κD and v across the sector, as we do not have a-priori reasons
to assume that different firms in the same sector revert to their targeted
volatility-adjusted leverages differently from one another, and also in order
to maintain a parsimonious model in the face of limited time-series data on
each firm. (Our Monte Carlo tests confirm substantial small-sample bias of
MLE estimators for firm-by-firm mean reversion parameters.)
    A key question is how to empirically model the targeted distance to de-
fault, θDi of firm i. Despite the arguments that swayed us to assume homo-
geneity across firms of the mean-reversion and volatility parameters κD and
  16
       This is the long-run mean ignoring the effect of survivorship.

                                              20
v, our preliminary analysis showed that applying the same assumption to
the targeted distance to default parameter θDi caused estimated term struc-
tures of future failure probabilities to rise dramatically for firms that had
consistently maintained low failure probabilities during our sample period.
Perhaps some firms derive reputational benefits from low distress risk, or have
firm-specific costs of exposure to financial distress. In the end, we opted to
estimate θDi firm by firm. As a long-run-mean parameter is challenging to
pin down statistically in samples of our size, the standard errors in our es-
timates of θDi are responsible for a significant contribution to the standard
errors of our estimated term structures of future failure probabilities.
    After specifiying joint normality for the innovations w1k , . . . , wnk and k ,
we tested for, and rejected at conventional confidence levels, positive corre-
lation between wik and k , at least when that correlation is restricted to be
common across all firms. While it is somewhat counter to our original intu-
ition that firms’ distances to default and national personal income growth do
not show significantly positive correlation, the failure of this correlation to ap-
pear significantly in our sample may be due to mis-specification, for example
in the manner in which correlation arises (perhaps there are substantial lag
effects), or in the assumed homogeneity of correlation across different firms.
In any case, we adopt a model in which  is independent of w = (w1 , . . . , wn ).
    As for the correlation between wi and wj , we again adopted a simple
homogeneous structure under which
                    √
       wik = rzk + 1 − r 2 uik ,                                               (16)

where u1k , . . . , unk and zk are independent standard normals, and r is a con-
stant, so that corr (wik , wjk ) = r 2 whenever i 6= j, and corr(wik , wj` ) = 0 for
k 6= `.
    We estimated the time-series parameter vector

                   γ = (κY , θY , σY , κD , v, r, θD1 , θD2 , . . . , θDn )0

by maximum likelihood. By independence, the sub-vector φ = (κY , θY , σY )0
can be estimated separately from the sub-vector ξ = (κD , v, r, θD1 , θD2 , . . . , θDn )0 ,
whose high dimension (873 coordinates) required special iterative numerical
treatment.
    With quarterly data on personal income growth from 1971 to 2001, the



                                              21
MLE estimate of φ is:
                          
           θ̂Y        1.8901
    φ̂ =  κ̂Y  =  0.6524  ,                                                   (17)
           σ̂Y        0.8888
with asymptotic covariance matrix estimate
                                          
              0.0076    0.0002 −0.0000
     Σ̂φ =  0.0002     0.0156 −0.0001  .                                        (18)
             −0.0000 −0.0001 0.0033
   Using notation similar to that of Section 2.2, for the firms’ distance-to-
default processes, the MLE of ξ = (κD , v, r, θD1 , θD2 , . . . , θDn )0 is obtained by
maximizing the joint likelihood
                 Y
      L(D; ξ) =      fR(k+1),R(k) (D̃k+1 | D̃k ; ξ).                               (19)
                   k

    The likelihood fR(k+1),R(k) ( · | D̃k ; ξ) is the density of a vector of m(k)
joint-normal random variables with mean vector wk and covariance matrix
Ωk , where m(k) is the number of firms (indexed as firm k(1) through firm
k(m)) existing in both periods k and period k + 1. We have
                                                 
                θDk(1) κD + (1 − κD )Dk(1)k
             θDk(2) κD + (1 − κD )Dk(2)k 
      wk =                  ..                                              (20)
                                                 
                                                  
                             .                   
               θDk(m) κD + (1 − κD )Dk(m)k
and
                        r2   r2          r2
                                           
                 1                 ···
                 r2     1    r2    ···   r2 
      Ωk = v 2 
               
                ..
                                                    .                            (21)
                       ...   ..   ....   .. 
                 r2     r2   r2    ···   1 m(k)×m(k)
   The MLE estimate of the common-parameter vector (κD , v, r)0 is
                      
       κ̂D       0.1185
      v̂  =  0.9657  .                                                        (22)
        r̂       0.2684
Because the asymptotic covariance matrix for ξˆ is of dimension 873 × 873, we
report in Appendix C only the portion relevant to the parameters (θ̂Di , κ̂D , v̂, r̂)
associated with an example firm.

                                           22
3.4     Failure and Other-Exit Intensity
As for the failure and other-exit intensity parameterizations, we take
       Λ((Yk , Dik ); µ) = exp (µ0 + µ1 Yk + µ2 Dik )                              (23)
       A((Yk , Dik ); ν) = exp (ν0 + ν1 Yk + ν2 Dik ) ,                            (24)
respectively, for parameter vectors µ = (µ0 , µ1 , µ2 ) and ν = (ν0 , ν1 , ν2 ) com-
mon to all firms. The sample relationship between distance to default and
failure frequency, shown in Figure 9 Appendix A suggests that the assumed
form of exponential dependence of failure intensity on distance to default is
at least reasonable.
    The likelihood maximization problems (11) and (12), with parameteri-
zations (23) and (24), are solved numerically using a BFGS quasi-Newton
method, based on a mixed quadratic-and-cubic line-search procedure. We
have tried a range of alternative initial parameter choices to mitigate the
risk of achieving only local maxima. In most cases, the search algorithm
achieved near convergence within fifteen iterations. The intensity parameter-
vector estimates, µ̂ and ν̂, and their estimated asymptotic standard errors17
are reported in Table 2. The associated asymptotic covariance matrices are
reported in Appendix C.
    Parameter estimates for failure intensity are reported in the first column
of Table 2. Consistent with the Black-Scholes-Merton model of default, the
estimated failure intensity is monotonically decreasing in distance to default.
(The estimated standard error implies statistical significance at conventional
confidence levels.) For example, consider for illustration a firm whose cur-
rent failure intensity is 100 basis points (1%) per quarter. Noting that the
logarithm of the failure intensity is modeled as linear with respect to the co-
variates, we see from Table 2 that the estimated marginal sensitivity of this
firm’s failure intensity is approximately a 0.44% increase in quarterly failure
intensity per unit reduction in distance to default, and an estimated 0.46% in-
crease in quarterly failure intensity per 1% reduction in U.S. personal income
growth. As we shall see in Section 3.5, while the magnitude of the impacts
of these two covariates on immediate failure likelihoods are comparable, the
conditional likelihood of failure more than 1 year ahead is estimated to have
  17
    Standard error estimates, shown in parentheses, are asymptotic standard errors ob-
tained from Fisher’s information matrix, associated with (9). These asymptotic estimates
are within about 1% of bootstrap estimates of finite-sample standard errors obtained by
independent resampling firms with replacement.

                                          23
Table 2: Parameter estimates for exit intensities (with standard errors shown
in parentheses)

            Covariate             Failure intensity   Other-exit intensity
            Constant              µ̂0      −4.2017    ν̂0         −3.9855
                                           (0.2465)               (0.1254)
            Personal income       µ̂1      −0.4597    ν̂1         −0.1711
            growth (percent)               (0.1382)               (0.0564)
            Distance to default   µ̂2      −0.4411    ν̂2           0.0137
                                           (0.0592)               (0.0129)




greater sensitivity with respect to normalized shocks to distance to default
than it does to normalized shocks to personal income growth, due to the
relatively greater time-series persistence of shocks to distance to default.
    With regard to the important roles of both firm-specific leverage and
macroeconomic performance for short-term failure probabilities, our results
are generally consistent with the prior literature, although we use somewhat
different covariates and methods. In particular, distance to default does not
on its own determine conditional failure probabilities, as it would in the
Black-Scholes-Merton model. Of course, it is conceivable that covariate mea-
surement error, small-sample noise, and mis-specification could have masked
the true role of distance to default as a potentially more powerful covariate.
Given the limits of empirical modeling of corporate failure prediction, how-
ever, it seems prudent to incorporate additional covariates beyond distance
to default.
    On average across the firms in our study, we attribute approximately 21%
of the variation (sample variance) of a firm’s failure intensity to variation of
personal income growth, 74% to variation in the firm’s distance to default,
and another 5% to covariation between these two covariates.
    The second column of Table 2 reports parameter estimates, and estimates
of their asymptotic standard errors, for the dependence of other-exit intensity
on the covariates. Distance to default does not pass a conventional test of
significance as a determinant of the arrival intensity of other exits (most
of which, about 80% of those in our sample, were mergers or acquisitions).
Personal income growth, however, does appear to play a significant role in
the intensity of other exits. (We are not aware of other econometric work on


                                         24
the prediction of merger or acquisition.)
   As a rough diagnostic of the reasonableness of the overall fit of the model,
we compared the actual failure rate in our sample, 0.24% (70 firms out of
28,612 firm-quarters) with the average model-implied expected failure rate
during the study period,
      PT −1 P                        
                             −λ̂i (k)
         k=0   i∈R(k) 1 − e
             PT P                       = 0.23%,                           (25)
               t=0   i∈R(k) 1

where R(k) is the risk set at the beginning of quarter k, that is the set of firms
operating at quarter k, and λ̂i (k) is the estimated failure intensity of firm i at
quarter k. The denominator of (25) is, as for the actual failure rate, merely
the sample size. We found that the incidence of default in reasonably sized
holdout periods to be too small to allow meaningful judgements regarding
out-of-sample performance.
     Appendix B reports an estimated model of failure and other-exit intensi-
ties that is augmented with two additional covariates: firm-level accounting
earnings and firm size. Adding these covariates does not lead to significant
changes, from the basic two-covariate model reported in Table 2, in the coef-
ficients representing the dependence of failure intensity on distance to default
and personal income growth. (It is perhaps noteworthy, however, that with
the addition of earnings and size covariates, the dependence of other-exit in-
tensity on distance to default becomes statistically significant at conventional
confidence levels.)
     In the end, we have opted to use the basic two-covariate model for es-
timation of term structures of conditional hazard rates. The four-covariate
model does not offer a better average fit (for example, the associated average
expected failure probability of the four-covariate model, 0.20no closer than
the 0.23% estimate of the basic model to the sample failure rate of 0.24%).
Firm size and earnings, moreover, are intricately structurally linked in their
time-series behavior with distance to default, and incorporating the essence
of these structural links into a time-series model for the four covariates seems
fraught with mis-specification risk, not to mention loss of parsimony.18
   18
      See Chava and Jarrow (2002) for additional discussion of the relative importance of
firm-specific covariates.




                                           25
3.5     Term Structures of Failure Hazards
We are now in a position to obtain maximum-likelihood estimates, by firm,
of the conditional survival and failure probabilities, (1) and (2), for each fu-
ture time horizon. For the i-th firm in our sample surviving to a given time
t, these conditional probabilities, denoted p(Yt , Dit , s; ψi ) and q(Yt , Dit , s; ψi )
respectively, depend on the parameter vector ψi = (µ, ν, φ, κD , v, θDi ) as-
sociated with firm i. Under standard technical conditions, the maximum-
likelihood estimators of these conditional probabilities at time horizon s are
p(Yt , Dit , s; ψ̂i ) and q(Yt , Dit , s; ψ̂i ) respectively, where ψ̂i is the maximum-
likelihood estimator of ψi .
    In order to illustrate the results more meaningfully, we will report the
estimated probability density qs (Xt , s; ψ̂i ) (partial of q( · ) with respect to
time horizon s) of the failure time,19 and the estimated failure hazard rate

                                qs (Yt , Dit , s; ψ̂i )
       H(Yt, Dit , s; ψ̂i ) =                             .                             (26)
                                p(Yt, Dit , s; ψ̂i )

    We emphasize that this failure hazard rate at time horizon s conditions on
survival to time s from both failure and from other forms of exit. (The total-
exit hazard rate is, notationally suppressing all arguments of the survival
function p( · ) except for the time horizon s, given as usual by −ps (s)/p(s).)
    As an illustration, we fix a particular time t, the end of our sample period
at the fourth quarter of 2001, fix a particular firm, General Binding Corpora-
tion (GBC), calculate GBC’s estimated conditional term structure of failure
hazard rates, and show how that term structure responds to changes to the
business-cycle variable Yt and to changes in GBC’s distance to default, Dit .
GBC is a natural choice for illustration, given that it has a non-trivial level
of credit risk at time t (with a current Moodys rating of B3, set on December
16, 1999), and is a reasonably closely followed firm that existed for 113 quar-
ters, most of our sample period. GBC, based in Illinois, is engaged in the
design, manufacture, and distribution of office equipment, related supplies,
and laminating equipment and films. Founded in 1947, GBC first appears in
the Compustat database at the fourth quarter of 1973. At the end of 2002,
  19
   This  density is most easily calculated
                                               by differentiation through the expectation, as
     − tt+s [λ(u)+α(u)] du
      R
E e                        λ(t + s) | Xt , which we compute by Monte-Carlo simulation. We
emphasize that this density is “improper” (integrates over all s to less than one) because
of other exit events.


                                                  26
                                     12




                                     10                                          Sample Mean: 5.1880
                                                                                 Max: 10.5098
                                                                                 Min: 0.3401
                                                                                 Long−run Mean: 3.9408

                                      8
               Distance to default




                                      6




                                      4




                                      2




                                      0
                                          0   20   40               60           80            100       120

                                                        Quarters from (1973:4)



Figure 1: Distance to default of General Binding Corporation, quarters from 1973:4 to
2001:4.



GBC had approximately 4,250 employees and a market capitalization of $208
million. The sample path of the distance to default of GBC during our sam-
ple period is illustrated in Figure 1. The maximum likelihood estimate of
the targeted distance to default, θDi , for GBC is 4.72.
    As of the end of 2001, GBC’s estimated term structure of failure hazard
rates is shown in Figure 2. The asymptotic 95% confidence intervals of
these estimated hazard rates are shown with dashed lines, and obtained by
the usual “Delta method.” That is, the variance of H(Yt , Dit , s; ψ̂i ) due
to parameter uncertainty is estimated as Hψ ΣHψ> , where Hψ denotes the
partial of H with respect to the parameter vector ψi , and where Σ is the
asymptotic estimate of the covariance matrix of ψ̂i reported in Appendix C,
which contains additional details on this calculation.
    The estimated term structure of failure hazard rates of GBC is downward-
sloping because, on the conditioning date t at the end of 2001, the growth
rate Y (t) of personal income, at 0.2197%, was well below its estimated long-
run mean, 1.8901%, and because GBC’s distance to default, Dit = 1.51, was
also well below its estimated “target,” θ̂Di = 4.72. The estimated reversion
of these covariates toward their respective long-run means causes a substan-
tial reduction in the estimated mean failure arrival rate s quarters ahead,

                                                               27
                                                400



                                                350



                                                300
        Annualized hazard rate (basis points)




                                                250



                                                200



                                                150



                                                100



                                                 50



                                                  0
                                                      0   2   4   6         8          10   12   14   16
                                                                      Quarters ahead


Figure 2: Annualized GBC failure hazard rates, with personal income growth and
distance to default measured at the fourth quarter of 2001: when Yt = 0.2197% and
Dit = 1.51, shown with dashed lines representing asymptotic estimates of 95% confidence
intervals.



H(Yt, Dit , s; ψ̂i ), conditional on survival to that time, as the time horizon s
increases. There is also a small downward effect on this curve due to covariate
uncertainty, based on the effect of Jensen’s Inequality.
    Figures 3 and 4 show the hypothetical effects on GBC’s hazard rates
of varying the current state variables Y (t) and Dit , respectively, from their
estimated long-run means to one-standard deviation above and below their
respective long-run means. Specifically, these shifts are the estimated stan-
dard deviations20 of the stationary distributions of Y and Di , which are
dY = 0.95% and dDi = 2.05, respectively. A comparison of Figures 3 and
4 shows that, in terms of both the impact of normalized shocks to failure
intensity as well time-series presistence, shocks to distance to default have a
  20
     For example, with a mean-reversion parameter of κY and an innovation standard
deviation of σY , the stationary distribution of Y has a standard deviation whose maximum
likelihood estimate is dY = σ̂Y2 /(1 − (1 − κ̂Y )2 ).


                                                                        28
                                                55




                                                50
        Annualized hazard rate (basis points)




                                                45




                                                40




                                                35




                                                30




                                                25




                                                20
                                                     0   2   4   6         8          10   12   14   16
                                                                     Quarters ahead


Figure 3: Annualized GBC failure hazard rates, with distance to default set hypothet-
ically at the estimated long-run mean distance to default (θ̂Di = 4.72), and with U.S.
personal income growth at three hypothetical levels, the long run mean (θ̂Y = 1.89%,
solid line); one standard deviation dY of its stationary distribution above its long-run
mean (θ̂Y + dY = 2.84%, dashed line) and one standard deviation below its long-run mean
(θ̂Y − dY = 0.94%, solid line with asterisks).



relatively greater effect on the term structure of GBC’s failure hazard rates
than do shocks to U.S. personal income growth, especially for maturities
more than one year into the future. (We recall that κ̂Y = 0.6524, while
κ̂D = 0.1192.) Figure 5 shows the effects of moving both covariates above,
and both covariates below, their respective long-run means.
    Figure 6 shows the estimated probability density function of GBC’s failure
time (solid line) setting the initial conditions for personal income growth and
GBC’s distance to default at their respective long run means. Figure 6 also
shows what this failure-time density would be if one were to ignore the effect
of other exits (that is, if one assumes that the other-exit intensity parameter
vector ν is zero). For example, GBC obviously cannot itself fail more than
one year into the future in the event that it is merged with another firm in

                                                                        29
                                                 90



                                                 80



                                                 70
         Annualized hazard rate (basis points)




                                                 60



                                                 50



                                                 40



                                                 30



                                                 20



                                                 10
                                                      0   2   4   6         8          10   12   14   16
                                                                      Quarters ahead


Figure 4: Annualized GBC failure hazard rates, at a hypothetical level of U.S. personal
income growth equal to its estimated long-run mean (θ̂Y = 1.89%), and with GBC’s
distance to default at three hypothetical levels: the estimated long-run mean, (θ̂Di = 4.72,
solid line); at one standard deviation dDi of its stationary distribution above its long-run
mean, (θ̂Di + dDi = 7.24, solid lines with asterisks); and at an estimate of one standard
deviation below its long run mean (θ̂Di − dDi = 3.13, dashed line).



less than one year.
    In summary, the shape of the term structure of GBC’s failure hazard rates
for future quarters, conditioning on GBC’s current distance to default and on
current U.S. personal income growth, clearly reflects the time-series dynamics
of these covariates over the coming quarters. The counter-cyclical behavior of
failure probabilities is already well documented in such prior studies as Fons
(1991), Blume and Keim (1991), Jonsson and Fridson (1996), McDonald
and Van de Gucht (1999), Hillegeist, Keating, Cram, and Lundstedt (2003),
Chava and Jarrow (2002), and Vassalou and Xing (2003). The main marginal
contribution of this paper is the ability to estimate the influence of firm-
specific and macro-covariates on the likelihood of corporate failure, not just
during the subsequent time period, but also for subsequent quarters into the

                                                                         30
                                                  120




                                                  100
          Annualized hazard rate (basis points)




                                                   80




                                                   60




                                                   40




                                                   20




                                                    0
                                                        0   2   4   6         8          10   12   14   16
                                                                        Quarters ahead


Figure 5: Annualized GBC failure hazard rates. Solid line: covariates initialized at
their respective long-run means, θ̂Di = 4.72 and θ̂Y = 1.89. Dashed line: covariates each
initialized one standard deviation (of the respective stationary distributions) above long-
run means. Solid line with asterisks: covariates initialized one standard deviation below
long-run means.



future.


4     Discussion and Additional Applications
This paper offers an econometric method, and an empirical implementation
of this method for the U.S. industrial machinery and instruments sector, for
estimating the term structure of corporate failure probabilities over multi-
ple future periods, conditional on firm-specific and macroeconomic covari-
ates. The method, under its probabilistic assumptions, allows one to com-
bine traditional duration analysis of the dependence of event intensities on
time-varying covariates with conventional time-series analysis of covariates,
in order to obtain maximum-likelihood estimation of multi-period failure


                                                                          31
                                            −4
                                        x 10
                                   13




                                   12




                                   11
         Implied default density




                                   10




                                    9




                                    8




                                    7




                                    6
                                        0        5   10   15         20         25   30   35   40
                                                               Quarters ahead


Figure 6: Estimated density of GBC failure time. Solid line: the estimated failure time
density ps (θ̂Y , θ̂Di , s; ψ̂i ) of GBC. Dashed line: the estimated failure-time density obtained
by ignoring (setting to zero) the intensity of other exits. Both cases take the covariates at
their respective estimated long-run means.



probabilities.
    Applying this model to data on U.S. firms in the industrial machinery
and instrument sector over the years 1971 to 2001, we find that the estimated
term structures of failure hazard rates of individual firms in this sector de-
pend significantly, in level and shape, on the current state of the economy,
and on the current leverage of the firm, as captured by a volatility-adjusted
leverage measure, distance to default, that is popular in the banking indus-
try. For some firms, variation in distance to default has a greater relative
effect on the term structure of future failure hazard rates than does a com-
paratively sized change in the business-cycle covariate, U.S. personal income
growth, especially for the conditional likelihood of failure over long future
time periods.
    Our methodology could be applied to other settings involving the forecast-


                                                                  32
ing of discrete events over multiple future periods, in which the time-series
behavior of covariates could play a significant role, for example: mortgage
prepayment and default, consumer default, initial and seasoned equity offer-
ings, merger, acquisition, and the exercise of real timing options, such as the
option to change or abandon a technology.
     Our model also allows estimates of portfolio credit risk, as it provides
maximum-likelihood estimates of joint probabilities of default. Figure 7,
for example, shows maximum likelihood estimates of five-year failure-event
correlations implied by our model, for a range of firms distinguished by initial
credit quality.21 For a given maturity T , the failure-event correlation between
firms i and j is the correlation between the random variables 1{τ (i)<T } and
1{τ (j)<T } . These correlations can be calculated by using the fact that, in a
doubly-stochastic framework, for stopping times τ (A) and τ (B) that are the
first jump times of counting processes with respective intensities λA and λB ,
                                                             RT                    
 E(1{τ (A)>T } 1{τ (B)>T } ) = P (τ (A) > T, τ (B) > T ) = E e− 0 (λA (t)+λB (t)) dt .

Contrary to a view that is sometimes expressed, for example by Schönbucher
(2004), that doubly-stochastic intensity models of default display unrealisti-
cally little default event correlation, the correlations shown in Figure 7 are
somewhat larger than the average “actuarial” empirical within-sector 5-year
default-event correlations calculated by DeServigny and Renault (2002).


A      Construction of Distance to Default
This appendix explains how we construct the distance to default, following
a recipe similar to those of Vassalou and Xing (2003), Crosbie and Bohn
(2002), Hillegeist, Keating, Cram, and Lundstedt (2003), and Bharath and
Shumway (2004). For a given firm, the distance to default is the number of
standard deviations of asset growth by which a firm’s market value of assets
exceeds a liability measure. Formally, for a given firm at time t, the distance
to default is
                
             ln LVtt + µA − 12 σA2 T
                                  
      Dt =              √            ,                                     (27)
                      σA T
  21
    For this calculation, we initiated the macroeconomic covariate at its long-run mean,
and initiated the distance-to-default of firm i at its target-level, θDi .

                                          33
      Five-year default-event correlation


                                             0.13


                                            0.125


                                             0.12


                                            0.115


                                             0.11


                                            0.105


                                              0.1

                                               1000
                                                      800                                                                      1000
                                                            600                                                      800
                                                                    400                                   600
                                                                                                  400
                                                                           200
                                                                                            200
                                                                                   0   0
                                                        Default intensity λj (0)                    Default intensity λi (0)


                                                      Figure 7: Five-year default-event correlations


where Vt is the market value of the firm’s assets at time t and Lt is a liability
measure, defined below, that is often known in industry practice as the “de-
fault point”. Here, µA and σA measure the firm’s mean rate of asset growth
and asset volatility, respectively, and T is a chosen time horizon, typically
taken to be 4 quarters.
    The default point Lt , following the standard established by Moodys KMV
(see Crosbie and Bohn (2002), as followed by Vassalou and Xing (2003)), is
measured as the firm’s book measure of short-term debt (“Debt in current
liabilities”, Compustat item 45), plus one half of its long-term debt (item
51), based on its quarterly accounting balance sheet. If these accounting
measures of debt are missing in the Compustat quarterly file, but available
in the annual file, we replace the missing data with the associated annual
debt data (Compustat items 34 and item 9 for short-term and long term
debt, respectively). Of 28, 612 firm-quarters in our sample, there are 3, 086
firm-quarters in which we use annual debt data to approximate quarterly
debt data in this way.


                                                                                       34
    We estimate the assets Vt and volatility σA according to a call-option
pricing formula, following the theory of Merton (1974) and Black and Scholes
(1973), under which equity may be viewed as a call option on the value of a
firm’s assets, Vt . In this setting, the market value of equity, Wt , is the option
price at strike Lt and time T to expiration.
    We take the initial asset value Vt to be the sum of Wt (end-of-quarter
stock price times number of shares outstanding, from the CRSP database)
and the book value of total debt (the sum of short-term debt and long-term
debt from Compustat). We take the risk-free return r to be the one-year T-
bill rate. We solve for the asset value Vt and asset volatility σA by iteratively
applying the equations:

       Wt = Vt Φ(d1 ) − Lt e−rT Φ(d2 )                                              (28)
       σA = sdev (ln(Vt ) − ln(Vt−1 )) ,                                            (29)

where
                    
              ln   Vt
                   Lt
                         + (r + 21 σA2 )T
       d1 =                √              ,                                         (30)
                         σA T
              √
d2 = d1 − σA T , and Φ( · ) is the standard-normal cumulative distribution
function, and sdev( · ) denotes sample standard deviation. Equation (28) is
the call-option pricing formula of Black and Scholes (1973), allowing, through
(29), an estimate of the asset volatility σA . For simplicity, by using (29), we
avoided the calculation of the volatility implied by the option pricing model
(See Crosbie and Bohn (2002) and Hillegeist, Keating, Cram, and Lundstedt
(2003) for this alternative approach), but instead estimated σA as the sample
standard deviation of the time series of asset-value growth, ln(Vt ) − ln(Vt−1 ).
A histogram22 of our sample of distances to default is provided in Figure 8.
    Our construction of distance to default has the property that, in the
theoretical setting of Merton (1974), a firm whose current distance to default
is D has a conditional probability (given all available information) of failure in
one year of Φ(−D), where Φ is the cumulative standard-normal distribution
function. Figure 9 shows the average realtionship in our sample between
distance to default and failure rate. For the purpose of this figure, distance
to default is “bucketed” into intervals of length 0.25. The denominator for
  22
    Of all 28, 612 firm-quarters, four had distances to default larger than 40. These are
not shown in Figure 8.

                                              35
                                           1600



                                           1400



                                           1200



                                           1000
              Frequency of Firm−quarters




                                           800



                                           600



                                           400



                                           200



                                             0
                                             −5   0   5   10         15          20   25   30   35   40

                                                               Distance to Default




     Figure 8: Histogram of distance to default for firm-quarters in the sample.


a given bucket is the number of firm-quarters with distance to default in
the associated interval; the numerator is the number of failures from that
bucket within the subsequent quater. We did not include in Figure 9 those
buckets with distances to default of less than −2, which constitutes 0.8% of
the firm-quarters in our sample. Figure 9 illustrates an average relationship
between distance to default and failure frequency that is roughly consistent
with our assumption that failure intensity depends exponentially on distance
to default, fixing other covariates.


B     Four-Covariate Intensity Model
This appendix provides coefficient estimates for a model of failure and merger
intensities based on the covariates listed in Table 1.
    Instead of assuming (23) and (24), we specify failure intensity and other-
exit intensity to be the form:
     Λ((Yk , Dik , Rik , Sik ); µ) = eµ0 +µ1 Yk +µ2 Dik +µ3 Rik +µ4 Sik                                   (31)
     A((Yk , Dik , Rik , Sik ); ν) = eν0 +ν1 Yk +ν2 Dik +ν3 Rik +ν4 Sik ,                                 (32)
where Rik is the earnings (relative to assets) of firm i in quarter k, and Sik
is the size of firm i in quarter k, as explained in Section 3.2. Maximizing

                                                                    36
                                                         0.03




                                                        0.025



              Empirical Failure Intensity (quarterly)
                                                         0.02




                                                        0.015




                                                         0.01




                                                        0.005




                                                           0
                                                           −2   0   2           4             6   8   10
                                                                        Distance to Default




      Figure 9: Empirical mapping from distance to default to failure intensity.


a likelihood function analogous to that of the two-covariate model, we ob-
tain the coefficient estimates reported in Table 3. The coefficient estimates
for the dependence of failure intensity on distance to default and personal
income growth do not differ dramatically from those of the two-covariate
model shown in Table 2. As for the other-exit intensity, although the co-
efficient of distance to default is not statistically significant different from
zero in the two-covariate model, this coefficient is significantly positive in
the four-covariate model, the most notable change that we observed.
     The two new covariates, earnings and firm size, show a statistically signif-
icant effect on failure intensity and other-exit intensity. Consistent with our
expectation, firms with a higher earnings ratio are less likely to go bankrupt,
and large firms have a larger chance to survive. It is also notable that high-
profit and big firms are less likely to be merged or acquired.


C     Asymptotic MLE Covariance Estimates
This appendix provides the asymptotic covariance estimates for our maxi-
mum likelihood estimators.
   The confidence intervals plotted in Figure 2 are, as explained in the
main text, based on the asymptotic standard errors obtained from the Delta

                                                                         37
                Table 3: Parameter Estimates for Exit Intensities

           Covariate                   Failure intensity   Other-exit intensity
           Constant                    µ̂0      −3.1718    ν̂0         −3.5550
                                                (0.3566)               (0.1626)
           Personal income growth      µ̂1      −0.4979    ν̂1         −0.1933
                                                (0.1479)               (0.0560)
           Distance to default         µ̂2      −0.4473    ν̂2           0.0289
                                                (0.0699)               (0.0111)
           Firm-level earnings         µ̂3      −0.3752    ν̂3         −0.3613
                                                (0.0976)               (0.0570)
           Firm size                   µ̂4      −0.2910    ν̂4         −0.1136
                                                (0.0785)               (0.0280)

Asymptotic standard errors are in parentheses.


method. For this, we require an estimate of the covariance matrix Σ of the
MLE estimator ψ̂i of the parameters affecting the hazard rates of firm i, which
in this case is General Binding Corporation. We let ψi = (γi, µ, ν), where γi
is the vector of parameters of the time-series model for (Yt , Dit ), and where
µ and ν parameterize the failure and other-exit intensities, respectively, as
in Section 2.
    Fixing Yt , Dit , and s, we write

      H(Yt, Dit , s; ψi ) = G(ψi ).                                                    (33)

    The failure probability q(Yt , Dit , s; ψi ), failure-time density qs (Yt , Dit , s; ψi ),
survival probability p(Yt , Dit , s; ψi ), and failure hazard rate H(Yt, Dit , s; ψi )
are all continuous with respect to the parameter           vector ψi , by the dominated
                                                  − tt+s [λ(u)+α(u)] du
                                                    R
convergence theorem, using the fact that e                              is strictly positive
and bounded by 1, using the continuity of the probability distribution of the
covariate process with respect to the parameters, using the monotonicity of
the failure and other-exit time intensities with respect to the parameters,
and finally using the fact that λ(t + s) is the double-exponential of a nor-
mal variable. Thus, under the consistency assumption that ψ̂i converges in
distribution with sample size to ψi , the continuity of G( · ) implies that the
maximum-likelihood estimator G(ψ̂i ) of G(ψi ) is also consistent. Moreover,
with the addition of differentiability and other technical conditions, G(ψ̂i )
has the asymptotic variance estimate ∇G(ψi )Σ∇G(ψi )> , where ∇G( · ) is

                                            38
the gradient of G and where
                         
             Σγi       0
      Σ=         Σµ                                                             (34)
               0      Σν
is determined by the asymptotic covariance matrices Σγi , Σµ , and Σν of γi , µ,
and ν, respectively. These asymptotic covariance matrices are obtained by
the usual method of inverting the Hessian matrix of the likelihood functions,
evaluated at the parameter estimates.
    With regard to Σγi , we have already presented the estimated asymptotic
covariances of (κ̂Y , θ̂Y , σ̂Y ) in Section 3.3. The asymptotic covariance matrix
ΣDi of (θ̂Di , κ̂D , v̂, r̂) is part of the full covariance matrix for the distance-to-
default time-series parameters of all firms (θ̂Di for all i, and (κ̂D , v̂, r̂). For
our particular firm, GBC, the estimated parameter covariance matrix is
                                                         
                      5931 0.3340 0.7416 2.6375
                 0.3340 0.0962 0.0003 0.0012                   −4
      Σ̂Di =    0.7416 0.0003 0.3948 0.7936  × 10 .
                                                                                  (35)
                    2.6375 0.0012 0.7936 3.0292

Combining this estimate with Σ̂φ from equation (18), we obtain the asymp-
totic covariance for γi as
                        
               Σ̂φ 0
      Σ̂γi =               .                                          (36)
                0 Σ̂Di
    For the two-covariate model of failure intensity, the asymptotic estimate
of the covariance matrix of the MLE estimators of the parameters (µ0 , µ2 , µ1 ),
the coefficients for constant, distance to default and personal income growth,
is
                                              
                 0.0607 −0.0039 −0.0274
      Σ̂µ =  −0.0039 0.0035 −0.0003  .                                   (37)
                −0.0274 −0.0003 0.0191
    For the other-exit intensity parameters, the aysmptotic covariance matrix
of the MLE estimators of the parameters (ν0 , ν2 , ν1 ) is
                                             
                0.0157 −0.0008 −0.0055
      Σ̂ν =  −0.0008 0.0002         0.0000  .                          (38)
               −0.0055 0.0000        0.0032

                                          39
References
 Allen, L. and A. Saunders (2002). A Survey of Cyclical Effects in Credit
    Risk Measurement Models. mimeo, Stern School of Business, New York
    University.
 Altman, E. I. (1968). Financial Ratios, Discriminant Analysis, and the
    Prediction of Corporate Bankruptcy. Journal of Finance 23, 589–609.
 Amemiya, T. (1985). Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
   Harvard University Press.
 Andersen, P. K., O. Borgan, R. D. Gill, and N. Keiding (1992). Statistical
   Models Based on Counting Processes. New York: Springer-Verlag.
 Beaver, B. (1966). Financial Ratios as Predictors of Failure. Empirical
    Research in Accounting: Selected Studies, Supplment to Journal of Ac-
    counting Research Autumn, 91–101.
 Beaver, B. (1968a). Alternative Accounting Measures as Predictors of Fail-
    ure. Accounting Review January, 113–122.
 Beaver, B. (1968b). Market Prices, Financial Ratios, and the Prediction
    of Failure. Journal of Accounting Research Autumn, 170–192.
 Behar, R. and K. Nagpal (1999). Dynamics of Rating Transition. Working
    Paper, Standard and Poor’s.
 Berman, S. M. and H. Frydman (1999). Parametric Estimation of Hazard
    Functions with Stochastic Covariate Processes. Sankhya, Series A 61,
    174–188.
 Bharath, S. and T. Shumway (2004). Forecasting Default with the KMV-
   Merton Model. Working Paper, University of Michigan.
 Black, F. and M. Scholes (1973). The Pricing of Options and Corporate
    Liabilities. Journal of Political Economy 81, 637–654.
 Blume, M. and D. Keim (1991). Realized Returns and Volatility of Low-
    Grade Bonds: 1977-1989. Journal of Finance 46, 49–74.
 Chava, S. and R. Jarrow (2002). Bankruptcy Prediction with Industry
   Effects. Working Paper, Cornell University.
 Collin-Dufresne, P. and R. Goldstein (2001). Do Credit Spreads Reflect
    Stationary Leverage Ratios? Reconciling Structural and Reduced-
    Form Frameworks. Journal of Finance 56, 1929–1958.

                                   40
Cox, D. R. and V. Isham (1980). Point Processes. New York: Chapman
   and Hall.
Cox, D. R. and D. Oakes (1984). Analysis of Survival Data. New York:
   Chapman and Hall.
Crosbie, P. J. and J. R. Bohn (2002). Modeling Default Risk. Technical
   Report, KMV, LLC.
Daley, D. J. and D. Vere-Jones (1988). An Introduction to the Theory of
   Point Processes. New York: Springer.
Das, S. R., D. Duffie, and N. Kapadia (2004). Common Failings: How Cor-
   porate Defaults are Correlated. Working Paper, Stanford University.
DeServigny, A. and O. Renault (2002). Default Correlation: Empirical
   Evidence. Working Paper, Standard and Poor’s.
Duffie, D. (2001). Dynamic Asset Pricing Theory (Third edition). Prince-
   ton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Duffie, D., D. Filipović, and W. Schachermayer (2003). Affine Processes
   and Applications in Finance. Annals of Applied Probability 13, 984–
   1053.
Duffie, D. and D. Lando (2001). Term Structures of Credit Spreads with
   Incomplete Accounting Information. Econometrica 69, 633–664.
Duffie, D., J. Pan, and K. Singleton (2000). Transform Analysis and Asset
   Pricing for Affine Jump-Diffusions. Econometrica 68, 1343–1376.
Duffie, D. and K. Singleton (2003). Credit Risk. Princeton, New Jersey:
   Princeton University Press.
Engle, R. F. and J. R. Russell (1998). Autoregressive Conditional Dura-
   tion: A New Model for Irregularly Spaced Transaction Data. Econo-
   metrica 66, 1127–1162.
Engle, R. F. and J. R. Russell (2002). Econometric Analysis of Discrete-
   Valued Irregularly-Spaced Financial Transactions Data. Working Pa-
   per, University of California, San Diego.
Fama, E. and K. French (2004). New Lists: Fundamentals and Survival
   Rates. Journal of Financial Economics 73, 229–269.
Fisher, E., R. Heinkel, and J. Zechner (1989). Dynamic Capital Structure
   Choice: Theory and Tests. Journal of Finance 44, 19–40.

                                  41
Fons, J. (1991). An Approach to Forecasting Default Rates. Working Pa-
   per, Moody’s Investors Services.
Helwege, J. and P. Kleiman (1997). Understanding Aggregate Default
   Rates of High Yield Bonds. Journal of Fixed Income 7, 55–62.
Hillegeist, S. A., E. K. Keating, D. P. Cram, and K. G. Lundstedt (2003).
    Assessing the Probability of Bankruptcy. Working Paper, Northwestern
    University.
Jones, F. (1987). Current Techniques in Bankruptcy Prediction. Journal
   of Accounting Literature 6, 131–164.
Jonsson, J. and M. Fridson (1996, June). Forecasting Default Rates on
   High-Yield Bonds. The Journal of Fixed Income, 69–77.
Kalbfleisch, J. and R. Prentice (2002). The Statistical Analysis of Failure
   Time Data (Second edition). Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley &
   Sons.
Karr, A. (1991). Point Processes and Statistical Inference (Second edition).
   New York: Marcel Dekker.
Kavvathas, D. (2001). Estimating Credit Rating Transition Probabilities
  for Corporate Bonds. Working paper, University of Chicago.
Kealhofer, S. (2003). Quantifying Credit Risk I: Default Prediction. Fi-
   nancial Analysts Journal , January–February, 30–44.
Keenan, S. C., J. Sobehart, and D. T. Hamilton (1999). Predicting Default
   Rates: A Forecasting Model For Moody’s Issuer-Based Default Rates.
   Working Paper, Moody’s Investors Services.
Lancaster, T. (1990). The Econometric Analysis of Transition Data. New
   York: Cambridge University Press.
Lando, D. and T. Skødeberg (2002). Analyzing Rating Transitions and
   Rating Drift with Continuous Observations. Journal of Banking and
   Finance 26, 423–444.
Lane, W. R., S. W. Looney, and J. W. Wansley (1986). An Application
   of the Cox Proportional Hazards Model to Bank Failure. Journal of
   Banking and Finance 10, 511–531.
Lee, S. H. and J. L. Urrutia (1996). Analysis and Prediction of Insolvency
   in the Property-Liability Insurance Industry: A Comparison of Logit
   and Hazard Models. The Journal of Risk and Insurance 63, 121–130.

                                   42
Leland, H. (1994). Corporate Debt Value, Bond Covenants, and Optimal
   Capital Structure. Journal of Finance 49, 1213–1252.
Leland, H. (1998). Agency Costs, Risk Manamgement, and Capital Struc-
   ture. Journal of Finance 53, 1213–1242.
McDonald, C. G. and L. M. Van de Gucht (1999). High-Yield Bond Default
  and Call Risks. Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 409–419.
Merton, R. C. (1974). On the Pricing of Corporate Debt: The Risk Struc-
  ture of Interest Rates. Journal of Finance 29, 449–470.
Meyer, B. D. (1990). Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells.
  Econometrica 58, 757–782.
Miller, R. (1981). Survival Analysis. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Nickell, P., W. Perraudin, and S. Varotto (2000). Stability of Rating Tran-
   sitions. Journal of Banking and Finance 24, 203–227.
Ohlson, J. (1980). Financial Ratios and the Probabilistic Prediction of
   Bankruptcy. Journal of Accounting Research 19, 109–131.
Pesaran, M. H., T. Schuermann, B.-J. Treutler, and S. M. Weiner (2003).
   Macroeconomic Dynamics and Credit Risk: A Global Perspective. Un-
   published working paper. Wharton School, Federal Reserve Bank, New
   York.
Philosophov, L. and V. Philiosophov (2002). Corporate Bankruptcy Prog-
   nosis: An Attempt at a Combined Prediction of the Bankruptcy Event
   and Time Interval of its Occurrence. International Review of Financial
   Analysis 11, 375–406.
Protter, P. (1990). Stochastic Integration and Differential Equations. New
   York: Springer-Verlag.
Schönbucher, P. (2004). Frailty Models, Contagion, and Information Ef-
   fects. Working Paper, ETH, Zurich.
Shumway, T. (2001). Forecasting Bankruptcy More Accurately: A Simple
   Hazard Model. Journal of Business 74, 101–124.
Therneau, T. M. and P. M. Grambsch (2000). Modeling Survival Data:
   Extending the Cox Model. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Vassalou, M. and Y. Xing (2003). Default Risk in Equity Returns. Working
   Paper, Columbia University, forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

                                   43
Whalen, G. (1991). A Proportional Hazards Model of Bank Failure: An
  Examination of its Usefulness as an Early Warning Model Tool. In
  Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review, pp. 21–31. 1991.
Wheelock, D. C. and P. W. Wilson (2000). Why Do Banks Disappear?
  The Determinants of U.S. Bank Failures and Acquisitions. Review of
  Economics and Statistics 82, 127–138.
Wilson, T. (1997a). Portfolio Credit Risk, I. RISK 10, September, 111–
   117.
Wilson, T. (1997b). Portfolio Credit Risk, I. RISK 10, October, 56–61.




                                 44
