                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 RULE OF LAW, DEMOCRACY, OPENNESS, AND INCOME:
                       ESTIMATING THE INTERRELATIONSHIPS

                                            Roberto Rigobon
                                              Dani Rodrik

                                          Working Paper 10750
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10750


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We thank Vincent Hogan, Aart Kray and Ricardo Hausmann for very useful comments. We also thank the
participants at the Macro Seminar at the World Bank for the comments and suggestions. All remaining errors
are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Roberto Rigobon and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Rule of Law, Democracy, Openness, and Income: Estimating the Interrelationships
Roberto Rigobon and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 10750
September 2004
JEL No. F10, F43, O40, C33

                                            ABSTRACT

We estimate the interrelationships among economic institutions, political institutions, openness, and

income levels, using identification through heteroskedasticity (IH). We split our cross-national

dataset into two sub-samples: (i) colonies versus non-colonies; and (ii) continents aligned on an East-

West versus those aligned on a North-South axis. We exploit the difference in the structural

variances in these two sub-samples to gain identification. We find that democracy and the rule of law

are both good for economic performance, but the latter has a much stronger impact on incomes.

Openness (trade/GDP) has a negative impact on income levels and democracy, but a positive effect

on rule of law. Higher income produces greater openness and better institutions, but these effects are

not very strong. Rule of law and democracy tend to be mutually reinforcing.



Roberto Rigobon
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-431
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                  RULE OF LAW, DEMOCRACY, OPENNESS, AND INCOME:

                          ESTIMATING THE INTERRELATIONSHIPS

                            Roberto Rigobon and Dani Rodrik


I. Introduction

        What are the fundamental determinants of the large income gaps that separate
different regions of the world? Are high incomes the result of good institutions, or is it
economic wealth that enables high-quality institutions? How does democracy affect
economic development? Is openness to international trade good for development? For
democracy? For the quality of institutions? What role do geographical constraints and
advantages play in driving all these? What are the relative contributions to patterns of
global inequality of exogenous determinants such as geography versus man-made factors
such as institutions?

        These are some of the most important questions in the social sciences and among
the thorniest to resolve empirically. An immediate difficulty has to do with measurement
and quantification. How are concepts such as “institutions” and “geography” to be
operationalized? In recent years, economists have developed a number of different
proxies for these, which by now are quite common in the cross-country growth literature
(even though they often baffle other social scientists). The quality of institutions, for
example, is typically measured using survey-based perceptions of expropriation risk or
the rule of law. Geography is typically quantified by looking at distance from the
equator, an indicator of climate, or some measure of malaria risk.

        The far greater difficulty arises with ascertaining causality. Each of the
determinants listed above, with the possible exception of purely geographical variables,
can be (and probably are) both a cause and an effect. Simple OLS regressions that relate,
say, institutional quality and trade to income levels are likely to yield seriously biased
results if used to infer the causal impact of right-hand side variables on the left-hand side
variable. The standard solution to this conundrum in cross-national work has been to
employ an instrumental-variable approach. This entails finding a variable (the
instrument) that (a) is exogenous; (b) is correlated with the endogenous variable for
which it is instrumenting; and (c) does not influence the dependent variable through any
channel other than the relevant endogenous variable. Once such a variable is located,
unbiased estimates of the causal effects can be recovered.

         This approach has yielded considerable progress in recent years. Several papers
in this line of work are particularly noteworthy. Frankel and Romer (FR, 1999) have
used a gravity trade equation to derive the geographical component of trade, which they
then used as an instrument to estimate the effect of trade on the level of income.
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (AJR, 2001) have used the mortality rate of early
European colonists to derive an instrument for institutional quality and to estimate the
                                                      2

influence of institutions on incomes. Sachs (2003) has used an ecologically-based
determinant of malaria incidence to estimate the impact of geography. Rodrik,
Subramanian, and Trebbi (RST, 2002) have combined the FR and AJR instruments to run
a “horse race” among institutions, trade, and geography and to examine their relative
significance in the determination of income.

        While the IV approach has paid off, it also has some drawbacks. Most
importantly, the requirements for an instrument to be valid (as discussed briefly above)
are quite demanding. In particular, it is difficult to come up with truly exogenous
variables that also satisfy the exclusion restriction—i.e., indicators that can be argued to
influence incomes solely through the determinant for which they are instrumenting.
Consequently, the list of plausible instruments that can be used in this line of inquiry is
extremely short (and the instruments mentioned in the previous paragraph come close to
exhausting it). This results in just-identified specifications, restricts the range of
questions that can be posed, and raises interpretational difficulties.

        As a result, none of the previously mentioned papers can shed much light on the
reverse causality running from income to institutions, trade, or public health. Doing so
would require coming up with an instrumental variable for income--a variable that affects
income but not any of its determinants. Perhaps for obvious reasons, no-one has yet
embarked on such an effort. Also, existing instruments do not allow us to distinguish,
say, between economic and political institutions and gauge their respective contributions
to economic performance.2 There are simply not enough good instruments to answer
these important questions. In a similar vein, Dollar and Kraay (2003) have raised
questions about the validity of using the AJR and FR instruments simultaneously in order
to parse out the separate influences of trade and institutions on incomes, arguing that the
predicted values for the endogenous regressors are too collinear and therefore inference is
unreliable.3

         Moreover, existing instruments for institutional quality and trade are correlated
strongly with geographical variables and with human capital, raising interpretational
questions about what is in fact being identified. For example, Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2001) suggest that the FR (1999) findings have more to do with the impact of geography
on incomes than with the impact of trade on incomes. Similarly, analysts like Sachs who
think geography plays a key role would argue that the AJR (2001) instrument is a stand-
in for the historical impact of geography, and not for the quality of institutions
bequeathed by colonial settlers. Glaeser et al. (2004) have argued that settler mortality
may simply capture the human capital of the European colonists, rather than early
institutional strengths.
2
 See however Acemoglu and Johnson (2003) which tries to unbundle two types of economic institutions,
which they call property rights institutions and contracting institutions. They use an IV strategy relying on
colonial history.
3
 This is essentially the “weak instruments” problem in the context of multiple instruments. RST (2002)
argue that this is not a problem when the conventional measure of trade openness is used (as in RST 2000),
but becomes one when an alternative measure (due to Alcala and Ciccone 2002) is substituted.
                                                      3



         In this paper we pursue an alternative identification strategy which does not have
these disadvantages. We rely on a novel approach called Identification through
Heteroskedasticity (IH). The IH method does not require an instrumental variable. It
achieves identification instead by exploiting plausible differences in the variances of
error terms across sub-samples of the data. To see the intuition behind the IH method,
consider the pair of equations that describe the relationship between income (y) and
institutional quality (I):

(1)                                             y=βI+ε

(2)                                             I=θy+ν

where ε and ν are the random shocks to the income and institutions equations
respectively. This is an unidentified system. The usual IV trick would be to find a
variable that enters the institutions equation (2) but not equation (1). But suppose we can
split our data into two sub-samples A and B such that the variance of the shock to the
institutions equation ( σ ν2 ) is larger in sub-sample A than it is in sub-sample B. This helps
us uncover the structural parameters of the model without an instrumental variable. What
the hypothesized difference in shocks in the two sub-samples means is that the scatter of
observations in (y, I) space in sub-sample A is aligned more closely along the income
equation (1) than it is in sub-sample B. In the limit, if the variance of ν is infinite in sub-
sample A, the scatter of observations in that sub-sample would trace out the income
equation (1) perfectly. More generally, as long as relative variances of the structural
shocks differ across sub-samples, this difference provides us with a “probabilistic
instrument”, and allows us to solve the problem of identification.

        Somewhat more formally, the reason that the system of equations (1)-(2) is not
identified is that we need to estimate four unknowns, βˆ , θˆ, σ ε2 , and σ ν2 while the data
yield estimates of only three moments, var(y), var(I), and cov(y, I). Suppose now that we
could split our data into two sub-samples (j=A, B) with identical parameters β and θ, but
different variances for the random shocks ( σ ε2, A ≠ σ ε2, B and σν2, A ≠ σν2, B ). The two sub-
samples now yield two separate variance-covariance matrices and six moments, which
are enough to solve for the six unknowns ( βˆ , θˆ, σ ε2, A , σ ε2, B , σν2, A , σν2, B ). In other words,
splitting the sample adds two new unknowns (two additional variances), while generating
three bits of useful information, and therefore identifies the system. Moreover, if our
equations contain truly exogenous variables (such as distance from the equator), the
system becomes over-identified. That in turn enables us to insert additional endogenous
regressors. We shall describe our procedures in greater detail in the next section.

        The IH method relies on two critical identification assumptions. First, the
parameters of interest (i.e., β and θ in the above example) are identical in the different
sub-samples. We consider this particular assumption to be innocuous, since it has long
been the maintained assumption in the cross-national literature, where it is standard
practice to pool the data for all countries in the sample. The second, and more critical
                                              4

identifying assumption is that we can split the data into sub-samples with different
relative variances of the structural shocks. This is where we need to rely on prior
assumptions and make plausible guesses.

        In this paper we use two different splits. First we distinguish between countries
that have been colonized by European powers and countries that have not. While both
sets of countries exhibit wide variance in income levels (RST 2002), the (unconditional)
variance of incomes (and of other endogenous regressors) is typically larger in the non-
colonized group than it is in the colonized group. Our maintained assumption here is that
colonization is a homogenizing experience that reduces the variance of shocks to which
countries have been subjected. Countries that have not been colonized by European
powers have been open to a much wider array of influences and ruler types. Note that
making this distinction between the two groups is not inconsistent with the assumption
that the parameters of interest are stable across the two groups. Non-colonized countries
may have had more heterogeneous outcomes in institutional arrangements (due to
exogenous shocks), but that does not imply that the impact of institutions on incomes, or
vice versa, is any different in that sample.

        The second split we use relies on an argument made by Jared Diamond (1997)
regarding how geography interacts with technology transfer. Diamond points out that it
is easier for new seed varieties and other agricultural technologies to migrate on an East-
West axis than on a North-South axis. The reason is that moving in the North-South
direction entails traversing different ecological and climatic zones, with attendant loss in
the suitability and adaptability of agricultural innovations. Hence we split our sample
between countries that are located in continents aligned on an East-West axis (Eurasian
countries) versus those in continents aligned on a North-South axis (Africa and the
Americas). Once again, the idea is that the relative magnitude of structural shocks will
differ in the two samples without necessarily altering the parameters of interest. In
particular, following Diamond we expect the variance of income shocks to be larger in
the North-South sample than in the East-West sample.

        One important feature of our methodology is that if both splits of the data are
valid, then the coefficients should be the same across specifications. We perform this test
and are unable to reject the overidentifying restrictions. Not only are the point estimates
not statistically different, but our two splits produce remarkably similar coefficients.
Finally, another advantage of our procedure is that because all the variances and
coefficients are estimated we can compute a variance decomposition and evaluate the
respective contributions of the explanatory variables to explaining the observed variance
in outcomes.

         We apply this approach to analyze the joint determination of four endogenous
variables: incomes (GDP per capita), economic institutions (rule of law), political
institutions (democracy), and integration (trade). Aside from these endogenous variables,
our specifications include distance from the equator, population, and land area as
exogenous regressors. Note that in contrast with the previous literature, we are able to
                                              5

estimate the impact of income levels on the other endogenous variables. Returning to the
questions we posed at the opening of this paper, we find:

   1. Democracy and the rule of law are both good for economic performance, but the
      latter has a much stronger impact on incomes (both statistically and
      quantitatively). Using the colony split, the estimated coefficient on rule of law is
      smaller than the OLS estimate–exactly as we would have expected in the presence
      of feedback from income.

   2. Openness (trade/GDP) has a negative impact on income levels after we control for
      geography and institutions.

   3. Countries located far from the equator are richer, although this effect is smaller
      when we use the geographical split. Interestingly, because distance to the equator
      has a sizable impact on our endogenous variables, it ends up explaining an
      important proportion of the variance in incomes. Using the colony/non-colony
      split, the proportion of the variance that is ultimately explained by distance from
      the equator is 20 percent.

   4. Having a large land area or population is bad (in general) for economic
      performance. Even though the estimated coefficients for area are highly
      statistically significant, country size explains less than 7 percent of the variance in
      income.

   5. Turning to the determinants of institutions, we find that higher income produces
      better institutions (but our estimates here are not terribly significant). This is true
      both for democracy and for rule of law. Income explains a little less than 10
      percent of the variation in institutions.

   6. Rule of law and democracy are generally mutually reinforcing and they tend to
      feed on each other. Greater rule of law produces more democracy, and vice versa.
      But the effects are not strong: the estimates are sometimes insignificant and in
      most cases they explain less than 10 percent of the variation.

   7. Trade openness is good for the rule of law but bad for democracy. Trade’s
      estimated (negative) impact on democracy is very significant, while its estimated
      (positive) impact on the rule of law is significant in one specification and
      insignificant in the other. The asymmetric effect of trade on economic and
      political institutions is one of our most striking findings. It is also a very robust
      result, surviving all the specifications we ran. Regarding the variance
      decomposition, however, openness contributes very little to the determination of
      institutions (less than 10 percent).

   8. Distance from the equator has a significant effect on democracy and rule of law,
      and explains between 8 and 17 percent of the variation in democracy and between
      22 and 40 percent of the variation of rule of law.
                                               6



    9. Income has a positive but small impact on the degree of openness. Democracy
       and rule of law have negligible effects on openness. The variance decomposition
       indicates a very small explanatory power of institutions on openness (less than 2
       percent).

    10. Finally, the most important variables determining the degree of openness are
        those related to geography: distance from the equator, land area and population.
        Taken together, they explain more that 50 percent of the variation in openness in
        the sample.

         These results are generally quite robust to changes in the underlying
specifications and the use of one split versus the other. We estimated the same system of
equations using two different splits, and various different measures of openness,
democracy, and institutions. In all these estimations the coefficients turned out to be
relatively stable. In comparing our preferred specification to the ones from the sensitivity
analysis, we find that coefficients that are significant in the former usually are also
significant in the latter, with the same sign. The few cases in which the coefficients
reverse signs are those where the coefficients are badly estimated (with large standard
errors). However, we never found a single case in which the hypothesis of parameter
stability could be rejected.

        The plan of the paper is as follows. Section II presents our methodology in
greater detail. Section III presents and discusses the results. Section IV discusses
robustness and other issues. Section V concludes.


II. Solving the estimation problem

        One of the thorniest problems in applied work is the presence of simultaneous-
equations bias. As we discussed in the introduction, the coefficients in equations (1) and
(2) cannot be consistently estimated without the help of instrumental variables, which
requires us to locate exogenous variables that belong in one of the equations but not the
other. In particular, to estimate the impact of institutions on income through instrumental
variables necessitates that there exist a variable (z) that is correlated with institutions but
not with the innovation to the income equation:

                                        y = βI + ε
                                        I = θy + γz + v

This is an exclusion restriction that allows us to estimate the coefficient in the first
equation (β). However, there are several applications in which this assumption cannot be
imposed, and hence there does not exist a plausible instrument that can solve the problem
of estimation. Furthermore, IV allows us to estimate one equation (the income equation
in this example) but does not help us estimate the other (the institutions equation).
                                              7

       In this paper we use an alternative method–Identification through
Heteroskedasticity (IH)–to deal with the simultaneous equations issues that are likely to
be present in the joint determination of institutions, openness, and income. In this section
we present the intuition of the procedure for a general multinomial system of equations
assuming that all variables are endogenous. This is done to simplify the exposition. The
more general case, including exogenous variables, is discussed below.

        Assume that there is a set of N endogenous variables denoted by X , and assume
that the “true” model (which is known as the structural form) is denoted as

(3)                                      A X = c +ε

where the matrix A is the matrix that characterizes the contemporaneous relationships
among the endogenous variables. In general it is assumed that the diagonal of the matrix
is equal to 1 (which is known as the normalization assumption). Our application is cross
sectional and lags are not included in the specification. The constant terms are denoted
by the vector c. The residuals ( ε ) are known as the structural shocks and in most
macroeconomic and development applications they are assumed to be uncorrelated. In
other words:

                                         σ ε2,1 0      L 0 
                                                                  
                                            0 σ ε2, 2   L 0 
(4)                        var(ε ) = Σ = 
                                          M     M      O    M 
                                                                  
                                          0    0      L σ ε2, N 

The reduced form of the model is given by

(5)                                   X = A−1c + A−1ε

with the reduced form residuals defined as

                                          η = A−1ε

Although the structural form cannot be estimated, the reduced form can. In this particular
case, we can estimate the reduced form constant terms and the covariance matrix of the
reduced form residuals. In fact, these are the only statistics that can be obtained from the
data.

        The question of identification has to do with whether the structural coefficients
can be recovered from the reduced form estimates. In general, the answer is no. For
instance, the covariance matrix of the reduced form shocks is

(6)                             var( X ) = var(η ) = A−1 Σ A−1'
                                               8


Note that in a system with N endogenous variables the matrix A has N 2 terms, and the
covariance matrix of the structural form residuals has N terms–which accounts for a total
of N ( N + 1) unknowns. On the other hand, the covariance matrix of the reduced form
                     N ( N + 1)
residuals provides              equations–half of what is needed to solve the problem of
                         2
estimation. This is indeed the standard problem of identification in simultaneous
equations models. The number of reduced form coefficients–or moments that can be
estimated from the reduced form–is smaller than the number of unknowns–or structural
parameters.

        The idea of identification through heteroskedasticity is to increase the number of
available moments or equations such that the problem of identification can be solved. So
let us assume that the sample can be split in two (s1 and s2) in a manner that satisfies the
following properties:

                                       AX s1 = c + ε s1
                                       AX s 2 = c + ε s 2
                                         ( )
                                      var ε s1 = Σ s1
                                      var(ε ) = Σ
                                             s2      s2


                                      Σ s1 ≠ Σ s 2

        This structure only adds the assumption that the data has heteroskedasticity. All
other aspects of the structure remain identical. This model assumes that the constant (c)
and the set of coefficients on the endogenous matrix (A) are the same across the cross-
section. The only difference is in the variance of the residuals of the structural equations
across the two sub-samples. This change implies that the reduced form covariance matrix
                                    N ( N + 1)
of each sub-sample now provides                equations. The order condition requires that
                                        2
the number of knowns be larger than or equal to the number of unknowns. The rank
condition specifies that the knowns (or equations) have to be linearly independent. In
standard linear systems of equations we test for the rank condition given that the order
condition is satisfied. In other words, we count the number of equations and the number
of unknowns. If the number of equations is larger than the unknowns we compute the
rank of the matrix of the system. If that rank is larger than the number of unknowns then
the system of equations has at least as many linearly independent equations as the number
of unknowns; and therefore there is a solution.

        In our case this is exactly what we can do. We assume the heteroskedasticity in
the data, and count whether or not there are more moments in the data than the number of
coefficients that have to be estimated. Assuming that such a condition is satisfied, then
we can proceed and test if the estimates of the structural equation variances are different
across sub-samples–which is equivalent to the rank condition.
                                                       9

         It is important to highlight the identifying assumption in this procedure – the fact
that the structural shocks are uncorrelated. If the shocks were correlated and there is no
restriction on the variation of such covariance, then every heteroskedastic regime adds as
many equations as unknowns, and the problem of identification could not be solved.
Observe that there is a crucial difference between parameter stability and the covariance
assumption. Parameter stability can be tested if there is enough regimes. The reason is
that it can be estimated assuming that parameters are stable and check the overidentifying
restrictions. The zero correlation assumption, on the other hand, cannot be tested. This is
the identifying assumption, and therefore it is maintained. In our application, given that
we are including income, institutional variables, openness, and geographical variables we
believe that we are considering enough variables such that no additional variables are
needed.

        Finally, it should be obvious that heteroskedasticity can be combined with other
assumptions (such as exclusion restrictions), in which case the system of equations will
become overidentified. In our application, several of the variables in X can be considered
exogenous (for example, geographical variables), and therefore, the problem of
identification can be lessened.

        The literature on identification through heteroskedasticity is based on the original
intuition provided by Philip Wright (1928). Wright indicates that we can solve the
problem of identification if instead of moving the mean (which is the standard IV
methodology) we find a variable that increases the variance of one of the equations to
infinity. In other words, if the volatility of the innovations to the demand schedule is
infinitely large in comparison to the volatility of the innovations in the supply schedule,
effectively we only observe movements due to innovations to the demand, and therefore
we can estimate the supply schedule directly. This is known today as “near identification”
(Fisher 1976).

        Recently this methodology has been revisited and extended to time series and
panel data. The most important innovation of this new literature is that the original
intuition of taking the variance to infinity has been shown to be not required. It is enough
to find a shift in the variances of the structural shocks that changes their relative
importance. Leamer (1981) pointed out in the standard supply and demand framework
that the admissible coefficients belong to a hyperbola. If the variances of the shocks shift,
then the hyperbola rotates and the pivotal point is the pair of true coefficients. See
Rigobon (2003) and Lewbel (2004) for the formal derivation.4

4
  Regarding the development of the theory in the times series literature see Sentana (1992), Sentana and
Fiorentini (2001), and Rigobon (2003a). For applications see in Caporale, et. al. (2002a), Rigobon (2002a),
Rigobon and Sack (2003a). In these papers the heteroskedasticity is modeled as a GARCH process and the
authors use the heteroskedasticity in the time series mainly as a statistical method to achieve identification.
See Rigobon (2002b 2003b), Rigobon and Sack (2003b), Caporale teal. (2002b) for applications where the
heteroskedasticity is described by regime shifts. In these papers economic events are used to determine the
regimes. Additionally, see Rigobon and Sack (2002) and Evans and Lyons (2003) for applications of the
identification through heteroskedasticity to event study estimation. Few applications have been applied to
panel data in the literature. Hogan and Rigobon (2003) apply the method to a very large panel data to
estimate the returns to education, where the regions of the UK are used as the different regimes. Klein and
                                                          10



III. Results

        In this section we apply the methodology described above to our problem. We are
interested in estimating the relationships among income, political institutions
(democracy), economic institutions (rule of law), openness, distance from the equator,
land area, and population.5 We assume that the last three are exogenous to the first four
allowing us to have a large set of overidentifying restrictions. So our system includes
four endogenous variables (income, democracy, rule of law, openness) and three
exogenous variables (distance from equator, area, population). We allow the equation for
each of the endogenous variables to include all the exogenous variables as well as the
(other) endogenous variables.

        The data come from the standard sources: Penn World Tables and World
Development Indicators for economic data, Polity IV for indicators of democracy and
constraint on the executive, and Knack and Keefer (1995) and Kaufmann et al. (2002) for
the rule of law.

        Table 1 shows the summary statistics of the variables included in most of the
specifications.

                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                               Num Obs.   Average    Std. Deviation
           Distance from the Equator            disteq           208        25.0         16.8
           Country Area                         area             162      315534.2     902546.9
           Openness                             copen            170        72.9         43.6
           Population                           pop              192        29.3         113.2
           Openness (PWT)                       pwtopen          171        74.0         42.7
           GDP percapita                        gdppc            165       7358.9       7541.9
           Democracy                            democ            161        0.5          19.1
           Constraints on the executive         xconst           161        0.1          18.7
           Rule of Law (Kaufmann et al.)        rulelawkkz        81        -0.3          0.9
           Rule of Law 80s (KK)                 rulelaw80        126        3.1           1.5
           Rule of Law 90s (KK)                 rulelaw90        131        3.8           1.3




Vella (2003) also use heteroskedasticity to estimate the returns to education. They use a nonparametric
model to describe the heteroskedasticity as a function of the regressors. Broda and Weinstein (2003) use the
inequality constraints together with the heteroskedasticity to estimate the elasticities of substitution in
models of trade to evaluate the gains from variety in the same spirit of Leamer’s (1981). Pattillo, Poirson,
and Ricci (2003) use the IH method to identify the impact of external debt on growth. Hviding and Ricci
(2003) investigate the impact of official reserves on exchange rate volatility. These last two papers use the
regime shift methodology of times series to obtain the different groups in the population.
5
  We include land area and population primarily because these have been frequently used as determinants
of openness. Frankel and Romer (1999) argue that these also belong in the income equation when openness
is used as a determinant.
                                                      11

        One important ingredient in the identification strategy (IH) is the split of the data
in several groups. We assume that there are two groups in the sample in terms of their
variances of the structural shocks. The assumption that the same A applies to both sub-
samples is innocuous, insofar as it is an implicit assumption made whenever we estimate
the system by OLS or IV by pooling the two sub-samples. We use two criteria to split
our sample in two different ways. First, we distinguish between countries that were
colonized by Europeans and countries that were not. We rely here on the argument that
colonization has been, relatively speaking, a homogenizing experience insofar as it has
implied rule by a few metropolitan centers and the adoption of practices and institutions
imposed from these centers. Everything else being the same, this historical experience
should have reduced the variance of the structural shocks to which colonized countries
have been subjected to, compared to non-colonized countries. Countries that have been
occupied by Europeans for a relatively short period of time (fewer than 25 years) are not
included in the colonized group.6 Second, we split the data according to the way the
continents are aligned, distinguishing between horizontal and vertical continents. Here we
rely on an argument made by Jared Diamond (1997) regarding how geography interacts
with technology transfer. Diamond points out that it is easier for new seed varieties and
other agricultural technologies to migrate on an East-West axis than on a North-South
axis. The reason is that moving in the North-South direction entails traversing different
ecological and climatic zones, with attendant loss in the suitability and adaptability of
agricultural innovations. Hence we split our sample between countries that are located in
continents aligned on an East-West axis (Eurasian countries) versus those in continents
aligned on a North-South axis (Africa and the Americas).

        In the appendix we present the list of countries in each of the splits. Under the
colony split we have 70 countries that have not being colonized by Europeans for a
significant period of time, and 168 countries that have been. We do not have information
about institutions, openness, etc. for all of them and the final sample constitutes 53
colonized countries and 33 not colonized countries. The geographical orientation split has
fewer countries in the sample (Oceania is excluded). We have 98 countries that belong to
continents that are horizontally aligned (Eurasia) and 59 countries in continents that are
vertically aligned (Africa and the Americas). The final sample with all the data contains
43 countries in each sub-sample.


III.1 Openness, institutions, and income with OLS

     As a first step, we show the results when the income equation is estimated using
OLS without instruments. We estimate the following specification:



6
  Our variable requires that the colonization take place before the beginning of the 20th century, and that the
country be occupied for more than 25 years. We have also employed an alternative colonization variable
that is set to one if Europeans colonized the country for short periods of time, at any time before world war
one. The results are almost unaffected by the change in the split and therefore are not presented. These
results are available upon request.
                                                 12


              y = α1 idem + α 2 irol + α 3 open + α 4 disteq + α 5 area + α 6 pop

where y, idem, irol, open, disteq, area, and pop are log output, democratic institutions,
economic institutions (rule of law), log of openness (trade/GDP), distance from the
equator (which is divided by 100), log of area, and log of population. This is the
benchmark to which our estimates are going to be compared. We normalize each variable
by its standard deviation in the whole sample to facilitate evaluation of the quantitative
significance of the estimated coefficients.

         The results of estimating the OLS on the full equation are summarized in Table 2
(t-statistics are reported under the coefficient estimates).
                           Table 2: Income Equation: OLS estimates
                              Idem     Irol   Open    DistEq   Area     Pop
                          y   0.187   0.539   0.035   0.185    0.185   -0.151
                               2.3     5.4     0.3     2.0      2.0     -1.8


The first coefficient indicates that an improvement in democratic institutions improves
income significantly. The second estimate shows that an improvement in economic
institutions – measured by the rule of law – also increases the income level, with a larger
impact than democratic institutions. In this regression openness is not significant. This
result appears when in the OLS regression several measures of institutions are included in
the specification. Regarding the effect of geography, distance from the equator is
associated with an improvement in the income levels, larger countries have higher
incomes, and countries with large populations have smaller income levels (this last one is
only marginally significant).

       Instrumental variables versions of such a specification have been reported in work
by AJR (2001), FR (1999), Easterly and Levine (2003), RST (2002), Dollar and Kraay
(2002), Alcala and Ciccone (2003), and Sachs (2003). Generally, these results point to an
important causal impact of institutional quality, with all studies that have explicitly
considered the role of institutions finding a strong effect. But the causal role played by
trade and geography still remains controversial. For example, RST (2002) finds no
significant role for trade once institutional quality is controlled, and AJR (2001), Easterly
and Levine (2003), and RST (2002) find only an indirect effect of geography (through
institutional quality).

      As we discussed earlier, IV estimates are subject to questions having to do with the
plausibility and quality of the instruments selected. Moreover, none of these earlier
studies is able to distinguish between economic and political institutions, and none can
examine the full set of interactions among the endogenous variables. That is where the
advantages of the current approach lie.

III.2 IH estimation

      Our approach identifies the relationship among the endogenous variables not
through instrumentation but by appealing to heteroskedasticity in the data. Because
                                             13

several of the variables under analysis (all the geography ones) are exogenous to income,
institutions, and openness, we can impose some exclusion restrictions on the system.
These improve the estimation, and can be used to test for overidentifying restrictions. In
particular, we assume that the model takes the following form:

              1 a12 a13 a14 a15 a16 a17   y   c y   ε y 
             a                                  c  ε 
              21 1 a23 a24 a25 a26 a27   idem   idem   idem 
              a31 a32 1 a34 a35 a36 a37   irol   cirol   ε irol 
                                                                   
             a41 a42 a43 1 a45 a46 a47   open  =  copen  +  ε open 
             0     0  0  0   1   0   0  disteq  cdisteq  ε disteq 
                                                                   
             0     0  0  0 a65 1     0   area   carea   ε area 
             0
              440444  0  0 a    a    1   pop   c pop   ε pop 
             1           4244754476443 
                                A
where the pre-multiplying matrix is A, and where as before y, idem, irol, open, disteq,
area, and pop denote output, democratic institutions, economic institutions (rule of law),
openness, distance to the equator, area, and population, respectively. In the estimation we
allow for different constant terms across the splits in the data.

        As in the simple example, we assume that the covariance of the structural
residuals is diagonal; in other words, these residuals truly reflect independent innovations
to each of the observed variables. Observe that in matrix A we have imposed the
assumption that distance, area, and population are exogenous to income, institutions, and
openness–the coefficients of the lower-matrix a51 to a74 are all set equal to zero.
Moreover, we allow interrelationships among these three exogenous variables through
the coefficients a65 , a75 , and a76 , but with the assumption that distance from the equator
is the most exogenous one, and population the least exogenous. In other words, we allow
population to be a function of distance from equator and area, and area to be a function of
distance from equator.

        As was mentioned before we use two splits to estimate the model using the
heteroskedasticity across the sub-samples. Both splits assume that the differences across
groups are concentrated on their second moments and not on their A-matrix coefficients.
In other words, our assumption is that the variances change but the coefficients in matrix
A do not. One advantage of the IH methodology is that the parameter stability assumption
can be tested. In our particular application this is best done by comparing the estimates
from the different splits of the data.

        The parameters of interest are the endogenous coefficients (matrix A), the
structural variances in each of the regimes, and the intercepts. All of our estimation is
performed by GMM, and the iteration process for convergence is as follows:
                                                                   14

     1. Given the parameters (matrix A, the structural variances, and intercepts) We
        compute the structural residuals in each regime
        ηi = A × [y idem irol open disteq area pop ] '
     2. The identifying assumption is that the covariance terms of the structural shocks
        are zero. We compute these moment conditions for each regime and each pair of
        variables.
     3. Finally, we minimize the moment conditions searching for the intercepts,
        variances and contemporaneous coefficients.

        Note that in the construction of the moments we are conditioning on the split (this
is not estimated, but assumed). An alternative would be to assume that countries belong
to two different types differentiated only by their standard deviation. We could estimate
that model where we do not have to commit to any ex-ante split of the data. This
procedure would use the heteroskedasticity in the data as statistical means to solve the
problem of identification. Although a significant part of the literature using
heteroskedasticity – specially the one in which ARCH and GARCH models are fitted – is
along this line, we believe that using an economic reason behind the identification has
several advantages: First, we understand what the split is achieving and why. Second,
because we have economic reasons to believe that the split changes the second moments
but not the first moments or the contemporaneous coefficients we feel more comfortable
with the outcome of the methodology and the assumption that the parameters are stable.
Finally, using economic reasoning to construct the split, instead of random differences,
eliminates some of the mysterious aspect of the identification.

        The first question that arises is how different are the two sub-samples under these
splits? Are the means statistically different? Are the second moments? The following
two tables answer these questions. Table 3 shows the estimated constant terms (c’s)—the
structural intercepts—derived using the GMM procedure.

                                 Table 3: Differences in means across sub-samples
                             Y               Idem               Irol                Open          DistEq           Area             Pop
                      s1          s2    s1          s2   s1            s2      s1          S2   s1     s2     s1          s2   S1         s2
Colony        Mean    5.30       5.20   1.28    1.42     -5.1          -5.1   14.67    14.77    1.01   2.52   6.30    5.28     7.01   7.54
              StDev   1.72       1.73   2.25    2.26     2.01      2.03       0.96     0.98     0.09   0.12   0.22    0.46     0.60   0.58
                                 0.04           0.05               0.01                0.07            9.99           2.01            0.63
Geog.         Mean    5.99       5.81   4.07    4.01     -6.2          -6.0   15.71    15.15    2.22   0.95   5.61    6.43     7.39   6.51
orientation
              StDev   1.90       1.81   2.50    2.41     2.29      2.18       0.97     0.92     0.14   0.10   0.35    0.19     0.50   0.52
                                 0.07           0.02               0.06                0.42            7.64           2.04            1.22


        For each split and variable, the first entry is the mean in sub-sample one (s1) and
the second entry is the mean in the other sub-sample (s2). Below each mean we show the
standard deviation of the mean and the t-statistic associated with the test for the equality
of the means. As can be seen, the two sub-samples reveal no differences in means with
respect to our four endogenous variables--income, democracy, rule of law, and openness.
This result holds for both of our splits. Any significant difference in means across sub-
                                                                        15

samples is confined to some of our exogenous variables (distance from the equator and
land area).

        Our methodology relies on the assumption that second moments are statistically
different across the sub-samples generated by our splits. In Table 4 we show the
differences in the variances of all seven variables across the sub-samples. As before,
these are the variances of the structural shocks after the model has been estimated using
GMM. Remember that the identification requires heteroskedasticity of the structural
shocks and not of the reduced form shocks.

        As before, the first row for each split is the estimated standard deviation of the
variable of interest; the second row is the standard deviation of this estimate; and the last
row is the standard t-test for equality between the latter standard deviations. As can be
seen, there are important differences here. In about half of the cases the standard
deviations across the two sub-samples are statistically different. It is this feature of the
data that enables us to estimate the coefficients using heteroskedasticity. If it were the
case that second moments are not statistically different across splits identification would
remain a hopeless task.

                               Table 4: Differences in variance across sub-samples
                               Y                Idem                Irol                Open          DistEq               Area             Pop
                        s1         s2      s1          s2      s1          s2      s1          s2   s1     s2        s1           s2   s1         s2
  Colony        σ       0.49       0.18    0.79    0.21     0.45        0.42      0.36     0.34     0.44   0.47      0.94     0.71     0.60   0.58
                StDev   0.10       0.05    0.16    0.06     0.09        0.11      0.07     0.09     0.09   0.12      0.20     0.19     0.12   0.15
                                   2.74            3.36                 0.24               0.12            0.20               0.84            0.10
  Geog.         σ       0.19       0.56    0.34    0.78     0.37        0.51      0.32     0.31     0.78   0.39      0.96     0.83     0.66   0.34
  orientation
                StDev   0.04       0.13    0.08    0.18     0.09        0.13      0.07     0.07     0.17   0.08      0.21     0.19     0.15   0.08
                                   2.69            2.24                 0.93               0.10            2.07               0.43            1.91


        The results when the data are organized according to the geography split (shown
in the bottom panel in each table) produce very similar results regarding means and
standard deviations. In general, there are no large differences in the means, but significant
disparities in second moments.

        We are now ready to discuss the results of interest. The estimates of matrix A
using the colony variable to split the data are shown in Table 5; the estimates using
geographical orientation are shown in Table 6.

                                        Table 5: Estimates of A matrix: Colony split
                                             Y         Idem          Irol        Open      DistEq      Area         Pop
                        Income                         0.233        0.243       -0.360     0.245      -0.209      -0.105
                                                       1.64          1.88        4.02       2.38       3.68        1.57
                        Democracy          0.433                    -0.392      -0.294     0.267      -0.175      -0.179
                                           1.04                      0.88        2.24       1.96       1.70        2.51
                        Rule of Law        0.198       0.432                     0.316     0.228       0.146       0.086
                                           1.69        2.96                      3.40       1.91       1.84        1.27
                        Openness           0.452       0.009        -0.052                 -0.274     -0.138      -0.550
                                                     16

                                 2.60    0.07     0.19              1.82    2.35     8.21



                  Table 6: Estimates of A matrix: Geographical orientation split
                                  Y      Idem     Irol    Open     DistEq   Area      Pop
                   Income                0.034    0.739   -0.179   -0.014   -0.235    0.065
                                         0.32     9.89     2.03     0.19     3.17     1.03
                   Democracy     0.145            0.254   -0.358   0.121    0.068    -0.460
                                 0.61             1.60     2.47     0.89     0.85     4.57
                   Rule of Law   0.129    0.099            0.177    0.720   -0.127    0.057
                                 0.78     0.58             1.21     4.06     2.53     0.54
                   Openness      0.033   -0.034   0.035            -0.127   -0.081   -0.677
                                 0.26     0.27    0.26              0.93     1.19    11.20


         In both Tables we present only the equations for income, democracy, rule of law,
and openness. The equations for distance from the equator, area, and population are not
presented as they are not of interest. Each table is organized as follows: The first equation
is the income equation, which is a function of the other six variables. Each entry presents
the point estimate and the t-stat. The coefficients in the table are the coefficients of the
matrix multiplied by -1, so, they have the same signs as if we had run them on the right
hand side, instead of on the left hand side. This is just for ease of presentation of the
results and to simplify the discussion and comparison between these estimates and those
form OLS. The second equation shows the determination of democratic institutions as a
function of the other six variables, and so forth. All the variables have been normalized
by their standard deviations and therefore the point estimates are comparable and have
the same interpretation as those from Table 2.

         Before proceeding to interpret each equation it is important to point out the
stability of the coefficients across the two splits of the data. Remember that the set of
countries included in one of the splits is different from that included in the other. Hence,
the grouping cuts the data from two very different perspectives, and still the estimates are
close–not only statistically but also in magnitude. We can see this in a number of ways.

         First, statistically speaking, we cannot reject the hypothesis that all the coefficient
estimates are the same across the two splits; the F-test has a p-value of 0.14. Second,
notice that the signs of the coefficients across the two tables are relatively consistent. For
example, except for the non-significant coefficients the signs always agree across the two
specifications. Third, the coefficients that are significant in one split are likely to be
significant in the other or to be insignificant but of the same sign. For instance, in the first
split there are 14 coefficients that are significant or borderline significant (t-stats larger
than 1.80). From these coefficients, 6 have the same sign and are also significant in the
second split, and only one has a different sign. That last coefficient is badly estimated
and hence it is not statistically different from the coefficient estimated with the first split.
Finally, the point estimates are close coefficient by coefficient. This strong robustness of
the coefficient will be further highlighted below when we return to the sensitivity
analysis, but as can be seen, the results seem to be quite robust so far.

        We proceed equation by equation for the interpretation of the coefficients. The
first equation in both tables summarizes the determinants of income. We find, in line with
                                                       17

the existing literature, that the rule of law has a strong positive effect on income
(although the estimated coefficient is only borderline significant with the colony split).
Distance from the equator has a positive and significant effect in the first split, but an
insignificant effect in the second split. Area and population enter significantly, although
they have different signs from the OLS regressions – in fact, these coefficients are
statistically different from those reported in Table 2. Trade openness has a significant
and negative effect on incomes in both splits. Note, however, that the estimated
coefficient on openness is not statistically different from that in the OLS specification,
mainly because the OLS coefficient is badly estimated. When only one of the two types
of institutions is included in the OLS regression openness becomes significant, but when
both are included the effect of openness disappears. So, the small effect is in part due to
an aspect that has not been analyzed in the literature before. Finally, democracy enters
with a positive sign in the income equation, but is (borderline) significant only with the
colony split.

         A standard result in the literature on institutions is that the estimated coefficient
on institutions typically increases significantly when the income equation is estimated
using IV rather than OLS (with settler mortality as an instrument for example). One
explanation for this is the presence of errors-in-variables, which the instrumentation
presumably corrects. Certainly this is a possibility; however, another potential reason for
the IV coefficient to be larger than the OLS coefficient is that the instrument is invalid –
i.e., that settler mortality enters the income equation directly.

        We cannot directly compare our results with the standard IV results because the
literature using mortality as instrument only includes one type of institution (rule or law
or a measure of expropriation) and we use two. Therefore, just for this discussion we re-
estimated the model eliminating the democracy variable. First, the OLS estimates are:
                                      Irol     Open    DistEq   Area     Pop
                                  y   0.374    0.074   0.447    -0.211   0.105
                                      4.80     0.74    5.78     2.22     1.09


        This shows the usual result in the growth literature – the significant impact of rule
of law and distance from the equator in explaining income differences in OLS
specifications. If we apply the IH estimator to this data using the colony split, the results
are as follows:
                                        Y       Irol    Open    DistEq   Area      Pop
                       Income                  0.161   0.321     0.528   -0.085    0.185
                                               2.14    1.98      8.10     1.44     2.00
                       Rule of Law     0.136           0.064     0.509    0.155   -0.150
                                       1.18            0.46      6.10     2.07     1.93
                       Openness       -0.148   0.152            -0.023   -0.432   -0.396
                                       0.95    1.54              0.24     6.96     9.60


Notice that the coefficient on the rule of law is statistically significant, but it is half of the
OLS estimate. Also observe that the feedback coefficient (income on rule of law) is
positive and hence the OLS coefficient should be biased upwards.
                                              18



         We now turn our attention to the determinants of the democratic institutions.
Although some of the results in the income equation are known, very little work has been
done to ascertain empirically how institutions are affected by income, the degree of
openness, etc. We find that income has a positive (but statistically insignificant) effect on
democratic institutions. We find that rule of law has a (marginally) significant coefficient
in the democracy equation when the geography split is used, but this coefficient is
negative and not significant when the colony split is used. There is a belief in the
literature that institutions of different kinds reinforce each other and some of our results
are suggestive of that. Third, and most strikingly, we find that openness is bad for
democracy. This result is robust to the split (and even to changes in the definition of
openness and of democratic institutions, as we discuss below). The effects are large and
statistically significant. Distance from the equator has a positive impact on democratic
institutions, although the effect is significant in only one of the specifications. The size of
the country (measured as its area) has no impact on the quality of its democracy, while
countries with larger populations are less democratic on average. This last effect is highly
significant.

        The results in the rule of law equation show some differences. On the one hand,
income improves the quality of rule of law in the same way as it does for democracy –
although here the point estimate is larger and more significant. Additionally, better
democracy improves the rule of law. The feedback effects in this case are larger and more
significant than in the case of the impact of the rule of law on democratic institutions.
Again, as we mentioned before, our methodology seems to be capturing the positive
feedback between the quality of economic and political institutions. The main difference
here is that in contrast to the case with democracy, openness improves the rule of law.
The latter estimates are positive and significant in the first split, and just positive when
the geography split is used. Putting these results together with the ones from the
democracy equation we conclude that openness is working through institutions in two
different ways. Countries that are more open tend to acquire better economic institutions,
perhaps because this is required to better compete internationally. However, openness in
general tends to weaken democratic institutions, perhaps because openness exacerbates
distributional conflicts. This result also may help resolve some of the different findings
found in the literature. If only one of the two institutions is included in an OLS equation
for income, then the bias on the openness coefficient can go in either direction
(considering that both institutions have positive impact on income).

        Distance to the equator has a positive and significant effect on the quality of rule
of law. In the case of the geography split this effect is large economically speaking.
Regarding population and area, the message seems to be that larger countries seem to
have worse quality of the rule of law, although the overall effect is small.

        The openness equation reveals that the most important determinant of the degree
of openness is income and geography. The level of income per capita has a positive
impact on the degree of openness when the colony split is used, but it is insignificant in
the other specification. Better democratic institutions or rule of law have a negligible
                                                              19

impact on openness. Distance from the equator, area, and population have negative and
significant effects on the degree of openness. Bigger countries are in general less open,
and the closer they are to the equator the larger the share of trade.

       One of the advantages of our procedure is that we can perform a variance
decomposition, and determine the relative importance of each of the shocks. Given the
estimates of matrix A, the structural residuals can be computed and the unconditional
variance can be estimated from the sample:

                                                   var(ε ) = var( AX )

The diagonal of this matrix is an estimate of the unconditional variance of the structural
shocks. Given that variance we can compute the contribution of each shock to the
variance of the observed variables. Denote

                                                      B = inv( A) = bij [ ]
the elements of the inverse of A, and denote as σ y , σ idem , σ irol , σ open , σ DistEa , σ area , and
σ pop the unconditional variances of the structural residuals. Then the variance of variable
i (let us say income) is given

var( X i ) = (bi1 ) σ y + (bi 2 ) σ idem + (bi 3 ) σ irol + (bi 4 ) σ open + (bi 5 ) σ DistEq + (bi 6 ) σ area + (bi 7 ) σ pop
                   2             2                2                2                   2                   2          2




         In this variance decomposition we are already assuming that the structural shocks
are uncorrelated. In Table 7 we show the variance decomposition implied by the colony
split, and in Table 8 we present the variance decomposition when the geography split is
used.

                                   Table 7: Variance decomposition: Colony split
                                         Y       Idem       Irol       Open   DistEq       Area    Pop
                        Income         58.1%    8.1%      1.1%     9.9%       20.1%        2.2%    0.4%
                        Democracy      1.2%     73.3%     4.1%     10.2%      8.0%         3.2%    0.0%
                        Rule of Law    9.6%     23.6%     43.4%    0.0%       22.4%        0.7%    0.2%
                        Openness       8.2%     0.9%      0.0%     33.3%      3.7%         36.8%   17.1%


                       Table 8: Variance decomposition: Geographical orientation split
                                         Y       Idem       Irol       Open   DistEq       Area    Pop
                        Income         38.6%     0.8%     31.3%        0.3%   21.4%        6.6%    0.9%
                        Democracy      0.4%     66.9%      5.4%        5.1%   17.4%        1.4%    3.5%
                        Rule of Law    0.4%      0.5%     49.8%        1.2%   44.3%        3.1%    0.7%
                        Openness       0.0%      0.0%      0.1%    43.7%      0.9%         27.1%   28.1%


       The interpretation of these results is as follows. Again, let us concentrate equation
by equation. In the income equation, innovations to income uncorrelated with the any of
                                            20

the other residuals explain 58 and 39 percent of the variance depending on the
specification. In other words, geography and institutions explain roughly 40 to 60 percent
of the income variation we observe today. The two measures of institutions contribute
from 9 to 32 percent of the variation of income while distance to the equator explains a
little more than 20 percent. Indeed, all the geographic variables together explain less than
30 percent of the variation.

       Regarding democratic institutions 70 percent of the variation is unexplained – or
explained by own innovations. Rule of law explains only 5 percent of the variation, while
openness explains a little more (almost 10 percent in the colony split). Distance to the
equator has a larger effect, while area and population explain almost nothing.

        Rule of law, on the other hand, is much better explained by the explanatory
variables. Democracy and distance from the equator explain more than 40 percent of the
variation, while area, population and income explain an additional 10 percent.

       Finally, openness is also well explained by the explanatory variables. Only 33 to
43 percent of the variation is explained by innovations to openness alone. Interestingly,
income and institutions have small explanatory power on openness and it is the
geographical characteristics that are the most important determinants.

IV. Discussion

IV.1 Robustness

      The results we presented have been subjected to several sensitivity tests. First, we
have substituted the variable “constraints on the executive” for democracy without major
changes in the results. Second, we have also tried several definitions for rule of law.
When we use the rule of law measures from Political Risk Services (Knack and Keefer
1995) averaged for the 1980s and 1990s, respectively, the results are almost identical.
Third, we tried several standard measures of openness. When openness from the Penn
World Tables is used (instead of the WDI measure) the estimates become less significant
but the signs remain the same as those presented here. Finally, we also modified the
definition of colonization including as “colonized” those countries where there was any
presence of Europeans. The results are almost identical. Therefore, our findings are
generally robust to redefinitions of the variables, exclusion of some countries, and
changes in the split. The general message (signs and significance of the relationship)
survived this sensitivity exercise.

IV.2 Testing the model

      Even though the model is overidentified and therefore we can either test the
overidentification or allow some coefficients to change across the sub-sample, it is
important to understand that not all coefficients are overidentified.
                                             21

      In particular, the overidentified coefficients in our model are those in the distance
from the equator, area, and population equations (the exogenous variables); the other
coefficients are just identified. Consequently, our test of overidentification is confined to
evaluating the stability of the coefficients in the equations for the exogenous variables.
We did not reject the overidentifying restrictions for these equations. But it is important
to recognize the limitation of this result. This just states that the coefficients in the
exogenous variables equations–how much area and population are explaining distance
from the equator and vice-versa–are stable, and not that the coefficients of interest are
stable.

      An interesting exercise would be to expand the splits used in this paper to achieve
overidentification of all the endogenous interactions and determine if the coefficients are
different across sub-samples. This can be achieved if the data is a panel, for example, and
we use decades as different splits. Unfortunately, in this paper, the assumption that the
coefficients in the four equations of interest are stable across the samples has to remain a
maintained assumption.

IV.3 OLS versus IV

       The IV literature estimating the impact of institutions on income usually finds that
the coefficient is larger than the OLS estimate. There are several potential explanations
for this. First, there may be large errors-in-variables and settler mortality can be
instrumenting for it. Second, the feedback from income to institutions could be negative.
Third, the instrument may be invalid in that it belongs in the income equation. The results
we have presented help resolve this ambiguity.

        First, we find that the feedback is in general positive—as the standard intuition
would suggest. Richer countries in general can afford better institutions. We also find that
variables that are highly correlated with settler mortality—such as distance to the
equator–enter the income equation, suggesting that part of the upward bias in the IV
estimates could be the result of the instrument not being entirely valid.

        Finally, there is the question of whether IH can deal directly with the errors-in-
variables in the data. The model that we have presented relies on the assumption that
heteroskedasticity exists in the data, and that this heteroskedasticity is the outcome of
differences in the variances of the structural shocks. As a result, the methodology can
deal with errors in variables if we can assume that the variance of the errors-in-variables’
shock remains unchanged across the splits. In other words, we have to assume that the
change in the variance that is observed across sub-samples still is due to a shift in the
structural variances and not to the fact that some sub-sample has a larger error-in-
variables than the other. This implies that to deal with errors-in-variables we require a
somewhat strong assumption. If the split would have been performed by separating
developed and developing economies it is clear that this assumption would have been
wrong. But our splits are based on geographical alignment and according to whether
countries were colonized or not. Therefore, developed and developing economies are
                                                   22

both represented in the sub-samples.7 Thus, this assumption could perhaps be justified.
Consequently, the fact that we can deal with some form of errors in variables is a major
advantage of our procedure. By contrast, the IV literature assumes that the instrument is
orthogonal to both the income shocks and to the measurement errors in the institutions.8


V. Conclusions

        The approach we have taken here serves as a useful robustness check on a large,
important, and influential body of research on the determinants of income differences
across countries. It also allows us to probe further on the interrelationships among the
endogenous variables than the IV literature has been able to do. Some of our results
reinforce findings that have already been reported: most importantly, we find a strong
causal impact from economic institutions (rule of law) to incomes. Others are novel: one
of our most intriguing results is the strong negative effect of trade openness on
democracy. Yet other results weigh in on one side of prevailing controversies: for
example, our findings on the impact of openness on incomes are in line with papers that
have reported negative or insignificant results (e.g. RST) and contradict papers with
positive results (e.g., FR).

        In closing, we emphasize the need to subject the IH approach itself to further
robustness checks. As we indicated above, it would be useful to come up with plausible
alternative splits and to be able to test for coefficient stability across sub-samples directly.




7
  Some of the poorer countries in the world, namely Ethiopia and Afghanistan, have never been colonized.
8
  The error in variables is equivalent to a common shock and the relaxation of the assumption that the
structural shocks have zero covariance. To solve the problem of identification we were to need additional
regimes. See Rigobon and Sack (2003b) for a model in which the zero covariance of the structural shocks is
relaxed. See also Hogan and Rigobon (2002).
                                           23


References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, "The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review,
91, 5, December 2001, 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, and Simon Johnson, “Unbundling Institutions,” MIT, July 2003.

Alcalá, F., and Antonio Cicconé, “Trade and Productivity,” Paper presented at the NBER
Summer Institute, June 2002.

Broda, Christian and David Weinstein. (2003) “Globalization and the Gains from
Variety”, Columbia University, Mimeo.

Caporale, G. M., Cipollini, A., and Demetriades, P. (2002a). “Monetary policy and the
exchange rate during the Asian crisis: Identification through heteroskedasticity”,
CEMFE, Mimeo.

Caporale, G. M., Cipollini, A., and Spagnolo, N. (2002b), “Testing for contagion: A
conditional correlation analysis”, CEMFE, Mimeo.

Diamond, Jared , Guns, Germs, and Steel, New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1997.

Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay, “Institutions, Trade and Growth,” Carnegie Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 2002.

Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay, “Institutions, Trade and Growth: Revisiting the
Evidence,” World Bank, January 2003.

Easterly, W., and Ross Levine, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments
Influence Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, January 2003,
volume 50.

Evans, M., and R. Lyons "How is Macro News Transmitted to Exchange Rates?" NBER
Working Paper 9433, January 2003.

Fisher, F. M. (1976). “The Identification Problem in Econometrics”, Robert E. Krieger
Publishing Co., New York, second edition.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, "Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic
Review, June 1999, 89(3), 379-399.

Glaeser, Edward L., Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
“Do Institutions Cause Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 10568, June 2004
                                           24

Hogan, Vincent and Roberto Rigobon (2002) “Using Unobserved Supply Shocks to
Estimate the Returns to Education”, MIT, mimeo

Hviding Ketil and Luca Ricci (2003) “The Effect of Reserves on Exchange Rate
Volatility”, IMF, mimeo.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay, and P. Zoido-Lobatón, “Governance Matters II—Updated
Indicators for 2000/01,” World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper No.
2772, Washington D.C., 2002.

Kaufmann, Daniel, and Aart Kraay, “Growth Without Governance,” Economia, 2002.

Klein, Roger and Francis Vella (2003) “Identification and Estimation of the Triangular
Simultaneous Equations Model in the Absence of Exclusion Restrictions Through the
Presence of Heteroskedasticity” Rutgers, Mimeo.

Knack, Stephen and Keefer, Philip, "Institutions and Economic Performance: Empirical
Tests using Alternative Measures of Institutions," IRIS Working Paper #109, 1995.

Leamer, Edward (1981) “Is it a demand curve, or is it a supply curve? Partial
identification through inequality constraints” Review of Economics and Statistics,
August, 63 (3), pp. 319-27.

Pattillo Catherine, Poirson Helene, and Luca Ricci (forthcoming), “The Channels through
Which External Debt Affects Growth”, Brookings Institutions Trade Forum.

Rigobon, Roberto (2000) "A simple test for stability of linear models under
heteroskedasticity, omitted variable, and endogenous variable problems" September. MIT
Mimeo.

Rigobon, Roberto (2002a) "The Curse of Non-investment Grade Countries". Journal of
Development Economics, Volume 69, Issue 2, December, pp. 423-449.

Rigobon, Roberto (2002b) "Contagion: How to measure it?" in "Preventing Currency
Crises in Emerging Markets" Editors: Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, The
University Chicago Press, Chicago, pp 269-334.

Rigobon, Roberto (2003a) "Identification Through Heteroskedasticity." Review of
Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Rigobon, Roberto (2003b) "On the Measurement of the International Propagation of
Shocks: Are they Stable?" Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.

Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2002) “'The impact of monetary policy on asset
prices” MIT mimeo.
                                            25

Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2003a) “Spillovers Across U.S. Financial Markets”,
MIT mimeo.

Rigobon, Roberto and Brian Sack (2003b) “Measuring the Reaction of Monetary Policy
to the Stock Market”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2003, vol. 118, issue 2, pages
639-669.

Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic's Guide to the Cross-National Evidence," Macroeconomics Annual 2000, eds.
Ben Bernanke and Kenneth S. Rogoff, MIT Press for NBER, Cambridge,MA, 2001.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi, “Institutions Rule: The
Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development”
NBER Working Paper, November 2002 (forthcoming, Journal of Economic Growth).

Sachs, Jeffrey, “Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita
Income,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9490, February
2003.

Sentana, E. (1992). “Identification of multivariate conditionally heteroskedastic factor
models”, LSE, FMG Discussion Paper, 139.

Sentana, E. and Fiorentini, G. (2001) “Identification, estimation and testing of conditional
heteroskedastic factor models”, Journal of Econometrics, 102(2):143—164.

Wright, P. G. (1928). “The Tariff on Animal and Vegetable Oils” The Institute of
Economics. The Macmillan Company, New York.
                                                         26


Appendix
                                                   Colony Dummy
                        Not Colonized                                               Colonized
   Afghanistan                Liberia                    Algeria                      Kiribati
   Albania                    Libya                      Angola                       Lao PDR
   American Samoa             Liechtenstein              Antigua and Barbuda          Lesotho
   Andorra                    Lithuania                  Argentina                    Macao, China
   Armenia                    Luxembourg                 Aruba                        Madagascar
   Austria                    Macedonia, FYR             Australia                    Malawi
   Azerbaijan                 Marshall Islands           Bahamas, The                 Malaysia
   Bahrain                    Micronesia, Fed. Sts.      Bangladesh                   Maldives
   Belarus                    Moldova                    Barbados                     Mali
   Belgium                    Monaco                     Belize                       Malta
   Bosnia and Herzegovina     Mongolia                   Benin                        Mauritania
   Bulgaria                   Netherlands                Bermuda                      Mauritius
   Channel Islands            Northern Mariana Islands   Bhutan                       Mayotte
   China                      Norway                     Bolivia                      Mexico
   Croatia                    Oman                       Botswana                     Morocco
   Cyprus                     Palau                      Brazil                       Mozambique
   Czech Republic             Poland                     Brunei                       Myanmar
   Denmark                    Portugal                   Burkina Faso                 Namibia
   Eritrea                    Qatar                      Burundi                      Nepal
   Estonia                    Romania                    Cambodia                     Netherlands Antilles
   Ethiopia                   Russian Federation         Cameroon                     New Caledonia
   Faeroe Islands             Samoa                      Canada                       New Zealand
   Finland                    San Marino                 Cape Verde                   Nicaragua
   France                     Saudi Arabia               Cayman Islands               Niger
   Georgia                    Slovak Republic            Central African Republic     Nigeria
   Germany                    Slovenia                   Chad                         Pakistan
   Greece                     Spain                      Chile                        Panama
   Hungary                    Sweden                     Colombia                     Papua New Guinea
   Iceland                    Switzerland                Comoros                      Paraguay
   Iran, Islamic Rep.         Syrian Arab Republic       Congo, Dem. Rep.             Peru
   Iraq                       Taiwan                     Congo, Rep.                  Philippines
   Ireland                    Tajikistan                 Costa Rica                   Puerto Rico
   Isle of Man                Thailand                   Cote d'Ivoire                Reunion
   Israel                     Tonga                      Cuba                         Rwanda
   Italy                      Turkey                     Djibouti                     Sao Tome and Principe
   Japan                      Turkmenistan               Dominica                     Senegal
   Jordan                     Ukraine                    Dominican Republic           Seychelles
   Kazakhstan                 United Arab Emirates       Ecuador                      Sierra Leone
   Korea, Dem. Rep.           United Kingdom             Egypt, Arab Rep.             Singapore
   Korea, Rep.                Uzbekistan                 El Salvador                  Solomon Islands
   Kuwait                     Vanuatu                    Equatorial Guinea            Somalia
   Kyrgyz Republic            Virgin Islands (U.S.)      Fiji                         South Africa
   Latvia                     West Bank and Gaza         French Polynesia             Sri Lanka
   Lebanon                    Serbia/Montenegro          Gabon                        St. Kitts and Nevis
                                                         Gambia, The                  St. Lucia
                                                         Ghana                        St. Vincent and the Grenadines
                                                         Greenland                    Sudan
                                                         Grenada                      Suriname
                                                         Guam                         Swaziland
27

Guatemala          Tanzania
Guinea             Togo
Guinea-Bissau      Trinidad and Tobago
Guyana             Tunisia
Haiti              Uganda
Honduras           United States
Hong Kong, China   Uruguay
India              Venezuela, RB
Indonesia          Vietnam
Jamaica            Yemen, Rep.
Kenya              Zambia
                   Zimbabwe
                                                 28

                                  Geographical Orientation
                     Horizontal                                          Vertical
Andorra                   Korea, Rep.             Aruba                        Algeria
Afghanistan               Kuwait                  Angola                       Ecuador
Albania                   Lao PDR                 Netherlands Antilles         Eritrea
United Arab Emirates      Lebanon                 Argentina                    Ethiopia
Armenia                   Liechtenstein           Antigua and Barbuda          Gabon
Australia                 Sri Lanka               Burundi                      Ghana
Austria                   Lithuania               Benin                        Guinea
Azerbaijan                Luxembourg              Burkina Faso                 Gambia, The
Belgium                   Latvia                  Bahamas, The                 Guinea-Bissau
Bangladesh                Macao, China            Belize                       Equatorial Guinea
Bulgaria                  Monaco                  Bermuda                      Grenada
Bahrain                   Moldova                 Bolivia                      Guatemala
Bosnia and Herzegovina    Maldives                Brazil                       Guyana
Belarus                   Macedonia, FYR          Barbados                     Honduras
Brunei                    Myanmar                 Botswana                     Haiti
Bhutan                    Mongolia                Central African Republic     Jamaica
Switzerland               Malaysia                Canada                       Kenya
Channel Islands           Netherlands             Chile                        St. Kitts and Nevis
China                     Norway                  Cote d'Ivoire                Liberia
Cyprus                    Nepal                   Cameroon                     Libya
Czech Republic            New Zealand             Congo, Rep.                  St. Lucia
Germany                   Oman                    Colombia                     Lesotho
Denmark                   Pakistan                Comoros                      Morocco
Egypt, Arab Rep.          Philippines             Cape Verde                   Madagascar
Spain                     Papua New Guinea        Costa Rica                   Mexico
Estonia                   Poland                  Cuba                         Mali
Finland                   Korea, Dem. Rep.        Cayman Islands               Malta
France                    Portugal                Djibouti                     Mozambique
Faeroe Islands            Qatar                   Dominica                     Mauritania
United Kingdom            Romania                 Dominican Republic
Georgia                   Russian Federation
Greece                    Saudi Arabia
Greenland                 Singapore
Hong Kong, China          San Marino
Croatia                   Slovak Republic
Hungary                   Slovenia
Indonesia                 Sweden
Isle of Man               Syrian Arab Republic
India                     Thailand
Ireland                   Tajikistan
Iran, Islamic Rep.        Turkmenistan
Iraq                      Turkey
Iceland                   Taiwan
Israel                    Ukraine
Italy                     Uzbekistan
Jordan                    Vietnam
Japan                     West Bank and Gaza
Kazakhstan                Yemen, Rep.
Kyrgyz Republic           Cambodia
