                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            EXPLAINING DIVERSITIES IN AGE-SPECIFIC LIFE EXPECTANCIES
                          AND VALUES OF LIFE SAVING:
                            A NUMERICAL ANALYSIS

                                               Isaac Ehrlich
                                                 Yong Yin

                                          Working Paper 10759
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10759


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




An earlier draft of this paper was distributed at the National Bureau of Economic Research Health Economics
Spring Meeting. We are indebted to Michael Grossman and the participants in the meeting for helpful
comments, and to Dhaval Dave for assistance with data sources. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Isaac Ehrlich and Yong Yin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Explaining Diversities in Age-Specific Life Expectancies and Values of Life Saving: A
Numerical Analysis
Isaac Ehrlich and Yong Yin
NBER Working Paper No. 10759
September 2004
JEL No. C6, D8, I1

                                             ABSTRACT

Little attempt has been made so far to quantify the extent to which individual willingness to spend
on life protection may account for the observed trends and diversities in agespecific life expectancies
across individuals and over time. We address these issues via calibrated simulations of a dynamic,
life-cycle model of life protection in which life’s end is a stochastic event, age-specific mortality
risks are endogenous variables, and spending on life protection is set jointly with related insurance
options: life insurance as well as annuities. A unique feature of our model is that it links age-specific
mortality risks and implicit private values-of-life-saving (VLS) as “dual variables”, and estimates
them jointly. It also offers new insights about the concept and measurement of VLS. Life protection
is estimated to have a non-negligible impact on age-specific life expectancies. It can account for
significant portions of observed inequalities in life expectancies across population groups and over
time, as well as for a wide range of empirical estimates of VLS produced via the conventional
“willingness to pay” approach.



Isaac Ehrlich
Department of Economics
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu

Yong Yin
Department of Economics
State University of New York at Buffalo
Buffalo, NY 14260
yyin@buffalo.edu
INTRODUCTION

   Despite the persistent upward trend in longevity in the developed world, there has been

little attempt by economists to quantify the importance of individual efforts at health and

life protection in explaining the trend and persistent disparities in age-specific life

expectancies across population groups 1 . Studies that address the determinants of life

expectancy generally rely on life-cycle models treating life’s end as known with certainty

(see references in Forster, 2000). Most also estimate reduced-form equations of an

underlying theoretical structure, which are not derived from the theoretical structure itself

(see references in Gerdtham et al., 1999, and Barlow and Vissandjee, 1999). Expanding on

the approach developed in Ehrlich (2000), we redress these issues through calibrated

simulations of a dynamic life-cycle model of life protection where life’s end is an uncertain

event, life-cycle consumption and savings plans are influenced by related insurance

options, and age-specific mortality risks, hence life expectancy, are endogenous variables.

This enables us to address the demand for life expectancy as a direct choice variable. A

unique feature of our model is that it links age-specific mortality risks and implicit private

values-of-life-saving (VLS) as “dual variables”, and estimates them jointly.

   Our key assumption is that age-specific mortality risks can be lowered on the margin

from biologically endowed levels that continuously rise with age (at least from adulthood),

through self-protective inputs. These include preventive medical care services, diet and

exercise, and myriad safety measures, collectively termed “life protection”. Individuals can

also insure against mortality risks by purchasing both life insurance and annuities. The

model’s control variables thus include age-specific consumption and bequest (accumulated

ordinary savings and life insurance) as independent choice variables, in addition to


                                              1
willingness to spend on life protection. A key co-state variable affecting the latter is the

‘shadow price of life protection’, also known as the ‘value of life saving’ (VLS).

   As previous literature emphasized (see e.g., Yaari, 1967, Thaler and Rosen, 1975,

Davies, 1981, Arthur, 1981, Shephard and Zeckhouser 1982, Philipson and Becker, 1998,

and Johansson, 2001), recognizing longevity as uncertain can change the standard

economic predictions about life-cycle choices. We go beyond these models by treating the

risk of mortality and age-specific VLS as endogenous variables, along with consumption

and bequest (life insurance as well as annuities). This complex framework does not yield

explicit solutions for our three endogenous variables. Ehrlich (2000) derived such solutions

by treating life protection as predetermined. In this study, we provide unconditional

solutions for all three choice variables, using numerical methods.

   The model’s parameters are, in principle, estimable statistically, but the individual life-

cycle data required for such estimation are not fully available. We rely, instead, on

calibrated simulations of our model’s basic parameters, based on representative group data.

Our analysis is facilitated by a number of simplifying assumptions, which permit the use of

the model’s optimality conditions in the simulations. To account for major life protection

inputs, we use an aggregate spending measure, which we calibrate empirically to

incorporate estimated spending on preventive medical care, workplace safety measures,

and health-enhancing goods and services (life style). We generally treat life protection as a

flow, rather than a stock variable, but we also use our methodology to account for the

durability of life protection over finite periods. We assume that annuities and life

insurance are available to individuals in private insurance markets at actuarially fair terms,

but we also develop insights about the impact of social security on optimal life protection.


                                              2
Despite these simplifications and related data limitations, our simulations are found to

account for a non-trivial portion of observed variations in life expectancies by age and

population groups, as well as for a wide range of empirically estimated VLS levels. They

also yield insights about the relative importance of basic determinants of life protection.

   Value-of-life-saving estimates have so far been derived mainly through regression

estimates of “willingness to pay” (WTP) opportunity costs for marginal reductions in

mortality risks, based on compensating wage or price differentials in activities associated

with varying risks to life. But these regressions treat observed mortality risks as exogenous

variables, whereas we treat observed probabilities of mortality as endogenous outcomes of

WTP directly for optimally determined life protection. We are thus able to link variations

in age-specific life expectancies with their implicit VLS counterparts over the life cycle as

well as in the cross section (see Viscusi, 1993 and Viscusi and Aldy, 2003).2 Moreover,

our analysis enables us to offer new insights into the concept and measurement of VLS.

   We conduct two types of calibrated simulations. In the first, we rely on the observed

rates of age-specific mortality risks for the general population (our benchmark group), as

reported by Vital and Health Statistics of the US [VS], to impute the corresponding

optimal spending on life protection and age-specific “biological” mortality risks. The

differences between the realized and projected risks indicate the quantitative impact of life

protection on realized life expectancy levels.

   In the second, we use the imputed biological mortality risks for our benchmark group to

project the realized risks of different educational groups, and of our benchmark group over

time. These simulations permit an assessment of the model’s power to explain diversity in

life expectancies in the population. They also provide alternative age-specific VLS


                                                 3
estimates based on a conventional “willingness to pay” approach, which highlight the

dependence of VLS estimates on the length of the interval of time over which they are

measured.

   We proceed as follows: Sections I and II introduce our model and simulation

procedure. In section III we calibrate our benchmark case. In sections IV and V we conduct

simulations explaining life expectancy variations across individuals, groups, and over time.

We conclude by assessing the model’s power to explain the apparent variability in both life

expectancies and empirically estimated magnitudes of ‘value of life saving’.

I. The Theoretical Model And Its Numerical Solution

   The essence of our theoretical approach is the correspondence between efforts to reduce

mortality risks, which we call “life protection”, and the standard definition of what the

literature calls “value of life saving”. Under static conditions, the prospect of mortality

means facing a pair of conditional outcomes: a consumption plan if alive (G), subject to a

wealth constraint (W) net of life-protection outlays (s), G = (W-s) with utility level U(G),

or a bequest plan B = (W-s), subject to the same constraints but yielding a lower utility

level V(B). The underlying mutually exclusive states of the world are “life” and “death”,

with probabilities (1-p) and p, respectively. Life protection outlays (s) are designed to

lower p, where p(s) is a continuously differentiable and strictly concave function of s, and

p’(s=0) → ∞. Optimal life protection requires as a necessary condition the equality

between the marginal cost of life protection and its marginal benefit:

(1) [-p’(s)] = [(1-p(s))U’(G) +p(s)V’(B)]/[U(G)- V(B)].

Equation (1) restates the optimal “self-protection” decision in Ehrlich and Becker [EB]

(1972). Taking its inverse value we obtain:


                                              4
(2) v(s) ≡ -[1/p’(s)] = [U(G)- V(B))]/[(1-p(s))U’(G) + p(s)V’(B)].

The numerator of (2) defines the difference in utility between being alive or dead and the

denominator of (2) defines the marginal expected utility of wealth. Their ratio defines the

“shadow price of life protection”, or “willingness to pay” for a marginal reduction in the

probability of mortality – better known as the “value of life saving” (VLS). Optimal self-

protection and VLS are thus shown to be two sides of the same coin. In EB’s model, the

self-protection decision is determined jointly with a “market insurance” alternative.

   The model we specify and simulate in this paper is a generalization of this market-

insurance-self-protection paradigm in several ways: it is formulated as a continuous-time,

life-cycle consumption prospect subject to stochastic odds of survival to any point in time

(“age”), under a given age-earnings profile and an initial wealth level, which is inherited as

the optimal bequest left by an earlier generation. It is also a generalization of the

“insurance” problem analyzed in EB in that two types of “market insurance” are recognized

simultaneously: insuring survivors’ needs in the event of ones’ premature death (life

insurance), and insuring one’s own old-age needs arising from unanticipated longevity

(annuities purchase). The availability of a market for actuarial notes allows us to solve for

optimal consumption and bequest paths separately over the life cycle, to estimate the

“market” value of human wealth under uncertain work horizons, and to link optimal

bequest of an older generation with initial wealth of its offspring.

   The formal model is outlined in Appendix A. Here we introduce its basic components.

We assume that the survival probabilities between any two points in time follow a

                                                  j
generalized Poisson process: S(i, j) = exp[− f ( t )dt ] , where f(t) is the time-varying hazard
                                              i




                                                  5
that death would occur at t, given survival to t. We specify this conditional hazard rate, f(t),

or "force of mortality", to be controllable on the margin by a concurrent aggregate life

protection measure, I(t), which is an increasing function of own time (m), preventive

health care and safety measures (M), personal efficiency proxied by education (E), and a

given health-care technology θ, i.e., I(t) = I(m(t), M(t); E(t), θ(t)).3 Life protection lowers

the natural, or biological hazard rate, j(t), which continuously rises with age (at least from

                  0
adulthood), i.e., j( t ) > 0 . For convenience, we define the output of life protection efforts in

units of mortality rates, so f(t) = j(t) - I(t) ≥ 0.

    Life protection output is assumed to be subject to diminishing marginal productivity,

largely because of the finiteness of the human body. The cost of life protection is thus

specified as an increasing cost function, C(t) = cI(t)α, where c is the cost of providing "one

unit" of I(t), and α>1. This one-unit cost is generally a function of given health-services

market price and medical technology and one’s wage and human capital (education) paths,

or c(t) = c(Pm, θ, w(t), E(t)), respectively. Since the wage (opportunity cost of time) is

itself a function of human capital, w(t)=w(E(t)), and the two have opposite effects on c, we

abstract from any drift in c over the life cycle or in the cross section, by invoking a

“neutrality” assumption about the net effect of human capital on unit costs.4

    We assume the existence of competitive markets for actuarial notes (life insurance and

annuities) that are actuarially fair to individuals. This simplification enables us to treat real

“consumption” spending Z(t) (net of life protection) and bequest B(t), i.e., life insurance

and accumulated ordinary savings (which survive one’s death), as separate objects of

choice, along with life protection, as well as to derive conditional closed-form solutions for



                                                  6
our control variables. It also facilitates the assessment of the “market” values of both

human wealth, i.e., the capitalized value of future earnings stream net of life protection

costs L(t), and non-human wealth, A(t), i.e., the annuity-equivalent of regular savings and

all annuities, as defined in equations (A.2a) and (A.3a) in Appendix A.1. The objective
                                                                                          ~
function is the additive expected lifetime utility (J) having a stochastic time of death, D :
                                           ~
                                       D                                            ~           ~
(3) J (A( t ), t; η) = Max Z,B, I E{           exp[−ρ(s − t )]U( Z(s)) ds + exp[−ρ(D − t )]V(B(D), t )},
                                       t



where U(Z) = (1/k)Zk, V(B,t) = [n(t)/k]Bk, 0<k<1 to assure concavity, ρ is a subjective

discount factor, and        is a parameters vector. The expectation operator E is defined over
                                                                           ~
the density function of the endogenous mortality risks. Since age at death D is stochastic,

the optimization problem must be defined over some planning horizon D ≤ ∞. The

boundary conditions restrict annuity wealth, A(t), to be exhausted at D (see equation A.4).

    To facilitate the dynamic simulations, the model treats life protection as a flow

variable. In section IV.C.1, however, we simulate the model by allowing life-protection to

have a durable effect on future mortality rates. Also, we do not model morbidity risk

(health) as a direct argument entering the utility function, although implicitly we take it to

be monotonically related to mortality risk (see Ehrlich, 2000), since the material impact of

life protection on morbidity is captured by the actual earnings data we use in our

simulations, w(t), which reflects labor time lost to illness. To mitigate the omission of

health as utility, however, we also conduct simulations in which the value of healthy time

is imputed as part of our definition of “full earnings” (see subsection IV.B.5).

    Equation (3) allows for “bequest” just as a financial legacy. It thus implicitly includes

in “consumption” any investments a family head makes in raising and educating children,



                                                             7
who provide altruistic benefits as well as informal-care and support at old age. The

accumulated financial wealth we derive should thus be interpretable as accounting, in part,

for such parental investments. In addition, the model assumes all annuities to be private,

although in practice annuity income and related taxes come largely from social security. In

our baseline simulations A(t) thus accounts, in principle, for social security as well. In

section IV.C.2, however, we treat social security wealth as a separate wealth component.

   The first-order optimality conditions are given in Appendix A. The model’s parameters

are the age profiles of the biological mortality density j(t), the real wage profile, w[E(t)],

and the time-invariant parameters associated with the real return on capital (r), and the

utility and health-production cost functions (ρ, k, n, c, α) as defined above and in

Appendix A. The optimized “control variables” are the time-varying paths of life

protection, I(t), consumption, Z(t), and bequest, B(t), under a given planning horizon (D ≤

∞). These dictate the resulting “state variables” paths – net human and non-human wealth,

L(t) and A(t), and the mortality density function f(t), hence life expectancy T*(t).

   A key co-state variable in the model is the shadow price of life protection, measuring

the value of a marginal reduction in the force of mortality, f(t), or the private value of life

saving. Its optimal solution is given by

(4) v*(t) = (1/k)L(t)+[(1-k)/k][A(t)-B*(t)] = z(t)[A(t) + L(t)] - A(t) = αcI*(t)α-1

with A(t), L(t), and z(t)>1, defined in equations (A.2a), (A.3a) and (A.13) of appendix A.

   The closed-form solution of v*(t) in equation (4) represents a dynamic version of the

static VLS in equation (2). Like equation (2) it is conditional, however, on the mortality

density f(t), which affects the values of z(t), L(t) and A(t) and is an endogenous outcome of

optimal life protection, I*(t). The latter is found by equating the value of life saving with its


                                               8
marginal cost, v*(t) = αcI*(t)α-1. The age-varying VLS can thus be inferred from the

optimal “willingness to pay” for a marginal increase in life protection, which is determined

jointly with optimal consumption and bequest, Z*(t) and B*(t) (see Appendix A). Note that

A(t)-B*(t) measures the optimal demand for annuities at different age levels.

   An immediate implication of equation (4) is the greater importance of human relative

to non-human wealth in determining age-specific VLS. The intuitive reason is that human

wealth can be realized at any given age only upon survival to that age. It thus has a greater

weight in determining the optimal path of life protection efforts over the life cycle.

   It is impossible to obtain closed-form solutions for all endogenous variables, but we

make use of conditional closed-form solutions of the system obtained by first taking life

protection to be predetermined (see Appendix A.2). Here we derive unconditional

solutions for all choice variables through an iterative procedure described below. The

stochastic dynamic programming method used to solve the model (see, e.g., Judd, 1998)

produces time-consistent life-cycle paths of these endogenous variables starting from any

given age, t, conditional on survival to t.

II. THE ITERATIVE METHOD

   We combine our conditional closed-form solutions for consumption, bequest, and the

value of life-saving function along with the first-order condition for optimal life protection,

as given in Appendix A, to derive unconditional solutions for all choice variables through

an iterative procedure described in Appendix B.

   As a starting point, we need to explain our treatment of mortality rates, which is a key

input in our iterations. No data are available on “biological” rates, j(t). What we observe in

practice are the actual mortality rates f(t), which we take to be the difference between the


                                               9
biological rates and the impact of life-protection, or f(t) = j(t) - I(t). In our benchmark case

we then calibrate our simulations by taking the observed average mortality rates for the

entire US population as the solution for f(t), and project the optimal age-profile of self-

protection activity that accounts for it. We thus impute the group’s implicit biological

mortality density j(t). For specific population groups, we can similarly impute group-

specific biological densities from the observed ones, if available, or use the imputed

biological density for the benchmark group as the actual densities of the specific-groups.5

   The simulations we conduct converge quite rapidly and smoothly under widely varying

values of the model’s underlying parameters. In most cases, the iterations converge on a

stable solution after just 4 or 5 iterations. The solutions are also found to be locally unique,

since when we use different starting values (initializations) of I(t) (see Appendix B), the

system converges on the same numerical solutions for all endogenous variables.

III. CALIBRATING THE MODEL

   We calibrate the basic parameters of the model using actual data and independent

studies. Some of our calibrations apply to the entire population (our benchmark group)

while others vary across population groups, based on available data.

A. Age-Specific Mortality Density

   We start with the observed profile of average age-specific mortality rates, f(t), for the

US population in 1996, which we take from VS (1999; Series 2, No. 129, Table 1). The VS

life table contains discrete, and somewhat noisy annual death rates from age 0 to 100. To

smooth out this annual series, specified as a generalized Poisson density function, f(t), we

convert it to a continuous function by assuming that f(t) follows a “local” linear trend

within each year. We also take the growth rate of f(t) at time t to be the average growth rate


                                              10
of f(t) over the time periods t-1 and t+1. The constant term of the projected linear trend is

then derived from the constraint that the integral value of the affected fatality density

should equal - ln(1 - q t ) , where qt is the death rate at time t.

    One remaining problem is that, while life tables end at age 100, we need to project

mortality rates up to age 107, and even up to 150 in our sensitivity analyses (see section

III.E). Following the technical recommendation in the VS report, we extend our death rate

series beyond age 100 using the relationship 1 − p( t − 1, t ) ≡ q t = q t −1e k t , where

k t = k 85 + s( t − 85) , and the report’s recommended values for k85 and s.

B. The Earnings Profile

    The age-earnings profiles we use are the average labor earnings of employees and self-

employed workers of different age groups as well as of different sex and schooling levels

in 1996, as listed in the Statistical Abstract of the United States [SAUS] (1998, Table 246).

These data are converted into a continuous wage profile, w(t), by fitting a cubic trend, since

market wages are reported only up to age 65 and are projected to age 80, assuming that

earnings are negligible past that age. While our model is interpretable as relating to "full-

earnings”, including the value of healthy time in both life protection and home production,

we allow for arbitrary estimates of the latter only as part of our comparative dynamics and

sensitivity analysis. In our baseline simulations we use reported labor earnings and

monetary spending to calibrate w(t) and the unit cost of life protection.

C. The one-unit Cost of Life Protection

    An important challenge is estimating the “one-unit” cost of self-protection, c. The

estimate we arrive at for our baseline group is c= 3.4 “units”.6 We calibrate this parameter,




                                                  11
based on our specification of the life-protection cost function, to ensure that our projected

value of the average annual life-protection spending per person over the middle-age bracket

40 to 49 would account for available data on three major categories of life-protection

spending (regardless of source of financing): “preventive” medical care, work-place safety

costs based on mandated OSHA requirements, and private spending on diet and exercise

representing preventive efforts associated with life-style choices.

   Medical care expenditures by age are available from the Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey of 1996. We distinguished discretionary “preventive care”, which protects a person

in a healthy state from reaching a potentially acute state of illness, from “remedial care”,

which is spent in a state of illness to avert potential life-threatening conditions, since

theoretically, our life-protection spending is inherently discretionary. Based on an expert

physician’s assessment, we set the preventive care portion of total spending at 46.27%,

allowing for a range of deviations around this figure in our actual simulations. 7

Assessments of the total cost of mandatory OSHA regulations per worker are hotly

disputed in the literature – we have thus used a conservative lower-bound assessment,

taken from Harvey (1998), by which this cost constitutes 0.866 % of average annual wages.

We extrapolated the annual spending on diet and exercise using Nachtrieb (2003).8

D. Other Parameters

   Since there are no available data on individual financial endowments at age 18, (A(0)),

we impute this variable iteratively via our dynamic simulation procedure so as to match

the expected value of bequest left by a parent who dies one generation (25 years) ahead

(i.e., at age 43), discounted by the average mortality rates of parents through that age. We

make the same adjustment to A(0) whenever we vary any of our basic parameters. For our


                                              12
baseline case, this method sets the financial endowment at A(0) = $6,315 (see IV.A).

   We set the elasticity of utility with respect to consumption k in equations (3) and (A.9)

to be 0.5, so the degree of relative risk aversion, d = (1-k), is 0.5 as well. The implied

inter-temporal elasticity of substitution in consumption (σ) is thus 2, which falls within the

range of estimated values of σ in many econometric studies. The intensity of utility

derived from bequest, n (see equation (A.10) in Appendix A), is calibrated to be constant at

1.2.9 Theoretically, n is the square root of the ratio of bequest to consumption in our model

(see equations (A.14) and (A.15) in Appendix A). The Statistical Abstract of the United

States for 1998 sets the total ordinary life insurance in force in 1996 (which we take to be

the main indicator of intended bequest) at $8.337 trillion, and personal consumption at

$5.208 trillion, producing a rounded ratio of 1.5, and justifying n=1.2. The real interest

rate, r, is calibrated to be 3.2%, a conservative estimate of the long-term real rate of return

on a total portfolio of financial and non-financial assets, 10 and the time preference

parameter, ρ, is set at 1.5%. This variable is calibrated so as to make our benchmark

simulation of the non-human annuity-wealth accumulation per family head approach the

level of mean family wealth, as gleaned from official statistics (see fn. 11).

   We set the planning horizon to start at age 18 because market wage income prior to this

age is quite low, and most juveniles do not make independent consumption, health, and

bequest choices. Starting our simulations at age 18 (or 25 in section V.C) supports our

treatment of schooling in this paper as a largely predetermined variable.

E. The Planning Horizon.

   A critical parameter to be selected is the terminal point of the planning horizon, D. In

principle D is infinite, as we place no upper limit on biological survival. We choose a finite


                                              13
horizon, however, because our stochastic dynamic optimization problem and our

simulations require a finite D, and because the rising biological mortality risks with age,

and the finiteness of human wealth make it inexpedient to plan on potential survival

beyond some distant, but finite age. Yet, to specify such an age a priori defeats the basic

premise of the model, which treats survival probabilities as a choice variable.

      A logical remedy would be to set D to be sufficiently distant so that the simulation

results would be practically invariable to its value. This can be done by computing the

maximized expected utility from living J(D) (see equation (3)) at alternative terminal

planning dates. For any given set of parameter values, we plot J(D) as a function of D. The

results, based on our benchmark parameter set, are striking. Figure 1 shows that although

J(D) is a monotonically increasing function of D, it becomes asymptotic to a finite level.

Specifically, J(D) first rises sharply at young ages, then more slowly at older age levels, but

becomes essentially flat after age 100. The conventional stopping rule we adopt sets D at

the point where the increase in J(D) falls below 10-5 percent. This occurs at age 107.

Indeed, higher values of D result in virtually no changes in the solutions for the model’s

endogenous variables, and the solutions remain virtually identical regardless of whether we

start our simulations at age 18 or at age 75, for example. Our selected value of D=107 is

not inconsistent with the sharp upward trend in longevity in the US.

IV.      SIMULATION RESULTS

A. The Baseline Case

      The simulation results for our benchmark group (the total population) are presented in

Table 1. Figures 2-6 also present the simulated age profiles of key variables: the value of

human and non-human wealth, the value of life saving, v(t), the actual vs. imputed


                                              14
“biological” mortality rates, f(t) v. j(t), and the profile of the age-specific (remaining) life

expectancy T*(t). We skip the age profiles of consumption (Z) and bequest (B), which are

proportionally related (B* = n1/dZ* by equations A.14 and A.15) since the rate of growth of

both is a constant, [(r-ρ)/(1-k)], as can be shown using equations (A.7) and (A.5).

   Figure 2 shows the age-specific (remaining) expected net human wealth L(t),

representing the capitalized sums of remaining “net earning flows” (the difference between

employment earnings and expenditures on self-protection), discounted for both the cost of

future funds and mortality risks (see equation A.3a). While the observed earnings profile

peaks at age 49, human wealth peaks at age 29 and declines continuously afterwards. This

profile reflects both increasing expenses for life protection and increasing fatality rates.

Indeed, our simulated value of human wealth in Figure 2, based just on market wages,

becomes negative after age 80, which is our last age with (projected) positive earnings. In

the following section, however, we also present simulations based on “full earnings”

adjustments, designed to capture the value of healthy time in “home production” as well.

   The annuity-equivalent non-human wealth age profile A(t)* (Figure 3), defined in

equation (A.2a), has the usual intertemporal humped shape, starting at an endogenously

solved bequeathed endowment at age 18, A(0), and falling back towards A(D)=0 at the end

of the planning horizon. We link iteratively A(0) to optimal bequest from an older

generation (25 years apart). In our benchmark case, planned bequest (transferable savings

and life insurance) for a 43-year old parent is projected at $31,575. However, since only

20% of the parent'
                 s generation would expire by age 43, we take 20% of $31,575, or $6,315,

to be our benchmark inheritance level of an average offspring at age 18 (in a two-parent

family with 2 children). Given our perfect capital market assumption, this figure stays the


                                              15
same regardless of whether the parent'
                                     s death occurs at an age younger or older than 43, as

long as the age gap between parent and offspring remains 25. 11

   Figure 4 shows the equilibrium age-specific ‘value-of-life-saving’ profile, v*(t),

defined in equation (4) and (A.13). Since the optimal value of life saving is also equal to

the equilibrium marginal cost of (or “willingness to spend on”) life protection, or v*(t) =

αcI*(t)α-1 (we set α=2 in our baseline simulation), the v*(t) and I*(t) age-profiles share the

same shape, and we therefore skip a separate presentation of I*(t). The v*(t) profile is also

hump-shaped, starting at a low level and falling to zero at the end of the planning horizon,

D. In Figure 4, v*(t) (in 1996 dollars) starts at $1.191 million at age 18, peaks at $1.435

million at age 38, and falls sharply after 48. This reflects the influence of the changing

magnitudes of human and non-human wealth and the rates of return on annuities (see Table

2). Although the value of life saving falls to zero at the end of the planning horizon, it

remains quite high through old age (see Table 1).

   This pattern is somewhat different from the shape of the “value of life-extension”

profile in Ehrlich and Chuma (EC) (1990), which is monotonically increasing with age,

essentially because our model recognizes the potential of death at any age over the life

cycle, rather than at an artificially assumed certain (though endogenous) age. Since the

value of lowering the probability of mortality at a given age is influenced by the expected

length of one’s remaining (uncertain) life span, which shrinks as one advances in age, the

value-of-life-saving profile in this analysis is more closely related to that of the ‘value of

healthy life’ in EC’s paper. Indeed, an interesting feature of the simulated v*(t) profile in

Figure 4 is that it remains fairly flat about the age in which it reaches its peak value. For the

baseline case, v*(t) varies less than 2.5% from its peak between age 30 and 46. This


                                               16
remains the case for different parameter values of n and k, or r, except that the flat segment

covers a different range of ages. For r=4%, for example, v*(t) varies less than 2.5% from its

peak at age 55 between the years 44 and 65.

    Figure 5 enables us to explore a central theme of the paper – the quantitative impact of

life protection on the age-specific fatality rates and life expectancies – by comparing the

actual and our imputed (“biological”) fatality rates. The plot reveals, not surprisingly, a

diminishing importance of life-protection efforts in affecting rising mortality risks as the

biological risks increase significantly, especially at older age levels. Over the average life

span – ages 18 to 77 (the actual life expectancy at age 18) – average life protection, I( t ) , is

seen to account for 17.81% of the projected average “biological” mortality risk, j( t ) .

    To complete the simulations, we also provide in Table 1 and Figure 6 the age profiles

                              D                                                    u
of life expectancy T*(t) = exp [ − m( t, u )]f ( u )( u − t )du , where m(t,u) ≡       f (s)ds , based on
                              t                                                    t


both our estimated biological, and the actual, age profiles of mortality rates. The gap

between the two indicates that life protection accounts for about 3.426 years, or a 6.16%

improvement over our imputed “biological” life expectancy of our benchmark group at age

18, and about 0.065 years, or 0.66% at age 77.12

B. Comparative Dynamics and Sensitivity Tests

    The simulations we conduct to estimate comparative-dynamic effects are based on our

imputed biological, rather than the observed, age-specific mortality rates for the

benchmark group, since the latter are endogenous in our model. The key results are

summarized in Table 2. While all our reported simulations begin at age 18, we have also

tested the sensitivity of our results to a starting age of 22, partly to justify our treatment of



                                                 17
schooling as a predetermined variable for our benchmark group. The results concerning

projected mortality risks remain virtually unaffected (to the 4th decimal point) by this

change, and the differences concerning other endogenous variables are less than 1% at

comparable ages. Comparative dynamic effects are assessed by varying the level of each of

our parameters 25% above and below its calibrated value.13

B.1. Varying relative risk aversion.

   Since a lower k implies a higher degree of relative risk aversion, we expect it to lower

exposure to life-risking activities, i.e., to increase the value of life saving and the demand

for life protection (see eq. 4). Changes in k may have little quantitative effect on net human

wealth, L(t), because of their opposite impacts on f*(t) and on spending on life protection

(see eq. A.3a), but the impact on non-human wealth A(t) can be higher: Greater relative

risk aversion (a lower k) increases consumption at young ages while reducing the optimal

rate of growth of consumption and bequest, thus savings and asset accumulation.

   Table 2 confirms these results. As k falls from 0.625 to 0.375, the peak v*(t) rises from

$1.186 to $1.823 million at age 38; the gap between biological and actual mortality risks

rises from 2.817 to 4.419; and life expectancy at 18 rises from 58.49 to 60.09.

B.2. Varying unit cost and marginal productivity of life protection.

   Table 2 indicates that larger values of c arising from higher medical care prices or a less

effective medical technology (θ), greatly lower self-protection and life expectancy,

especially at age 18, but they marginally raise the value of life saving at all ages. This is

not paradoxical. A larger c generates opposing effects on the demand for self-protection

and its cost, thus on the value of life saving, v* = αcI*(c)α-1 (see equation A.6). VLS can

fall or rise as a result, depending upon whether the elasticity of demand for life protection


                                             18
with respect to c exceeds or falls short of 1. Our simulations indicate that optimal life-

protection, I*(c), falls by almost the same proportion as the increase in c; therefore a higher

c slightly increases VLS: At age 38, the peak value of v* rises from $1.432 to $1.437

million as c rises from 2.55 to 4.25. Average spending on life protection, cIα (α=2), falls

by about 50% at age 38, while life expectancy at 18 falls from 60.29 to 58.39.

    The impact of an increase in the marginal productivity of life protection due the

parameter α of the cost of life protection function C(t) = cI(t)α, has, of course, just the

reverse effect to that of a higher unit cost of life protection, c.14

B.3. Varying real interest rate.

   Theoretically, an increase in r lowers human wealth, L(t) and increases the rate of

accumulation of non-human assets, A(t). The impact on the value of life saving, v*(t),

which is a non-linear function of L(t) and A(t) (see equation A.2a), is thus two-fold: a

higher r may increase v*(t) at older ages, where A(t)/L(t) is relatively high, but it lowers it

at young ages. These changes work to affect mainly the age at which v*(t), hence life

protection, I*(t), peak. These predictions are borne out by Figure 4. The projected peak

value of v*(t) (1996 dollars) changes from $1.534 million at age 28, to $1.523 million at

age 55 as r increases from 2.4% to 4.0%. The corresponding impact on life expectancy is

not monotonically related to r, and relatively modest, as shown in Table 2.

B.4. Varying bequest preferences

    By the conditional, closed-form solutions of our model (see equations (A.13)-(A.15)), a

higher bequest preference lowers the demand for life protection, essentially because

placing a higher value on the legacy to heirs lowers the marginal value of longevity. Our

“bequest preference” parameter (n) captures, however, only benefits associated with


                                                19
financial legacy. Even under this limited bequest preference concept, however, Table 2

indicates that variations in n produce only minor changes. A higher n motivates a switch

from own consumption to bequest (life insurance and regular savings), but also a higher

asset accumulation to enable a higher bequest level. The optimal values of v*(t) and I*(t)

thus fall only moderately as n rises.

B.5. Varying wage income streams

   As already mentioned, reported age-earnings profiles, w(t), while capturing the return

on healthy time (low morbidity risk) in the labor market, do not capture the full benefits of

healthy time as a producer good. One way to account for the latter (assuming that mortality

and morbidity risks are monotonically related) is to measure market earnings as “full

earnings”, incorporating the opportunity cost of healthy time in home production. Since no

accurate measures exist, we experiment with implicit full earnings measures that are 25%

or 50% higher than observed labor-market earnings.15

   Higher full earnings raise human wealth (indirectly asset accumulation as well), and

thus the demand for life protection, since the only way to secure future earnings is through

survival. Indeed, I*(t) and v*(t) rise almost proportionally with w(t). In particular, the peak

value of v*(t) rises from $1.435 to $2.141 million as w(t) rises 50% from its reported level.

The corresponding life expectancy at age 18 increases from 59.10 to 60.89 years.

B.6. Varying initial endowments of non-human wealth

   Although equation (A.13) indicates that an exogenous change in A(0) would raise the

value of life saving, the increase appears relatively modest in our simulations. When initial

wealth increases from $6315 by 25% or 50%, peak v*(t) rises from $1.435 to $1.437 or

$1.439 million at age 38. Note that the effect of a 25% increase in wage income, leading to


                                              20
an approximately equal percentage rise in human wealth at age 18 (L(0)), has a 24.5%

larger effect on v*(t), and a 25.7% larger effect on life expectancy at age 18, than that of an

equal percentage increase in the initial financial endowment, A(0). This confirms a key

implication of our model about the larger importance of human wealth, relative to human

wealth in determining the value of life saving (see section I and Appendix A.2).

B.7. Varying health endowments

   It may appear that better endowed health, i.e., a lower biological mortality risk, j(t),

could lower optimal life protection (I*(t)), as life expectancy then rises even without

additional effort. Our model indicates, however, that the likely outcome could be a rise in

life protection. This is because the wealth effect generated by a longer life expectancy

increases the value of life saving. Indeed, although the rates of return on actuarial savings

(r+f(t)) fall, non-human wealth accumulation A(t) rises because of greater savings. More

important, the capitalized values of human wealth L(t) unambiguously rise because of the

reduced mortality risks. Table 2 indicates that both optimal life protection outlays and life

expectancy increase as j(t) decreases 25% about its projected age profile.

C. Simulated Extensions of our Model

C.1. Allowing for durable effects of life-protection outlays.

   Our model treats life protection at a given age as impacting only contemporaneous

mortality risks. A more general approach would be to allow for durable effects that last

through future years as well. A full recognition of durability requires a significant

generalization of our model, which we leave for future work. We can use the current

framework, however, to assess the qualitative impact of a discrete change in the duration

of life protection’s impact through a simple experiment.


                                              21
   Starting with our imputed “biological” mortality risks, j(t), we approximate the impact

of higher (lower) durability of a given investment in life protection at age 39, I(39), by

letting it cause an exogenous decline (increase) in the endowed mortality risks, j(t), over

the subsequent 10-year period, since the objective of the experiment is to assess how such

implicit durability shift affects the entire age profile of optimal life protection, I*(t), hence

f*(t), and T*(t). We carry out the simulations under two alternative assumptions: a. the

impact of the shift will last for 10 years and then disappear at the end of the 10th year; b. the

impact would decay at a constant rate and become zero at the end of the 10th year.

   Naturally, an increase in the implicit durability of I(39) raises life-protection’s efficacy,

hence the demand for life protection, especially at relatively young ages, because life

protection has a lingering effect on future as well as current mortality risks. At the same

time, the fall in future mortality risks lowers the risk premium on annuities, which raises

the discounted value of future wages, but lowers annuity wealth, which may lower the

value of life saving at older ages. The net effect of higher durability appears to be a change

in the age profile of life protection outlays. It raises life protection, and hence life

expectancy, at younger relative to older ages, and these effects are naturally stronger the

slower is the rate at which the investment impact depreciates. The changes in the age

profiles of the value of life saving exhibit the same pattern (see Table 3A).

C.2. The impact of social security

   Our model ascribes all annuity savings to private annuities. The impact of a pay-as-

you-go, defined-benefits social security system can be integrated in our simulations by

imposing social security taxes at working age levels, and adding the defined social security

benefits at retirement ages for our benchmark group. Specifically, we imposed a 6.2% tax


                                               22
rate on the wage-income profile of our benchmark group in 1996, while adding untaxed

benefits of $16,614 post age 65, using the web “calculator” of the Social Security

Administration. We then recomputed the resulting age-earnings profile after applying the

6.2% tax rate to our smoothed earnings profile, as originally calibrated.

   Accounting for social security as a distinct “annuity” program produces a significant

change in the structure of life protection spending: since social security is a defined-

benefits, rather than a defined-contributions, scheme, it is shown to create an incentive to

postpone spending on life protection to later years, rather than earlier years, which are

subject to actuarially unfair taxes. This is reflected by the commensurate change in the

structure of v*(t). Furthermore, the simulations in Table 3B suggest that the existence of

social security leads to higher life expectancies and VLS at older age levels (see Ehrlich,

2000, section VI and a related result in Philipson and Becker, 1998).

V. APPLICATIONS OF THE BASIC MODEL

       We now proceed to examine the power of our model to explain, or project,

diversities in age-specific life expectancies and values of life saving across population

groups. These simulations are constrained, however, by the limited data available to

calibrate group-specific parameters. Available data include mainly age-earnings profiles

and age-specific mortality rates, or life expectancies. Little else is available for calibrating

group- and age-specific parameters concerning home production, education, cost of life

protection, access to medical care, or access to financial markets. 16 In the following

section, we focus on explaining projected or observed differences in age-specific life

expectancies and VLS among different educational groupings for the male population, and

for the general population over time, since differences in group-specific earnings profiles


                                              23
may constitute a predominant source of heterogeneity across these population groups. In

both cases we employ the biological mortality risks we imputed for our benchmark group,

to project group-specific life expectancies and compare these to observed ones.

A. Life Expectancy Gaps Across Schooling brackets

   Under the “neutrality assumption” invoked in our baseline case, education does not

alter the “unit” cost of life protection, c, because it raises both efficiency at life protection

and the opportunity cost of time devoted to it. Our model suggests, however, a more direct

link between education and life protection: since the more educated possess relatively

higher human wealth, L(t), they will have a higher incentive to protect this wealth through

survival. To what extent would this factor alone explain the observed gaps in life

expectancy across educational classes?

   To answer this question, we impose a common profile of biological mortality rates for

males of all educational classes - the j(t) density imputed in our analysis of US males in the

preceding section (the emphasis on males is clarified below) - since no separate VS data

are reported for specific classes. We then consider four education groups: those holding

High School, Bachelor, Master, and Doctorate degrees. Wage income profiles for these

groups are from the SAUS, 1998 Table 246, Earnings, by Highest Degree Earned: 1996.

   The results are summarized in Table 4. We start our simulations at age 25, to allow for

a reasonable representation of all education groups in the labor market. The simulations

indicate that people with more education have a higher human and non-human wealth and

thus value of life saving. They also spend more on consumption than others as a result of

their greater total wealth. Their non-human wealth profile is thus relatively lower initially,

but becomes higher at older age levels. The VLS profile peaks at age 37 for high school


                                               24
graduates and at age 40 for Doctorates. The peak values range from $1.282 million for high

school graduates to $3.228 million for Doctorate holders.

   Next we project the impact of the differential levels life protection undertaken by

different educational groups on their life expectancies. These projections can be compared

with life-expectancy estimates for males of all races by educational attainments in 1990 in

Richards and Barry [RB] (1998, Table 5(a)), who linked death certificates data with

attained individual schooling. Clearly, our educational categories are not fully comparable

with those estimated by RB. Nevertheless, we come close to RB’s estimated life

expectancies for high school at most ages. Comparing the estimated life expectancy gap

between those with high school v. a Bachelor degree in each study, our projected gap

explains 47% (=1.43/3) of the actual gap estimated by RB at age 30, 38% at age 38, and

20% at age 55 (the latter two not shown in the table). Our projected life-expectancy gaps

between those with high school and a Doctorate degree explain an even larger percentage

of the actual gap estimated by RB between those with a High School v. the highest degree

(64% at age 30, 51.5% at age 38 and 23.7% at age 55).17

B. The Overall Trend in Life Expectancy

   We next extrapolate the time trend of life expectancy for the average wage earner in the

economy from 1996 backwards. Once again, the only variable readily available for

calibration over time is the real wage income of the representative worker.18

   The simulation analysis is similar to the one we performed in section IV. We take as a

point of reference the “biological” age-specific mortality profile we estimated for our

benchmark group in 1996, j(96), and project the realized age-specific life expectancies

backwards over the period 1970-1990. We interpolate the shifts in the age-earnings profile


                                             25
based on the rate of growth in average wage income over the same period, as reported by

USCB (2000). Our age-specific life expectancy projections are given for 5-year intervals at

age 20, to make them comparable to the actually reported age-specific life expectancies,

which we take from National Vital Statistics Report and various volumes of Vital Statistics

of United States. The results are summarized in Table 5.

   The simulations explain a good part of the actual changes in life expectancy between

1970 and 1996. For the entire period between 1996 and 1970, our projected growth in the

conditional life expectancy at age 20 explains 25.66% (=1.07/4.17) of the actual growth.

For the more recent period between 1980 and 1996, our projected growth of life

expectancy at age 20 explains 33.33% (=0.57/1.71) of its actual growth. This is not

insignificant given that we do not allow for any improvement in medical technology. If we

assume that our one-unit cost of life protection fell at an annual rate of 1% over 1970-1990

as a result of improving life saving technologies (which is also the growth rate of the

economy’s total factor productivity), our simulations would now explain 37.65% of the

growth in life expectancy between 1970 and 1996 or 56.73% of the growth between 1980

and 1996. This higher explanatory power reflects the considerable influence of c on life

expectancy (see Table 2). As for imputed values of life saving, our simulations indicate

that VLS increased by 1.56% per annum over the period 1970-1996, which roughly mimics

the growth rate of real wage earnings in that period.

C. Alternative Values of Life Saving Computed via a Conventional WTP Approach

   The age-specific values of life saving (VLS) in Tables 1-4 are simulated by solving for

the marginal cost of life protection, [αcI(t)α-1]* since its equilibrium value is equated to the

shadow price of life protection, v*(t). This method of solving for VLS illustrates a direct


                                              26
“willingness to pay” (WTP) approach, since v*(t) thus measures the willingness to pay for

the added life protection costs needed to gain the utility benefit from a marginal reduction

in the conditional mortality hazard rate at a point in time (see equation A.6). By

comparison, conventional WTP measures of VLS are based on regression estimates of

wage premiums workers are willing to forgo for bearing marginally lower occupational

mortality probabilities, typically over a given year. These measure “compensating” wage

differentials, assuming workers are homogeneous and labor markets are competitive.

   Our model can be used to simulate analogous WTP estimates. In the illustration below,

we raise the density function of j(t) of our benchmark group to effect (via proper

integration) an exogenous rise in the probability of mortality p(t) by 1/10000 over one

year (age). We next simulate the optimal increase in the annual wage flow, w*(t), needed

to keep expected lifetime utility intact. VLS is the ratio of the two, V*(t)= w*/ p(t).

   Our two VLS measures are conceptually different. V*(t) is defined over an interval of

time, while v*(t) is defined at a point in time. Which concept is relevant empirically

depends on whether individuals perceive of the relevant risk to their life as being

operational over an interval of time, and adjust their plans accordingly, or whether they

react to the conditional hazard rates they face at any moment in time. Both concepts are

valid under different circumstances or institutional arrangements.

   Technically, in a continuous-time setting the time-interval estimate of VLS, V*(t), is an

approximation of its point estimate, v*(t). To simulate the latter using compensating wage

differentials, the change in the mortality density must be imposed over an infinitesimally

short time interval, rather than over one-year. Indeed, as we narrow down the time interval

used for computing V*(t), its value approaches that of v*(t). The simulations show that the


                                             27
estimated age-specific values of V*(t), assessed over a one year period, are roughly 84%

higher than those of v*(t) at all ages, essentially because of the greater loss of utility from

adjusting to an interval change in probability of mortality, rather than adjusting

continuously to changes in the mortality density all along the time interval.19 But the age

profiles of v*(t) and V*(t) are virtually identical when adjusted for scale (see Table 6).

   Despite their methodological similarity, our numerical estimates of V*(t), while closer

in magnitude reported regression estimates of VLS (see, e.g., Viscusi 1993), are not

comparable to the latter for three main reasons: a. The estimated V*(t) (or v*(t)) do not

account for the utility gain from reduced morbidity or injury due to life protection, although

our earnings data do reflect corresponding earnings gains. On this score, our V*(t)s may

typically underestimate the empirically estimated VLS, which are based on the wage

compensations accepted by workers for assuming higher mortality and morbidity risks; b.

The empirical studies take the observed differences in mortality probabilities, say, across

occupations, to be nature’s choice, although by our analysis, they are endogenous variables.

Our simulations indicate that increases in exogenous mortality risks (j(t) produce smaller

increases in observed risks due to the intervening effects of life protection; treating

observed risks as exogenous can thus result in overstated values of VLS; c. We project a

wide diversity of V*(t) by age, which regression estimates of VLS do not pin down.

CONCLUSION

   The primary contribution of this paper is methodological: projecting jointly variations

in age-specific life expectancies and values of life saving (VLS) by simulating a life-cycle

model with endogenous mortality risks. Although the iterative methodology we use is well

known, its application to a stochastic-dynamic model of life protection with endogenous


                                              28
risks of mortality is novel, especially our iterative determination of a finite planning

horizon along with the model’s control and state variables. Although the magnitudes of the

numerical solutions must be viewed with caution, their relative variations suggest that life

protection plays a non-trivial role in explaining observed disparities.

    To highlight some of our results: For our benchmark group (the entire US population),

average life protection I( t ) is projected to account for a 17.81% reduction in the

unobserved average level of “biological” mortality hazards j( t ) between ages 18-77. This

may be a conservative estimate since our model abstracts from the utility value of lower

morbidity due to life protection. The impact on life expectancy at age 18 (6.155%)

fluctuates within a range of 4.23% - 9.37%, or 2.355 – 5.218 years, if we allow for a 25%

change in our basic parameters separately. These estimates are little affected if we allow for

varying durability of life protection, which generally raises the incentive to engage in life

protection at younger, relative to older ages, or if we introduce a balanced PAYG social

security, which mainly delays the age at which VLS and life protection peak.

       In terms of the relative impact of different determinants of life protection, which

may also vary across different population groups, 1% lower unit cost of life protection or

higher relative risk aversion raise life expectancy at age 18, by 1.4%, and higher rates of

return on annuity savings delay significantly the age at which life protection peak. Life

protection is estimated to add between 1.825 to 4.839 years of life expectancy at age 30 for

high school graduates relative to those holding Doctorates, and net “human wealth” has a

25% higher impact on life expectancy at 18 than non-human wealth. More significantly,

our simulations explain 47% of documented differences in life expectancies of at age 30

across males with high school vs. bachelor degrees.


                                              29
       The simulations account for 24%-33.3% of the secular growth in average life

expectancy at 20 over different periods ending in 1996, just on the basis of the secular

growth in real labor earnings and its impact on human and non-human wealth. Based solely

on the growth rate of real labor income (1.58%) observed in our sample, we project life

expectancy at age 18 to reach 82.04, or 4.94 added years, by the year 2050.

       Our simulations highlight the existence of significant variations in imputed “values

of life saving” (v*(t)) by age, by schooling levels, and over time. They also highlight a

conceptual difference concerning alternative estimates of VLS, based on the time interval

length over which the VLS are projected. The VLS estimates we simulate based on

compensating wage differentials for assuming higher risks of mortality over a one-year

time interval (V*(t)), exhibit a relative age profile virtually identical to that of v*(t), but

84% higher on average at all ages. They vary between $1.298 million for high-school

males at age 75 and $5.965 million for males with Doctorates at age 40 in 1996 dollars.

       While our estimates of both v*(t) and V*(t) are likely to be understated, since they

do not account for utility benefits life protection imparts through reduced morbidity, their

range of variation appears to rationalize a good part of the huge disparities in private VLS

estimates obtained via regression analyses of occupational data. 20 Our paper offers a

theoretical methodology by which such age-specific disparities can be assessed.

       The feasibility and stability of our simulations open up opportunities for further

extensions of our model to assess more fully the dynamic role of different means of life

protection under different insurance setups, and to provide a more complete numerical

analysis of the trends and diversities in life expectancies and values of life saving. We

leave such extensions to future work.


                                              30
REFERENCES

AHRQ (1996), Medical Expenditure Panel Survey [MEPS], the Agency for Healthcare
Research and Quality, Rockville, MD.

Bacci, Guido (1965), Sex Determination. Oxford New York: Pergamon Press.

Barlow, R. and B. Vissandjee (1999), “Determinants of National Life Expectancy”,
Canadian Journal of Development Studies, Vol. XX No. 1, 9-29.

Davies, James B. (1981), “Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption, and Dissaving in
Retirement”,Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 89 (3), 561-577.

Ehrlich, I (2000), “Uncertain Lifetime, Life protection, and the Value of Life Saving”,
Journal of Health Economics, Vol. 19(3), 341-367.

Ehrlich, I. and H. Chuma (1990), “The Demand for Longevity, and the Value of Life
Extension”, Journal of Political Economy, 98, 761-82.

Forster, M. (2001), “The Meaning of Death: Some Simulations of a Model of Healthy and
Unhealthy Consumption”, Journal Of Health Economics, (20)4, 613-638.

Gerdttham, U.G., Johannesson, M., Lunndberg, L. and Isacson, D. (2000), “The Demand
for Health: Results From New Measures of Health Capital”, European Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 15, 501-521.

Goldman, D. and D. Lakdawalla (2001), “Understanding Health Disparities Across
Education Groups”, NBER Working Paper #8328.

Grossman, M., (1972), The Demand for Health: A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation
(Columbia University Press, New York).

Harvey, J. (1998), "Estimating OSHA compliance costs", Policy Science, 31, 321-341.

Johansson, P. (2001), “Is There a Meaningful Definition of the Value of a Statistical Life?”
Journal of Health Economics, 20, 131-139.

Kydland, F. E. and E. C. Prescott (1982), “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations”,
Econometrica, 50(6), 1345-1370.

Mitchell. O. (2001), “Developments in Decumulation: The Role of Annuity Products in
Financing Retirements”, NBER working paper 8567.

Nachtrieb, L. (2003), “Food and Nutrition Information – Fact or Fiction”, Nutrition Times



                                            31
Philipson, T. and G. Becker (1998), “Old-Age Longevity and Mortality-Contingent
Claims”, The Journal of Political Economy, 106(3), 551-573.

Richards, H. and R. Barry (1998), “U.S. Life Tables For 1990 By Sex, Race, and
Education”, Journal of Forensic Economics, 11(1), 9-26.

Shepard, D.S., and Zeckhauser, R.J. (1984), “Survival versus Consumption”. Management
Science, 30, pp. 424-439.

Thaler, R., and Rosen, S. (1975), “The Value of Saving a Life: evidence from the labor
market”. In Terleckyj, N. (Ed.), Household Production and Consumption. Columbia
University Press, New York, pp. 265-298.

U.S. Census Bureau, “Historical Income Tables – People, (Table) P-1, Total CPS
Population and Per Capita Money Income: 1967 to 1998”, published April, 2000.
<http://www.census.gov/hhes/income/histinc/p01.html>[USCB]

U.S. Census Bureau (1998), Statistical Abstract of the United States. [SAUS]

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Vital and Health Statistics, Series 2: Data
Evaluation and Methods Research, No. 129, 1999. [VS]

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Vital Statistics Report, Various
Volumes.

Viscusi, W. K. (1993), “The Value of Risks to Life and Health”, Journal of Economic
Literature, 31, 1912-46.

Viscusi, W. K. and J. E. Aldy (2003), “The Value of a Statistical Life: A Critical Review
of Market Estimates Throughout the World”, NBER Working Paper #9487.




                                           32
FOOTNOTES
1
    A recent exception is Goldman and Lakdawalla (2001) who analyze trends in the
diversity of mortality risks by age and education, based on a static model of the demand for
health.
2
   Viscusi and Aldy (2003) also emphasize the importance of recognizing variations in
private VLS by age, but do not offer a formal model in this context.
3
  This specification of the output of life protection, I(t), measured in units of f(t), abstracts
from any dependence of the productivity of life-protective inputs on the scale of j(t)
because the direction of such effect is not clear a-priori; any assumed non-neutrality would
thus be arbitrary. Also, allowing for such interaction would rule out the derivation of
conditional closed-form solutions of the model, which greatly facilitate our simulations.
We use an aggregate measure of I(t), and a corresponding cost function, on the implicit
assumption that spending on specific inputs {mj, Mj} is allocated optimality to obtain the
same marginal increase in I(t), or reduction in the hazard rate. Note that identifying M(t) as
“preventive” care makes “remedial” care part of consumption, Z(t); the latter is conceived
of as compulsory to prevent morbidity from becoming life threatening.
4
  As in deterministic models of health following Grossman (1972) and Ehrlich & Chuma
(1990), we do not model education as endogenously determined with life protection. Since
our simulations use age 18 or 25 as reference points, however, completed education may be
viewed as predetermined. In our simulations we relax somewhat this “Ben-Porath
neutrality” assumption by allowing for a range of deviations of c about its “neutral” level.
5
  However, these cross-sectional data do not allow for any adjustments to mortality data
due to “cohort effects”.
6
  This estimate is based on the assumed cost function of life protection in equation (A.2),
setting the parameter α=2, and estimates of actual spending on life protection from all
sources, discussed below. The actual cost parameter used in the simulations is 3.4x108.
This parameter implies that the cost of a “one-unit” reduction in I(t), hence in the mortality
rate from its biological level (0.01 or 11% of the average fatality rate over the life cycle) is
34,000 dollars.
7
  We have arrived at this figure as follows: after smoothing the reported medical
expenditure for different ages (which are quite noisy) over 10-year intervals, we find the
average annual medical care spending per person in the age interval 40-49 to be $1703.67
in 1996, which is the year of our sample. The preventive care portion of total spending on
each of the categories reported in the MEPS data was then arrived at adding all “primary
care”, and 50% of all “secondary care”, spending totaling $788.22, or 46.27% of total
medical care (We are indebted to Dr. Michelle Ehrlich of the Cleveland Clinic for
providing these preventive care assessments by categories of care.).



                                               33
8
   Our Harvey-based lower-bound OSHA annual cost estimate is $300 for 1996. Nachtrieb
(2003) bases her figures on NIH studies. The annual “diet” costs, including food
supplements, are extrapolated as $173.38 in 1996, and exercise costs are assessed to be
approximately equal. These are lower-bound assessments of all “life-style” measures of life
protection. Adding these spending items to the preventive care figure produces a combined
annual estimate of $1,434.98 for life protection spending. The projected total spending on
life protection, based on the calibrated simulation for our benchmark group, is quite close:
$1,433.32. We do not incorporate time costs involved in specific life protection activities
since no reliable estimates exist, and our earnings estimate is confined to market earnings.
9
    Theoretically, our model allows for variations in n(t) over the life cycle. While
preference for bequest may change in accordance with the individual’s marital or family
status, any assumed changes in the life-cycle pattern of n(t) would be rather speculative in
the context of the present formulation, which is why we set n to be constant.
10
   This figure is a conservative estimate of the real return on a total portfolio consisting of
50% treasury bills, 25% government bonds, and 25% S&P 500 stocks over the 50-year
period preceding 1996 where the corresponding yields were 1.33%, 2.14%, and 8.08%.
Davies (1981) is using a similar real rate of return estimate.
11
    SAUS data for 1995 and 1998 imply that the median non-human wealth of a 65 years
old family head is $343,197 in 1996 (using the annual growth rate of 14.09% for median
wealth between 1995 and 1998). This produces a mean value of $473K on the assumption
that wealth, like earnings, is log-normally distributed with a median of $343K and a
dispersion value of 0.8 (derived via a grid search that produces comparable values of the
mean and the standard deviation of the wealth distribution.) In 1996 we also project the
“social security wealth” of an average family head to be $175,698 at age 65. This estimate
is obtained by discounting the annual benefit stream of $16,614 for a 65 years old recipient
over the following 12 years (i.e., through life expectancy) at the reported 2% yield on social
security taxes. The total mean wealth level thus computed is $659K, which is comparable
to our model’s projection. Our projected mean wealth and social security wealth at age 65
are quite close: $694.92 and $165.79K (see section IV.C.2). They are also close to those in
Mitchell (2001), $625K and 174K, respectively.
12
   Note that life expectancy is less than proportionally related to survival risks, because of
both the effect of discounting for survival, and the fixed planning horizon D.
13
   Our model assumes that annuities and life insurance are traded at actuarially fair terms.
In reality, the existence of loading terms due to transaction costs implies that the premium
charged on life insurance and borrowing becomes (1+g)f(t), while the risk premium paid
on annuities becomes (1-g)f(t). No conditional closed-form solutions of our model exist in
this case, which is why we do not attempt to impute the effect of loading in this paper.
Ehrlich (2000, section 6) has shown, however, that while actuarially fair insurance markets
produce higher VLS, hence life expectancies, compared to a world with no such markets,


                                              34
actuarially unfair insurance markets have an ambiguous impact on these variables,
essentially because of conflicting effects on annuities and life insurance.
14
    The value of c has been calibrated based on personal outlays on preventive life
protection (see section III.C) and an assumed value of α. Consequently, when we vary α in
this experiment, we also reconfigure the calibrated value of c to make the comparison
relevant.
15
  For age groups beyond 80, where we do not have reported market earnings, we maintain
the same 25% and 50% increments applied to the reported earnings at age 80.
16
   We conducted similar analyses to explain cross-group differences in life expectancies
for different gender and racial groups, which also indicated the model’s potential
explanatory power. We do not report these results since the data available for calibrating
these groups’ specific parameters are comparatively more limited.
17
   To the extent that persons with higher schooling are self-selected by virtue of their
higher (endowed) survival probabilities, our assumed common j(t) density for all schooling
groups understates our projected life expectancies especially for those with higher
educational attainments.
18
   Data exigencies preclude an application of our model to explain also trends in the
diversity of age-specific life expectancies of different population groups over time.
19
     Note that the mortality probability, p(t, t+ ) is by definition 1-S(t, t+ ), where
                        t +ε
S( t , t + ε) = exp[−          f (u )du ] by the Poisson law. We can show that our time-interval
                        t
estimate of VLS, V*(t; ) = w*/ p, evaluated over an interval length , would approach a
point estimate of VLS, dw*/dj [J(t) held constant] = − [∂J ( t ) / ∂j] /[∂J ( t ) / ∂w ] = v*(t) in
equation (A.6), as ε → 0 . While w* is naturally approximated by (dw* × ε ), however, a
Taylor approximation of p(t, t+ ) can be shown to always fall short of j = (dj × ε) , as
long as >0. The reason is that dp(t, t+ ) measures a change in probability, not in a density
function. Thus V*(t; )= w*/ p overstates v*(t)= w*/ j= (dw* × ε )/ (dj × ε) over any
positive time interval . Moreover, the difference between V*(t) and v*(t) is an increasing
function of the interval length,
20
   Viscusi (1993) survey reports the range of regression estimates applying the WTP
approach using labor market data to be $0.6 million to $16.2 million. In contrast, the range
of reported regression estimates using non-labor data is $.1 to $4 million.




                                                     35
                                                      APPENDIX A

1. Model specification

The formal model follows Ehrlich (2000, section 5). The stochastic probability law

governing the ‘force of mortality’, the definitions of the control and state variables, and

the utility, ‘life-protection’ production, and cost functions are discussed in the text. The

maximized expected utility function in this formulation is:
                                                ~
                                             D                                                 ~               ~
(A.1) J (A( t ), t; η) = Max Z, B,I E{              exp[−ρ(s − t )]U( Z(s)) ds + exp[−ρ(D− t )]V(B(D), t )}
                                            t


      ~
where D denotes the stochastic time of death, ρ an inter-temporal discount factor, and

is vector of our model’s parameters, subject to wealth constraints:

       0
(A.2) A( t ) = (r+f(t))A(t) + w(t)h(t) - cIα(t) - Z(t) - f(t)B(t),

(A.3) 0 ≤ B(t) ≤ A(t) + L(t) ≥ 0,

and boundary conditions:

(A.4) J(A(D),D;               ) = V(B*(D),D) = V(A(D),D) and A(D) ≥0.

In equation (A.2)-(A.4), A(t) denotes the current value of non-human wealth,

                                                          t
(A.2a ) A( t ) = exp(rt + m(0, t )) {A(0) +                   exp(− ru − m(0, u ))[ wh (u ) − cI α (u ) − Z(u ) − f (u )B(u )]du},
                                                         0
                          u
where m(0, u ) =              f (s)ds , w(t) = the wage rate, h(u) = healthy (labor) time, L(t) = net
                         0


human wealth, i.e.,

                     D                                                                               u
(A.3a) L(t) =            exp [-r(u-t)-m(t,u)][w(u)h(u)- cIα(t)]du, where m(t,u) ≡                        f (s)ds,
                 t                                                                                  t


and D denotes the terminal date of the planning horizon that must be used to solve our

stochastic dynamic program. Its determination is discussed in section III.E in the text.

        By the stochastic dynamic programming approach, the solution must satisfy
(A.5) -Jt= - ρJ + U(Z*)+JA[(r+f)A+ w(t)h(t) - cIα(t) - Z* - fB*] + f[V(B*,t) - J] ,

where Jt ≡ ∂J(A(t),t; )/∂t.

The optimal control variables I*, Z*, and B* are then solved from

(A.6) [αcI(t)α-1]* = [∂J t / ∂f ] / J A = (1/JA)[J(A(t),t; )-V(B*)]+B*-A ≡ v*(t)

(A.7) UZ(Z*) = JA

(A.8) B* =                (B*)
               0 if JA > V'

                                         (B*)
               ε (0, A(t)+L(t)), if JA= V'

                                   (B*),
               A(t)+L(t), if JA < V'

where (A.6) is also the solution for the shadow price of life protection, or VLS.

2. Conditional Explicit Solutions

       No explicit solutions can be obtained for the system (A.6)-(A.8). To obtain a

conditional closed-form solution for the maximized life-time expected utility function J1

in equation (A.1), the instantaneous utility of consumption function is first specialized to

exhibit ‘constant relative risk aversion’,

(A.9) U(Z) = (1/k)Zk ,

where 0< k < 1 to assure concavity, and d = (1-k) denotes the degree of relative risk

aversion. The utility of bequest function is similarly specialized as

(A.10) V(B,t) = [n(t)/k]Bk ,

with n(t) representing the intensity of utility derived by the individual from capital to be

bequeathed to heirs. Finally, the optimal consumption and bequest choices are now taken

to be conditional on a predetermined path of optimal self-protection outlays.

       These simplifications permit an explicit solution for the partial differential

equation (A.5), conditional on an optimal path of self-protection inputs (I), i.e., taking the
age-specific density of mortality rates f(t) as given.. The solution can be shown equal to

(A.11) J(A(t),t;α) = [a(t)/k][A(t) + L(t)]k .

where a(t) represents the marginal expected utility of a unit of wealth while one is alive.

It s solution is given by

(A.12) [a ( t )](1 / d ) = exp{−       x (u )du} [n (D)]
                                   D                   (1 / d )       D              u
                                                                  +       y(u ) exp{− x (s)ds}du,
                                   t                                  t              t



where x(u) ≡ f(u) + [(ρ-rk)/(1-k)], and y(u) ≡ 1+f(u)[n(u)](1/d).

         Equations (A.11) and (A.12) provide an explicit solution for the indirect expected

utility of the remaining life span, conditional on optimal self-protection inputs (I*(t)). By

exploiting equations (A.6), (A.7), (A.8), and (A.11), we can obtain similarly conditional

explicit solutions for the co-state variable v*(t), or the value-of-life-saving function, and

the optimal values of consumption and bequest as follows:

(A.13) v*(t) = (1/k)L(t)+[(1-k)/k][A(t)-B*(t)] = z(t)[A(t) + L(t)]-A(t) = αcI*(t)α-1

where z(t) = [n(t)/a(t)](1/d) + (1/k){1-[n(t)/a(t)](1/d)} >1 (see Ehrlich 2000, p.357)

(A.14) Z*(t) = [1/a(t)](1/d)[A(t) + L(t)], and

(A.15) B*(t) = [n(t)/a(t)](1/d)[A(t) + L(t)].

         Equation (A.13) indicates the greater importance of human (L(t)), relative to non-

human (A(t)) wealth in affecting the value of life saving. For a detailed interpretation of

this result see Ehrlich (op. cit.).

3. Unconditional Solutions

         Using the explicit solutions (A.13)–(A.15) and the first order condition for the

optimal self-protection (A.6), an unconditional solution to all three control variables of

the model, and thus for the model’s co-state and state variables as well, can be found

through the iterative procedure described in the text and in Appendix B.
APPENDIX B

The iteration procedure we use is similar to Newton’s method, except that we do not use
the system’s Jacobian matrix to enhance the convergence speed. All the relevant
numerical integrations are carried out using the Simpson method. The iterations involve
the following steps:

•   Step A: Initialize a path of life-protection efforts, I(t). In the benchmark case proceed
    to step B. In our calibrated simulations we use the initialized I(t) to construct f(t)
    from previously projected j(t), subject to f(t) 0, and then proceed to obtain
             j

    m(i, j) ≡ f ( t )dt through numerical integration.
             i
•    Step B: Calculate by numerical integration the factor a(t) – a component of the
    intensity of the optimal value function (A.11) − using its definition in eq. (A.12) of
    Appendix A. This calculation is done on the basis of the computed values of f(t) and
    m(i,j), and subject to our calibrated values for the other basic parameters of the
    model: the real rate of interest, r, the rate of time preference, ρ, the intensity of
    bequest preference, n, and the degree of relative risk aversion, 1-k.

•   Step C: Calculate financial wealth A(t), bequest B(t), consumption Z(t), and net
    human wealth L(t) (the discounted labor income net of the cost of self-protection) as
    follows:
    C1: Given I(t) and f(t), calculate L(t) by numerical integration using equation (A.3a)
    in Appendix A.
    C2: Calculate Z(t) and B(t). As in Ehrlich (2000) equation (3.7a), Z(t) has a growth
    rate of (r-ρ)/(1-k), and from (A.14), Z(0) can be determined by A(0), a(0), and L(0).
    B(t) can be similarly calculated, given the assumed value of the intensity of bequest
    preferences , since by equations (A.14) and (A.15) B(t) = n(t)1/(1-k) Z(t).
    C3: Given the solutions to Z(t), L(t) and a(t), we can use (A.14) to solve for A(t).

•   Step D: Calculate the value of life saving v*(t), thus life-protection expenditures I(t),
    as given in equation (A.13), using A(t), B(t), and L(t) from the previous step.

•   Step E: Compare I(t), as calculated in Step D, with the preceding path of I(t). (In the
    first round, the “preceding path” is the initialized path). Define diff = Max t [|I(t) -
    I0(t)| / I0(t)], where I0(t) is the preceding path of I(t), i.e., diff is the maximum
    percentage change in I(t). If diff < tol, where tol is some pre-specified tolerance
    level, the system converges, and you may report the results. If diff > tol, record the
    current new I(t) as the previous path of I(t) and proceed to Step C. The tolerance level
    we have chosen for tol is 10-5.
Table 1: Calibrated Simulations of Life-Protection Choices in our Baseline Case
(1996 data) Conditional on survival to:

  Age 18               Peak of v*(t)             Age 65       Actual life expectancy at 18
                    Age          Value of                       Age          Value of other
                                  v*(t)                                        variables
                                                                 * #
                      1a. Remaining Actual Life Expectancy T (t)
    59.08                                         17.58
                          1b. Net Human Wealth L(t) (in $K)*
   610.27           38           653.52          234.21          77              43.37
                          1c. Non-Human Wealth A(t) (in $K)*
     6.50           38           172.80          694.92          77             793.41
                         1d. Value of Life Saving v*(t) (in $M)*
    1.191           38            1.435           1.090          77              0.775
                   1e. Expenditure on Life Protection C(t) (in $ mil.)
   1043.1           38           1514.1           873.1          77              441.9
                        1f. Observed Mortality Hazard Rates f(t)
   0.0009           38           0.0019          0.0166          77             0.0445
                 1g. Imputed “Biological” Mortality Hazard rates j(t)
   0.0026           38           0.0040          0.0182          77             0.0457
         1h. Impact of Life Protection on “Biological” Life Expectancy (years)
    3.426           38            1.614           0.249          77              0.065
           1i. Impact of Life Protection on “Biological” Life Expectancy (%)
    6.155           38            4.172           1.435          77              0.656
Basic parameter set: k = 0.5, r = 3.2%, ρ = 1.5%, n = 1.2, α=2, and c = 3.4.
* Life Expectancy T*(t), the actuarially fair values of net human wealth L(t), non-human
wealth A(t), and value of life saving v*(t) are defined in Appendix A. Monetary values
are in 1996 dollars
#
  Remaining actual life expectancy for the benchmark group.
  Table 2: Life Protection’s Impact on Life Expectancy and Value of Life Saving
                  (in 1996 million $). Role of Parameter Changes
                             Impact on Life Expectancy at 18    Value of Life Saving at
Parameter       Range         Percentage         Years         Peak Age      Peak Value
                0.375           7.939            4.419            38            1.823
    k            0.5*           6.155            3.426            38            1.435
                0.625           5.060            2.817            38            1.186

                 2.55           8.300             4.621           38           1.432
    c            3.4*           6.155             3.426           38           1.435
                 4.25           4.890             2.722           38           1.437

                  1.5           4.230             2.355           38           1.424
    α            2.0*           6.155             3.426           38           1.435
                  2.5           8.015             4.462           38           1.448

                2.4%            6.242             3.475           28           1.534
    r           3.2%*           6.155             3.426           38           1.435
                4.0%            6.302             3.508           55           1.523

                  0.9           6.174             3.437           38           1.439
    n            1.2*           6.155             3.426           38           1.435
                  1.5           6.131             3.413           37           1.430

              $26,658*          6.155             3.426           38           1.435
 w(t)**        +25%             7.750             4.314           38           1.789
               +50%             9.373             5.218           38           2.141

               $6,315#          6.155             3.426           38           1.435
A(0)***         +25%            6.163             3.431           38           1.437
                +50%            6.172             3.436           38           1.439

                  -25%           6.691          3.966           39            1.485
   j(t)        Original*         6.155          3.426           38            1.435
                 +25%            5.707          3.003           37            1.391
* Denotes our selected benchmark parameter and initial conditions.
** Upward adjustments of 25% and 50% are meant to capture alternative “full earnings”
    levels, adjusted for home production.
*** Upward adjustments designed to be comparable to those for w(t).
#
    A(0) in the benchmark case is imputed from the bequest choices of the previous
    generation (see text).
   Table 3: Calibrated Simulations of Life-time Choices in our Benchmark Case
                         Additional Sensitivity Analysis

  At Age:          18            Peak of v*(t)         65     Actual life expectancy at
                                                                         18:
  Change                     Age Value of v*(t)                Age      Value of other
                                                                           variables
 A. Approximating the impact of higher (lower) durability of life protection I(t) by
    letting I(39) lower (raise) mortality risks by 25% over 10 years (ages 40-50)
                      3A.1 Remaining Projected Life Expectancy
     0*            59.08                             17.58
   -25%            59.44                             17.58
-25%(10%)#         59.27                             17.58
   +25%            58.72                             17.58
+25%(10%)#         58.88                             17.58

                           3A.2 Value of Life Saving (in $M)
     0*           1.191       38        1.435         1.090      77         0.775
   -25%           1.197       38        1.448         1.088      78         0.743
-25% (10%)#       1.194       38        1.442         1.089      77         0.774
   +25%           1.185       37        1.423         1.092      77         0.777
+25%(10%)#        1.188       38        1.428         1.091      77         0.776

                          3A.3 Expenditure on Life Protection
     0*          1043.1       38       1514.1        873.1       77         441.9
   -25%          1053.3       38       1540.7        870.2       78         405.8
-25%(10%)#       1048.9       38       1529.0        871.7       77         441.0
   +25%          1033.0       37       1488.1        876.1       77         443.7
+25%(10%)#       1037.3       38       1499.4        874.5       77         442.7

        B. Simulations adjusted to reflect the role of PAYG Social Security
                    3B.1 Projected Remaining Life Expectancy
Unadjusted*     59.10                                17.58
Adjusted**      59.14                                17.60

                           3B.2 Value of Life Saving (in $M)
Unadjusted*       1.191       38        1.435         1.090      77         0.775
Adjusted**        1.173       40        1.442         1.228      77         0.805

                          3B.3 Expenditure on Life Protection
Unadjusted*      1043.1        38        1514.1          873.1     77        441.9
 Adjusted**      1011.4        40        1528.8         1109.1     77        477.0
Basic parameter set: r=3.2%, ρ =1.5%, n=1.2, and c=3.4. Monetary values are in 1996$
# Assuming a straight-line depreciation of the durability impact
* The unadjusted values are the simulated values for our benchmark case in Table 1
** Simulations adjusted after imposing social security taxes and benefits
             Table 4: Calibrated Simulations of Lifetime Choices by
Education (1996 data), Using Imputed Biological Mortalities of Benchmark Group*

   At Age:          30      Peak of v*(t)       65      Life Expectancy at 25
  Education              Age      Value of             Age      Value of other
                                    v*(t)                         variables
  4a. Remaining Projected Life Expectancy using Benchmark Biological Risks**
 High School    44.41                          15.71
  Bachelor      45.84                          15.84
   Master       46.51                          15.91
  Doctorate     47.42                          15.99

                          4b. Value of Life Saving (in $M)
 High School      1.256     37        1.282       0.955       74          0.743
  Bachelor        2.183     38        2.245       1.651       76          1.178
   Master         2.651     36        2.689       1.984       76          1.448
  Doctorate       3.098     40        3.228       2.485       78          1.577

               4c. Impact of Life Protection on Life Expectancy (years)
 High School        1.825     37       1.335        0.180     74          0.066
  Bachelor          3.256     38       2.258        0.311     76          0.087
   Master           3.932     36       2.998        0.379     76          0.107
  Doctorate         4.839     40       3.041        0.467     78          0.095

                4d. Impact of Life Protection on Life Expectancy (%)
 High School       4.286     37        3.621       1.158      74          0.639
  Bachelor         7.646     38        6.265       2.001      76          0.947
   Master          9.235     36        7.956       2.441      76          1.164
  Doctorate       11.364     40        8.835       3.007      78          1.153

    4e. Estimated Remaining Life Expectancies Based on Death Certificates Data
                                     (RB 1990)**
 High School         44.4                            15.5
Some College         44.9                             15.6
   Bachelor          47.4                             16.6
  More Than          49.1                             17.9
   Bachelor
* See notes to Table 1. The benchmark group here is all US males. All monetary values
are in 1996 dollars.
** Estimated life expectancies in RB, thus in our simulations, are for males.
Table 5. Trends in Life Expectancy at Age 20* (through 1996)

                                                     Year

                         1970        1975          1980             1985          1990
                               Remaining Life Expectancy
    Projected1           56.10       56.35        56.60            56.82          57.04
    Projected2           55.60       55.89        56.20            56.51          56.86
     Actual              53.00        53.9        55.46            56.1           56.63

                  Increase in Life Expectancy from Selected Year to 1996
              1
    Projected             1.07          0.82         0.57          0.35           0.13
    Projected2            1.57          1.28         0.97          0.66           0.31
     Actual               4.17          3.27         1.71          1.07           0.54

                                  Percentage Explained
    Projected1           25.66        25.08         33.33          32.71          24.07
    Projected2           37.65        39.14         56.73          61.68          57.41

* Backward projections based on imputed “biological” mortality rates in 1996.
Projections shown at age 20, to make them comparable to actually reported age-specific
life expectancies in VS publications. The Basic parameter set is the same as in Table 1.
1
  Based on reported labor earnings for the general population.
2
  Given a 1% rate of reduction in the real unit cost of life protection, c (based on a 1%
economy-wide TFP growth rate) in addition to actual earnings growth.


  Table 6: Age-Specific VLS based on Willingness to Accept Compensating Wage
   Differentials for Marginally Higher Mortality Risks Over One-Year Intervals
 (V*(t)) vs. “Point” Estimates based Willingness to Spend on Life Protection (v*(t))

      Age            20       25       30       35     36     37     38               39
 v*(t) (in $M)     1.2399   1.3369   1.3991   1.4303 1.4330 1.4345 1.4350            1.434
 V*(t) (in $M)     2.3647   2.5586   2.6451   2.6722 2.6722 2.6740 2.6782            2.653
      Age            40       45       50       55     60     65     70               75
 v*(t) (in $M)     1.4325   1.4078   1.3578   1.2859 1.194 1.090 0.968               0.834
 V*(t) (in $M)     2.6472   2.5832   2.4722   2.2966 2.155 1.972 1.756               1.504

The v*(t) estimates are derived from the simulations reported in Table 1 for detailed ages.
V*(t) are derived by raising the mortality probability over a one-year period by 0.1 per
1000 and estimating the compensating wage differential (in 1996 dollars) required to
keep lifetime expected utility at age 18 intact for our benchmark group.
             Figure 1: Calibrated Simulations in Benchmark Case: Maximized Expected Utility



12000




10000




 8000




 6000




 4000




 2000
        18         38             58              78              98         118              138
                                                       age




                  Figure 2: Calibrated Simulations of Benchmark Case: Net Human Wealth
                                          (in 100,000 1996 dollars)


690



590



490



390



290



190



 90



-10
      18     28          38        48        58              68        78    88          98         108
                                                       age
                 Figure 3: Calibrated Simulations of Benchmark Case: Non-Human Wealth
                                         (in 100,000 1996 dollars)


790


690


590


490


390


290


190


90


-10
      18    28          38          48              58          68     78               88   98   108
                                                          age




                     Figure 4: Calibrated Simulations (using Alternative Interest Rates):
                                Value of Life Saving (in million 1996 dollars)


1.6


1.4


1.2


  1
                                                                                benchmark
0.8


0.6


0.4


0.2


  0
       18    28          38          48              58          68     78              88   98   108
                                                          age

                                         r = 2.4%           r = 3.2%         r = 4.0%
                                Figure 5: Calibrated Simulations of Benchmark Case: "Biological" v. Observed
                                                                Mortality Rates

                  0.06




                  0.05




                  0.04
Mortality Rates




                                                                                                               observed
                  0.03
                                                                                                               "biological"



                  0.02




                  0.01




                       0
                           18        28            38          48            58           68           78
                                                                    age




                                Figure 6: Calibrated Simulations of Benchmark Case: Life Expectancy based on
                                                    "Biological" v. Observed Mortality Rates



                  55




                  45
Life Expectancy




                  35
                                                                                                               observed
                                                                                                               "biological"


                  25




                  15




                   5
                       18           28            38           48           58            68           78
                                                                age
