                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         THE LONG-RUN VOLATILITY PUZZLE OF THE REAL EXCHANGE RATE

                                            Ricardo Hausmann
                                               Ugo Panizza
                                             Roberto Rigobon

                                          Working Paper 10751
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10751


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We would like to thank the participants at the Lunch on International Economic Policy at the KSG, Harvard
for helpful comments and suggestions and Alejandro Riaño and Monica Yañez for excellent research
assistance. The usual caveats apply. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Ricardo Hausmann, Ugo Panizza, and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Long-Run Volatility Puzzle of the Real Exchange Rate
Ricardo Hausmann, Ugo Panizza, and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 10751
September 2004
JEL No. F31, F41

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper documents large cross-country differences in the long run volatility of the real exchange

rate. In particular, it shows that the real exchange rate of developing countries is approximately three

times more volatile than the real exchange rate in industrial countries. The paper tests whether this

difference in volatility can be explained by the fact that developing countries face larger shocks (both

real and nominal) and recurrent currency crises or by different elasticities to these shocks. It finds

that the magnitude of the shocks and the differences in elasticities can only explain a small part of

the difference in RER volatility between developing and industrial countries. Results from ARCH

estimations confirm that there is a substantial difference in long term volatilities between these two

sets of countries and indicate that there is also a much higher persistence of deviations of the

variance of the RER from its long run value when the economy suffers shocks of various kinds.

Ricardo Hausmann
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
ricardo_hausmann@harvard.edu

Ugo Panizza
Research Department
Inter-American Development Bank
ugop@iadb.org

Roberto Rigobon
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-431
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu
1. Introduction
Developing countries are more volatile than industrial countries. This is true when we look across
countries at differences in the volatility of output, consumption, interest rates, or exchange rates.
The purpose of this paper is to document cross-country differences in long run volatility of the
real exchange rate (RER). We show that the real exchange rate tends to be much more volatile in
developing countries than in industrial countries, even at long horizons, and that this difference
in volatility cannot be attributed to standard explanations based on the fact that developing
countries face larger shocks (either real or nominal), or that they are more sensitive to these
shocks. The paper finds that part of the explanation lies in the fact that volatility swings are more
persistent in developing countries.

        Since the seminal contribution by Cassel (1922), Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) has been
one of the most studied topics in international economics. In its simplest form, PPP implies that
the price level of consumption baskets across countries is the same. This is the absolute version of
PPP which, by expressing all variables in logs, can be written as:

                                            pt = pt* + s t

where pt is the price of the domestic consumption basket, pt* is the price of the foreign basket,

and s t represent the exchange rate. The idea is that if goods are traded freely then deviations

from PPP would imply flow of goods to arbitrage the differences. Absolute PPP is only satisfied
under very strong assumptions and the presence of non-tradable goods, transportation costs, and
monopolistic competition are among the main reasons used in the literature to account for
deviations from absolute PPP. Relative PPP entails weaker assumptions and, rather than requiring
price equalization across consumption baskets, it only assumes that changes in the price of those
consumption baskets are arbitraged away. Formally, relative PPP requires that:

                                          ∆pt = ∆pt* + ∆st

        Both absolute and relative PPP have implications for the behavior of the real exchange
rate. Absolute PPP implies that the real exchange rate is always equal to one, while relative PPP
implies that deviations of the real exchange rate from its steady state are zero.

                                      ∆qt = ∆s t + ∆pt* − ∆pt


                                                                                                        2
         PPP is an appealing theory. So much so, that it is one of the most important building
blocks of the models in international economics. PPP, however, was never meant to characterize
the short-term dynamics of countries. Prices do not adjust to monthly fluctuations of the exchange
rate, and in most countries, not even to yearly movements. Dornbusch’s (1976) seminal paper
explained exchange rate overshooting in the short run as the consequence of differential arbitrage
speeds between the fast financial markets and the slower goods markets. In all these theories,
arbitrage in the goods markets will eventually take place and PPP can be thought as a the long run
characteristic of a mean reverting process. There are, however, theoretical models that by
assuming permanent real shocks can account for an RER that follows a random walk.

         In fact, most of the attention of the empirical literature on PPP has focused on testing
whether the RER is better described by a random walk or by a mean reverting process. In most
cases this is done by concentrating on the stochastic properties of real exchange rate deviations
from some trend and by estimating variations of the following regression:

                                             ∆qt = α∆qt −1 + ε t                                    (1)

where the focus of the analysis has tended to concentrate on the coefficient α.

         While a survey of the extensive literature on the empirics of PPP is beyond the purpose of
this paper, it is worth noting that Froot and Rogoff (1995) find that the consensus in the literature
is that PPP holds in the long run, and that the half-life of the deviations ranges between 3 and 4
years. 1 It should be pointed out that this is a consensus, not an agreement (Kilian and Zha, 2002).
For example, the area continues to be investigated and recently Imbs, et.al. (2002) suggest that
the average half-life is smaller than a year. They argue that the longer estimates found in the
previous literature were due to aggregation bias. Their findings, however, have been recently
challenged by Chen and Engel (2004).2

         While the literature has mostly concentrated on the serial correlation coefficient α in
equation (1), this paper studies cross-country differences in the variance of the innovations to the

1
 Froot and Rogoff (1995), Rogoff (1996), and Chen and Engle (2004) offer excellent surveys of the
empirical and theoretical literature. The survey of economists reporting the consensus view was conducted
by Kilian and Zha (2002).
2
 There are important small sample problems in the estimation of auto correlation models. There are two
alternatives: one is to use extremely long data sets and the other one is to perform the estimation on a panel.
Abuaf and Jorion (1990), Diebold, Husted, and Rush (1991), Frankel (1986, 1990), Glen (1992), Lothian
and Taylor (1996), and Mark (1995), look at very long data sets. Frankel and Rose (1996), Lothian (1997),
Oh (1996), and Wu (1996) estimate the autoregressive coefficient using panels. Recently, some papers
have studied non-linearities (Obstfeld and Taylor, 1997, Taylor, Peel and Sarno, 2001, and Taylor and Peel,
2000).


                                                                                                             3
PPP equation ε .3 We find that some countries have innovations whose variance is more than 20
times larger than others. And more importantly, we find that these differences are only very
partially explained by the higher variance of their terms of trade, monetary and output shocks, by
differences in the sensitivities to these shocks or by differences in exchange rate regimes. These
differences are also not accounted for by different speeds of mean reversion in the PPP equation.

         We consistently find that industrialized economies have, on average, a lower standard
deviation of the innovations to the RER (developing economies are 2.5 times more volatile than
industrial countries).4 Controlling for various shocks and allowing for different parameters by
country groups explains a very small fraction of the RER volatility. Estimating country-by-
country equations can explain up to 60 percent of the variance in the long run RER. However,
none of these equations can reduce the ratio of the residual long run RER volatilities, which
remains between 2 and 2.5.

         We also find that the difference in residual RER volatility is strongly associated with the
level of development (either economic, as measured by GDP per capita, or institutional, as
measured by rule of law) and to a lesser extent to the degree of exports diversification, as
measured by the Hirschman-Herfindahl concentration indexes.

         Further investigation suggest that differences in long run RER volatility are not due to the
magnitude or frequency of the shocks but to differences in persistence of the volatility indicating
that the way in which the RER adjusts to shocks tend to imply more persistent swings in
volatility.

         The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 shows the basic facts about cross-country
differences in RER volatility and tests different theories aimed at explaining these differences.
Section 3 uses an ARCH model to show that part of the difference in RER volatility between
developing and industrial countries can be explained by differences in persistence. Section 4
concludes.




3
  While there is a large literature that uses cross country data to gauge the consequences of RER volatility
(especially on trade, for a recent survey see Hau, 2002), there are almost no papers that use cross-country
data to study the causes of long run RER volatility. One exception is Hau (2002) who focuses on how
openness affects RER volatility.
4
  In a paper that is somewhat related to ours, Cashin and McDermott (2004) find that the speed of reversion
to PPP is faster for developed countries than for industrial countries.



                                                                                                               4
2. The Puzzle
The purpose of this section is to document the presence of large cross-country differences in real
effective exchange rate (RER) volatility and show that in developing countries the real exchange
rate tends to be much more volatile than in industrial countries, even after controlling for
differences in external and domestic shocks.

         Our sample covers up to 74 industrial and developing countries for which we have annual
data on real effective exchange rate over the 1980-2000 period.5 We start with the simplest
possible measure of volatility: the standard deviation of the growth rate of the RER. Formally,
our first measure of volatility is given by:



                                         SD(ln( RERi ,t ) − ln( RERi ,t − n ) )
                               VOLi =                                                            (2)
                                                           n



         We focus on both one year (n=1) and five-year (n=5) volatility (the upper bound for
standard estimates of the real exchange rate half-life is 4 years, Froot and Rogoff, 1995). Figure 1
plots five-year volatility for our sample of countries (the data have been normalized so that the
cross-country average is equal to one). It clearly shows that industrial countries (the light bars)
tend to have levels of real exchange rate volatility that are much lower than those of emerging
market and developing countries (dark bars). Portugal is the industrial country with the highest
level of volatility and its volatility is just above the cross-country average; no other industrial
country has levels of volatility that are above the cross-country average. We also find very few
emerging market or developing countries in the left part of Figure 1. The few we find tend to be
very small (Papua New Guinea, St. Vincent, and The Bahamas). The only large emerging market
countries that are characterized by low levels of real exchange rate volatility (i.e., less than half
the cross-country average) are Israel and Taiwan, two rather advanced economies.

         Table 1 reports average values for one-year and five-year volatility for the whole sample
of countries and for developing and industrial countries (not normalized to one) and tests whether

5
  The real exchange rate data are from J.P. Morgan and the IMF International Financial Statistics. We use
J.P. Morgan data whenever they are available and complement them with IMF data for countries that are
not included in the J.P. Morgan dataset. All the results are robust to using the IMF as main source or to
restricting the sample to only J.P. Morgan or IMF data. In all cases, we focus on the annual average of the
real exchange rate index (the results are robust to using end of period data). An increase in the RER index
reflects a real appreciation of the currency.



                                                                                                              5
the difference in volatility between these two groups of countries is statistically significant. It
shows that five-year volatility is only ten percent lower than one-year volatility and that volatility
in developing countries is always at least 2.5 times larger than volatility in industrial countries.
The last two rows of the table show that we can always reject the hypothesis that the two groups
of countries have the same level of volatility. The last four columns of the table also show that
differences in volatility are not due to a specific sub-period. In fact, we obtain similar results
when we restrict our analysis to the 1980s or to the 1990s (even though the difference between
developing and industrial countries was slightly larger in the 1980s).
         We also look at the third and fourth moments to check whether differences in volatility
are due to large devaluation or real appreciation episodes. Table 2 reports the skewness and
kurtosis of RER changes. The first two columns show that the distribution of the real exchange
rate is skewed to the left in both developing and industrial countries, indicating that large
depreciations are more common than large appreciation. While column 1 indicates that skewness
is significantly larger (in absolute value) in developing countries (indicating that large
depreciation are more common in this group of countries), column 2 shows that when we focus
on five-year periods there is no significant difference between the two samples of countries. This
suggests that large depreciations and currency crises (that are more common in developing
countries) cannot explain why five-year RER volatility is higher in developing countries.
         The last two columns of Table 2 show that if we focus on one-year volatility, we find that
the distribution of RER tends to have fatter tails in the sample of developing countries. However,
the difference in kurtosis between these two groups of countries disappears when we focus on
five-year volatility. Again, this suggests that extreme episodes cannot fully explain the fact that
five-year RER volatility is much higher in developing than in industrial countries.

2.1.      Trying to Explain the Puzzle

Why are developing countries more volatile? Clearly this suggests a misspecification error in the
AR(1) representation of the real exchange rate – i.e., there are unobservable shocks that are more
volatile in one sub-sample than in the other. These forms of misspecification should have been
expected. In fact, several of them are implied by the theories we already have available.
         There are six standard explanations based on the different types of shocks and responses6:
(i) Developing countries are subject to larger terms of trade shocks. (ii) Developing countries are



6
  The higher volatility of developing countries and its potential causes in terms of external shocks and
institutional failings is discussed in Inter-American Development Bank (1995), Hausmann and Gavin


                                                                                                           6
subject to large volatility in GDP growth because of their limited ability to conduct counter-
cyclical monetary and fiscal policies. (iii) Developing countries are subject to large nominal
shocks because they have non-credible monetary institutions and weak fiscal position. (iv)
Developing countries are subject to sudden stops in capital flows that lead to currency crisis. (v)
Differences in volatility are due to the fact that developing countries are not as open as industrial
countries. (vi) Differences in volatility are due to different exchange rate arrangements and in
particular to the adoption of non-credible pegs.
           To check whether these theories can help us in explaining away the difference in RER
volatility between developing and industrial countries we start by running various subsets of the
following regression:
                DEVi ,t = SHOCK i ,t β + +δCrisis i ,t + CC i ,t λ + SHOCK i ,t * CC i ,t γ +

                    ∑                                                                           (3)
                     2
                +          α n DEVi ,t − n + µ i + ε i ,t
                    n =1


Where the variable DEV is the first difference of the real exchange rate deviation from its long
run equilibrium level (computed as a log-linear trend). 7 Notice that expressing the dependent
variable in terms of deviation from its long run trend is equivalent to including a country specific
trend in Equation (2). Such a country specific trend controls for the fact that, because of the
Balassa-Samuelson effect, some countries may experience trend appreciation or depreciation.
           SHOCK is a matrix that includes various measures of shocks. Crisis is a dummy variable
aimed at capturing the effect of currency crisis. CC is a matrix of country characteristics
(openness, exchange rate regime, level of development) that may affect the RER response to
shocks. Finally, we include two lags of the dependent variable to control for the possibility that
differences in volatility are driven by differences in persistence. µ i is a country fixed effect.

           After running regression (3), we recover the error term ( ε i,t ) and use it to compute

country’s i one-year and five-year residual RER volatility as:




(1996), De Ferranti et al. (2000), Aizenman and Pinto (2004). The role of sudden stops and openness is
discussed in Calvo et al (2003).
7
    Formally, DEVt ,i = (ln RERt ,i − ln TRENDt ,i ) − (ln RERt −1,i − ln TRENDt −1,i ) . As
(ln TRENDt ,i − ln TRENDt −1,i ) is a constant, the standard deviation of DEVt ,i is equal to the one-
year volatility as computed in Equation (1). As we run fixed effect estimations, we would obtain exactly
the same results if we were to define our dependent variable as ln RERt ,i − ln RERt −1,i



                                                                                                           7
                                                    SD
                                                       
                                                           ∑ε
                                                        n −1

                                                           j =0
                                                                  i ,t + j
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                    RESVOLi , n =                                            (4)
                                                              n

        Clearly, when n=1 (one-year volatility), the residual volatility is just equal to the country-
specific standard deviation of the regression’s residuals. When n=5 (five-year volatility), the
residual volatility is equal to the standard deviation of the five year average of the residuals.
        Next, we use RESVOL to check whether, after controlling for all the variables included
in Equation 2, there is still a difference between the unexplained volatility of the real exchange
rate in developing and developed countries.

2.2.     The Role of Shocks

In Table 3, we explore whether shocks can help in explaining away the difference in RER
volatility between developing and industrial countries. In column 1, we control for terms of trade
shocks (dtot measures the change in terms of trade and ldtot its lagged value). While we find that
terms of trade shocks are positively and significantly correlated with changes in the RER
(indicating that positive TOT shocks lead to an appreciation of the RER), the low R-squared
(0.03) suggests that terms of trade shocks can only explain a very small fraction of the variance of
the real exchange rate. Columns 1 of Tables 4 and 5 report the residual (after controlling for terms
of trade shocks) one-year and five-year volatility. They show that the residual volatility is
basically identical to the unconditional volatility. In the case of developing countries, the one-
year volatility goes from 0.112 to 0.109 and the five-year volatility goes from 0.103 to 0.099. In
the case of industrial countries, one-year volatility goes from 0.044 to 0.042 and five-year
volatility goes from 0.041 to 0.040. Hence, differences in the magnitude of terms of trade shocks
do not explain the difference in RER volatility between developing and industrial countries.
Developing countries remain 2.5 times more volatile than industrial countries and the difference
between the two groups remains highly significant.
        In the second column of Table 3, we control for output shocks by including GDP growth
(growth). Clearly, GDP growth shocks are not exogenous and may be jointly determined with
RER innovations. However, this dual causation cleads the regression to overstate the explanatory
power of GDP growth shocks and hence to leave a smaller residual than is warranted. This biases
the results against the point we are making. This comment is valid for other endogenous variables
that we consider below as well. Remember that the problems of endogeneity will affect the




                                                                                                     8
estimation and interpretation of the coefficients in equation (1). We are, on the other hand,
concentrating on the properties of the residuals regardless of their sources.
        While GDP growth (we use real local currency GDP growth) has a positive and
statistically significant coefficient (indicating that positive output shocks are associated with real
appreciations), the R-squared of the regression remains extremely low (0.05) and columns 2 of
Tables 4 and 5 show that controlling for GDP growth neither reduces RER volatility nor reduces
the difference in RER volatility between developing and industrial countries.
        In the third column of Table 3, we include the change in log inflation (dinf) to control for
nominal shocks. While inflation is not statistically significant, column 3 fits the data better than
the two previous columns (the R-squared goes to 0.09) and somewhat reduces five-year volatility
(in developing countries it goes from 0.099 to 0.092). However, this is due to the fact that, when
we include inflation in the regression, we lose about 300 observations. In any case, columns 3 of
Tables 4 and 5 show that the difference between developing and industrial countries remains
large and highly significant.
        In column 4 of Table 3, we include a dummy variable that takes value 1 during currency
crises. The Crisis dummy takes value one when, in any two-year period, the RER depreciates by
more than two standard deviation of the cross-country sample (according to this definition there
are no currency crisis in industrial countries). As this variable is built using the left hand-side of
the regression, it has a negative and highly significant coefficient and greatly increases the fit of
the regression (the R-squared jumps to 0.3). However, controlling for currency crisis does not
explain away the difference in volatility between developing and industrial countries. Columns 4
of Tables 4 and 5 still show that developing countries are at least twice as volatile as industrial
countries. This suggests that the difference in volatility between industrial and developing
countries is not due to the presence of a few large depreciations. This is consistent with our
finding that there is no significant difference between the five-year skewness of developing and
industrial countries.
        Column 5 of Table 3 controls for changes in exports (dexp) in order to check whether
movements in the real exchange rate are due to sudden jumps demand for a country’s exports. It
finds that the coefficient of dexp is negative and not statistically significant. Column 6 controls
for openness and Column 7 interacts openness with output (grop), terms of trade shocks (dtop and
ldtop), and changes in exports (dexpop). The rationale for including these interaction terms is that
more open economies could be better equipped to face external shocks. In particular, Calvo et al.
(2003) show that the real depreciation brought about by a sudden stop in capital flows is




                                                                                                         9
negatively correlated with the degree of openness.8 We find that neither openness nor the
interaction terms are statistically significant. We also find that the R-squared remains low (at
0.10) and that the difference in volatility between developing and industrial countries remains
large and highly significant (columns 6 and 7 of Tables 4 and 5).
        In column 8 of Table 3, we interact the shock variables with an industrial country dummy
to control for the possibility that shocks may have a different effect on the real exchange rate in
each of the country sets. We find that the interaction terms are rarely significant. The only
exception is the change in exports which is correlated with real depreciations in developing
countries and real appreciations in industrial countries. In any case, controlling for these
interactions neither reduces the level of real exchange rate volatility, nor the difference in
volatility between industrial and developing countries (column 8 of Tables 4 and 5).
        In columns 9, 10, and 11 of Table 3, we check whether differences in RER volatility can
be explained away by the interaction between shocks and the exchange rate regime (Broda, 2001
shows that countries with a flexible exchange rate regime are better able to smooth-away terms of
trade shocks). In column 9, we include two dummies based on the de facto measure of the
exchange rate regime assembled by Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2000). Lys02 takes value one
for countries with an intermediate regime and Lys03 takes value one for countries with a fixed
exchange rate regime (the excluded dummy is for countries with a floating regime). In column
10, we interact these dummies with the output, terms of trade, and inflation shocks discussed
above. In column 11, we also include a dummy (switch) that takes value one when a country
moves to a more flexible exchange rate regime (from intermediate to floating or from fixed to
intermediate or floating). We find that, compared with countries with floating and fixed exchange
rate regime, terms of trade shocks tend to have a larger effect on the RER in countries with an
intermediate regime (all the other variables are not significant). Controlling for the exchange rate
regime reduces the sample by approximately 200 observations and increases the R-squared of the
regression to 0.20. However, columns 9, 10 and 11 of Tables 4 and 5 show that controlling for the
role of the exchange rate regime and its interaction with shocks does not explain away the
difference in RER volatility between developing and industrial countries.
        The last three column of Table 3 interact shocks with both exchange rate regime and
growth. As one may expect, we find that terms of trade shocks have a smaller effect on the RER
during periods of high growth (grdtot is negative) but, again, this does not explain away the


8
 Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) find that in models with nominal rigidities, more open economies should
exhibit lower RER volatility. We test this hypothesis in subsection 2.4.



                                                                                                      10
difference in volatility between developing and industrial countries (columns 12, 13, and 14 of
Tables 4 and 5).

2.3.      The role of Persistence

As we found that shocks cannot explain away the difference in volatility between developing and
industrial countries, we now explore the role of persistence by augmenting the regression with
lagged values of the dependent variable and allowing for different persistence in developing and
industrial countries. The idea is that the variance of the observed variable could be different
across groups because countries have different persistence and not necessarily because the
innovations have different variances. This section explores this possibility.
         In the first column of Table 6, we include two lags of the dependent variable. Both lags
have a negative coefficient (statistically significant for the second lag). While the negative
coefficients suggest that, after a shock, the RER tend to revert to its long run trend, the
coefficients are rather small indicating that shocks tend to be persistent. The typical estimate in
the table implies an autoregressive coefficient of about 0.8.9 This is consistent with the PPP
literature that has found average half-lives of about 3 to 4 years. Columns 1 of Tables 7 and 8
show that, allowing for persistence does not reduce our measure of RER volatility and does not
eliminate the difference in volatility between industrial and developing countries.
         In the second column of Table 6, we interact the lagged values of the dependent variable
with an industrial country dummy and thus allow persistence to differ across the two groups of
countries. Interestingly, we find that the coefficient on the first lag becomes positive in industrial
countries suggesting that exchange rate shocks are more persistent (at least in the short run) in
this group of countries. This result is also consistent with some evidence of non-linearity of PPP
deviations. In the data developing countries have larger deviations and if the relationship is non-
linear we should expect these countries to return to the mean faster (Obstfeld and Taylor 1997).
However, for the purpose of this paper, allowing for different degrees of persistence does not
affect our basic result that RER is more volatile in developing countries (column 2 of Table 7 and
8).
         In columns 3 through 9 we introduce the variables discussed above (shocks, crisis,
openness, and exchange rate regime). Again, we find that none of these variables can explain



9
  Remember that we are estimating an AR(2) which means that the value of 0.8 reported in the text is the
implied coefficient if we were to fit an AR(1). Or put it in other terms, the half-lives of the estimated AR(2)
is the same as an AR(1) with an autoregressive coefficient of 0.8.



                                                                                                            11
away the difference in volatility between developing and industrial countries (see columns 3-9 of
Tables 7 and 8).
        In column 10, we allow both the shocks and persistence to have a differential effect in
developing and industrial countries. Column 11 controls for the exchange rate regime and
columns 12 through 16 allows for interactions between shock and exchange rate regime and
shocks and growth. The results are similar to those of Table 3 and show that none of the
specifications of Table 6 can explain away differences in RER volatility between industrial and
developing countries. 10
        The results of the exercises described above are remarkable. After controlling for a very
ample set of shocks and interacting the shocks with different country characteristics, we could, in
the best of cases (when we interact shocks with the exchange rate regime in columns 10, 11, 13
and 14 of Table 3 or include our crisis dummy which is built using the left hand side variable,
column 4) reduce the residual five-year RER volatility in developing countries by 30 percent
(from 0.103 to 0.07). Even in these cases, volatility in developing countries remains 1.7 times
higher than the RER volatility in industrial countries (and the difference is statistically significant
at the 1 percent confidence level). In all other cases, our set of explanatory variables can reduce
developing countries five-year volatility by at most 20 percent. Interestingly, these explanatory
variables account for a smaller reduction in residual volatility at 5-year horizons than at 1 year .
        As a final robustness check, we look at whether our results are driven by aggregation bias
or by non-linearities. We start by running a set of regressions where all the shocks are interacted
with country fixed effects. This eliminates any aggregation bias because this is equivalent to
running the regression country by country. After running these regressions, we recover the errors
in the two groups, compute the residual volatility, and compare industrial with developing
countries. The results are reported in Table 9. They show that even after running a separate
regression for each country, we still get that the residual volatility of the RER in developing
countries is more than twice as large as the residual volatility in industrial countries (the ratios
between the volatilities of the two groups of countries range between 2.4 and 2.9). Table 10,
reports results of country by country regressions where we also control for non-linearities by
entering the squares of various shocks. Again, this does not eliminate differences in RER
volatility between developing and industrial countries and the ratio between the volatility of the
two group of countries remains in the 2.3-2.7 range.

10
   To check the robustness of our results, we also reestimated the specifications of Table 6 by using the
GMM estimator developed by Arellano and Bond (1991) and obtained results that are essentially identical
to those of Table 6.



                                                                                                        12
        In Figure 2 we illustrate the real exchange rate volatility puzzle in yet another way. We
plot summary statistics of all the regressions we have estimated thus far. For each specification
we plot the R-squared of the equation separately for industrial and for developing countries,
shown respectively in dark and light color bars (measured from the left axis). The idea is to
measure how much can be explained by the shocks and interactions we are including in the
regressions. Note that as we include more explanatory variables, the R squares go up. However,
in general, the equations do a significantly better job in explaining the within country volatility
among industrial countries than among developing countries. Note also that as more variables are
included, the R-square increases, especially after equation 33 when we run country by country
equations (this should be expected because the country by country regressions have less than
fifteen degrees of freedom).
        However, the line depicted in the figure indicates the ratio of the residual volatilities
between developing and industrialized countries is very stable. Notice that the ratio fluctuates
between 2 and 2.5 regardless of the specification. Therefore, the puzzle is, then, that
independently of how much of the RER volatility we can explain, we are unable to make any
progress in explaining the relative residual volatilities of these two sets of countries.

2.4.     Going beyond the industrial-developing split

So far we compared volatility between developing and industrial countries without asking
whether there is any specific characteristic of these two groups of countries that may explain the
differences in volatility we just documented. In what follows we use the one-year residual
volatility obtained by running the country by country regressions that includes all controls and
two lags of the dependent variable (column 8 of Table 9) and regress these volatilities over a set
of country characteristics (measured as averages for the 1980-2000 period unless otherwise
noted). In the first column, we control for the log of GDP per capita (to control for differences in
the level of development), the volatility of terms of trade, and the degree of openness. As
expected, we find that more developed countries have lower residual RER volatility (the
coefficient of LGDPPC is negative and statistically significant) and, as suggested by Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2000) and Calvo et al. (2003), we also find that more open countries have lower residual
RER volatility. At the same time, we find that terms of trade volatility is not correlated with
residual RER volatility (this should not be surprising because in computing residual RER
volatility we already netted out the effect of terms of trade shocks). In the second and third
columns, we also control for GDP growth volatility and volatility of exports and find an
insignificant relationship (again, this was expected because in computing residual volatility we


                                                                                                      13
already netted out the effect of GDP and export shocks). In the fourth column, we control for rule
of law (measured over the 1996-2002 period) and we find that this variable has the expected
negative sign but that it is not statistically significant. We also find that once we include rule of
law, GDP per capita is no longer significant (and the coefficient drops from 0.01 to 0.005).11 This
is due to the fact that GDP per capita and rule of law are highly correlated (the correlation
coefficient is 0.89) and a Wald test indicates that the two variables are jointly significant with a p-
value of 0.001. In the fifth and sixth columns we control for export concentrations at the 4 and 10
digits (the idea is that countries with less diversified export structures might experience higher
volatility). We use data on US imports by country and calculate Hirschman-Herfindahl indexes of
concentration at the 4 (CONC4) and 10 (CONC10) digit levels (the concentration indexes are
measured as averages over the 1990-2000 period). As expected, the coefficients are positive and
marginally significant in the case of CONC10. Columns 7, 8, 9 control for country size (measured
by total GDP) and two measures of financial development (DC_GDP is an average over the
1990-2000 period) and find that none of these variables are significantly correlated with residual
volatility (when we control for total GDP we find that openness is no longer significant). 12
           Equations 11 through 13 put several of the explanatory variables together. The main
message of these equations is that a measure of development – whether GDP per capita or rule of
law – is robustly related to the difference in residual RER volatility. In addition, export
concentration is also robust to the inclusion of other variables. In particular, it is robust to the
inclusion of openness and size, two variables with which it is related.13 However, neither of these
two latter variables are robustly related to RER volatility.14
           Table 12 uses the equations estimated in Table 11 to account for the difference in average
residual RER volatility between industrial countries (2.3 percent) and developing countries (5.6
percent). The estimated equations when applied to the average characteristics of industrial and
developing countries can allow for a decomposition of the residual volatilities. The equations


11
   It should be pointed out that, as rule of law is measured in the late 1990s rather than for the whole period,
this variable is “more endogenous” than GDP per capita.
12
  Larger economies tend to be more closed and country size and openness have a negative correlation of
0.5 in our dataset. Our results are in contrast with the finding of Hau (2002) who find that openness is a
robust predictor of long run RER volatility. One difference between our and his empirical strategy is that
we focus on residual volatility and, in the cross-country analysis, we also control for country size and
export concentration.
13
  There is a relatively high and negative correlation between CONC10 and LGDP of -0.41 in our dataset
and there is no correlation between CONC10 and openness (0.05). Inclusion of both size as measured by
LGDP and CONC10 makes openness no longer statistically significant.
14
     These results are robust to estimation techniques that put less weights on outliers.



                                                                                                             14
‘explain’ between 71 and 100 percent of the difference. In general, the level of development,
measured either as LGDPPC or as the index of Rule of Law or in tandem, can explain between 80
and 100 percent of the difference, depending on the specification. Differences in export
concentration can account for about 18 percent of the difference. Differences in openness do not
help explain the differences, as developing countries are on average more open than developed
countries. Differences in size also do not explain the RER puzzle as larger countries tend to have
more residual RER volatility. Hence, the level of development and of export concentration seems
to be involved in any explanation of why residual RER volatility is higher in developing
countries.



3. Another way to look at persistence and a possible answer to
   the puzzle
So far we compared RER volatility between industrial and developing countries by testing the
difference between average volatility in the two groups of countries or by regressing residual
volatility on a series of country characteristics. We now estimate an ARCH model that allows us
to use a proper regression set up to test whether there is indeed a difference between long-run
RER volatility in developing and industrial countries. We also use the ARCH model to check
whether the difference in RER volatility between developing and industrial countries can be
explained by differences in persistence in the ARCH component of the regression.
         Formally, we jointly estimate the following two ARCH (2) equations:
DEVi ,t = SHOCK i ,t a + INDi b + SHOCK i,t * INDi c +

                        ∑ g DEV
                         2
                                                                                   (5)
+ (1 + d * IND) *              n       i ,t − n   + u i ,t
                        n =1

hi ,t = ϕ + SHOCK i ,tα + INDi β + SHOCK i ,t * INDi γ +

                        ∑ λ DEV
                         2
+ (1 + δ * IND) *              n       i ,t − n   +                                (6)
                        n =1

+ ψ 1 hi ,t −1 + ψ 2 hi ,t − 2 + φ1 IND * hi ,t −1 + φ 2 IND * hi,t − 2 + ε i ,t


         The first equation (mean equation) measures how shocks and persistence affect the level
of the dependent variable (in our case the change of the real exchange rate). The second equation
– the variance equation – describes the evolution of the variance and allows us to measure the
difference in the long run variance between developing and industrial countries.



                                                                                                  15
         Equation 1 in Table 13 estimates the above model by setting c and d equal to zero in the
mean equation and α , γ , δ , λ1 , λ2 ,ψ 1 ,ψ 2 , φ1 ,φ2 equal to zero in the variance equation. In this case,
the constant (0.0132) measures the long run variance in developing countries and the constant
plus β (0.0132-0.0118=0.0014), the long run variance in industrial countries. Hence, the fact that
the industrial country dummy has a negative and highly significant coefficient indicates that the
conditional variance of the real exchange rate is significantly higher in developing countries. Note
that these numbers reflect the estimated variances, which are the squares of the standard
deviations. By taking the square roots of the estimated long run variances we obtain 11.5 percent
for developing countries and 3.7 percent for industrial countries, numbers which are in line with
the results obtained in the previous sections (Equation 1 of Table 13 is comparable to Equation 4
of Table 6; the residual 5 year volatility of this latter equation is 1.09 percent in developing
countries and 3.5 percent in industrial countries).
         In Equation 2, we explore whether the two sets of countries have the same persistence in
the variance equation. We address this issue by adding two ARCH terms to the previous equation.
                                                                                          ϕ
The estimated long run variances of these equations are given by hNONIND =                       for
                                                                                      1 −ψ1 −ψ 2
                                           ϕ+β
developing countries and by hIND =                   for industrial countries, the estimated ratio
                                        1 −ψ 1 − ψ 2
                                                                                             ϕ
between the long run variance of industrial and developing countries is given by                   =5.125
                                                                                           ϕ+β
(i.e., long run RER volatility is five times higher in developing countries). Taking square roots of
this ratio we obtain 2.264, which is in line with our estimated relative residual volatilities of the
previous section.
         Equation 3 allows the variance of developing and industrial countries to have different
persistence and shows that persistence is stronger in developing countries. While the ARCH
coefficients are positive and statistically significant, the interaction terms are negative and
statistically significant and indicate that persistence in the variance of the real exchange rate of
industrial countries is a small fraction of that in developing countries (0.55 vs. 0.20 for ARCH1
and 0.53 vs. 0.04 for ARCH2). In this case, the respective long run variances are given by:
                ϕ                         ϕ+β
hNONIND =              and hIND =                         . Notice that ψ 1 + ψ 2 is very close to
            1 −ψ1 −ψ 2            1 − ψ 1 − ψ 2 − φ1 − φ2
one (1.09) indicating that the model could be misspecified because the variance of developing
countries could be either negative or explosive.



                                                                                                            16
        In equation 4 we allow for various shocks and the lagged values of the real exchange rate
to have an effect on the variance (i.e., we relax the assumption that α , λ1 , λ2 are equal to zero). In
the variance equation we square all our explanatory variables, so that the coefficient of, say, terms
of trade, should be interpreted as the effect of terms of trade shock (either positive or negative) on
the variance of the RER. We find that past RER shocks increase RER volatility but we find no
significant effect of terms of trade or output shocks (the estimated effects are positive but not
significant). The long run variance of the RER in developing and industrial countries can be
calculated in the same way as we did in Equation 2 yielding values of 0.00414 and 0.00072,
which correspond to volatilities of 6.4 percent and 2.7 percent and a ratio of volatilities of 2.4.
        In Equation 5, we reproduce equation 4 but now we allow for interaction in the mean
equation (i.e., we relax the assumption that c and d are zero) this allows industrial and developing
countries to have different slopes in the mean equation. None of the interaction terms is
statistically significant indicating that there is no evidence that shocks affect the real exchange
rate of developing countries differently from the way they affect the real exchange rate of
industrial countries. We find almost identical results for the estimated long run RER volatilities
and of the estimated persistence terms in the variance equation.
        Finally in Equation 6, we also allow for different persistence in the two sets of countries
of the effects of the RER, TOT and output shocks on the variance equation (i.e., relax the
assumption that γ and δ are equal to zero). Several results are worth noting. First of all, the
difference on the ARCH coefficient remains large and highly statistically significant indicating
that persistence is lower in industrial countries, even after allowing the various shocks to have a
differential effect in the two groups of countries. We find that terms of trade shocks and the
second lag of the dependent variable have a smaller effect on the volatility of the RER in
industrial countries. Also, we now find that the IND dummy in the variance equation is no longer
significant. The estimated ratio of long run volatilities between industrial and developing
countries now declines to 1.57, indicating that part of the long run variance of developing
countries is explained by difference in persistence.
        All this points to the fact that the difference in real exchange rate volatility documented
in Section 2 is neither fully explained by differences in the magnitude of the shocks or by how
shocks directly affect the level of the real exchange rate, or their volatilities. Part of the
explanation is that the adjustment of the shifts in the variance tends to be slower in developing
countries.
        As a final robustness analysis, we augment the ARCH model with a further set of time
invariant continuous variables that are likely to be correlated with the industrial country dummy.


                                                                                                      17
The results are reported in Tables 14 through 16. The structure of the estimations is similar to that
of Table 10.
        In Table 14, we include a variable measuring the log of average (over the 1980-2000
period) GDP per capita (GDPPC). This is the best proxy for economic development and it is
highly correlated with the IND dummy. Column 1 shows that even controlling for GDP per
capita, the industrial dummy remains negative and significant. Columns 2, allows for differences
in the ARCH terms between the two sets of countries. The estimated persistence in the industrial
countries is close to nil, while it is large in developing countries. Moreover, allowing for a
difference in persistence drastically reduces the value and significance of the coefficient on IND.
This result is essentially repeated in the rest of Table 14 and in the subsequent tables. If we do not
allow for differences in the ARCH terms between the two sets of countries, we usually get a
large, negative and significant coefficient on IND. Once we allow for differences in the ARCH
terms we find large differences in persistence between the two sets of countries. In addition, the
coefficient on the IND term declines drastically and becomes insignificant. Tables 15 and 16
repeat these experiments using rule of law and financial development as continuous proxies for
the industrial country dummy.



4. Final Remarks
The aim of this paper was to document the main facts about long run RER volatility. It showed
that the long run RER of developing countries is between 2 and 2.5 times larger than that of
industrial countries. We also show that these differences are only partially due to the fact that
developing countries face larger shocks (both real and nominal) or to differences in the sensitivity
of the RER to these shocks. In fact, after controlling for such shocks the ratio of the residual
volatilities between the two sets of countries remains essentially unaffected. We also show that
differences in residual volatility (i.e. after controlling for shocks and sensitivities) are strongly
correlated with the level of development and to the degree of diversification of the economy (as
measured by the concentration of its export basket).
        In addition, we show that a significant part of the larger measured RER volatility in
developing countries is associated with a much larger persistence of shocks to the variance of the
RER itself, as captured by different ARCH coefficients.
        Any model that attempts to explain the long run RER volatility puzzle would need to
explain not only the potentially larger sensitivities of the RER to shocks in developing countries,
but also the much longer persistence of shocks both to the level and volatility of the RER.



                                                                                                        18
References

Abuaf, Niso and Jorion, Philippe. “Purchasing Power Parity in the Long Run.” Journal of
Finance, 1990, 45(1), pp. 155-74.

Aizenman, Joshua and Brian Pinto “Managing Volatility and Crises: A Practitioner's Guide
Overview”, mimeo, University of California, Santa Barbara, 2004

Arellano, Manuel and Stephen Bond “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo
evidence and an application to employment equations”, Review of Economic Studies, 1991
vol.58, 277-97.

Beck, Torsten, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine “A New Database on Financial
Development and Structure” World Bank Economic Review, September 2000, pp. 597-605.

Broda, Christian "Coping with Terms-of-Trade shocks: Peg versus Floats." American Economic
Review, Vol. 91, No. 2, May 2001.

Calvo, Guillermo, Izquierdo, Alejandro, and Talvi, Ernesto “Suden Stops, The Real Exchange
rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons,” NBER Working Paper N. 9828, 2003

Cashin, Paul and John McDermott “Parity Reversion in Real Exchange Rates: Fast, Slow or Not
at All?” IMF Working Paper No. 04/128, 2004

Cassel, Gustav Penningväsendet efter 1914. Stockholm: P. A. Norstedt. English translation 1922:
Money and Foreign Exchange after 1914, London: Constable and Co.

Chen, Shiu-Sheng and Charles Engel "Does 'Aggregation Bias' Explain the PPP Puzzle?"
forthcoming, Pacific Economic Review, 2004

David de Ferranti, David, Guillermo Perry, Indermit Gill, and Luis Servén “Securing Our Future
in a Global Economy,” The World Bank, Washington DC. 2000

Diebold, Francis X., Husted, Steve and Rush, Mark. “Real Exchange Rates Under the Gold
Standard.” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99(6), pp. 1252-71.

Dornbusch, Rudiger "Expectations and Exchange Rate Dynamics," Journal of Political Economy,
December 1976. Vol. 84, pp. 1161-76

Frankel, Jeffrey A. “International Capital Mobility and Crowding-Out in the U.S. Economy:
Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets or Goods Markets?” Rik W. Hafer (ed.): How Open is
the U.S. Economy? Lexington: Lexington Books, 1986.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. “Zen and the Art of Modern Macroeconomics: A Commentary.” William S.
Haraf and Thomas D. Willett (eds.): Monetary Policy for a Volatile Global Economy.
Washington D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1990.




                                                                                             19
Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Rose, Andrew K. “A Panel Project on Purchasing Power Parity: Mean
Reversion Within and Between Countries.” Journal of International Economics, 1996, 40, pp.
209-25.

Froot, Kenneth and Rogoff, Kenneth. “Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Exchange Rates.”
Handbook of International Economics, 1995. Eds. G. Grossman and K. Rogo¤, Vol.3, pp 1647-
1688, North-Holland, New York.

Glen, Jack D. “Real Exchange Rates in the Short, Medium, and Long Run.” Journal of
International Economics, 1992, 33(1/2), pp. 147-66.

Hau, Harald (2002) “Real Exchange Rate Volatility and Economic Openness: Theory and
Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 2002 Vol. 34 pp. 611-630

Hausmann, Ricardo and Michael Gavin “Securing Stability and Growth in a Shock-Prone
Region: The Policy Challenges for Latin America”, in Hausmann, R. and Reisen, H., Securing
Stability and Growth in Latin America, eds. 1996 OECD, Paris, pp. 23-64.

Imbs, Jean, Haroon Mumtaz, Morton O. Ravn, Helene Rey, "PPP Strikes Back: Aggregation and
the Real Exchange Rate" NBER Working Papers N. 9372, 2002

Inter-American Development Bank Overcoming Volatility, a special report on Economic and
Social Progress in Latin America, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1995

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, Massimo Mastruzzi “Governance Matters III: Governance
Indicators for 1996-2002,” mimeo, World Bank, 2003

Kilian, Lutz and Zha, Tao. “Quantifying the Uncertainty about the Half-Life of Deviations from
PPP.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 2002, Vol. 17, 2, pp. 107-125.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger “Classifying Exchange Rate Regimes: Deeds
vs. Words”, 2001, forthcoming, European Economic Review.

Lothian, James R. “Multi-Country Evidence on the Behavior of Purchasing Power Parity under
the Current Float.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 1997, 16(1), pp. 19-35.

Lothian, James R. and Taylor, Mark P. “Real Exchange Rate Behavior: The Recent Float from
the Perspective of the Past Two Centuries.” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, 104(3), pp. 488-
509.

Mark, Nelson “Exchange Rate Fundamentals: Evidence on Long-Horizon Predictability.”
American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (1), pp. 201-218.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Taylor, Alan M. “Nonlinear Aspects of Goods-Market Arbitrage and
Adjustment: Heckscher’s Commodity Points Revisited.” Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies, 1997, 11, pp. 441-79.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff “New Directions in Open Macroeconomics.”
Journal of International Economics, 2000, 50: 117-153.




                                                                                              20
Oh, Keun-Yeob. “Purchasing Power Parity and Unit Root Tests Using Panel Data.” Journal of
International Money and Finance, 1996, 15(3), pp. 405-18.

Rogoff, Kenneth S. “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle.” Journal of Economic Literature,
1996, 34, pp. 647-68.

Taylor, Mark P. and Peel, David A. “Nonlinear Adjustment, Long-Run Equilibrium and
Exchange Rate Fundamentals.” Journal of International Money and Finance, 2000, 19, pp. 33-53.

Taylor, Mark P., Peel, David A. and Sarno, Lucio. “Nonlinear Mean-Reversion in Real Exchange
Rates: Towards a Solution to the Purchasing Power Parity.” International Economic Review,
2001, 42(4), pp. 1015-42.

Wu, Yangru. “Are Real Exchange Rates Nonstationary: Evidence from a Panel-Data Test.”
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 1996, 28(1), pp. 54-63.




                                                                                            21
5. Appendix

List of countries included in the full sample
Industrial: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Malta, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States.
Developing: Argentina, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Belize, Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon,
Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Fiji,
The Gambia, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Israel, South Korea, Kuwait, Lesotho,
Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Romania, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, St. Lucia, St.Vincent & Grenadines, Taiwan,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia.

List and definition of variables
Variable Name                    Definition                     Source
Real Exchange Rate (RER)         Real Effective Exchange Rate   JP Morgan
                                 Index (yearly average)         IMF International Financial
                                                                Statistics
Terms of trade (TOT)            Index of terms of trade for     IMF
                                goods and services
                                (1995=100).
GROWTH                          Real GDP per capita growth in   World Bank, WDI
                                local currency.
Inflation (INFL)                Inflation measured as changes   World Bank, WDI
                                in CPI.
CRISIS                          Dummy variable that takes       Authors’ calculations based on
                                value one when, in any two-     RER data from JP Morgan and
                                year period, the RER            IMF
                                depreciates by more than two
                                standard deviation of the
                                cross-country sample.
Change in Exports (DEXP)        Percentage change in real       World Bank, WDI
                                exports in goods and services
                                (measured in US$).
OPEN                            Openness defined as export      Authors’ calculations based on
                                plus imports divided by GDP.    World Bank’s, WDI data
LYS                             Exchange rate regime. Lys01     Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger
                                takes value one for countries   (2001)
                                with a floating exchange rate
                                (excluded dummy). Lys02
                                takes value one for countries
                                with an intermediate regime.
                                Lys03 takes value one for
                                countries with a fixed
                                exchange rate regime.




                                                                                              22
LGDPPC             Log of average (over the          Authors’ calculations based on
                   1980-2000 period) GDP per         GDP per capita data from the
                   capita measured in 1995 US$.      World Bank’s WDI
VOL_TOT            Volatility of terms of trade      Authors’ calculations based on
                   over the 1980-2000 period.        terms of trade data form the
                   Computed as the standard          IMF
                   deviation of the terms of trade
                   index.
VOL_GROWTH         Volatility of local currency      Authors’ calculations based on
                   real GDP per capita growth.       GDP per capita data from the
                   Computed as the standard          World Bank’s WDI
                   deviation DEXP over the
                   1980-2000 period.
VOL_EXP            Volatility of exports.            Authors’ calculations based on
                   Computed as the standard          exports data from the World
                   deviation GROWTH over the         Bank’s WDI
                   1980-2000 period.
RULE_WB            Rule of Law from Kauffman         Kauffman et al. (2003)
                   et al. (2003). Average over the
                   1996-2002 period.
CONC4 and CONC10   Four and ten digits Hirschman     Trade Data Online from
                   – Herfindahl concentration of     Industry Canada
                   US imports by country of
                   origin. Average over the1990-
                   2000 period.
LGDP               Log of average (over the          Authors’ calculations based on
                   1980-2000 period) GDP             GDP data from the World
                   measured in 1995 US$.             Bank’s WDI
FIN_DEPTH          Private Credit over GDP           Beck et al. (2000)
                   average over the 1980-2000
                   period.
DC_GDP             Domestic Credit over GDP.         World Bank’s WDI.
                   Average over the 1990-2000
                   period.




                                                                                 23
Table 1: Real Exchange rate volatility in industrial and developing countries
                   1 YR          5YR         1 YR            5YR          1 YR          5YR
                  Volatility   Volatility   Volatility     Volatility    Volatility   Volatility
                                             1980s          1980s         1990s        1990s
Combined            0.089        0.083        0.099          0.074         0.072        0.070
Developing          0.112        0.103        0.125          0.094         0.088        0.085
Industrial          0.044        0.041        0.045          0.034         0.040        0.037
Difference          0.068        0.062        0.081          0.060         0.048        0.048
t-statistics        4.262        4.818        3.769          3.689         3.176        4.130
P (Dev>Ind)         1.000        1.000        1.000          1.000         0.999        1.000


Table 2: Skewness and kurtosis or RER changes
                        Skewness         Skewness        Kurtosis       Kurtosis
                          1YR              5YR            1YR            5YR
Combined                  -0.73            -0.24          4.12            2.40
Developing                -1.02            -0.21          4.74            2.37
Industrial                -0.14            -0.32          3.08            2.46
Difference                -0.88            0.11           1.65           -0.09
t-statistics              -4.40            0.89           2.54           -0.46
P (|dev|>|IND|)           1.000            0.19           0.99            0.33




                                                                                                   24
             Table 3: Panel Regressions, the Role of Shocks
                     (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)       (10)         (11)         (12)       (13)       (14)
                   fddev       fddev       fddev         fddev      fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev      fddev        fddev       fddev       fddev      fddev
dtot               0.130       0.163        0.242        0.199      0.262        0.262       0.383       0.281       0.315     0.087        0.063        0.338      0.179      0.331
                 (4.75)***   (5.62)***   (6.72)***    (6.27)***   (6.64)***   (6.40)***   (4.10)***   (6.58)***   (6.60)***    (0.87)       (0.62)    (7.14)***    (1.76)*    (2.40)**
ldtot              0.117       0.103       0.150         0.084      0.158       0.164       0.072       0.176       0.167      0.060        0.044       0.170       0.063      0.166
                 (4.24)***   (3.63)***   (4.26)***    (2.70)***   (4.42)***   (4.36)***     (0.83)    (4.53)***   (3.86)***    (0.69)       (0.49)    (3.96)***     (0.71)     (1.38)
growth                         0.286        0.381        0.184      0.399        0.397       0.507       0.424       0.482     0.528        0.471        0.479      0.352      0.428
                             (3.90)***   (4.33)***     (2.36)**   (4.26)***   (3.94)***   (2.74)***   (3.99)***   (3.91)***   (2.07)**     (1.82)*     (2.16)**     (1.22)     (1.38)
dinf                                       -0.001        0.008      0.000       -0.001      -0.001      -0.000      -0.001     0.006        0.006       -0.000      0.007      0.009
                                           (0.11)       (1.92)*     (0.05)      (0.20)      (0.30)      (0.02)      (0.12)     (0.50)       (0.46)      (0.02)      (0.57)     (0.62)
crisis                                                  -0.256
                                                     (17.26)***
dexp                                                               -0.026      -0.041      -0.084      -0.077      -0.088       -0.104      -0.108     -0.082      -0.095       -0.261
                                                                   (0.89)      (1.35)      (1.61)     (2.28)**    (2.32)**    (2.77)***   (2.81)***   (2.17)**    (2.52)**    (3.68)***
open                                                                           -0.017      -0.011      -0.014      -0.007        0.011       0.016      0.001       0.012        0.042
                                                                               (1.06)      (0.58)      (0.85)      (0.41)       (0.32)      (0.47)     (0.04)      (0.33)       (1.12)
grop                                                                                       -0.109                                                                               -0.053
                                                                                           (0.61)                                                                               (0.23)
dtop                                                                                       -0.179                                                                               -0.178
                                                                                           (1.40)                                                                               (1.12)
ldtop                                                                                      0.140                                                                                -0.120
                                                                                           (1.18)                                                                               (0.83)
dexpop                                                                                      0.039                                                                                0.110
                                                                                           (0.77)                                                                              (1.79)*
INDdtot                                                                                                -0.048                                                                    0.028
                                                                                                       (0.28)                                                                   (0.14)
INDldtot                                                                                               -0.222                                                                   -0.198
                                                                                                       (1.41)                                                                   (1.07)
INDgrowth                                                                                              -0.239                                                                   -0.093
                                                                                                       (0.69)                                                                   (0.21)
INDdinf                                                                                                -0.004                                                                   -0.007
                                                                                                       (0.28)                                                                   (0.45)
INDopen                                                                                                -0.016                                                                   -0.063
                                                                                                       (0.26)                                                                   (0.78)
INDdexp                                                                                                 0.191                                                                    0.332
                                                                                                      (2.37)**                                                                (3.32)***
lys02                                                                                                              -0.026       -0.038      -0.035     -0.028       -0.042      -0.038
                                                                                                                  (1.99)**      (1.54)      (1.40)    (2.03)**     (1.68)*      (1.53)
lys03                                                                                                               0.013        0.024       0.034      0.017        0.028       0.035
                                                                                                                   (0.78)       (0.82)      (1.12)     (0.92)       (0.93)      (1.13)
lys02dtot                                                                                                                        0.516       0.541                   0.389       0.390
                                                                                                                              (4.43)***   (4.60)***               (3.28)***   (3.27)***
lys03dtot                                                                                                                       -0.058      -0.021                  -0.099      -0.080
                                                                                                                                (0.47)      (0.17)                  (0.80)      (0.62)
lys02ldtot                                                                                                                       0.170       0.196                   0.167       0.114
                                                                                                                                (1.52)     (1.71)*                  (1.45)      (0.99)
lys03ldtot                                                                                                                       0.108       0.142                   0.116       0.114
                                                                                                                                (1.00)      (1.28)                  (1.05)      (1.00)



                                                                                                                                                                               25
lys02gr                                                                                                          0.499    0.494                  0.526       0.558
                                                                                                                (1.59)   (1.53)                 (1.63)     (1.71)*
lys03gr                                                                                                         -0.438   -0.438                 -0.384      -0.383
                                                                                                                (1.47)   (1.45)                 (1.17)      (1.16)
lys02dinf                                                                                                       -0.001    0.002                 -0.005      -0.003
                                                                                                                (0.04)   (0.13)                 (0.29)      (0.16)
lys03dinf                                                                                                       -0.015   -0.015                 -0.012      -0.014
                                                                                                                (1.04)   (1.02)                 (0.82)      (0.84)
lys02open                                                                                                        0.011    0.010                  0.013       0.008
                                                                                                                (0.36)   (0.32)                 (0.42)      (0.27)
lys03open                                                                                                       -0.007   -0.012                 -0.008      -0.010
                                                                                                                (0.20)   (0.34)                 (0.24)      (0.27)
switch                                                                                                                    0.002     -0.002      -0.001      -0.002
                                                                                                                         (0.18)     (0.13)      (0.10)      (0.14)
grdtot                                                                                                                              -6.463      -5.466      -5.464
                                                                                                                                  (6.59)***   (5.49)***   (5.48)***
grldtot                                                                                                                             -1.969      -1.306      -1.353
                                                                                                                                   (1.91)*      (1.25)      (1.28)
grinf                                                                                                                               -0.106      -0.168      -0.135
                                                                                                                                    (0.94)      (1.39)      (1.11)
gropen                                                                                                                              -0.132       0.031       0.000
                                                                                                                                    (0.64)      (0.13)         (.)
Constant            0.000       -0.004      -0.003       0.012     -0.004   0.011    0.007    0.014    0.006    -0.008   -0.014      0.002      -0.006      -0.019
                    (0.15)      (1.17)      (0.93)     (3.75)***   (1.00)   (0.87)   (0.46)   (0.79)   (0.34)   (0.33)   (0.53)     (0.12)      (0.24)      (0.66)
Observations         1387        1364        1066        1066       1038     949      949      949      768      768      741         741         741         741
R-squared            0.03        0.05        0.09         0.30      0.10     0.09     0.10     0.10     0.13     0.20     0.20       0.19        0.24        0.26
            Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
            *significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                                           26
Table 4: Residual One year Volatility from Table 3
                      (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
Combined             0.087    0.087    0.085    0.075    0.084    0.085    0.085
Developing           0.109    0.109    0.106    0.092    0.106    0.106    0.105
Industrial           0.042    0.042    0.042    0.042    0.042    0.043    0.043
Difference           0.066    0.066    0.065    0.050    0.064    0.063    0.062
t-statistics         4.242    4.314    4.060    3.575    4.015    3.732    3.721
P(Dev>Ind)           1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000
                      (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)
Combined             0.084    0.087    0.086    0.085    0.086    0.085    0.084
Developing           0.106    0.106    0.102    0.101    0.103    0.100    0.102
Industrial           0.040    0.048    0.052    0.052    0.050    0.052    0.045
Difference           0.066    0.058    0.051    0.049    0.053    0.049    0.057
t-statistics         3.957    3.409    3.141    2.936    3.252    3.059    3.676
P(Dev>Ind)           1.000    0.999    0.999    0.998    0.999    0.998    1.000
The volatilities are computed as the one-year standard deviation from the residuals
obtained from the regressions in the corresponding columns of Table 3

Table 5: Residual Five year Volatility from Table 3
                      (1)      (2)       (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
Combined             0.079    0.079    0.073    0.061    0.071    0.070    0.070
Developing           0.099    0.099    0.092    0.073    0.089    0.087    0.087
Industrial           0.040    0.040    0.038    0.037    0.037    0.038    0.038
Difference           0.059    0.059    0.053    0.036    0.052    0.049    0.049
t-statistics         4.948    5.071    4.780    3.635    4.670    4.080    4.057
P(Dev>Ind)           1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000    1.000
                      (8)      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)
Combined             0.070    0.067    0.062    0.060    0.065    0.061    0.062
Developing           0.088    0.081    0.072    0.069    0.078    0.071    0.073
Industrial           0.036    0.038    0.041    0.041    0.037    0.040    0.039
Difference           0.051    0.043    0.030    0.028    0.040    0.030    0.034
t-statistics         4.342    3.418    2.571    2.377    2.946    2.435    2.780
P(Dev>Ind)           1.000    0.999    0.993    0.989    0.998    0.991    0.996
The volatilities are computed as the five-year standard deviation from the residuals
obtained from the regressions in the corresponding columns of Table 3




                                                                                       27
            Table 6: Panel Regressions, Shocks and Persistence
                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)        (12)        (13)        (14)        (15)         (16)
                 fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev        fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev       fddev        fddev
fddev1          -0.036      -0.064      -0.078      -0.069      -0.088       -0.258      -0.100      -0.119      -0.118      -0.126      -0.158      -0.160      -0.155      -0.146      -0.153       -0.167
                (1.29)     (2.09)**    (2.58)**    (2.29)**   (2.80)***    (9.19)***   (3.12)***   (3.58)***   (3.53)***   (3.77)***   (4.28)***   (4.40)***   (4.19)***   (3.99)***   (4.22)***    (4.61)***
fddev2          -0.132      -0.138      -0.132      -0.122      -0.127       -0.098      -0.135      -0.131      -0.128      -0.133      -0.185      -0.168      -0.166      -0.166      -0.159       -0.158
              (4.83)***   (4.60)***   (4.46)***   (4.12)***   (4.12)***    (3.73)***   (4.30)***   (4.01)***   (3.92)***   (4.08)***   (4.73)***   (4.39)***   (4.14)***   (4.16)***   (4.04)***    (4.03)***
INDL1                        0.325       0.301       0.308       0.312        0.488       0.312       0.341       0.330       0.458       0.354       0.376       0.371       0.372       0.392        0.503
                           (2.39)**    (2.25)**    (2.31)**    (2.34)**    (4.31)***    (2.31)**    (2.44)**    (2.36)**   (3.15)***    (2.30)**    (2.51)**    (2.44)**    (2.44)**   (2.63)***    (3.28)***
INDL2                       -0.053      -0.025      -0.027      -0.025       -0.075      -0.032      -0.063      -0.074      -0.014      -0.011      -0.003      -0.003      -0.045      -0.019       0.077
                            (0.41)      (0.19)      (0.21)      (0.19)       (0.68)      (0.24)      (0.46)      (0.54)      (0.10)      (0.07)       (0.02)     (0.02)       (0.29)     (0.13)       (0.51)
dtot                                    0.173       0.168        0.239        0.203       0.255       0.261       0.408       0.282       0.326       0.166       0.141       0.347       0.271       0.393
                                      (4.91)***   (4.78)***   (6.33)***    (6.34)***   (6.14)***   (6.09)***   (4.03)***   (6.32)***   (6.48)***      (1.56)     (1.31)    (6.93)***    (2.50)**    (2.72)***
ldtot                                   0.131       0.115        0.169        0.125       0.174       0.176       0.115       0.197       0.189       0.067       0.033       0.196       0.063       0.179
                                      (3.70)***   (3.25)***   (4.42)***    (3.88)***   (4.48)***   (4.39)***     (1.22)    (4.76)***   (4.10)***      (0.75)     (0.36)    (4.24)***     (0.69)       (1.39)
growth                                              0.328        0.370        0.098       0.378       0.396       0.444       0.404       0.426       0.483       0.436       0.450       0.301       0.318
                                                  (3.70)***   (3.89)***      (1.20)    (3.77)***   (3.66)***    (2.21)**   (3.54)***   (3.24)***     (1.83)*     (1.62)      (1.89)*     (1.00)       (0.99)
dinf                                                            -0.001        0.005      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001      -0.001       0.003      0.002       -0.001      0.005        0.000
                                                                (0.16)       (1.37)      (0.12)      (0.18)      (0.19)      (0.17)      (0.22)       (0.25)     (0.19)       (0.17)     (0.42)       (0.00)
crisis                                                                       -0.300
                                                                          (19.39)***
dexp                                                                                    -0.030      -0.051      -0.118      -0.088       -0.113      -0.128      -0.131     -0.103       -0.116       -0.317
                                                                                        (0.97)      (1.57)     (1.98)**    (2.46)**    (2.78)***   (3.18)***   (3.17)***   (2.52)**    (2.88)***    (3.79)***
open                                                                                                -0.016      -0.015      -0.013       -0.002       0.015       0.020      0.008        0.012        0.036
                                                                                                    (0.92)      (0.77)      (0.69)       (0.11)      (0.43)      (0.55)     (0.36)       (0.35)       (0.96)
grop                                                                                                            -0.034                                                                                 0.063
                                                                                                                (0.17)                                                                                (0.25)
dtop                                                                                                            -0.209                                                                                -0.117
                                                                                                                (1.52)                                                                                (0.69)
ldtop                                                                                                            0.097                                                                                -0.132
                                                                                                                (0.73)                                                                                (0.82)
dexpop                                                                                                           0.069                                                                                 0.141
                                                                                                                (1.16)                                                                               (1.88)*
INDdtot                                                                                                                     -0.023                                                                    -0.008
                                                                                                                            (0.12)                                                                    (0.03)
INDldtot                                                                                                                    -0.361                                                                    -0.318
                                                                                                                           (2.12)**                                                                   (1.60)
INDgrowth                                                                                                                   -0.098                                                                     0.129
                                                                                                                            (0.27)                                                                    (0.28)
INDdinf                                                                                                                     -0.001                                                                     0.003
                                                                                                                            (0.04)                                                                    (0.17)
INDopen                                                                                                                     -0.009                                                                    -0.059
                                                                                                                            (0.14)                                                                    (0.72)
INDdexp                                                                                                                      0.213                                                                     0.407
                                                                                                                           (2.38)**                                                                 (3.67)***
lys02                                                                                                                                   -0.028      -0.045      -0.045      -0.034      -0.053        -0.048
                                                                                                                                       (2.10)**     (1.77)*     (1.72)*    (2.38)**    (2.09)**      (1.85)*
lys03                                                                                                                                    0.014       0.025       0.028       0.012       0.023         0.033
                                                                                                                                        (0.82)       (0.85)      (0.91)     (0.62)      (0.73)        (1.07)



                                                                                                                                                                                                   29
lys02dtot                                                                                                                                    0.422       0.446                   0.284        0.307
                                                                                                                                          (3.44)***   (3.59)***                (2.27)**     (2.45)**
lys03dtot                                                                                                                                   -0.133      -0.099                  -0.198       -0.183
                                                                                                                                            (1.02)      (0.74)                   (1.49)       (1.34)
lys02ldtot                                                                                                                                   0.226       0.271                   0.221        0.177
                                                                                                                                           (1.95)*     (2.27)**                 (1.83)*       (1.48)
lys03ldtot                                                                                                                                   0.108       0.158                   0.145        0.147
                                                                                                                                            (0.95)      (1.35)                   (1.25)       (1.25)
lys02gr                                                                                                                                      0.475       0.466                   0.507        0.530
                                                                                                                                            (1.47)      (1.40)                   (1.52)       (1.58)
lys03gr                                                                                                                                     -0.494      -0.503                  -0.575       -0.589
                                                                                                                                            (1.57)      (1.57)                  (1.67)*      (1.71)*
lys02dinf                                                                                                                                   -0.003      -0.000                  -0.008       -0.001
                                                                                                                                            (0.20)      (0.01)                   (0.47)       (0.07)
lys03dinf                                                                                                                                   -0.010      -0.010                  -0.009       -0.004
                                                                                                                                            (0.70)      (0.66)                   (0.60)       (0.21)
lys02open                                                                                                                                    0.017       0.015                   0.018        0.011
                                                                                                                                            (0.53)      (0.45)                   (0.57)       (0.34)
lys03open                                                                                                                                   -0.004      -0.009                  -0.005       -0.010
                                                                                                                                            (0.12)      (0.26)                   (0.13)       (0.29)
switch                                                                                                                                                  -0.008      -0.011      -0.012       -0.012
                                                                                                                                                        (0.53)      (0.76)       (0.89)       (0.86)
grdtot                                                                                                                                                              -6.106      -5.652       -5.641
                                                                                                                                                                  (5.90)***   (5.42)***    (5.40)***
grldtot                                                                                                                                                             -2.586      -1.986       -1.945
                                                                                                                                                                   (2.31)**     (1.71)*      (1.66)*
grinf                                                                                                                                                               -0.116      -0.222       -0.195
                                                                                                                                                                    (1.00)      (1.80)*       (1.58)
gropen                                                                                                                                                              -0.188       0.091        0.000
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.82)       (0.36)         (.)
Constant       0.000         0.000        0.001          -0.005     -0.004          0.015    -0.003   0.011    0.011    0.010    0.005     -0.009      -0.010        0.005       0.001       -0.010
               (0.08)        (0.06)       (0.19)         (1.42)      (0.95)      (4.61)***   (0.88)   (0.79)   (0.68)   (0.57)   (0.26)    (0.36)      (0.35)       (0.23)       (0.03)       (0.34)
Observations    1314          1152         1152           1151        1006          1006      981      899      899      899      730       730         704           704         704          704
R-squared       0.02          0.03         0.06           0.07        0.12           0.37     0.12     0.13     0.13     0.14     0.18      0.24        0.24          0.22        0.28         0.30
                     Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses
                     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                                                                          30
Table 7: Residual One year volatility from table 6
                 (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)
Combined        0.088   0.087   0.087   0.087   0.084   0.073   0.084   0.084
Developing      0.110   0.110   0.110   0.109   0.106   0.090   0.106   0.106
Industrial      0.043   0.041   0.041   0.040   0.040   0.040   0.040   0.041
Difference      0.067   0.069   0.069   0.069   0.066   0.050   0.066   0.065
t-statistics    4.108   4.254   4.479   4.532   4.209   3.922   4.174   3.960
P(Dev>Ind)      1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 (9)     (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)    (14)    (15)    (16)
Combined        0.084   0.083   0.086   0.085   0.085   0.086   0.085   0.084
Developing      0.106   0.106   0.105   0.102   0.101   0.103   0.101   0.102
Industrial      0.041   0.037   0.047   0.051   0.052   0.049   0.052   0.045
Difference      0.065   0.069   0.058   0.051   0.049   0.054   0.050   0.057
t-statistics    3.958   4.270   3.623   3.287   3.059   3.472   3.278   3.891
P(Dev>Ind)      1.000   1.000   1.000   0.999   0.998   1.000   0.999   1.000



Table 8: Residual Five year volatility from Table 6
                 (1)      (2)     (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)
Combined        0.086   0.086   0.086   0.085   0.078   0.069   0.076   0.075
Developing      0.108   0.110   0.110   0.109   0.101   0.087   0.099   0.097
Industrial      0.042   0.035   0.036   0.035   0.034   0.033   0.033   0.033
Difference      0.065   0.075   0.074   0.074   0.067   0.054   0.066   0.064
t-statistics    4.767   5.418   5.541   5.648   5.148   4.374   5.044   4.384
P(Dev>Ind)      1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000
                 (9)     (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)    (14)    (15)    (16)
Combined        0.075   0.074   0.073   0.069   0.066   0.070   0.067   0.066
Developing      0.096   0.098   0.091   0.082   0.079   0.087   0.081   0.083
Industrial      0.034   0.029   0.036   0.039   0.039   0.034   0.037   0.031
Difference      0.062   0.069   0.055   0.043   0.041   0.054   0.044   0.052
t-statistics    4.292   4.833   3.368   2.975   2.824   3.341   3.087   3.751
P(Dev>Ind)      1.000   1.000   0.999   0.998   0.997   0.999   0.998   1.000




                                                                                31
Table 9: Residual Volatility from country by country regressions
                      (1)      (2)       (3)     (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)      (8)

                                                   One year
Combined              0.076     0.072    0.062    0.056 0.070       0.064    0.055    0.045
Developing            0.097     0.091    0.078    0.070 0.088       0.081    0.068    0.056
Industrial            0.035     0.033    0.031    0.028 0.032       0.031    0.028    0.023
Difference            0.062     0.057    0.048    0.043 0.056       0.050    0.040    0.033
t-statistics          4.693     4.473    4.045    4.228 4.375       4.203    3.691    3.663
P(Dev>Ind)            1.000     1.000    1.000    1.000 1.000       1.000    1.000    1.000
                      (9)      (10)     (11)     (12)     (13)     (14)     (15)     (16)
                                                   Five-year
Combined              0.067    0.052     0.115    0.047 0.061       0.054    0.045    0.038
Developing            0.086    0.066     0.148    0.061 0.077       0.068    0.057    0.048
Industrial            0.030    0.024     0.053    0.022 0.027       0.026    0.022    0.020
Difference            0.056    0.043     0.096    0.039 0.050       0.042    0.036    0.028
t-statistics          5.740    5.240     5.240    4.693 4.514       4.247    4.165    3.213
P(Dev>Ind)            1.000    1.000     1.000    1.000 1.000       1.000    1.000    0.999
Columns 1 and 9 only control for TOT, Columns 2 and 10 control for TOT and Growth, Columns 3 and 11 control
for TOT, Growth, and inflation, Columns 4 and 12 control for TOT, Growth, inflation, and export growth,
Columns 5 and 13 only control for TOT + two lags of the dependent variable Columns 6 and 14 control for TOT and
Growth + two lags of the dependent variable, Columns 7 and 15 control for TOT, Growth, and inflation + two lags
of the dependent variable, Columns 8 and 16 control for TOT, Growth, inflation, and export growth + two lags of
the dependent variable

Table 10: Residual volatility with country by country regressions and non-linearities
                      (1)      (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)      (6)      (7)      (8)
                                              One year volatility
Combined             0.048    0.053     0.051 0.053 0.037 0.042             0.041    0.040
Developing           0.061    0.066     0.063 0.066 0.046 0.052             0.050    0.049
Industrial           0.024    0.026     0.027 0.025 0.019 0.022             0.022    0.021
Difference           0.037    0.040     0.036 0.041 0.027 0.030             0.027    0.028
t-statistics         3.740    3.862     3.733 4.075 3.087 3.152             3.044    3.208
P(Dev>Ind)           1.000    1.000     1.000 1.000 0.999 0.999             0.998    0.999
                      (9)      (10)      (11)    (12)     (13)     (14)      (15)     (16)
                                              Five year volatility
Combined             0.042    0.047     0.043 0.044 0.032 0.038             0.036    0.033
Developing           0.054    0.060     0.055 0.057 0.040 0.048             0.045    0.042
Industrial           0.021    0.022     0.021 0.020 0.016 0.020             0.020    0.017
Difference           0.033    0.038     0.034 0.036 0.023 0.028             0.025    0.024
t-statistics         4.116    4.079     4.135 4.403 2.972 2.776             2.755    2.972
P(Dev>Ind)           1.000    1.000     1.000 1.000 0.998 0.996             0.996    0.998
These are the residuals of country by country regressions that TOT, Growth, inflation, and export growth, columns
5, 6, 7, 8 and 13, 14, 15, 16 also include two lags of the dependent variables. In columns 1, 5, 9, 13 TOT shocks are
also entered squared, in columns 2, 6, 10, 14 growth is entered squared, in columns 3, 7, 11, 15 inflation is entered
squared, in columns 4, 8, 16 and 16 export growth is also entered squared.


                                                                                                                   32
Table 11: Cross Country Regressions
                      (1)         (2)         (3)       (4)         (5)            (6)        (7)         (8)         (9)          (10)     (11)         (12)      (13)
                   VOL_P       VOL_P       VOL_P      VOL_P      VOL_P          VOL_P      VOL_P       VOL_P       VOL_P        VOL_P      VOL_P       VOL_P      VOL_P
LGDPPC              -0.011      -0.013      -0.006    -0.005      -0.010         -0.009     -0.016      -0.013      -0.012       -0.011    -0.000       -0.010
                  (3.10)***   (3.00)***    (2.10)**   (0.58)    (3.27)***      (3.19)***   (2.59)**    (2.39)**    (2.36)**    (3.10)***   (0.04)     (2.84)***
VOL_TOT              0.033                                                                                                        0.033
                    (0.60)                                                                                                       (0.60)
OPEN                -0.015      -0.016      -0.018    -0.012         -0.018      -0.017     -0.010      -0.016      -0.016       -0.015    -0.008      -0.009      -0.008
                   (2.47)**    (2.45)**   (2.75)***   (2.00)*       (2.66)**   (2.77)***    (1.46)     (2.47)**    (2.56)**     (2.47)**   (1.20)      (1.63)      (1.19)
VOL_GROWTH                      -0.027
                                (0.11)
VOL_EXP                                     0.283
                                            (1.42)
RULE_WB                                                -0.014                                                                               -0.017                  -0.017
                                                       (1.59)                                                                              (2.13)**               (3.83)***
CONC4                                                                0.073
                                                                     (1.57)
CONC10                                                                           0.090                                                      0.101      0.098       0.102
                                                                                (1.80)*                                                    (2.13)**   (2.04)**    (2.12)**
LGDP                                                                                        0.003                                           0.004      0.005       0.004
                                                                                            (1.11)                                          (1.37)     (1.55)      (1.37)
FIN_DEPTH                                                                                               0.001
                                                                                                        (0.05)
DC_GDP                                                                                                               -0.006                -0.007      -0.016      -0.007
                                                                                                                     (0.47)                (0.53)       (1.20)     (0.53)
Constant            0.147       0.164       0.075      0.102      0.126          0.122       0.152       0.162        0.157      0.147      0.009       0.085       0.007
                  (4.02)***   (3.74)***    (1.73)*     (1.54)   (4.52)***      (4.41)***   (4.82)***   (3.62)***   (3.77)***   (4.02)***   (0.16)      (1.97)*     (0.19)
Observations          60          60         60          53         53             53          60          60          60          60        53           53         53
R-squared            0.34        0.33       0.45        0.37       0.45           0.47        0.34        0.33        0.33        0.34      0.53         0.50       0.53
Robust t statistics in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                                                                                        34
Table 12: Share of difference explained by regressions
Share explained by       (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)      (5)     (6)     (7)      (8)     (9)     (10)     (11)     (12)
LGDPPC                 79.7%   94.2%   43.5%   36.2%     72.5%   65.2%   116.0%   94.2%   87.0%            72.5%
VOL_TOT                 6.5%
OPEN                   -6.9%   -7.3%   -8.3%    -5.5%    -8.3%   -7.8%   -4.6%    -7.3%   -7.3%   -3.7%    -4.1%    -3.7%
VOL_GROWTH                     -2.0%
VOL_EXP                                35.4%
RULE_WB                                        72.0%                                              87.5%    0.0%     87.5%
CONC4                                                    13.7%
CONC10                                                           16.1%                            18.0%    17.5%    18.2%
LGDP                                                                     -22.9%                   -30.5%   -38.2%   -30.5%
FIN_DEPTH                                                                         -1.3%
DC_GDP                                                                                    10.3%   12.0%    27.5%    12.0%
TOT EXPLAINED BY
REGRESSION             79.3%   84.9%   70.7%   102.8%    77.9%   73.5%   88.5%    85.6%   89.9%   83.3%    75.1%    83.5%




                                                                                                                             35
Table 13: ARCH Estimations
                1               2                3                4               5               6
                                              Mean Equation
RER(-1)        0.8078          0.8533           0.8759           0.9630          0.9737          0.9844
              55.5258   ***   32.8036   ***    34.9352 ***      33.7198   ***   28.0731   ***   28.5951   ***
RER(-2)       -0.2025         -0.2803          -0.2940          -0.2904         -0.2743         -0.2815
              12.1422   ***   14.8160   ***    17.0880 ***      11.3483   ***    9.7926   ***    9.3137   ***
TOT            0.0945          0.0817           0.0886           0.0920          0.0758          0.0757
               5.9043   ***    5.0893   ***     5.9312 ***       4.7080   ***    2.6945   ***    2.6403   ***
G              0.1662          0.1341           0.1151           0.1098          0.1202          0.1269
               4.0782   ***    4.6520   ***     4.1516 ***       3.4109   ***    3.0098   ***    3.1642   ***
IND           -0.0017          0.0074           0.0081           0.0000         -0.0004         -0.0003
               0.3350          2.3364   **      2.5894 **        0.0114          0.1103          0.1015
RER(-1)*IND                                                                     -0.0235         -0.0073
                                                                                 0.3620          0.1142
RER(-2)*IND                                                                     -0.0580         -0.0732
                                                                                 0.7918          1.0797
TOT*IND                                                                          0.0214         -0.1180
                                                                                 0.5251          2.6969   ***
G*IND                                                                           -0.0336          0.0107
                                                                                 0.4935          0.1505
C0            -0.0002         -0.0090           -0.0093         -0.0008         -0.0004          0.0015
               0.0335          3.2004   ***      3.6999 ***      0.2989          0.1342          0.5349
                                            Variance Equation
CC             0.0132          0.0041            0.0032          0.0013          0.0013          0.0012
              42.7116   ***   16.6781   ***    11.9595 ***       5.3670   ***    5.3222   ***    5.4703   ***
IND           -0.0118         -0.0033           -0.0022         -0.0006         -0.0005         -0.0003
              35.7181   ***   13.4456   ***      7.3904 ***      2.1942   **     2.0687   **     1.5380
RER(-1)                                                          0.1155          0.1182          0.1433
                                                                 4.8322   ***    4.8926   ***    5.5479   ***
RER(-2)                                                          0.0990          0.0974          0.1264
                                                                11.1969   ***   11.1622   ***   12.4810   ***
TOT                                                              0.0251          0.0281          0.0453
                                                                 1.5531          1.6181          2.3819   **
G                                                                0.0624          0.0636          0.0375
                                                                 1.5613          1.5529          0.8320
RER(-1)*IND                                                                                     -0.0153
                                                                                                 0.2921
RER(-2)*IND                                                                                     -0.1340
                                                                                                 4.1150   ***
TOT*IND                                                                                         -0.0733
                                                                                                 3.5613   ***
G*IND                                                                                            0.0355
ARCH1                          0.4051            0.5492          0.3464          0.3443          0.2650
                               7.7760   ***      7.0169   ***    6.8953   ***    6.8776   ***    7.0531   ***
ARCH2                          0.3622            0.5329          0.3399          0.3461          0.2715
                               9.1353   ***      8.7162   ***    5.2305   ***    5.1714   ***    4.7033   ***
ARCH1 *IND                                      -0.3484         -0.3074         -0.3029         -0.1161
                                                 3.0319   ***    3.6385   ***    3.4681   ***    1.4825
ARCH2*IND                                       -0.4917         -0.3512         -0.3664         -0.2776
                                                 5.8929   ***    4.1644   ***    4.3373   ***    4.2525   ***




                                                                                                                36
Table 14: ARCH Estimations. The effect of GDP per capita
                      1                 2               3               4
                               Mean Equation
RER1                 0.9688          0.9441            0.9634          0.9963
                     31.08    ***    31.31     ***     26.46    ***    28.32    ***
RER-SQUARED         -0.2986         -0.2762           -0.2753         -0.2803
                     10.57    ***    10.88     ***     10.43    ***     9.97    ***
TOT                  0.1145          0.1172            0.1354          0.1286
                      5.57    ***     5.94     ***      4.54    ***     4.21    ***
G                    0.1478          0.1328            0.1035          0.1238
                      4.06    ***     3.77     ***      2.43    **      2.98    ***
IND                 -0.0007         -0.0006           -0.0006         -0.0014
                      0.17            0.14              0.14            0.34
GDPPC                0.0063          0.0068            0.0070          0.0046
                      2.04     **     2.20      **      2.30    **      1.46
RER1*GDPPC                                            -0.0104         -0.0181
                                                        0.68            1.29
RER-SQUARED*GDPPC                                     -0.0080         -0.0063
                                                        0.48            0.39
TOT*GDPPC                                             -0.0146         -0.0187
                                                        1.44            1.86     *
G*GDPPC                                                0.0181          0.0216
                      0.00             0.00             1.08            1.30
CONST               -0.0247          -0.0276          -0.0282         -0.0174
                      2.11     **      2.34      **     2.44    **      1.46
                              Variance Equation
CONST                0.0030           0.0023           0.0023          0.0010
                      4.49    ***      3.18     ***     3.10    ***     1.25
IND                 -0.0012          -0.0005          -0.0004         -0.0003
                      3.24    ***      1.23             1.14            0.78
GDPPC               -0.0003          -0.0003          -0.0003          0.0000
                      1.99      *      1.54             1.50            0.04
RER1                 0.1275           0.1029           0.1051         -0.3827
                      5.81    ***      3.95     ***     3.89    ***     2.35    **
RER-SQUARED         0.0792           0.0849           0.0831           0.5498
                      6.47    ***      6.24     ***     6.29    ***     9.77    ***
TOT                  0.0257           0.0225           0.0102          0.4964
                      1.31             1.01             0.45            4.24    ***
G                   -0.0045           0.0038           0.0101         -0.1906
                      0.11             0.09             0.24            0.75
RER*GDPPC                                                              0.1293
                                                                        3.15    ***
RER-SQUARED*GDPPC                                                     -0.1295
                                                                        8.48    ***
TOT*GDPPC                                                             -0.1238
                                                                        4.33    ***
G*GDPPC                                                                0.0493
                                                                        0.75
ARCH1               0.2725           0.3518           0.3587           0.3305
                     6.25     ***      5.30    ***      5.26    ***     4.95    ***
ARCH2               0.2176            0.4076           0.4273          0.4125
                     3.87     ***      4.76    ***      4.94    ***     5.32    ***
ARCH1*IND                            -0.3187          -0.3174         -0.2775
                                       3.36    ***      3.25    ***     2.86    ***
ARCH2*IND                            -0.3514          -0.3803         -0.2497
                                       2.59     **      2.83    ***     1.72     *




                                                                                      37
Table 15: ARCH Estimations. The effect of Rule of Law
                    1                2               3               4
                              Mean Equation
RER1               0.9668         0.9447            0.9932         1.0484
                   31.80    ***   32.39     ***     28.31    ***   5473.87   ***
RER-SQUARED       -0.2890        -0.2672           -0.2458         -0.3109
                    9.79    ***   10.48     ***      9.60    ***   2547.06   ***
TOT                0.1153         0.1125            0.0772         0.0953
                    5.85    ***    5.92     ***      2.81    ***   470.51    ***
G                  0.1650         0.1449            0.1161         0.1364
                    4.65    ***    4.23     ***      2.86    ***
IND               -0.0011        -0.0012           -0.0015         -0.0020
                    0.16           0.21              0.26
ROL                0.0021         0.0026            0.0022         -0.0001
                    0.64           0.86              0.72
RER1*ROL                                           -0.0690         -0.1411
                                                     1.91     *
RER-SQUARED*ROL                                    -0.0460         0.0048
                                                     1.22
TOT*ROL                                             0.0068         -0.0343
                                                     0.34
G*ROL                                               0.0523         0.0438
                                                     1.33
CONST             -0.0011          -0.0022         -0.0010         0.0011
                    0.35             0.71            0.31
                             Variance Equation
CONST              0.0021          0.0015          0.0014          0.0011
                    6.08    ***      4.22    ***     4.12    ***     8.06    ***
IND               -0.0006          -0.0001          0.0000         0.0002
                    1.22             0.13            0.07            1.38
ROL               -0.0005          -0.0004         -0.0004         -0.0007
                    2.31     **      1.76     *      1.75     *
RER1               0.1171           0.0954          0.1017          0.1414
                    5.67    ***      3.78    ***     3.82    ***     8.55    ***
RER-SQUARED       0.0932           0.1017          0.0910           0.1129
                    9.32    ***      9.57    ***     7.77    ***     27.87   ***
TOT                0.0271           0.0196          0.0140          0.0542
                    1.44             0.91            0.63            4.93    ***
G                 -0.0183          -0.0046         -0.0020         -0.0077
                    0.48             0.11            0.05            0.76
RER*ROL                                                            -0.0238
                                                                     2.81    ***
RER-SQUARED*ROL                                                    -0.0750
                                                                     34.60   ***
TOT*ROL                                                            -0.0549
                                                                     9.17    ***
G*ROL                                                              0.0171
                                                                     3.31    ***
ARCH1             0.2441          0.3182           0.3147          0.2671
                   6.37     ***     5.44    ***      5.32    ***     4.97    ***
ARCH2             0.1834           0.4078           0.4885          0.2879
                   3.63     ***     4.72    ***      5.18    ***     4.81    ***
ARCH1*IND                         -0.2869          -0.2806         -0.0987
                                    3.35    ***      3.26    ***     1.83     *
ARCH2*IND                         -0.4030          -0.4942         -0.3093
                                    3.60    ***      4.37    ***     5.17    ***




                                                                                   38
Table 16: ARCH Estimations. The effect of Financial Development
                    1                2               3               4
                              Mean Equation
RER1               0.9674         0.9428            0.9761          1.0096
                   31.25    ***   31.77     ***     26.94    ***    28.73    ***
RER-SQUARED       -0.2966        -0.2708           -0.2667         -0.2961
                   10.45    ***   10.87     ***     10.27    ***    10.14    ***
TOT                0.1117         0.1131            0.1150          0.1022
                    5.48    ***    5.77     ***      3.86    ***     3.29    ***
G                  0.1548         0.1402            0.1102          0.1238
                    4.36    ***    4.09     ***      2.64    ***     2.96    ***
IND               -0.0021        -0.0029           -0.0029         -0.0011
                    0.30           0.45              0.45            0.17
FD2                0.0026         0.0032            0.0029          0.0007
                    0.97           1.29              1.20            0.28
RER1*FD2                                           -0.0072         -0.0144
                                                     1.09            2.28    **
RER-SQUARED*FD2                                    -0.0041         -0.0004
                                                     0.57            0.06
TOT*FD2                                            -0.0043         -0.0029
                                                     1.00            0.75
G*RFD2                                              0.0089          0.0093
                    0.00            0.00             1.21            1.32
CONST             -0.0219         -0.0274          -0.0248         -0.0054
                    1.04            1.41             1.28            0.27
                             Variance Equation
CONST              0.0037          0.0031           0.0031          0.0011
                    2.68    ***     2.20      **     2.24    **      0.73
IND               -0.0010         -0.0002          -0.0002         -0.0004
                    2.06     **     0.51             0.36            0.91
FD2               -0.0002         -0.0002          -0.0002          0.0000
                    1.34            1.29             1.36            0.07
RER1               0.1103          0.0858           0.0907          0.0812
                    5.12    ***     3.27     ***     3.31    ***     0.60
RER-SQUARED       0.0858           0.0934           0.0908          0.4692
                    6.90    ***     7.10     ***     7.33    ***     8.22    ***
TOT                0.0274          0.0207           0.0108          0.3812
                    1.35            0.92             0.47            3.75    ***
G                 -0.0163         -0.0043          -0.0003         -0.0314
                    0.45            0.11             0.01            0.12
RER*FD2                                                             0.0037
                                                                     0.23
RER-SQUARED*Fd2                                                    -0.0481
                                                                     6.68    ***
TOT*FD2                                                            -0.0420
                                                                     4.12    ***
G*FD2                                                               0.0039
                                                                     0.13
ARCH1             0.2597          0.3379           0.3363           0.2338
                   6.23     ***     5.27    ***      5.21    ***     5.15    ***
ARCH2             0.2326           0.4453           0.4722          0.3710
                   4.10     ***     5.11    ***      5.32    ***     5.06    ***
ARCH1*IND                         -0.3048          -0.2925         -0.1341
                                    3.40    ***      3.18    ***     1.77     *
ARCH2*IND                         -0.3857          -0.4236         -0.2977
                                    2.86    ***      3.14    ***     2.56    **




                                                                                   39
     0
            0.5
                      1
                                1.5
                                          2
                                                   2.5
                                                                3
                                                                          3.5
                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                  4.5
         Norway
          Netherlands
          Ireland
           Denmark
           Austria
           Bahamas, The
           France
            Israel
             Canada
             Switzerland
              Germany
              Taiwan
              Cyprus
              Greece
               Papua New Guinea
               Sweden
                                                                                Developing countries
                                                                                                       Industrialized countries




               St.Vinc&Grenadines
               Malta
                Iceland
                 St. Lucia
                 Gambia, The
                 Belgium
                 Lesotho
                  Korea, Rep.
                  Hong Kong, China
                  Spain
                   Finland
                   United Kingdom
                   Italy
                    Morocco
                     Australia
                     Philippines
                     Thailand
                      Costa Rica
                      Belize
                      Japan
                                                                                                                                        Figure 1: Five-Year Volatility of Real Exchange Rate




                      New Zealand
                       Togo
                         Tunisia
                          Hungary
                          United States
                          Singapore
                           Fiji
                           Turkey
                            India
                             Malaysia
                             Portugal
                             Pakistan
                              South Africa
                                Bahrain
                                Peru
                                 Mexico
                                 Brazil
                                 Saudi Arabia
                                  Trinidad and Tobago
                                  Chile
                                  Kuwait
                                  Paraguay
                                    Cote d'Ivoire
                                    Dominican Republic
                                    Cameroon
                                    Colombia
                                     Argentina
                                     Indonesia
                                      Burundi
                                           Uruguay
                                               China
                                                Venezuela
                                                Ecuador
                                                  Zambia
40




                                                      Romania
                                                                    Bolivia
                                                                                                                           Nigeria
Figure 2: Five-Year Volatility Ratio and R-squares of the regressions.
 0.7                                                                                                                                                         3.0




 0.6
                                                                                                                                                             2.5



 0.5
                                                                                                                                                             2.0


 0.4

                                                                                                                                                             1.5

 0.3


                                                                                                                                                             1.0
 0.2



                                                                                                                                                             0.5
 0.1




  0                                                                                                                                                          0.0
       1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47

                                                                         R2 Dev     R2 Ind      Ratio




                                                                                                                                                                   41
