                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AND MEDICAL CARE
                       EXPENDITURES IN MEDICARE MANAGED CARE

                                              Kanika Kapur
                                          Jeanette A. Rogowski
                                           Vicki A. Freedman
                                          Steven L. Wickstrom
                                             John L. Adams
                                             José J. Escarce

                                          Working Paper 10757
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10757


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




This research was supported by grants RO1-HS/AG09630 and PO1-HS10770 from the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Kanika Kapur, Jeannette A. Rogowski, Vicki A. Freedman, Steven L. Wickstrom, John L. Adams,
and José J. Escarce. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Socioeconomic Status and Medical Care Expenditures in Medicare Managed Care
Kanika Kapur, Jeannette A. Rogowski, Vicki A. Freedman, Steven L. Wickstrom, John L.
Adams, and José J. Escarce
NBER Working Paper No. 10757
September 2004
JEL No. I1

                                          ABSTRACT

This study examined the effects of education, income, and wealth on medical care expenditures in
two Medicare managed care plans. The study also sought to elucidate the pathways through which
socioeconomic status (SES) affects expenditures, including preferences for health and medical care
and ability to navigate the managed care system. We modeled the effect of SES on medical care
expenditures using Generalized Linear Models, estimating separate models for each component of
medical expenditures: inpatient, outpatient, physician, and other expenditures. We found that
education, income, and wealth all affected medical care expenditures, although the effects of these
variables differed across expenditure categories. Moreover, the effects of these SES variables were
much smaller than the effects found in earlier studies of fee-for-service Medicare. The pathway
variables also were associated with expenditures. Accounting for the pathways through which SES
affects expenditures narrowed the effect of SES on expenditures; however, the change in the
estimates was very small. Thus, although our measures of preferences and ability to navigate the
system were associated with expenditures, they did not account for an appreciable share of the
impact of SES on expenditures.

Kanika Kapur                                         Steven L. Wickstrom
RAND                                                 Center for Health Care Policy and
1700 Main Street                                     Evaluation
Santa Monica, CA 90407                               United Health Care
kapur@rand.org
                                                     John L. Adams
Jeannette A. Rogowski                                RAND
RAND
                                                     José J. Escarce
Vicki A. Freedman                                    RAND and NBER
Policher Research Institute                          escarce@rand.org
                                       INTRODUCTION

       Managed care enrollment among elderly Medicare beneficiaries increased dramatically

during the 1980s and 1990s, from 3.5 percent of beneficiaries in 1985 to 16 percent in 2000

(CMS, 2002). The number of Medicare managed care enrollees has declined in recent years due

to plan withdrawals from the Medicare+Choice market. Nonetheless, more than 5 million older

Americans are currently enrolled in Medicare managed care plans.

       Because managed care plans use financial incentives and administrative rules to limit

utilization (e.g., Gold et al., 1995), policy makers have been concerned that Medicare managed

care enrollees face barriers to receiving appropriate care. Several studies have shown that

medical care utilization is lower among Medicare managed care enrollees compared to

beneficiaries in the traditional Medicare fee-for-service (FFS) program (Manning et al., 1984;

Miller and Luft, 1994, 1997; Chernew 1995), although rates of preventive services are higher in

managed care (Tudor et al. 1998; Greene et al. 2001). Medicare beneficiaries with low

socioeconomic status (SES) may be especially likely to face barriers to care under managed care

(PPRC, 1996). However, there is little research on the role of SES in medical care utilization or

expenditures among seniors in managed care.

       Studies of the Medicare FFS program have found that seniors with low SES utilize

medical care services less frequently than those with higher SES (e.g., Gornick, 1996; Mutchler

and Burr, 1991; Hoenig et al., 1996; Escarce and Puffer, 1997; Miller et al., 1997). For example,

Escarce and Puffer (1997) found sizable effects of household income and education on medical

care expenditures and physician visits. Other studies found similar income and education effects

on physician visits (Mutchler and Burr, 1991; Miller et al., 1997; Blustein and Weiss, 1998), and

more pronounced effects for specialist physician visits (Blustein and Weiss, 1998).




                                                2
       However, the applicability of this research to managed care may be limited by differences

between the managed care and FFS environments that may modify the influence of SES on use.

Under FFS Medicare providers have little incentive to constrain utilization, whereas in managed

care settings providers are motivated to impose impediments to care. Because beneficiaries must

learn to navigate the managed care system in order to overcome these impediments, education or

the ability to learn may be more important in managed care than in FFS Medicare. On the other

hand, financial barriers to care may be reduced in managed care, rendering financial resources

less important.

       The few studies that have examined the relationship between SES and medical care

utilization in Medicare managed care have focused on preventive care. A national study of

quality of care in Medicare managed care plans using HEDIS data found disparities in breast

cancer screening by race, education, and income (Schneider et al., 2002). In another study based

on the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey, Schneider et al. (2001) found that white

beneficiaries were more likely than blacks to receive influenza vaccinations, and that there was

no difference in the magnitude of the disparity in Medicare managed care plans compared with

FFS Medicare. In a study of Medicare managed care enrollees in four U.S. cities, Scott et al.

(2002) found that black enrollees and enrollees with inadequate health literacy were less likely

than their white and more literate counterparts ever to have received an influenza vaccination.

       This paper contributes to the limited literature on the role of SES in Medicare managed

care by examining the effects of SES on medical care expenditures in two Medicare managed

care plans. Our study goes beyond previous research in three ways. First, we incorporate a

comprehensive set of SES measures including household income, wealth, and educational

attainment. Second, we fully characterize the role of SES in medical care expenditures by




                                                3
separately modeling various components of expenditures. Third, we attempt to assess the roles

of the most likely pathways by which SES may affect utilization and expenditures.



                               CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

       We consider the effect of SES on the use of medical care by elderly persons in managed

care plans in the context of the standard health production function model (Grossman, 1972). In

this model, medical care is valued because it produces improvements in health, and the demand

for medical care derives from the demand for health. The health production function translates

the use of medical care services into improvements in health.

       Within this framework, there are at least three pathways through which SES can affect

medical care expenditures by Medicare managed care enrollees. First, SES may influence

preferences for health and medical care versus the consumption of other goods and services,

thereby affecting the demand for care. For instance, persons of low SES may have learned

behaviors with respect to seeking care that are developed over a lifetime of limited access to the

medical care system and manifest themselves as differences in preferences. Alternatively,

persons with low SES may be less likely to be adequately informed about the benefits of good

health or good medical care, and hence may have a lower demand for care (Scott et al., 2002).

SES may also affect preferences for the type of medical care; for example, better educated

persons may prefer receiving care from a specialist rather than a generalist.

       Second, SES may affect the ability to navigate the managed care system to obtain the

desired level of medical care. In the standard Grossman (1972) model, there are no supply-side

constraints on the medical services patients receive. However, managed care settings are

designed to control utilization through supply-side constraints, including restricting the network




                                                 4
of providers, requiring the use of gatekeepers and utilization management (Gold et al., 1995). In

such settings, patients may be unable to obtain the services they desire due to barriers erected by

managed care plans (e.g., financial and nonfinancial incentives to providers, administrative

hassles, etc.) and managed care enrollees who are more adept at navigating the system may be

more likely to obtain the care they desire. The ability to navigate around these barriers may be

related to SES (Scott et al., 2002); for instance, persons with higher educational attainment may

be more adept in obtaining preauthorization for desired services or referrals to specialists.

       Third, SES may affect utilization through the ability to pay for services. In managed care

settings where cost sharing is low, however, ability to pay is likely to be less important than

other factors.

       Whereas the first pathway applies to both the managed care and FFS settings, the second

and third pathways are most likely to generate differences between FFS and managed care with

regard to SES effects on medical care expenditures. Ability to navigate the system, for example,

may be more important in managed care than in FFS. On the other hand, managed care may help

to blunt SES differences in medical care expenditures if the coordination of care through a

primary care physician (PCP) that is typical of managed care reduces access barriers and

informational asymmetries for individuals with low SES (Ettner, 1999; Williams et al., 2001;

Sarver et al., 2002). Managed care may also allocate services more efficiently through utilization

management and utilization guidelines, thus narrowing the SES gap in expenditures. On net, the

effects of SES on medical care expenditures in managed care are ambiguous, and depend on the

main pathways underlying these effects and on the extent to which managed care features

exacerbate or blunt them. Therefore, the effects of SES on expenditures must be empirically

determined.




                                                 5
                                                    METHODS

Setting

        Both health plans in this study have Medicare risk contracts and participate in the

Medicare+Choice program. Both plans are independent practice association (IPA)-model HMOs

that contract with health care providers in their communities to create provider networks. One

plan is located in a Northeastern metropolitan area, the other in the Midwest. Enrollees in both

plans are required to select a PCP; however, enrollees in the Northeastern plan are required to

obtain PCP referrals for specialty care, whereas enrollees in the Midwestern plan are not required

to do so. At the time of the study, the copayment for an office visit was $15 in the Northeast

plan and $10 in the Midwest plan. Other benefits were similar in both plans, and both provided

limited coverage for prescription drugs.1 Both plans pay PCP and specialist physicians

discounted fee-for-service, and PCPs face no financial incentives to limit referrals.



Subjects

        The target population for our study consisted of 20,227 aged Medicare beneficiaries (i.e.,

65 years or older) enrolled in the two study plans. We used stratified random sampling to

increase the number of low-income enrollees in the study sample. For each study plan, one




1
 Both plans had zero premiums, a 20 percent outpatient hospital coinsurance, and a $50 co-payment for emergency
room visits, which were waived if the patient was admitted to the hospital. In the Midwest plan, the inpatient
copayment was $350 per admission to a maximum of $700 annually. In the Northeast plan, the inpatient copayment
was $75 per day to a maximum of $750 annually.


                                                       6
stratum consisted of enrollees who were dually eligible for Medicaid in addition to Medicare.

The remaining enrollees in each plan were assigned to a low-income stratum if they resided in a

zip code where the majority of households had incomes less than twice the federal poverty line,

according to the 1990 census, and to a high-income stratum otherwise.

       We oversampled dually eligible enrollees and enrollees in the low-income strata,

choosing sampling probabilities to obtain roughly equal numbers of enrollees from each plan.

The resulting sample consisted of 6,996 enrollees, including 942 dually eligible enrollees, 700

enrollees in low-income zip codes, and 5,354 enrollees in high-income zip codes



Data Sources

       The data sources for the study were administrative files from the study plans and a

telephone survey of plan enrollees. The administrative data consisted of enrollment files,

provider claims and facility claims for all services provided to enrollees in the initial study

sample between April 1, 2000 and October 31, 2001. Enrollment files from the study plans were

used to obtain each person's dates of enrollment, age, sex, and dual eligibility for Medicaid.

Facility claims files were used to identify services provided by institutional providers, including

hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers, skilled nursing facilities, hospices, laboratories, diagnostic

imaging centers, home health care providers, and medical equipment providers; the type of

facility that provided each service; and the payment for each service. Provider claims files were

used to identify services provided by physicians and by nonphysician providers, the specialty of

the physician or type of nonphysician provider who provided each service, and the payment for

each service. Services were identified using Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services

Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) codes (similar to Current Procedural Terminology




                                                  7
[CPT] codes) (AMA, 2000). We did not include prescription drug expenditures in this study

because of incomplete claims data.

        The survey included modules on demographic and socioeconomic characteristics, health

status, family and household structure, attitudes and beliefs regarding medical care, current

experience with medical care, and lifetime experience with health insurance and care. The

module on demographic and socioeconomic characteristics elicited information on sex, race and

ethnicity, educational attainment, household income, and household wealth (Smith, 1997).2

Health status was assessed using the Medical Outcomes Study 12-Item Short-Form Health

Survey (SF-12), which yields summary measures of physical health (Physical Component

Summary, or PCS) and mental health (Mental Component Summary, or MCS) that range from 0

to 100, with means of 50 and standard deviations of 10 in the general population (Ware et al.,

1996). Other measures of health status included self-rated general health (excellent, very good,

good, fair, poor), self-rated memory and ability to make decisions, smoking history, and medical

conditions and symptoms. The module on family and household structure elicited information on

marital status, number and sex of children and number living in the household, and whether the

enrollee lived with a spouse or partner.

        The module on attitudes and beliefs used a 3-item scale to assess respondents’ perceived

“health locus of control,” a construct from social learning theory that refers to whether health and

health outcomes are under respondents’ personal control or the control of medical care providers

(Lau and Ware, 1981; Marshall et al., 1990). Each item was scored from 1 to 3, with higher

scores reflecting a stronger belief in the efficacy of self-care versus formal medical care. We

constructed a summary score by adding the scores from the 3 items in this module.

2
 Wealth was calculated as the sum of the current worth of the following assets: real estate; checking and savings
accounts; certificates of deposits, government savings bonds, and treasury bills; Individual Retirement Accounts and
Keogh plans; and stocks and mutual funds.


                                                         8
        The module on current experience with medical care included questions on how easily

respondents were able to make appointments, contact providers, and obtain referrals.

        The module on lifetime experience with health insurance and medical care elicited

information on respondents’ cumulative years of insurance coverage before Medicare (i.e.,

between 18 and 64 years of age), whether they had a usual source of medical care before

Medicare (and the type of usual source), and whether they ever belonged to a health maintenance

organization (HMO) before their current enrollment in a study plan.

        The survey was conducted between April and October of 2000. A total of 528 enrollees

in the initial study sample were ineligible because they were no longer enrolled in a study plan

when they were contacted. Of the remaining 6,468 enrollees, 4,600 completed the survey for a

71 percent response rate.



Variables

        Medical care expenditures were defined as the sum of all paid amounts reported in the

provider and facility claims in the year following the survey administration for each respondent.

Expenditures included plan payments and patient out-of-pocket payments. However, patient out-

of-pocket expenditures on non-covered services were excluded from medical care expenditures

because we did not have claims data for these services.

        We decomposed total medical care expenditures into 4 categories by type or location of

service: (1) expenditures for physician services at any location, including inpatient, office-based

settings, clinics, or other outpatient settings; (2) expenditures for inpatient hospital stays,

excluding physician fees; (3) expenditures for outpatient hospital services, excluding physician

fees; and (4) expenditures for all other services, including services rendered by nonphysician




                                                   9
providers (e.g., chiropractors, optometrists, podiatrists, and physical therapists), home health care

services, medical equipment and other medical services and supplies, ambulance services, and

others. We further disaggregated expenditures for physician services into expenditures for

primary care physician services and for specialist services.3

          The key SES variables in our analysis consisted of three categories of educational

attainment (less than high school, high school graduate, any college); four categories of

household income based on percent of the federal poverty level (<100 percent of poverty, 100-

200 percent, 200-400 percent, >400 percent); and three categories of household wealth based on

tertiles of the distribution of wealth across the men and women in the sample (0-33th percentile,

33-67th percentile, 67-100th percentile). (We explored finer divisions of the SES variables, but

found that the new adjacent categories this created had similar effects on expenditures.)

         Additional enrollee characteristics used in the study included indicator variables for five

age categories (65-69, 70-74, 75-79, 80-84, 85); an indicator variable for female sex; three

categories of race or ethnicity (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, “other”); and four

marital status categories (married, widowed, divorced or separated, never married). Health status

was measured by the PCS and MCS scores, self- rated general health, whether the enrollee had

ever smoked, whether the enrollee died during the study period, and a full set of medical

condition indicators.4 All models also included indicator variables for whether a proxy

respondent was used during the interview, for whether the enrollee was dually eligible for

Medicaid, and for the Northeast plan.


3
  Specialist categories included allergist, dermatologist, neurologist, neurosurgeon, opthalmologist, orthopedist,
otolaryngologist, plastic surgeon, colon and rectal surgeon, psychiatrist, general surgeon, thoracic surgeon, urologist,
cardiologist, gastroenterologist, hematologist, nephrologist, rheumatologist, endocrinologist, oncologist, vascular
surgeon, pulmonologist, infectious disease specialist, neonatologist, and rehabilitation medicine.
4
  Medical condition indicators included in the analysis were high blood pressure, diabetes, cancer, lung disease,
heart attack, congestive heart failure, angina, stroke, arthritis, ulcers, bowel disease, glaucoma, and depression. In
addition, we included an indicator variable for unexplained weight loss.


                                                          10
        We also constructed several variables to assess the most likely pathways through which

SES may affect medical care expenditures under managed care: preferences and ability to

navigate the managed care system. We measured preferences for medical care by enrollees’

attitudes and beliefs regarding care, using the 3-item summary score described earlier. Other

proxy variables for preferences captured aspects of enrollees’ lifetime experiences with the

medical care system that could have shaped their care-seeking behavior, including health

insurance coverage before Medicare, having had a usual source of care before Medicare, and the

type of usual source of care before Medicare (e.g., doctor’s office, clinic, hospital, etc.)

        We measured enrollees’ ability to navigate the managed care system by their reported

ease of making an appointment, ease of contacting a provider, and whether they were able to

obtain needed referrals to specialists. Additional variables to assess this pathway included

whether enrollees had belonged to an HMO before enrolling in the study plan, which could have

enabled them to become familiar with how managed care works; enrollees’ memory and ability

to make decisions; number of children; and whether enrollees lived alone.5 Children as well as a

spouse or partner could help enrollees make appointments, make requests from providers, and

understand and interpret plan rules, among other things.

        We recognize that these measures are not a comprehensive set of all pathway variables,

and that each measure may conceivably operate through more than one pathway. For example,

belonging to an HMO may not only help enrollees learn how to navigate the system, but may

shape their preferences for care as well. Nonetheless, we assumed that these measures would

provide some insight into the mechanisms underlying SES effects on expenditures.




5
  Living with a family member could also affect utilization because the family member may serve as a source of
informal care.


                                                       11
Regression Analyses

       To assess the effect of SES on medical care expenditures, we conducted multivariate

regression analyses with expenditures in each of the 4 categories discussed earlier as dependent

variables. For each category of expenditures, we estimated two sets of regression models. The

first set of models estimated the effect of SES on medical care expenditures, adjusting for age,

sex, marital status, race, health status, dual Medicaid eligibility, proxy status, and study plan as

covariates. These models are similar to those used in earlier studies of SES and medical care

utilization or expenditures (e.g., Escarce and Puffer, 1997; Miller et al., 1997). However, we

also estimated a second set of models in which we added the pathway variables as covariates to

assess whether the pathways accounted for the effects of SES.

       Multivariate analyses for expenditures for inpatient and outpatient hospital stays were

based on the two-part model of medical care utilization (Manning et al., 1981, 1987; Blough et

al., 1999). The first part of the two-part model is an equation for whether a person has nonzero

expenditures in a particular category during the year, and was specified as a probit model. The

second part of the two-part model is an equation for the level of expenditures in the particular

category conditional on nonzero expenditures, and was specified as a generalized linear model

with a logarithmic link function and variance proportional to the square of the mean (McCullagh

and Nelder, 1989; Blough et al., 1999; Manning and Mullahy, 2001).

       Multivariate analyses for physician services expenditures and expenditures for other

services were based on a one-part model for the level of expenditures. Ninety-six percent of

enrollees had physician expenditures and 90 percent had other expenditures; therefore, the one-

part model was the more suitable model for these components. The one-part model was specified




                                                  12
as a generalized linear model with a logarithmic link function and with variance proportional to

the square of the mean. (Using two-part models for physician services expenditures and other

expenditures gave similar results, but the estimates were less precise.)

       All analyses were estimated using weights that reflected both the sample design and

survey nonresponse.



Simulations

       We used simulations to obtain the predicted annual expenditures per person, in each

category of expenditures, for each SES category, adjusted for other factors that may affect

medical care expenditures and that were included as explanatory variables in the models. Each

simulation for the estimates based on two-part models was conducted in three steps.

       First, we used the estimated coefficients from the first part of the two-part model to

predict the probability of nonzero expenditures for each person i, E[pi (Expi > 0)], for each SES

category, by substituting the person's covariate values and alternately switching each indicator

variable for SES category on and off. Similarly, we used the estimated coefficients from the

second part of the two-part model to predict conditional expenditures (i.e., conditional on

nonzero spending) for person i, E(Expi | Expi > 0), for each SES category.

       Second, we predicted unconditional expenditures for person i, E(Expi) for each SES

category, as:

                         E( Expi ) = E[pi (Expi > 0)] x E( Expi | Expi > 0).

Third, for each SES category, we averaged the individual predictions of unconditional

expenditures across all the persons in the study sample. We used the delta method (Bishop et al.,




                                                 13
1975) to derive the standard errors of the predicted annual expenditures per person and the

statistical tests of differences in expenditures across the SES categories.

          Analogously, each simulation for the estimates based on one-part models was conducted

in two steps. First, we used the estimated coefficients from the model to predict expenditures for

person i, E(Expi), for each SES category, by substituting the person's covariate values and

alternately switching each indicator variable for SES category on and off. Second, we averaged

the individual predictions of unconditional expenditures across all the persons in the study

sample and used the delta method to derive standard errors for these estimates.

          We obtained predicted annual total medical care expenditures per person, for each of the

SES categories, by summing the predicted expenditures across the 4 categories of expenditures.

Standard errors of predicted total expenditures per person and statistical tests of differences in

total expenditures across SES categories were obtained using a bootstrapping technique (Efron,

1982). The paper presents the findings of the simulations. Full regression results are available

from the authors on request.



                                             RESULTS



Descriptive Data

          Total medical care expenditures averaged $5200, with inpatient hospital expenditures

accounting for 41 percent ($2131), physician expenditures for 28 percent ($1471), outpatient

hospital expenditures for 12 percent ($622), and expenditures on the other services for 19 percent

($976).




                                                 14
       Table 1 presents descriptive data on SES and other sample characteristics. All statistics

are weighted using sampling weights. Thirty-eight percent of the sample had less than a high

school education, while 25 percent had some college education. By definition, one-third of the

sample fell in each household wealth tertile. Eleven percent of the sample had household

incomes below the poverty line, 44 percent of the sample was low-income (100-200 percent of

poverty), and 13 percent was high-income (400 percent of poverty and higher).

       Table 2 presents means of the pathway variables. Many of these variables were

significantly associated with the measures of SES (data not shown). Thus higher income

enrollees had stronger beliefs in the efficacy of formal medical care than their lower income

counterparts. Higher educational attainment, household wealth, and household income were

positively associated with having health insurance coverage, having HMO experience, and

having a usual source of care, especially a doctor’s office or clinic, before Medicare. For

instance, only 72 percent of poor enrollees had a usual source of care between the ages of 18 and

64, compared with 92 percent of high-income enrollees. Sixty four percent of individuals in the

top tertile of assets were insured all the time during age 18 to 64 compared with 47 percent in the

bottom tertile. Enrollees with higher education also found making an appointment with a

provider easier: 26 percent of enrollees with a high school degree reported that they found

making an appointment very easy compared with 29 percent of enrollees with a college degree.

       Higher educational attainment, household wealth, and household income were associated

with better self-rated memory and ability to make decisions. For example, 15 percent of

individuals with less than a high school degree rated their memory as excellent compared to 21

percent of individuals with a college degree. Conversely, low-income and less educated

enrollees were more likely than their high-income peers to be living alone and to be dually




                                                15
eligible for Medicaid. Forty three percent of individuals with less than a high school degree

were living alone compared with 37 percent of individuals with a college degree. The number of

children was unassociated with SES.


Regression Analyses

Effects of SES on Expenditures

       Table 3 reports predicted annual medical care expenditures, by expenditure category and

SES, adjusted for differences in the covariates. The analyses revealed that higher educational

attainment increased physician services expenditures. Enrollees with less than high school

education had lower physician expenditures than enrollees with a high school degree or some

college. However, the differences in physician expenditures by education did not result in

statistically significant differences in total medical expenditures by educational attainment.

       Household income had a large effect on medical care expenditures. Specifically, poor

enrollees had substantially higher total medical expenditures than low-income or middle-income

enrollees, and this effect was entirely due to inpatient hospital expenditures. The opposite pattern

was found for expenditures for other services, where the poor had lower expenditures than all

other income categories. Income had no effect on physician services expenditures.

       The effect of household wealth on medical expenditures was mixed. Enrollees with high

assets had higher total medical care expenditure than enrollees with medium assets. In addition,

enrollees with high assets had higher physician services expenditures than enrollees with low or

medium assets. For outpatient hospital expenditures and expenditures for other services,

however, enrollees with low assets had higher expenditures than enrollees with medium assets.

       Table 4 reports predicted expenditures by SES for two components of physician

expenditures: expenditures for PCP services and expenditures for specialist services.



                                                 16
Disaggregating physician services expenditures into these components revealed that the effects

of SES observed in Table 2 were driven by specialist expenditures. In particular, enrollees with

less than high school education had lower expenditures for specialist services than high school

graduates and enrollees with some college, whereas we found no education differences for PCP

services. Similarly, enrollees with high assets had higher specialist expenditures than enrollees

with low or medium assets, but we found the opposite pattern for PCP expenditures. Enrollees

with low assets had higher PCP expenditures than enrollees with medium assets, although the

magnitude of the difference was small.

       The effects of the covariates included in the first set of analyses are reported in the

Appendix. In general, these variables had the expected effects on expenditures.


The Pathway Variables and Expenditures

       In our second set of analyses, we reestimated the expenditure models after including the

pathway variables as additional covariates. We found that our measures of preferences for

medical care were significantly associated with medical care expenditures (Table 5). Thus a

weaker belief in the efficacy of formal medical care, as quantified by a decrease in the care

attitudes summary score from the 25th to the 75th percentile of the distribution in the sample, was

associated with a $685 decrease in total medical care expenditures. Enrollees who were insured

only some or none of the time between the ages of 18 and 64 spent $1,034 more on medical care

than enrollees who were insured most or all of the time. Enrollees whose usual source of care

between the ages of 18 and 64 was a hospital or emergency room incurred expenditures for other

services that were $231 higher than enrollees with no usual source of care.

       Several of our measures of ability to navigate the managed care system were also

significantly associated with medical care expenditures (Table 5). Enrollees who reported that



                                                 17
getting appointments with providers was easy had total expenditures that were $698 higher than

enrollees who reported difficulty getting appointments. Enrollees with 1 to 10 years of HMO

experience had total expenditures that were $902 higher than enrollees with no HMO experience,

although, curiously, enrollees with more than 10 years of HMO experience had expenditures

similar to those with no experience. Enrollees who reported poor decision-making skills had

total medical expenditures that were $362 lower than enrollees who reported good decision-

making skills.

        The effect of the pathway variables was not restricted to particular components of

medical expenditures. Even inpatient use, which arguably should be the least responsive to

preferences and accessibility, was significantly associated with care attitudes, ease of making an

appointment, HMO experience, and decision-making skills. Other pathway variables such as

number of children, ease of contacting providers and self-rated memory obtaining referrals were

not significant in the models, and were dropped from the final specifications.6



The Pathway Variables and SES Effects on Expenditures

        Despite the fact that many of the pathway variables were associated with expenditures,

including the pathway variables in the regression models did not appreciably narrow the SES

differences in Table 3. To illustrate, Table 6 presents ratios of predicted expenditures for

different SES categories derived from models with and without the pathway variables. For

instance, without adjusting for pathway variables, the ratio of total medical expenditures for

individuals with a high school degree relative to individuals without a high school degree was


6
  Although unrelated to the pathways we assessed, we also examined whether owning a car was associated with
medical care expenditures, since car ownership was associated with SES. However, car ownership was not
significant in the models.



                                                      18
1.09 (Table 6). This ratio narrowed to 1.06 when we included the pathway variables. The results

in the table indicate that the pathway variables explained a small share of the educational

differences in medical care expenditures; however, these variables explained none of the

expenditure differences based on household income or wealth.



                                           DISCUSSION

       This study examined the role of SES in medical care expenditures in two

Medicare+Choice managed care plans. Our analyses found several significant effects of SES on

expenditures. Additionally, we found that the impact of SES on expenditures varied according to

the category of expenditures, substantiating the need for modeling the components of medical

care expenditures separately.

       We found that higher educational attainment and higher assets increased physician

services expenditures, particularly expenditures on specialist services, and that higher assets

increased total medical care expenditures as well. However, the effect of assets on outpatient

expenditures and expenditures for other services was mixed. We also found that poor enrollees

had substantially higher inpatient hospital expenditures and, as a result, higher total expenditures

than nonpoor enrollees.

       A possible mechanism for our finding that higher educational attainment increased

specialist expenditures is that education may lead to a greater understanding of the benefits of

specialist care. Alternatively, more highly educated enrollees may be better able to navigate the

managed care system in order to obtain specialist referrals. It is also possible that physicians treat

highly educated patients differently, regardless of managed care, and are more likely to satisfy




                                                 19
these patients’ requests for referrals or to believe that these patients are more capable of adhering

to complex treatment regimens (e.g., Goldman and Smith, 2002).

       Our finding that poor enrollees had substantially higher inpatient hospital expenditures

than the nonpoor, even after adjusting for health status, is consistent with earlier research on both

Medicare and non-Medicare populations showing that people with low SES have higher hospital

use (Epstein et al. 1988; Epstein et al., 1990). The poor may prefer inpatient care, or their

physicians may be more likely to admit them for inpatient care, if they have less support than the

nonpoor for treatment and recovery at home. If the poor are more likely than the nonpoor to

delay ambulatory care, they may develop more severe health conditions that require inpatient

admission more frequently. Notably, Stern et al. (1991) found that low-income patients were

more likely than their higher income counterparts to be admitted to hospitals through the

emergency department. The poor may also have worse health status than the nonpoor in ways

that were not captured by our health status measures. However, unobserved differences in health

status would be expected to affect expenditures in all categories.

       Our finding that higher assets increased physician services expenditures and total

expenditures is consistent with previous studies that found positive effects of financial resources

on physician visits and medical care expenditures (Escarce and Puffer, 1997; Mutchler and Burr,

1991; Miller, 1997; Blustein and Weiss, 1998). Earlier studies have used income as the sole

measure of financial resources. Since wealth is a better indicator than income of financial

resources among the elderly (Smith, 1997), however, it is not surprising to find a positive effect

of wealth on expenditures without an effect of income. On the other hand, given the low level of

cost sharing in the two study plans, wealth effects on expenditures may reflect differences in

preferences for medical care rather than financial resources. If wealthier people have developed




                                                 20
preferences for higher quality or “luxury” goods, these preferences may translate into medical

care as well. Our finding that higher assets increased specialist expenditures is consistent with

this interpretation. It is also possible that physicians treat wealthier patients differently and are

more likely to refer these patients to specialists.

        Notably, the effects of SES on medical care expenditures in this study were modest in

size. In fact, these effects were smaller, or even opposite in direction, when compared with the

SES effects observed in previous studies of FFS Medicare. For example, using 1987 data for a

nationally representative sample of Medicare beneficiaries, Escarce and Puffer (1997) found that

total medical care expenditures for high-income seniors were 24 percent higher than

expenditures for poor seniors. In the current study, poor enrollees had the highest total

expenditures, and expenditures did not differ across the other income categories. Similarly,

Escarce and Puffer (1997) found that total expenditures for beneficiaries with some college were

23 percent higher and for high school graduates 13 percent higher than expenditures for

beneficiaries who did not have a high school degree. The current study found corresponding

differences in total expenditures of 13 percent and 9 percent, respectively.

        It is possible that features of the Medicare managed care plans in this study contributed to

blunting SES differences in expenditures. The study plans did not have financial incentives for

providers to limit referrals and required all enrollees to select a PCP. Having a PCP may foster

regular patient-provider relationships, which may reduce access barriers and promote use of

needed services, especially by low-income people (e.g., Scott et al., 2002). Consistent with this

notion, SES was unrelated to enrollees’ reported ease of getting appointments, contacting

providers, or obtaining referrals.




                                                  21
       Unfortunately, our exploration of the pathways through which SES affects medical care

expenditures met with limited success. Although attitudes and beliefs regarding medical care,

history of health insurance coverage, usual source of care before Medicare, ease of making an

appointment, HMO experience, and decision-making skills were significantly associated with

expenditures, including these variables in the regression models did not appreciably narrow the

SES effects. Thus, while our findings suggest that preferences and ability to navigate the system

influence spending, we were unable to uncover evidence that these are the main pathways

underlying the effects of SES.

       Our study has several limitations. First, we examined the experience of seniors from only

two HMOs; therefore, our findings may not be generalizable across health plans and areas of the

country. Second, although our measures of health status were comprehensive, unobserved

differences in health status may have influenced our results. For example, we had no

information on the severity of medical conditions. Third, as a result of incomplete pharmacy

claims, we could not assess the impact of SES on prescription drug expenditures.

       Finally, our ability to determine the role of alternative pathways may have been

undermined by the fact that our pathway measures were limited. Thus, for instance, while we had

a measure of beliefs in the efficacy of formal medical care, we had no direct measures of

preferences or habits regarding the consumption of higher quality or “luxury” goods. Similarly,

we used information on household and family structure, rather than direct measures, to assess

support at home, and we had no measures of health knowledge, ability to comply with medical

regimens, or treatment decisions by medical care providers.




                                               22
       Despite these limitations, this study makes an important contribution to our

understanding of the impact of SES on medical care expenditures in Medicare managed care. In

particular, our results show a smaller effect of SES on medical expenditures in Medicare

managed care compared with the effects in the existing literature based on traditional FFS

Medicare. Coordination of care by PCPs, utilization management, use of practice guidelines and

other quality assurance mechanisms, and other features of managed care plans may have helped

attenuate SES disparities. If our findings are generalizable to other Medicare managed care

plans, this would provide strong evidence for managed care as an instrument to foster equity in

health care delivery (Chen and Escarce, 2004).

       However, our study also suggests that research is needed to explore further the pathways

or mechanisms by which SES affects medical care utilization, because developing effective

policy interventions requires such an understanding. Better and more comprehensive measures

of preferences, ability to navigate the system, health knowledge, and other potential pathways

could be very fruitful in this regard.




                                                 23
                                        REFERENCES


American Medical Association. 2000. Physicians’ Current Procedural Terminology. Chicago,
IL: American Medical Association.

Blough, D.K., C.W. Madden, and M.C. Hornbrook. 1999. Modeling risk using generalized
linear models. Journal of Health Economics 18:153-171.

Blustein, J., and L.J. Weiss. 1998. Visits to specialists under Medicare: socioeconomic
advantage and access to care. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and Underserved. 9(2):153-
69.

Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. 2002. Program information on Medicare, Medicaid,
SCHIP and other programs of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Available online:
http://www.cms.hhs.gov/charts/series/sec2.pdf. Accessed November 26, 2002.

Chen, A.Y., and J.J. Escarce. 2004. Quantifying income-related inequality in health care
delivery in the United States. Medical Care 42(1): 38-47.

Chernew, M. 1995. HMO use of diagnostic tests: a review of the evidence. Medical Care
Research and Review 52:196-222.

Efron, B. 1982. The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and Other Resampling Plans. Philadelphia, PA:
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.

Epstein, A.M., R.S. Stern, and J. Tognetti et al. 1988. Association of patients’ SES with the
length of hospital stay and hospital charges within diagnosis-related groups. New England
Journal of Medicine 318(24):1579-1585.

Epstein, A.M., R.S. Stern, and J.S. Weissman. 1990. Do the poor cost more? A multihospital
study of patients' socioeconomic status and use of hospital resources. New England Journal of
Medicine. 322(16):1122-8.

Escarce, J.J., and F.W. Puffer. 1997. Black-white differences in the use of medical care by the
elderly: a contemporary analysis. In: Martin LG, Soldo BJ (eds). Racial and Ethnic Differences
in the Health of Older Americans. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press; 183-209.

Ettner, S.L. 1999. The relationship between continuity of care and the health behaviors of
patients: does having a usual physician make a difference? Medical Care 37(6):547-55.

Gold, M.R., R. Hurley, and T. Lake et al. 1995. A national survey of the arrangements managed
care plans make with physicians. New England Journal of Medicine 333:1678-1683.

Goldman, D.P., and J.P. Smith. 2002. Can patient self-management help explain the SES health
gradient? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99(16): 10929-34.



                                               24
Gornick, M.E., P.W. Eggers, and T.W. Reilly et al. 1996. Effects of race and income on
mortality and use of services among Medicare beneficiaries. New England Journal of Medicine
335:791-799.

Grossman, M. 1972. On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
Political Economy 80:223-255.

Greene, J., J. Blustein, and K.A.Laflamme. 2001. Use of Preventive Care Services, Beneficiary
Characteristics, and Medicare HMO Performance. Health Care Financing Review 22(4):141-53.

Hoenig, H., L. Rubenstein, and K. Kahn. 1996. Rehabilitation after hip fracture: equal
opportunity for all? Archives of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 77(1):58-63.

Hu, P., and D.B. Reuben. 2002. Effects of managed care on the length of time that elderly
patients spend with physicians during ambulatory visits: National Ambulatory Medical Care
Survey. Medical Care. 40(7):606-13.

Lau, R.R., and J.E. Ware. 1981. Refinements in the measurement in health-specific locus-of-
control beliefs. Medical Care 19:1147-1157.

Manning, W.G., and J. Mullahy. 2001. Estimating log models: to transform or not to transform?
Journal of Health Economics 20:461-494.

Manning, W.G., C.N. Morris, and J.P. Newhouse, et al. 1981. A two-part model of the demand
for medical care: preliminary results from the Health Insurance Study. In: van der Gaag J,
Perlman M, eds. Health, Economics, and Health Economics. Amsterdam, Holland: North
Holland: 103-123.

Manning, W.G., A. Leibowitz, and G.A. Goldberg, et al. 1984. A controlled trial of the effect of
a prepaid group practice on use of services. New England Journal of Medicine 310:1505-1510.

Manning, W.G., J.P. Newhouse, N. Duan, E.B. Keeler, A. Leibowitz, and M.S. Marquis. 1987.
Health insurance and the demand for medical care: evidence from a randomized experiment.
American Economic Review 77:251-278.

Marshall, G.N., B.E. Collins, V.C. Crooks. 1990. A comparison of two multidimensional health
locus of control instruments. Journal of Personality Assessment 54:181-190.

McCullagh, P., and J.A. Nelder. 1989. Generalized Linear Models, 2nd Edition. London,
England: Chapman & Hall.

Miller, B., R.T. Campbell, and S. Furner, et al. 1997. Use of medical care by African American
and white older persons: comparative analysis of three national data sets. Journal of Gerontology
(Social Sciences) 52B(6): S325-S335.




                                               25
Miller, R.H., and H.S. Luft. 1997. Does managed care lead to better or worse quality of care?
Health Affairs 16(5):7-25.

Miller, R.H., and H.S. Luft. 1994. Managed care plan performance since 1980: a literature
analysis. Journal of the American Medical Association 271:1512-1519.

Mutchler, J.E., and J.A. Burr. 1991. Racial differences in health and health care service
utilization in late life. Journal of Health and Social Behavior 32(4):342-356.

Physician Payment Review Commission. 1996. Access to Care in Medicare Managed Care:
Results from a 1996 Survey of Enrollees and Disenrollees. Washington, D.C.: PPRC.

Sarver, J.H., R.K. Cydulka, and D.W. Baker. 2002. Usual Source of Care and Nonurgent
Emergency Department Use. Academic Emergency Medicine 9 (9): 916-23.

Schneider, E.C., P.D. Cleary, A.M. Zaslavsky, and A.M. Epstein. 2001. Racial disparity in
influenza vaccination: does managed care narrow the gap between African Americans and
whites? Journal of the American Medical Association 286(12), 1455-60.

Schneider, E.C., A.M. Zaslavsky, A.M. Epstein. 2002. Racial disparities in the quality of care
for enrollees in Medicare managed care. Journal of the American Medical Association
287(10):1288-94.

Scott, T.L., J.A. Gazmararian, M.V. Williams, and D.W. Baker. 2002. Health literacy and
preventive health care use among Medicare enrollees in a managed care organization. Medical
Care. 40(5): 395-404.

Smith, J. 1997. Wealth inequality among older Americans. Journal of Gerontology (Special
Issue: Asset and Health Dynamics Among the Oldest Old [AHEAD]: Initial Results from the
Longitudinal Study) 52B(Special Issue):74-81.

Stern, R.S., J.S. Weissman, and A.M. Epstein. 1991. The emergency department as a pathway
to admission for poor and high cost patients. Journal of the American Medical Association.
266(16):2238-2243.

Tudor, C.G., G. Riley, and M. Ingber. 1998. Satisfaction with care: do Medicare HMOs make a
difference? Health Affairs. 17(2):165-76.

Ware, J., M. Kosinski, and S.D. Keller. 1996. A 12-item short-form health survey: construction
of scales and preliminary tests of reliability and validity. Medical Care 34(3), 220-33.

Williams, R.L., S.A. Flocke, and K.C. Stange. 2001. Race and preventive services delivery
among black patients and white patients seen in primary care. Medical Care 39(11):1260-1267.




                                               26
TABLE 1: SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS

Variable                                     Mean

Education
  Less than high school                             38%
  High school graduate                              37%
  Some college                                      25%

Household Income
  Poor (<100% poverty)                              11%
  Low income (100-200% poverty)                     44%
  Middle income (200-400% poverty)                  32%
  High income (400% and up)                         13%

Household Wealth
  Low assets (1st tertile)                          33%
  Medium assets (2nd tertile)                       33%
  High assets (3rd tertile)                         33%

Age
  65 to 69                                          25%
  70 to 74                                          29%
  75 to 79                                          23%
  80 to 84                                          14%
  85 or older                                        8%

Sex
  Female                                            56%
  Male                                              44%

Race/Ethnicity
  White                                             88%
  Black                                              7%
  Other                                              5%

Marital Status
  Married                                           42%
  Widowed                                           43%
  Divorced/Separated                                11%
  Never married                                      4%

Health Status
  PCS score                                         44.0
  MCS score                                         54.4
  Ever smoked                                       57%
  Self-rated health is Excellent/Very Good          28%
  Self-rated health is Good                         41%
  Self-rated health is Fair                         27%
  Self-rated health is Poor                          4%
  High blood pressure                               57%
  Diabetes                                          17%



                                                27
TABLE 1: SAMPLE CHARACTERISTICS

Variable                          Mean

   Cancer                                14%
   Lung disease                          14%
   Heart attack                          13%
   CHF                                    6%
   Angina                                12%
   Stroke                                 9%
   Arthritis                             54%
   Ulcers                                12%
   Bowel disease                          7%
   Glaucoma                               9%
   Depression                            11%
   Weight loss                            4%
   Died during year                       3%

Other
   Proxy status                          12%
   Northeast plan                        69%
   Dual Medicaid eligibility              4%

Number of Observations                   4600

Note: All means are weighted.




                                  28
TABLE 2: MEANS OF PATHWAY VARIABLES

Variable                                                   Mean

Preferences
   Care Attitudes (summary score, range 3-9)                       6.0
   Insured (18-64): All or most of the time                       84%
   Insured (18-64):Some or none of the time                       16%
   Never in HMO                                                   75%
   In HMO less than 10 yrs                                        12%
   In HMO 10 or more years                                        13%
   Usual source of care (18-64): doctor/clinic                    77%
   Usual source of care (18-64): other                             8%
   Usual source of care (18-64): none                             15%

Ability to Navigate the System
   Belonged to HMO before study plan                              26%
   Ease of appointment (1: very hard, 4: very easy)                3.2
   Ease of contact (1: very hard, 4: very easy)                    3.2
   Always got referral when needed                                95%
   Self-rated memory (1:excellent, 5: poor)                        2.5
   Self-rated decisions (1:excellent, 5: poor)                     2.5
   Living alone                                                   57%
   Number of children                                              2.9




                                                      29
TABLE 3: PREDICTED EXPENDITURES, BY EXPENDITURE CATEGORY AND SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS

                                                                              Expenditure Category

                                     Total              Physician          Inpatient         Outpatient         Other
                                                        Services           Hospital          Hospital

Education
Less than high school                        4966              1347 A B           2079                578                961
High School                                  5429              1557 A             2147                680               1045
College                                      5606              1667 B             2222                595               1123

Household Wealth (tertiles)
Low Assets (1st tertile)                     5343              1425 A             2112                704 A             1101 A
Medium Assets (2nd tertile)                  4738 A            1370 B             1945                508 A b            915 A
High Assets (3rd tertile)                    5835 A            1741 A B           2399                632 b             1063

Household Income (% of Poverty Line)
Poor (<100% poverty)                         6459 a b          1495               3440 A B            693                831   abC
Low Income (100-200% poverty)                5109 a            1508               1988 A              590               1024   a
Middle Income (200-400% poverty)             5050 b            1478               1919 B              605               1048   b
High Income (400% and up)                    5700              1533               2251                680               1236   C

Note: Letters show statistical significance between pairs of predictions within an SES category.
Upper case letters indicate significance at the 5% level; lower case letters indicate significance at the 10% level
For example: The poor have significantly higher total expenditure than the low income and the middle income (at the 10% level)

Multivariate analyses adjust for age, sex, race, marital status, health status (measured by PCS, MCS, self reported health and
chronic conditions), Medicaid enrollment, plan membership, proxy interview status, and death during the year.




                                                                    30
TABLE 4: PREDICTED PHYSICIAN EXPENDITURES, BY TYPE OF PHYSICIAN AND SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS

                                      Total               Primary Care      Specialists
                                      Physician           Physicians



Education
Less than high school                         1347 A B            259                783 A B
High School                                   1557 A              276                944 B
College                                       1667 B              283                977 A

Household Wealth (tertiles)
Low Assets (1st tertile)                      1425 A              289 A              805 A
Medium Assets (2nd tertile)                   1370 B              254 A              831 B
High Assets (3rd tertile)                     1741 A B            267               1056 A B

Household Income (% of Poverty Line)
Poor (<100% poverty)                          1495                277                842
Low Income (100-200% poverty)                 1508                264                905
Middle Income (200-400% poverty)              1478                275                872
High Income (400% and up)                     1533                281                916

Note: Letters show statistical significance between pairs of predictions within an SES category.
Upper case letters indicate significance at the 5% level; lower case letters indicate significance at the 10% level

Multivariate analyses adjust for age, sex, race, marital status, health status (measured by PCS, MCS, self reported health and
chronic conditions), Medicaid enrollment, plan membership, proxy interview status, dual Medicaid eligibility, and death during the year.




                                                                           31
TABLE 5: MARGINAL EFFECTS OF PATHWAY VARIABLES ON MEDICAL CARE EXPENDITURES

                                           Total        Physician       Inpatient     Outpatient    Other
                                                        Services        Hospital       Hospital

Preferences
Care attitudes
(75th-25th percentile)                       -685 **         -106 **        -384 **        -36       -160 **
Insured some or none of the time
(compared to all or most of the time)        1034 *           249 **        485            213 **      87
Usual source of care: Dr. Office
(compared to no source)                      -303            -148           -106           -58         10
Usual source of care: Other place
(compared to no source)                       369              82               28          28        231 *

Ability to Navigate the System
Decision-making skills
(75th-25th percentile)                       -362 *           -80 **        -226 *         -20        -36
Ease of appointment
(75th-25th percentile)                        698 **          203 **        336 *           18        141 **
Living alone                                  398              71           120             58        150
In HMO 1-10 yrs
(compared to 0 yrs)                           902 **          146 *         828 **         -34        -38
In HMO 10+ yrs
(compared to 0 yrs)                          -792             -61           -470           -97       -166


Note: * Denotes significance at 10% level ** Denotes significance at 5% level




                                                                       32
TABLE 6: RATIO OF EXPENDITURES, BY SES CATEGORY AND EXPENDITURE TYPE,
 WITH AND WITHOUT ADJUSTING FOR PATHWAY VARIABLES

                                            Total               Physician               Inpatient             Outpatient               Other
                                                                Services                Hospital               Hospital

Pathway Variables                          No       Yes          No          Yes         No         Yes          No      Yes          No       Yes


Education
Less than high school                    1.00       1.00        1.00       1.00         1.00        1.00        1.00     1.00        1.00      1.00
High School                              1.09       1.06        1.16       1.13         1.03        1.00        1.18     1.17        1.09      1.04
College                                  1.13       1.09        1.24       1.21         1.07        1.01        1.03     1.01        1.17      1.13

Household Income
Poor (<100% poverty)                     1.00       1.00        1.00       1.00         1.00        1.00        1.00     1.00        1.00      1.00
Low Income (100-200% poverty)            0.79       0.81        1.01       1.01         0.58        0.61        0.85     0.85        1.23      1.21
Middle Income (200-400% poverty)         0.78       0.82        0.99       1.01         0.56        0.60        0.87     0.88        1.26      1.27
High Income (400% and up)                0.88       0.92        1.03       1.03         0.65        0.72        0.98     0.98        1.49      1.44

Household Wealth (tertiles)
Low Assets (1st tertile)                 1.00       1.00        1.00       1.00         1.00        1.00        1.00     1.00        1.00      1.00
Medium Assets (2nd tertile)              0.89       0.88        0.96       0.97         0.92        0.90        0.72     0.72        0.83      0.83
High Assets (3rd tertile)                1.09       1.10        1.22       1.21         1.14        1.17        0.90     0.89        0.97      0.97


Note: Each value in the table is the ratio of predicted expenditures for enrollees in the particular education, income, or wealth category relative
to enrollees in the reference category for that SES variable. For instance, the reference category for education is less than a high school degree.
The columns labeled "No" are for models that did not include the pathway variables as covariates. Those labeled "Yes" are for models that
adjusted for the pathway variables. Multivariate analyses adjust for age, sex, race, marital status, health status (measured by PCS, MCS,
self reported health and chronic conditions), Medicaid enrollment, plan membership, proxy interview status, dual Medicaid eligibility, and death
during the year.




                                                                        33
APPENDIX TABLE: MARGINAL EFFECTS OF COVARIATES ON MEDICAL CARE EXPENDITURES

                                       Total         Physician        Inpatient        Outpatient      Other

Marital Status
Widowed                                  375              158               54              104           59
Divorced/Separated                        71              214             -311               80           87
Never Married                            978              147              607               85          139

Race
Black                                      71              -39              35               66           10
Other                                    -116               73            -202               27          -14

Health
PCS Score (75th -25th
percentile)                            -2233 **           -376 **       -1030 **           -288 **      -538 **
MCS Score (75th -25th
percentile)                              -147             -63              27               -47          -65
Ever Smoked                               902 **          231 **          408                11          252 **
Self-reported health is good
(omitted category is
excellent/very good)                     195              148    *        -83                17          112
Health is Fair                           544              421    **      -164                67          220   *
Health is Poor                          1764              582    **       609               281          291
High Blood Pressure                      513               56             367               104   **     -14
Diabetes                                 676               -6             312                54          318   **
Cancer                                  1802    **        706    **       173               152   *      771   **
Lung Disease                             946    *         -96             937 **            -19          124
Heart Attack                            -298               26             -71                -5         -248   **
CHF                                     1505    *         509    **       611               193          192
Angina                                  1028    *         460    **       413                19          136
Stroke                                   807               55             457               169   *      127
Arthritis                                256              216    **        44               -28           23
Ulcers                                   995              240    *        558                41          156
Bowel Disease                           -176                9            -299                95           19
Glaucoma                                 168              172            -120               109            7
Depression                              1003    *         327    *        467               132           77
Weight Loss                             3327    **        406    *       1837 *             316   *      768   *

Demographics
Age: 70 to 74 (omitted category
is 65 to 69)                             413               272   **       -64                94          112
Age: 75 to 79                            294               188   *         66                51          -10
Age: 80 to 84                           2285    **         466   **      1099 **            519 **       201
Age: 85 plus                            1115    *          207            340               148          419 **
Female                                 -1569    **        -320   **     -1027 **           -181 **       -40
Died during year                       20796    **        3704   **     13358 **           1037 **      2698 **

Plan Variables
Proxy status                           -1129 **           -301 **         -532 *           -149 **      -147
Northeast Plan                           -20               -37            -305              117 **       205 **
Medicaid                                 284               -36             243               13           64


** indicates significance at the 5% level; * indicates significance at the 10% level

                                                     34
