                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    FINANCE AND GROWTH: THEORY AND EVIDENCE

                                             Ross Levine

                                        Working Paper 10766
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10766


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2004




This paper is being prepared for the Handbook of Economic Growth. Philippe Aghion, Thorsten Beck, John
Boyd, Maria Carkovic, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, John Kareken, Luc Laeven, Raghu Rajan, Bruce Smith, and
Luigi Zingales provided helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence
Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10766
September 2004
JEL No. G0, O0

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper reviews, appraises, and critiques theoretical and empirical research on the connections
between the operation of the financial system and economic growth. While subject to ample
qualifications and countervailing views, the preponderance of evidence suggests that both financial
intermediaries and markets matter for growth and that reverse causality alone is not driving this
relationship. Furthermore, theory and evidence imply that better developed financial systems ease
external financing constraints facing firms, which illuminates one mechanism through which
financial development influences economic growth. The paper highlights many areas needing
additional research.

Ross Levine
Carlson School of Management
University of Minnesota
321 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu
                                                                                                    1


I. Introduction
       Economists disagree sharply about the role of the financial sector in economic growth.

Finance is not even discussed in a collection of essays by the “pioneers of development

economics” (Meier and Seers, 1984), including three Nobel Prize winners, and Nobel Laureate

Robert Lucas (1988, p.6) dismisses finance as an “over-stressed” determinant of economic

growth. Joan Robinson (1952, p. 86) famously argued that "where enterprise leads finance

follows." From this perspective, finance does not cause growth; finance responds to changing

demands from the “real sector.” At the other extreme, Nobel Laureate Merton Miller (1988,

p.14) argues that, “[the idea] that financial markets contribute to economic growth is a

proposition too obvious for serious discussion.” Drawing a more restrained conclusion, Bagehot

(1873), Schumpeter (1912), Gurley and Shaw (1955), Goldsmith (1969), and McKinnon (1973)

reject the idea that the finance-growth nexus can be safely ignored without substantially limiting

our understanding of economic growth.

       Research that clarifies our understanding of the role of finance in economic growth will

have policy implications and shape future policy-oriented research. Information about the

impact of finance on economic growth will influence the priority that policy makers and advisors

attach to reforming financial sector policies. Furthermore, convincing evidence that the financial

system influences long-run economic growth will advertise the urgent need for research on the

political, legal, regulatory, and policy determinants of financial development. In contrast, if a

sufficiently abundant quantity of research indicates that the operation of the financial sector

merely responds to economic development, then this will almost certainly mitigate the intensity

of research on the determinants and evolution of financial systems.
                                                                                                    2

       To assess the current state of knowledge on the finance-growth nexus, Section II

describes and appraises theoretical research on the connections between the operation of the

financial sector and economic growth. Theoretical models show that financial instruments,

markets, and institutions may arise to mitigate the effects of information and transaction costs.

In emerging to ameliorate market frictions, financial arrangements change the incentives and

constraints facing economic agents. Thus, financial systems may influence saving rates,

investment decisions, technological innovation, and hence long-run growth rates. A

comparatively less well-developed theoretical literature examines the dynamic interactions

between finance and growth by developing models where the financial system influences

growth, and growth transforms the operation of the financial system. Furthermore, an extensive

theoretical literature debates the relative merits of different types of financial systems. Some

models stress the advantages of bank-based financial systems, while others highlight the benefits

of financial systems that rely more on securities markets. Finally, some new theoretical models

focus on the interactions between finance, aggregate growth, income distribution, and poverty

alleviation. In all of these models, the financial sector provides real services: it ameliorates

information and transactions costs. Thus, these models lift the veil that sometimes rises between

the so-called real and financial sectors.

       Section III reviews and critiques the burgeoning empirical literature on finance and

growth, which includes broad cross-country growth regressions, times-series analyses, panel

techniques, detailed country studies, and a recent movement that uses more microeconomic-

based methodologies to explore the mechanisms linking finance and growth. Besides reviewing

the results, I critique the empirical methods and the measures of financial development. Each of

the different econometric methodologies that has been used to study the finance-growth nexus
                                                                                                    3

has serious shortcomings. Moreover, the empirical proxies for “financial development”

frequently do not measure very accurately the concepts emerging from theoretical models. We

are far from definitive answers to the questions: Does finance cause growth, and if it does, how?

       Without ignoring the weaknesses of existing work and the absence of complete unanimity

of results, three tentative observations emerge. Taken as a whole, the bulk of existing research

suggests that (1) countries with better functioning banks and markets grow faster, but the degree

to which a country is bank-based or market-based does not matter much, (2) simultaneity bias

does not seem to drive these conclusions, and (3) better functioning financial systems ease the

external financing constraints that impede firm and industrial expansion, suggesting that this is

one mechanism through which financial development matters for growth.

       I use the concluding section, Section IV, to (1) emphasize areas needing additional

research and (2) mention the fast-growing literature on the determinants of financial

development. In particular, this literature is motivated by the following question: If finance is

important for growth, why do some countries have growth-promoting financial systems while

others do not? Addressing this question is as fascinating and important, as it is multi-disciplined

and complex. Developing a sound understanding of the determinants of financial development

will require synthesizing and extending insights from many sub-specialties of economics as well

as from political science, legal scholarship, and history.

       Before continuing, I want to acknowledge and emphasize that this review treats only

cursorily some important issues. Here I highlight two, though this list is by no means

exhaustive. First, I do not discuss in much depth the relationship between growth and

international finance, such as cross-border capital flows and the importation of financial services.

A serious discussion of international finance and growth would virtually double the length of this
                                                                                                    4

already long review. There is a critical theoretical, empirical, and policy question, therefore, that

receives only limited attention in this essay: Can countries simply import financial services, or

are there substantive growth benefits from countries having well-developed domestic financial

systems? Second, I treat the political, legal, regulatory, and other policy determinants of

financial development in only a perfunctory manner. This is a problem. The links between the

functioning of the financial system and economic growth motivate research into the legal,

regulatory, and policy determinants of financial development. Moreover, since the financial

system influences who gets to use society’s savings, political forces have everywhere and always

shaped financial sector policies and the operation of the financial system. Again, however, these

crucial themes are beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, this chapter reviews the role of the

financial system in economic growth and very briefly lists some ongoing work on the

determinants of financial development in the conclusion.




II. Financial Development and Economic Growth: Theory

II.A. What is financial development?

       The costs of acquiring information, enforcing contracts, and making transactions create

incentives for the emergence of particular types of financial contracts, markets and

intermediaries. Different types and combinations of information, enforcement, and transaction

costs in conjunction with different legal, regulatory, and tax systems have motivated distinct

financial contracts, markets, and intermediaries across countries and throughout history.

       In arising to ameliorate market frictions, financial systems naturally influence the

allocation of resources across space and time (Merton and Bodie, 1995, p. 12). For instance, the

emergence of banks that improve the acquisition of information about firms and managers will
                                                                                                         5

    undoubtedly alter the allocation of credit. Similarly, financial contracts that make investors more

    confident that firms will pay them back will likely influence how people allocate their savings.

    As a final example, the development of liquid stock and bond markets means that people who are

    reluctant to relinquish control over their savings for extended periods can trade claims to

    multiyear projects on an hourly basis. This may profoundly change how much and where people

    save. This section’s goal is to describe models where market frictions motivate the emergence of

    distinct financial arrangements and how the resultant financial contracts, markets, and

    intermediaries alter incentives and constraints in ways that may influence economic growth.

           To organize a review of how financial systems influence savings and investment

    decisions and hence growth, I focus on five broad functions provided by the financial system in

    emerging to ease information, enforcement, and transactions costs. While there are other ways

    to classify the functions provided by the financial system (Merton, 1992; Merton and Bodie,

    1995, 2004), I believe that the following five categories are helpful in organizing a review of the

    theoretical literature and tying this literature to the history of economic thought on finance and

    growth. In particular, financial systems:

•              Produce information ex ante about possible investments and allocate capital
•              Monitor investments and exert corporate governance after providing finance
•              Facilitate the trading, diversification, and management of risk
•              Mobilize and pool savings
•              Ease the exchange of goods and services

    While all financial systems provide these financial functions, there are large differences in how

    well financial systems provide these functions.

           Financial development occurs when financial instruments, markets, and intermediaries

    ameliorate – though do not necessarily eliminate – the effects of information, enforcement, and

    transactions costs and therefore do a correspondingly better job at providing the five financial
                                                                                                   6

functions. Thus, financial development involves improvements in the (i) production of ex ante

information about possible investments, (ii) monitoring of investments and implementation of

corporate governance, (iii) trading, diversification, and management of risk, (iv) mobilization

and pooling of savings, and (v) exchange of goods and services. Each of these financial

functions may influence savings and investment decisions and hence economic growth. Since

many market frictions exist and since laws, regulations, and policies differ markedly across

economies and over time, improvements along any single dimension may have different

implications for resource allocation and welfare depending on the other frictions at play in the

economy.

       In terms of integrating the links between finance and growth theory, two general points

are worth stressing from the onset. First, a large growth accounting literature suggests that

physical capital accumulation per se does not account for much of long-run economic growth

(Jorgenson, 1995, 2005).1 Thus, if finance is to explain economic growth, we need theories that

describe how financial development influences resource allocation decisions in ways that foster

productivity growth and not aim the analytically spotlight too narrowly on aggregate savings.

       Second, there are two general ambiguities between economic growth and the emergence

of financial arrangements that improve resource allocation and reduce risk. Specifically, higher

returns ambiguously affect saving rates due to well-known income and substitutions effects.

Similarly, lower risk also ambiguously affects savings rates (Levhari and Srinivasan, 1969).

Thus, financial arrangements that improve resource allocation and lower risk may lower saving

rates. In a growth model with physical capital externalities, therefore, financial development

could retard economic growth and lower welfare if the drop in savings and the externality
                                                                                                    7

combine to produce a sufficiently large effect. These ambiguities are general features of

virtually all the models discussed below so I do not discuss them when describing each model.

       The remainder of this section describes how market frictions motivate the emergence of

financial systems that provide five broad categories of financial functions and also describes how

the provision of these functions may influence resource allocation and economic growth.

II.B. Producing information and allocating capital

       There are large costs associated with evaluating firms, managers, and market conditions

before making investment decisions. Individual savers may not have the ability to collect,

process, and produce information on possible investments. Since savers will be reluctant to

invest in activities about which there is little reliable information, high information costs may

keep capital from flowing to its highest value use. Thus, while many models assume that capital

flows toward the most profitable firms, this presupposes that investors have good information

about firms, managers, and market conditions. (Bagehot, 1873, p. 53)

       Financial intermediaries may reduce the costs of acquiring and processing information

and thereby improve resource allocation (Boyd and Prescott, 1986). Without intermediaries,

each investor would face the large fixed cost associated with evaluating firms, managers, and

economic conditions. Consequently, groups of individuals may form financial intermediaries that

undertake the costly process of researching investment possibilities for others. In Boyd and

Prescott (1986), financial intermediaries look like banks in that they accept deposits and make

loans. Allen (1990), Bhattacharya and Pfeiderer (1985), and Ramakrishnan and Thakor (1984)

also develop models where financial intermediaries arise to produce information on firms and


1
  For additional cross-country information, see King and Levine (1994) and Easterly and Levine
(2001).
                                                                                                     8

sell this information to savers. Unlike in Boyd and Prescott (1986), however, the intermediary

does not necessarily both mobilize savings and invest those funds in firms using debt contracts.

For our purposes, the critical issue is that financial intermediaries -- by economizing on

information acquisition costs-- improve the ex ante assessment of investment opportunities with

positive ramifications on resource allocation.

       By improving information on firms, managers, and economic conditions, financial

intermediaries can accelerate economic growth. Assuming that many entrepreneurs solicit

capital and that capital is scarce, financial intermediaries that produce better information on firms

will thereby fund more promising firms and induce a more efficient allocation of capital

(Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990).

       The Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990) paper is particularly novel because it formally

models the dynamic interactions between finance and growth. Financial intermediaries produce

better information, improve resource allocation, and foster growth. There is a cost to joining

financial intermediaries, however. Growth means that more individuals can afford to join

financial intermediaries, which improves the ability of financial intermediaries to produce better

information with positive ramifications on growth. Thus, this research emphasizes (i) the two-

way interactions between finance and growth and (ii) the relationship between income

distribution and financial development during the process of economic development.

       Besides identifying the best production technologies, financial intermediaries may also

boost the rate of technological innovation by identifying those entrepreneurs with the best

chances of successfully initiating new goods and production processes (King and Levine, 1993b;

Galetovic, 1996; Blackburn and Hung, 1998; Morales, 2003; Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti,
                                                                                                      9

2003).2 This lies at the core of Joseph Schumpeter’s (1912, p. 74) view of finance in the process

of economic development:

       The banker, therefore, is not so much primarily a middleman … He authorizes
       people in the name of society … (to innovate).

       Stock markets may also stimulate the production of information about firms. As markets

become larger and more liquid, agents may have greater incentives to expend resources in

researching firms because it is easier to profit from this information by trading in big and liquid

markets (Grossman and Stiglitz, 1980) and more liquid (Kyle, 1984; and Holmstrom and Tirole,

1993). Intuitively, with larger and more liquid markets, it is easier for an agent who has acquired

information to disguise this private information and make money by trading in the market. Thus,

larger more liquid markets will boost incentives to produce this valuable information with

positive implications for capital allocation (Merton, 1987). While some models hint at the links

between efficient markets, information, and steady-state growth (Aghion and Howitt, 1999),

existing theories do not draw the connection between market liquidity, information production,

and economic growth very tightly.

       Finally, capital market imperfections can also influence growth by impeding investment

in human capital (Galor and Zeira, 1993). In the presence of indivisibilities in human capital

investment and imperfect capital markets, the initial distribution of wealth will influence who

can gains the resources to undertake human capital augmenting investments. This implies a




2
  Note, the model by Acemoglu, Aghion, and Zilibotti (2003) focuses on examining when firms
undertake innovative activities and when they adopt existing technologies from the world
frontier. But, the existence of financial market frictions leads to financing constraints that help
shape firm decisions. By implication, financial development will loosen those constraints and
thereby affect innovative and adoption activities, with potential ramifications on aggregate
growth rates.
                                                                                                     10

suboptimal allocation of resources with potential implications on aggregate output both in the

short and the long run.

II.C. Monitoring firms and exerting corporate governance

       Corporate governance is central to understanding economic growth in general and the

role of financial factors in particular. The degree to which the providers of capital to a firm can

effectively monitor and influence how firms use that capital has ramifications on both savings

and allocation decisions.3 To the extent that shareholders and creditors effectively monitor firms

and induce managers to maximize firm value, this will improve the efficiency with which firms

allocate resources and make savers more willing to finance production and innovation. In turn,

the absence of financial arrangements that enhance corporate governance may impede the

mobilization of savings from disparate agents and also keep capital from flowing to profitable

investments (Stiglitz and Weiss, 1983). Thus, the effectiveness of corporate governance

mechanisms directly impacts firm performance with potentially large ramifications on national

growth rates.

       Diffuse shareholders may exert effective corporate governance directly by voting on

crucial issues, such as mergers, liquidations, and fundamental changes in business strategies, and

indirectly by electing boards of directors to represent the interest of the owners and oversee the

myriad of managerial decisions. With low information costs, shareholders can make informed

decisions and vote accordingly. In the absence of large market frictions and distorted incentives,

boards of directors will represent the interest of all shareholders, oversee managers effectively,


3
  Indeed, standard agency theory defines the corporate governance problem in terms of how
equity and debt holders influence managers to act in the best interests of the providers of capital
(e.g., Coase, 1937; Jensen and Meckling, 1976; Fama and Jensen, 1983a,b; Myers and Majluf,
1984).
                                                                                                 11

and improve the allocation of resources. Starting from at least Berle and Means (1932),

however, many researchers have argued that small, diffuse equity may encounter a range of

barriers to exerting sound control over corporations. 4

       An assortment of market frictions, however, may keep diffuse shareholders from

effectively exerting corporate governance, which allows managers to pursue projects that benefit

themselves rather than the firm and society at large.5 In particular, large information

asymmetries typically exist between managers and small shareholders and managers have

enormous discretion over the flow of information. Furthermore, small shareholders frequently

lack the expertise and incentives to monitor managers because of the large costs and complexity

associated with overseeing mangers and exerting corporate control. This may induce a “free-

rider” problem because each stockowner’s stake is so small: Each investor relies on others to

undertake the costly process of monitoring managers, so there is too little monitoring. The

resultant gap in information between corporate insiders and diffuse shareholders implies that the

voting rights mechanism will not work effectively. Also, the board of directors may not

represent the interests of minority shareholders. Management frequently “captures” the board

and manipulates directors into acting in the best interests of the managers, not the shareholders.

Finally, in many countries legal codes do not adequately protect the rights of small shareholders

and legal systems frequently do not enforce the legal codes that actually are on the books

concerning diffuse shareholder rights. Thus, large information and contracting costs may keep




4
 In the case of the United States, Roe (1994) argues that the corporate structure of the firms has
been heavily influenced by politics and therefore is not primarily an outcome of market forces.
5
 For citations and an insightful discussion, see the review of the corporate governance literature
by Shleifer and Vishny, 1997).
                                                                                                    12

diffuse shareholders from effectively exerting corporate governance, with adverse effects on

resource allocation and economic growth.

       One response to the frictions that prevent dispersed shareholders from effectively

governing firms is for firms to have a large, concentrated owner, but this ownership structure has

its own problems. Large owners have greater incentives to acquire information and monitor

managers and greater power to thwart managerial discretion (Grossman and Hart, 1980, 1988;

Shleifer and Vishny, 1986; and Stulz, 1988). The existence of large shareholders, however,

creates a different agency problem: Conflicts arise between the controlling shareholder and other

shareholders (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). The controlling owner may expropriate resources

from the firm, or provide jobs, perquisites, and generous business deals to related parties in a

manner that hurts the firm and society, but benefits the controlling owner. Indeed, Morck,

Wolfenzon, and Yeung (2005) show that concentrated ownership appears to have enduring

political and macroeconomic implications. Around the world, controlling owners are frequently

powerful families that use pyramidal structures, cross-holdings, and super voting rights to

magnify their control over many corporations and banks (La Porta et al., 1999; Morck et al.,

2000; Faccio and Lang, 2002; Caprio et al., 2003). Morck et al (2005) marshal an abundance of

evidence in arguing that (i) these controlling families frequently translate their corporate power

into political influence and (ii) the elite then use their influence to shape public policies in ways

that protect them from competition and subsidize their ventures. Thus, highly concentrated

ownership can distort corporate decisions and national policies in ways that curtail innovation,

encourage rent-seeking, and stymie economic growth.

       To the extent that diffuse or concentrated shareholders do not ameliorate the corporate

governance problem, theory suggests that other types of financial arrangements may arise to ease
                                                                                                  13

market frictions and improve the governance of corporations. In what follows, I discuss how

various financial arrangements – liquid equity markets, debt contracts, and banks – may arise to

enhance corporate governance and accelerate growth. There are countervailing arguments,

however, that each of these financial arrangements actually exerts a deleterious influence on

corporate governance. I provide a more complete pro and con assessment of these different

mechanisms below when I discuss the bank-based versus market-based debate.

       Besides the mechanisms discussed thus far, a large and influential literature trumpets the

importance of well functioning stock markets in fostering corporate governance (Jensen and

Meckling, 1976). For example, public trading of shares in stock markets that efficiently reflect

information about firms allows owners to link managerial compensation to stock prices. Linking

stock performance to manager compensation helps align the interests of managers with those of

owners (Diamond and Verrecchia, 1982; and Jensen and Murphy, 1990). Similarly, if takeovers

are easier in well-developed stock markets and if managers of under-performing firms are fired

following a takeover, then better stock markets can promote better corporate control by easing

takeovers of poorly managed firms. The threat of a takeover will help align managerial

incentives with those of the owners (Scharfstein, 1988; and Stein, 1988). Many, however, argue

that well functioning stock markets actually hurt corporate governance. I discuss this below

when reviewing the bank-based versus market-based debate. Finally, I am not aware of models

that assess the role of markets in boosting steady-state growth through its impact on corporate

governance.

       Some theoretical models indicate that debt contracts may emerge to improve corporate

governance, with beneficial ramifications on economic growth. An extensive literature

demonstrates how debt contracts may arise to lower the costs of monitoring firm insiders (e.g.,
                                                                                                14

Townsend, 1979; Gale and Hellwig, 1985; Boyd and Smith, 1994). In terms of growth, Aghion,

Dewatripont, and Rey (1999) link the use of debt contracts to growth. Using Jensen’s “free cash

flow argument,” Aghion, Dewatripont, and Rey (1999) show that debt instruments reduce the

amount of free cash available to firms. This in turn reduces managerial slack and accelerates the

rate at which managers adopt new technologies.

       In terms of intermediaries, Diamond (1984) develops a model in which a financial

intermediary improves corporate governance. The intermediary mobilizes the savings of many

individuals and lends these resources to firms. This “delegated monitor” economizes on

aggregate monitoring costs and eliminates the free-rider problem since the intermediary does the

monitoring for all the investors. Furthermore, as financial intermediaries and firms develop

long-run relationships, this can further lower information acquisition costs.

       In terms of economic growth, a number of models show that well-functioning financial

intermediaries influence growth by boosting corporate governance. Bencivenga and Smith

(1993) show that financial intermediaries that improve corporate governance by economizing on

monitoring costs will reduce credit rationing and thereby boost productivity, capital

accumulation, and growth. Sussman (1993) and Harrison, Sussman, and Zeira (1999) develop

models where financial intermediaries facilitate the flow of resources from savers to investors in

the presence of informational asymmetries with positive growth effects. Focusing on innovative

activity, De La Fuente and Marin (1996) develop a model in which intermediaries arise to

undertake the particularly costly process of monitoring innovative activities. This improves

credit allocation among competing technology producers with positive ramifications on

economic growth.
                                                                                                     15

        From a different perspective, Boyd and Smith (1992) show that differences in the quality

of financial intermediation across countries can have huge implications for international capital

flows and hence economic growth rates. They show that capital may flow from capital scarce

countries to capital abundant countries if the capital abundant countries have financial

intermediaries that are sufficiently more effective at exerting corporate control than the capital

scarce regions. Thus, even though the physical product of capital is higher in the capital scarce

countries, investors recognize that their actual returns depend crucially on the monitoring

performed by intermediaries. Thus, poor financial intermediation will lead to sub-optimal

allocation of capital.

II.D. Risk amelioration

        With information and transactions costs, financial contracts, markets and intermediaries

may arise to ease the trading, hedging, and pooling of risk with implications for resource

allocation and growth. I divide the discussion into three categories: cross-sectional risk

diversification, intertemporal risk sharing, and liquidity risk.

        Traditional finance theory focuses on cross-sectional diversification of risk. Financial

systems may mitigate the risks associated with individual projects, firms, industries, regions,

countries, etc. Banks, mutual funds, and securities markets all provide vehicles for trading,

pooling, and diversifying risk. The financial system’s ability to provide risk diversification

services can affect long-run economic growth by altering resource allocation and savings rates.

The basic intuition is straightforward. While savers generally do not like risk, high-return

projects tend to be riskier than low-return projects. Thus, financial markets that make it easier

for people to diversify risk tend to induce a portfolio shift toward projects with higher expected
                                                                                                       16

returns (Gurley and Shaw, 1955; Patrick, 1966; Greenwood and Jovanovic, 1990; Saint-Paul

1992; Devereux and Smith, 1994; and Obstfeld, 1994).6

         Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) carefully model the links between cross-sectional risk,

diversification, and growth. They assume that (i) high-return, risky projects are frequently

indivisible and require a large initial investment, (ii) people dislike risk, (iii) there are lower-

return, safe projects, and (iv) capital is scare. In the absence of financial arrangements that allow

agents to hold diversified portfolios, agents will avoid the high-return, risky projects because

they require agents to invest disproportionately in risky endeavors. They show that financial

systems that allow agents to hold a diversified portfolio of risky projects foster a reallocation of

savings toward high-return ventures with positive repercussions on growth.

         In terms of technological change, King and Levine (1993b) show that cross-sectional risk

diversification can stimulate innovative activity. Agents are continuously trying to make

technological advances to gain a profitable market niche. Engaging in innovation is risky,

however. The ability to hold a diversified portfolio of innovative projects reduces risk and

promotes investment in growth-enhancing innovative activities (with sufficiently risk averse

agents). Thus, financial systems that ease risk diversification can accelerate technological change

and economic growth.

         Besides cross-sectional risk diversification, financial systems may improve intertemporal

risk sharing. In examining the connection between cross-sectional risk sharing and growth,

theory has tended to focus on the role of markets, rather than intermediaries. However, in

examining intertemporal risk sharing, theory has focused on the advantageous role of

intermediaries in easing intertemporal risk smoothing (Allen and Gale, 1997). Risks that cannot


6
    Though not focused on the endogenous emergence of financial markets, Krebs (2003) shows
                                                                                                     17

be diversified at a particular point in time, such as macroeconomic shocks, can be diversified

across generations. Long-lived intermediaries can facilitate intergenerational risk sharing by

investing with a long-run perspective and offering returns that are relatively low in boom times

and relatively high in slack times. While this type of risk sharing is theoretically possible with

markets, intermediaries may increase the feasibility of intertemporal risk sharing by lowering

contracting costs.

       A third type of risk is liquidity risk. Liquidity reflects the cost and speed with which

agents can convert financial instruments into purchasing power at agreed prices. Liquidity risk

arises due to the uncertainties associated with converting assets into a medium of exchange.

Informational asymmetries and transaction costs may inhibit liquidity and intensify liquidity risk.

These frictions create incentives for the emergence of financial markets and institutions that

augment liquidity.

       The standard link between liquidity and economic development arises because some

high-return projects require a long-run commitment of capital, but savers do not like to

relinquish control of their savings for long-periods. Thus, if the financial system does not

augment the liquidity of long-term investments, less investment is likely to occur in the high-

return projects. Indeed, Hicks (1969, p. 143-145) argues that the products manufactured during

the first decades of the Industrial Revolution had been invented much earlier. Rather, the critical

innovation that ignited growth in 18th century England was capital market liquidity. With liquid

capital markets, savers can hold liquid assets -- like equity, bonds, or demand deposits -- that

they can quickly and easily sell if they seek access to their savings. Simultaneously, capital

markets transform these liquid financial instruments into long-term capital investments. Thus,


that imperfect sharing of individual human-capital risks can retard long-run economic growth.
                                                                                                     18

the industrial revolution required a financial revolution so that large commitments of capital

could be made for long periods (Bencivenga, Smith, and Starr, 1995)

       In Diamond and Dybvig's (1983) seminal model of liquidity, a fraction of savers receive

shocks after choosing between two investments: an illiquid, high-return project and a liquid, low-

return project. Those receiving shocks want access to their savings before the illiquid project

produces. This risk creates incentives for investing in the liquid, low-return projects. The model

assumes that it is prohibitively costly to verify whether another individual has received a shock

or not. This information cost assumption rules out state-contingent insurance contracts and

creates an incentive for financial markets -- markets where individuals issue and trade securities

-- to emerge.

       Levine (1991) takes the Diamond Dybvig (1983) set-up, models the endogenous

formation of equity markets, and links this to a growth model. Specifically, savers receiving

shocks can sell their equity claims to the future profits of the illiquid production technology to

others. Market participants do not verify whether other agents received shocks or not.

Participants simply trade in impersonal stock exchanges. Thus, with liquid stock markets, equity

holders can readily sell their shares, while firms have permanent access to the capital invested by

the initial shareholders. By facilitating trade, stock markets reduce liquidity risk. Frictionless

stock markets, however, do not eliminate liquidity risk. That is, stock markets do not replicate

the equilibrium that exists when insurance contracts can be written contingent on observing

whether an agent receives a shock or not. Nevertheless, as stock market transaction costs fall,

more investment occurs in the illiquid, high-return project. If illiquid projects enjoy sufficiently

large externalities, then greater stock market liquidity induces faster steady-state growth.
                                                                                                 19

       Thus far, information costs -- the costs of verifying whether savers have received a shock

-- have motivated the existence of stock markets, but trading costs can also hasten the emergence

and highlight the importance of liquid stock markets. In Bencivenga, Smith, and Starr (1995),

high-return, long-gestation production technologies require that ownership be transferred

throughout the life of the production process in secondary securities markets. If exchanging

ownership claims is costly, then longer-run production technologies will be less attractive. Thus,

liquidity -- as measured by secondary market trading costs -- affects production decisions.

Greater liquidity will induce a shift to longer-gestation, higher-return technologies.

       Besides stock markets, financial intermediaries may also enhance liquidity, reduce

liquidity risk and influence economic growth. As discussed above, Diamond and Dybvig's

(1983) model assumes it is prohibitively costly to observe shocks to individuals, so it is

impossible to write incentive compatible state-contingent insurance contracts. Under these

conditions, banks can offer liquid deposits to savers and undertake a mixture of liquid, low-

return investments to satisfy demands on deposits and illiquid, high-return investments. By

providing demand deposits and choosing an appropriate mixture of liquid and illiquid

investments, banks provide complete insurance to savers against liquidity risk while

simultaneously facilitating long-run investments in high return projects. Banks replicate the

equilibrium allocation of capital that exists with observable shocks. As noted by Jacklin (1987),

however, the banking equilibrium is not incentive compatible if agents can trade in liquid equity

markets. If equity markets exist, all agents will use equities; none will use banks. Thus, in this

context, banks will only emerge to provide liquidity if there are sufficiently large impediments to
                                                                                                    20

trading in securities markets (Diamond, 1991).7 Turning back to growth, Bencivenga and Smith

(1991) examine a growth model in which pre-existing impediments to the emergence of liquid

equity markets highlight the liquidity-enhancing role of banks. They show that, by eliminating

liquidity risk, banks can increase investment in the high-return, illiquid asset and therefore

accelerate growth.

        Financial systems can also promote the accumulation of human capital (Jacoby, 1994).

In particular, financial arrangements may facilitate borrowing for the accumulation of skills. If

human capital accumulation is not subject to diminishing returns on a social level, financial

arrangements that ease human capital creation help accelerate economic growth (DeGregorio,

1996; Galor and Zeira, 1993).

        Another form of liquidity involves firm access to credit during the production process,

which may reduce premature liquidity of projects and thereby foster investment in longer

gestation, higher-return projects. Holmstrom and Tirole (1998) note that firm production

processes are long-term, uncertain, and subject to shocks. Thus, some firms may receive shocks

after receiving outside financing and need additional injections of capital to complete the project.

In the presence of informational asymmetries, intermediaries can sell an option to a line of credit

during the initial financing of the firm that entitles the firm to access additional credit at an




7
 Note that Calomiris and Kahn (1991), Flannery (1994), and Diamond and Rajan (2001) develop
models in which the fragile structure of banks, i.e., liquid deposits and illiquid assets, serves as
an effective commitment device that keeps banks from assuming excessive risks or from shirking
on collecting payment from firms. Put succinctly, the sequential service constraint on bank
deposits creates a collective action problem among depositors that induces depositors to run if
they acquire information that the bank is not monitoring firms and managing risk appropriately.
                                                                                                  21

intermediate stage in certain states of nature.8 This improves the efficiency of the capital

allocation process, but the model does not formally link the provision of liquidity with economic

growth. Aghion, Angeletos, Banerjee, and Manova (2004), instead, focus on how the ability of

firms to access credit during the production process influences innovation and long-run growth

when firms face macroeconomic shocks (e.g., recessions). They develop a model where firms

can either invest in short-term, low-return investments or in more risky, growth-enhancing

research and development (R&D). They also assume that there are adjustment costs to R&D. In

this context, under-developed financial systems that are less able to provide firms with funds to

ease these adjustment costs will hinder innovation. Moreover, macroeconomic volatility exerts a

particularly negative impact on innovation and growth in under-developed financial systems

because firms’ willingness to undertake R&D depends on their ability to borrow in the future to

meet adjustment costs, which is influenced negatively by the likelihood of experiencing a

recession and positively by the level of financial development. Aghion et al (2004) also provide

empirical evidence consistent with the prediction that financial development reduces the adverse

growth effects of macroeconomic volatility.




8
  Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) develop a model to explain why two traditional commercial
banking activities, deposit-taking and loan-making, are done jointly within the same
intermediary. While Diamond (1984) motivates the existence of loan-making intermediaries, it
is not clear why the intermediary should be funded with demand deposits. Similarly, while
Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) motivate the existence of deposit-taking intermediaries, it is not
clear why the intermediary should make loans. Since banks often lend via committed lines of
credit that can be used at the discretion of firms, Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2002) argue that a
single bank is frequently the lowest cost provider of liquidity on both the liability and asset sides
of the balance sheet. This view of intermediation has not, to my knowledge, been incorporated
into a model of economic growth.
                                                                                                    22


II.E. Pooling of savings

         Mobilization -- pooling -- is the costly process of agglomerating capital from disparate

savers for investment. Mobilizing savings involves (a) overcoming the transaction costs

associated with collecting savings from different individuals and (b) overcoming the

informational asymmetries associated with making savers feel comfortable in relinquishing

control of their savings. Indeed, much of Carosso’s (1970) history of Investment Banking in

America is a description of the diverse costs associated with raising capital in the United States

during the 19th and 20th centuries.

         In light of the transaction and information costs associated with mobilizing savings from

many agents, numerous financial arrangements may arise to mitigate these frictions and facilitate

pooling. Specifically, mobilization may involve multiple bilateral contracts between productive

units raising capital and agents with surplus resources. The joint stock company in which many

individuals invest in a new legal entity, the firm, represents a prime example of multiple bilateral

mobilizations.

         To economize on the costs associated with multiple bilateral contracts, pooling may also

occur through intermediaries, where thousands of investors entrust their wealth to intermediaries

that invest in hundreds of firms (Sirri and Tufano 1995, p. 83). For this to occur, "mobilizers"

have to convince savers of the soundness of the investments (Boyd and Smith, 1992). Toward

this end, intermediaries worry about establishing stellar reputations, so that savers feel

comfortable about entrusting their savings to the intermediary (DeLong, 1991; and Lamoreaux,

1995).

         Financial systems that are more effective at pooling the savings of individuals can

profoundly affect economic development by increasing savings, exploiting economies of scale,
                                                                                                   23

and overcoming investment indivisibilities. Besides the direct effect of better savings

mobilization on capital accumulation, better savings mobilization can improve resource

allocation and boost technological innovation. Without access to multiple investors, many

production processes would be constrained to economically inefficient scales (Sirri and Tufano,

1995). Furthermore, many endeavors require an enormous injection of capital that is beyond the

means or inclination of any single investor. (Bagehot 1873, p. 3-4) argued that a major

difference between England and poorer countries was that in England the financial system could

mobilize resources for “immense works.” Thus, good projects would not fail for lack of capital.

Bagehot was very explicit in noting that it was not the national savings rate per se, it was the

ability to pool society’s resources and allocate those savings toward the most productive ends.

Furthermore, mobilization frequently involves the creation of small denomination instruments.

These instruments provide opportunities for households to hold diversified portfolios (Sirri and

Tufano, 1995). Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) show that with large, indivisible projects,

financial arrangements that mobilize savings from many diverse individuals and invest in a

diversified portfolio of risky projects facilitate a reallocation of investment toward higher return

activities with positive ramifications on economic growth.
                                                                                                     24


II.F. Easing exchange

       Financial arrangements that lower transaction costs can promote specialization,

technological innovation and growth. The links between facilitating transactions, specialization,

innovation, and economic growth were core elements of Adam Smith’s (1776) Wealth of

Nations. He argued that division of labor -- specialization -- is the principal factor underlying

productivity improvements. With greater specialization, workers are more likely to invent better

machines or production processes (Smith, 1776, p. 3).

       Men are much more likely to discover easier and readier methods of attaining any
       object, when the whole attention of their minds is directed towards that single
       object, than when it is dissipated among a great variety of things.

       Smith (1776) focused on the role of money in lowering transaction costs, permitting

greater specialization, and fostering technological innovation.9 Information costs, however, may

also motivate the emergence of money. Since it is costly to evaluate the attributes of goods,

barter exchange is very costly. Thus, an easily recognizable medium of exchange may arise to

facilitate exchange (King and Plosser, 1986; and Williamson and Wright, 1994). The drop in

transaction and information costs is not necessarily a one-time fall when economies move to

money, however. Transaction and information costs may continue to fall through financial

innovation.

       Greenwood and Smith (1996) have modeled the connections between exchange,

specialization, and innovation. More specialization requires more transactions. Since each

transaction is costly, financial arrangements that lower transaction costs will facilitate greater

specialization. In this way, markets that promote exchange encourage productivity gains. There


9
 Wright (2002, p. 212-216) documents that Adam Smith, in the second book of the Wealth of
Nations, indicated that well-functioning banks, besides well-functioning corporate governance
mechanisms, were crucial for economic development.
                                                                                                  25

may also be feedback from these productivity gains to financial market development. If there are

fixed costs associated with establishing markets, then higher income per capita implies that these

fixed costs are less burdensome as a share of per capita income. Thus, economic development

can spur the development of financial markets.

       In the Greenwood and Smith (1996) model, however, the reduction in transaction costs

does not stimulate the invention of new and better production technologies. Instead, lower

transaction costs expands the set of "on the shelf" production processes that are economically

attractive. Also, the model defines better “market” as a system for supporting more specialized

production processes. This does not explain the emergence of financial instruments or

institutions that lower transactions costs and thereby produce an environment that naturally

promotes specialized production technologies. This is important because we want to understand

the two links of the chain: what features of the economic environment create incentives for the

emergence of financial arrangements, and how do these emerging financial arrangements

influence economic activity.
                                                                                                   26


II.G. The theoretical case for a bank-based system

       Besides debates concerning the role of financial development in economic growth,

financial economists have debated the comparative importance of bank-based and market-based

financial systems for over a century (Goldsmith, 1969; Boot and Thakor, 1997; Allen and Gale,

2000; Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2001c). As discussed, financial intermediaries can improve

the (i) acquisition of information on firms, (ii) intensity with which creditors exert corporate

control, (iii) provision of risk-reducing arrangements, (iv) pooling of capital, and (v) ease of

making transactions. These are arguments in favor of well-developed banks. They are not

reasons for favoring a bank-based financial system.

       Rather than simply noting the growth-enhancing role of banks, the case for a bank-based

system derives from a critique of the role of markets in providing financial functions.

       In terms of acquiring information about firms, Stiglitz (1985) emphasizes the free-rider

problem inherent in atomistic markets. Since well-developed markets quickly reveal information

to investors at large, this dissuades individual investors from devoting resources toward

researching firms. Thus, greater market development, in lieu of bank development, may actually

impede incentives for identifying innovative projects that foster growth.10 Banks can mitigate

the potential disincentives from efficient markets by privatizing the information they acquire and

by forming long-run relationships with firms (Gerschenkron, 1962; Boot, Greenbaum, and

Thakor, 1993). Banks can make investments without revealing their decisions immediately in

public markets and this creates incentives for them to research firms, managers, and market

conditions with positive ramifications on resource allocation and growth. Furthermore, Rajan


10
  Using examples from the U.S. in the 18th Century, Wright (2002, p.30-32) shows how
securities market participants tended to free-ride off of the information collected by banks in
making credit decisions.
                                                                                                 27

and Zingales (1999) emphasize that powerful banks with close ties to firms may be more

effective at exerting pressure on firms to re-pay their debts than atomistic markets.

       On corporate governance, a large literature stresses that markets do not effectively

monitor managers (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). First, takeovers may not be an effective

corporate control device because insiders have better information than outsiders. This

informational asymmetry mitigates the takeover threat as a corporate governance mechanism

since ill-informed outsiders will outbid relatively well-informed insiders for control of firms only

when they pay too much (Stiglitz, 1985). Second, some argue that the takeover threat as a

corporate control device also suffers from the free-rider problem. If an outsider expends lots of

resources obtaining information, other market participants will observe the results of this

research when the outsider bids for shares of the firm. This will induce others to bid for shares,

so that the price rises. Thus, the original outsider who expended resources obtaining information

must pay a higher price for the firm than it would have paid if “free-riding” firms could not bid

for shares in a liquid equity market. The rapid public dissemination of costly information

reduces incentives for obtaining information, making effective takeover bids, and wielding

corporate control (Grossman and Hart, 1980). Third, existing managers often take actions –

poison pills – that deter takeovers and thereby weaken the market as an effective disciplining

device (DeAngelo and Rice, 1983). There is some evidence that, in the United States, the legal

system hinders takeovers and grants considerable power to management. Fourth, although in

theory shareholder control management through boards of directors, an incestuous relationship

may blossom between boards of directors and management (Jensen, 1993). Members of a board

enjoy their lucrative fees and owe those fees to nomination by management. Thus, boards are

more likely to approve golden parachutes to managers and poison pills that reduce the
                                                                                                    28

attractiveness of takeover. This incestuous link may further reduce the effectiveness of the

market as a vehicle for exerting corporate control (Allen and Gale, 2000). Chakraborty and Ray

(2004) examine bank-based and market-based financial systems in an endogenous growth model,

concluding that banks can partially resolve the tendency for insiders to exploit the private

benefits of control.

       The liquidity of stock markets can also adversely influence resource allocation. Liquid

equity markets may facilitate takeovers that while profiting the raiders may actually be socially

harmful (Shleifer and Summers, 1988). Moreover, liquidity may encourage a myopic investor

climate. In liquid markets, investor can inexpensively sell their shares, so that they have fewer

incentives to undertake careful – and expensive – corporate governance (Bhide, 1993). Thus,

greater stock market development may hinder corporate governance and induce an inefficient

allocation of resources according to the bank-based view. As noted above, Allen and Gale

(1997, 2000) argue that bank-based systems offer better intertemporal risk sharing services than

markets with beneficial effects on resource allocation.

       In response to the problems associated with relying on diffuse shareholders, large,

concentrated ownership may arise to prevent managers from deviating too far from the interests

of owners, but as stressed above, this brings its own complications. Large investors have the

incentives and ability to acquire information, monitor managers and exert corporate control.

Concentrated ownership, however, raises other problems. Besides the fact that concentrated

ownership implies that wealthy investors are not diversified (Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 1997),

concentrated owners may benefit themselves at the expense of minority shareholders, debt

holders, and other stakeholders in the firm, with adverse effects on corporate finance and

resource allocation. Large investors may pay themselves special dividends, exploit business
                                                                                                   29

relationships with other firms they own that profit themselves at the expense of the corporation,

and in general maximize the private benefits of control at the expense of minority shareholders

(Dann and DeAngelo, 1985; Zingales, 1994). Furthermore, large equity owners may seek to

shift the assets of the firm to higher-risk activities since shareholders benefit on the upside, while

debt holders share the costs of failure. Finally, as stressed by Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung

(2005), concentrated control of corporate assets produces market power that may corrupt the

political system and distort public policies. Thus, from this perspective, concentrated ownership

is unlikely to resolve fully the shortcomings associated with market-based systems.

       In sum, proponents of bank-based systems argue that there are fundamental reasons for

believing that market-based systems will not do a good job of acquiring information about firms

and overseeing managers. This will hurt resource allocation and economic performance. Banks

do not suffer from the same fundamental shortcomings as markets. Thus, they will do a

correspondingly better job at researching firms, overseeing managers, and financing industrial

expansion.

II.H. The theoretical case for a market-based system

       The case for a market-based system is essentially a counterattack that focuses on the

problems created by powerful banks.

       Bank-based systems may involve intermediaries with a huge influence over firms and this

influence may manifest itself in negative ways. For instance, once banks acquire substantial,

inside information about firms, banks can extract rents from firms; firms must pay for their

greater access to capital. In terms of new investments or debt renegotiations, banks with power

can extract more of the expected future profits from the firm (than in a market-base system)

(Hellwig, 1991). This ability to extract part of the expected payoff to potentially profitable
                                                                                                   30

investments may reduce the effort extended by firms to undertake innovative, profitable ventures

(Rajan, 1992). Furthermore, Boot and Thakor (2000) model the potential tensions between

bank-based systems characterized by close ties between banks and firms and the development of

well-functioning securities markets.

       Banks -- as debt issuers -- also have an inherent bias toward prudence, so that bank-based

systems may stymie corporate innovation and growth (Morck and Nakamura, 1999). Weinstein

and Yafeh (1998) find evidence of this in Japan. While firms with close to ties to a “main bank”

have greater access to capital and are less cash constrained than firms without a main bank, the

main bank firms tend to (i) employ conservative, slow growth strategies and do not grow faster

than firms without a “main bank,” (ii) use more capital intensive processes than non-main bank

firms holding other features constant, and (iii) produce lower profits, which is consistent with the

powerful banks extracting rents from the relationship.

       Allen and Gale (2000) further note that although banks may be effective at eliminating

duplication of information gathering and processing, which is likely to be helpful when people

agree about what information needs to be gathered and how it should be processed, banks may

be ineffective in non-standard environments. Thus, banks may not be effective gatherers and

processors of information in new, uncertain situations involving innovative products and

processes (Allen and Gale, 1999). Similarly, but in a model of loan renegotiations, Dewatripont

and Maskin (1995) demonstrate that in a bank-based system characterized by long-run links

between banks and firms, banks will have a difficult time credibly committing to not renegotiate

contracts. In contrast, more fragmented banking systems can more easily commit to imposing

tighter budget constraints. The credible imposition of tight budget constraints may be necessary

for the funding of newer, higher-risk firms. Thus, concentrated banks may be more conducive to
                                                                                                     31

the funding of mature, less risky firms, while more market-based systems, according to these

theories, more easily support the growth of newer, riskier industries.

       Another line of attack on the efficacy of bank-based systems involves their role in

exerting corporate control over firms and the corporate governance of banks themselves.

Bankers act in their own best interests, not necessarily in the best interests of all creditors or

society at large. Thus, bankers may collude with firms against other creditors. For instance,

influential banks may prevent outsiders from removing inefficient managers if these managers

are particularly generous to the bankers (Black and Moersch, 1998).11 For the case of Germany,

Wenger and Kaserer (1998) show that bank managers are enormously powerful. They not only

have the corporate control power over firms that derives from being large creditors to those

firms, banks also vote the shares of a larger number of small stockholders. For instance, in 1992,

bank managers exercised on average 61 percent of the voting rights of the 24 largest companies

and in 11 companies this share was higher than 75%. This control of corporations by bank

management extends to the banks themselves! In the shareholder meetings of the three largest

German banks, the percentage of proxy votes was higher than 80 percent, much of this voted by

the banks themselves. For example, Deutsche Bank held voting rights for 47 percent of its own

shares, while Dresdner votes 59 percent of its own shares (Charkham, 1994). Thus, the bank

management has rested control of the banks from the owners of the banks and also exerts a huge

influence on the country’s major corporations. Wenger and Kaserer (1998) also provide

examples in which banks misrepresent the accounts of firms to the public and systematically fail

to discipline management. Also, Rajan and Zingales (2002b) argue that in response to adverse


11
  Bank-based system may also impede the flow of information about firms (Morck et al 2000)
and the responsiveness of the economy to market signals (Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein,
1991; Peek and Rosengren, 1998).
                                                                                                 32

shocks that affect the economy unevenly, market-based systems will more effectively identify,

isolate, and bankrupt truly distressed firms and prevent them from hurting the overall economy

than a bank-based system. In a bank-based -- relationship-based -- system, bank managers may

be more reluctant to bankrupt firms with whom they have had long-term, and perhaps

multidimensional, ties. While this may smooth temporary aggregate shocks, it may also impede

the efficient adjustment to structural changes. Thus, to the extent that banks actually weaken the

corporate governance of firms, bank-based systems represent sub-optimal mechanisms for

overseeing firms and improving resource allocation.

       Furthermore, relying on a bank-based financial system may be problematic because of

the difficulties in governing banks themselves (Caprio and Levine, 2002). While subject to

debate, many argue that information asymmetries between bank insiders and outsiders are larger

than with nonfinancial corporations (Furfine, 2001; Morgan, 2002). Under these conditions, it

will be very difficult for diffuse equity and debt holder to monitor and control bank insiders. The

governance problem facing depositors is of course exacerbated in the presence of deposit

insurance. Furthermore, greater opacity implies even greater complexities in writing incentive

contracts to align managerial incentives with bank equity holders and creditors. Perhaps because

of the particularly severe informational impediments to governing banks, banks are even more

likely than nonfinancial corporations to have a large, controlling owner (Caprio, Laeven, and

Levine, 2003). This concentration of ownership in conjunction with greater opaqueness may

make it easier for bank insiders to exploit both other investors in the bank and the government if

it is providing deposit insurance. The history of Mexico, for example, is replete with incidents of

powerful families using their control over banks to exploit other creditors and taxpayers (Haber,

2004a,b; Maurer and Haber, 2004). For instance, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Zamarripa
                                                                                                  33

(2003) find high rates of connected lending in Mexico. They find that 20% of total loans go to

related parties. These loans benefited from interest rates that were about 415-420 basis points

below those to unrelated parties. Related borrowers also benefited from longer maturities, were

significantly less likely to have to post collateral, were 33% less likely to pay back, and the

recovery rates on these loans were massively less (78 percent lower) than on loans to unrelated

parties. Similarly, Laeven (2001) presents evidence that insiders in Russian banks diverted the

flow of loans to themselves and then defaulted 71% of the time.

       Finally, proponents of market-based financial systems claim that markets provide a richer

set of risk management tools that permit greater customization of risk ameliorating instruments.

While bank-based systems may provide inexpensive, basic risk management services for

standardized situations, market-based systems provide greater flexibility to tailor make products.

Thus, as economies mature and need a richer set of risk management tools and vehicles for

raising capital, they may concomitantly benefit from a legal and regulatory environment that

supports the evolution of market-based activities, or overall growth may be retarded.
                                                                                                   34


II.I. Countervailing views to bank-based vs. market-based debate

       Some reject the importance of the bank-based versus market-based debate and instead

argue that the issue is overall financial development, not the particular institutional arrangements

that provide financial services to the economy. As noted above, information, transaction, and

enforcement costs create incentives for the emergence of financial markets and intermediaries.

In turn, these components of the financial system provide financial functions: they evaluate

project, exert corporate control, facilitate risk management, ease the mobilization of savings, and

facilitate exchange. Thus, this “financial functions view” rejects the primacy of distinguishing

financial systems as bank-based or market-based (Merton, 1992, 1995; Merton and Bodie, 1995,

2004; Levine, 1997). According to this view, the crucial issue for growth is whether the

economy has access to a well-functioning financial system; the exact composition of the

financial system is of secondary importance.

       Another criticism for emphasizing market-based versus bank-based differences is that

markets and banks may provide complementary growth-enhancing financial services to the

economy (Boyd and Smith, 1998; Levine and Zervos, 1998a; Huybens and Smith, 1999). For

instance, stock markets may positively affect economic development even though not much

capital is raised through them. Specifically, stock markets may play a prominent role in

facilitating custom-made risk management services and boosting liquidity. In addition, stock

markets may complement banks. For instance, by spurring competition for corporate control and

by offering alternative means of financing investment, securities markets may reduce the

potentially harmful effects of excessive bank power. The theoretical literature is making progress

in modeling the co-evolution of banks and markets (Boyd and Smith, 1996; Allen and Gale,

2000). Furthermore, microeconomic evidence also emphasizes potential complementarities
                                                                                                      35

between intermediaries and markets. Using firm-level data, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic

(1996) show that increases in stock market development actually tend to increase the use of bank

finance in developing countries. Moreover, Sylla (1998) describes the interdependence of banks

and securities markets in providing financial services to the U.S. economy in the lat 18th and

early 19th centuries. Thus, these two components of the financial system may act as

complements during the development process. In many circumstances, we may not want to view

bank-based and market-based systems as representing a tradeoff. Rather, there may be policy

and analytical advantages to focusing on the legal, regulatory, and policy foundations that allow

both banks and markets to flourish without tipping the playing field in favor of either banks or

markets

       One additional argument for not focusing on distinguishing financial systems by whether

they are bank-based or market-based is the view that legal system differences are the

fundamental source of international differences in financial development (La Porta et al., 2000).

The law and finance view holds that finance is a set of contracts. These contracts are defined

and made more or less effective by legal rights and enforcement mechanisms. From this

perspective, a well-functioning legal system facilitates the operation of both markets and

intermediaries. It is the overall level and quality of the financial functions that are provided to

the economy that influences resource allocation and economic growth. The law and finance

view holds that distinguishing countries by the efficiency of national legal systems in supporting

financial transactions is more useful than distinguishing countries by whether they have bank-

based or market-based financial systems. While focusing on the law is not inconsistent with

banks or markets playing a particularly important role, La Porta et al. (2000) clearly argue that
                                                                                                  36

legal institutions are a more useful way to distinguish financial systems than concentrating on

whether countries are bank-based or market-based.

II.J. Finance, Income Distribution, and Poverty

       Thus far, I have focused on models of aggregate growth. I have not discussed the

potential impact of finance on income distribution in general or poverty in particular. Although

the focus of this article is on aggregate growth, the relationship between finance and income

distribution is independently relevant for understanding the process of economic development

and is indirectly related to growth because income distribution can influence savings decisions,

the allocation of resources, incentives to innovate, and public policies. Thus, this subsection

very briefly reviews a few recent theoretical inquiries into the relationship between the operation

of the financial sector and income distribution.

       Theory provides conflicting predictions concerning the relationship between financial

development and both income distribution and poverty alleviation. Some theories claim that

financial intermediary development will have a disproportionately beneficial impact on the poor.

Banerjee and Newman (1993), Galor and Zeira (1993) and Aghion and Bolton (1997) show that

informational asymmetries produce credit constraints that are particularly binding on the poor

because the poor do not have the resources to fund their own projects, nor the collateral (nor the

political connections) to access bank credit. These credit constraints, therefore, restrict the poor

from exploiting investment opportunities. While these credit constraints may slow aggregate

growth by keeping capital from flowing to its highest value use, a poorly functioning financial

system will also produce higher income inequality by disproportionately keeping capital from

flowing to “wealth-deficient” entrepreneurs. By ameliorating information and transactions costs

and therefore by allowing more entrepreneurs to obtain external finance, financial development
                                                                                                    37

improves the allocation of capital, exerting a particularly large impact on the poor. On a more

general level, some political economy theories suggest that better functioning financial systems

make financial services available to a larger proportion of the population, rather than restricting

capital to entrenched incumbents (Haber, Maurer, and Razo, 2003; Rajan and Zingales, 2003;

Morck, Wolfenzon, and Yeung, 2005). Thus, by ameliorating credit constraints, financial

development may foster entrepreneurship, new firm formation, and economic growth. On the

other hand, some argue that it is primarily the rich and politically connected who benefit from

improvements in the financial system. Especially at early stages of economic development,

access to financial services, especially credit, is limited to the wealthy and connected

(Lamoreaux, 1986; Haber, 1991, 2004a,b). Under these conditions, greater financial

development may only succeed in channeling more capital to a select few. Thus, it is an open

question whether financial development will narrow or widen income disparities even if it boosts

aggregate growth.

         Other models posit a non-linear relationship between finance and income distribution.

Greenwood and Jovanovic (1990) show how the interaction of financial and economic

development can give rise to an inverted U-shaped curve of income inequality and financial

intermediary development. At early stages of financial development, only a few relatively

wealthy individuals have access to financial markets and hence higher-return projects. With

aggregate economic growth, more people can afford to joint the formal financial system, with

positive ramifications on economic growth. With sufficient economic success, everyone

participates in the financial system, enjoying the full range of benefits. The distributional effect

of financial deepening is thus adverse for the poor at early stages, but positive after a turning

point.
                                                                                                   38


III. Evidence on Finance and Growth

       A substantial body of empirical work on finance and growth assesses the impact of the

operation of the financial system on economic growth, whether the impact is economically large,

and whether certain components of the financial system, e.g., banks and stock markets, play a

particularly important role in fostering growth at certain stages of economic development.

       This section is organized around econometric approaches to examining the relationship

between finance and growth. Thus, the first subsection discusses cross-country studies of growth

and finance. The second subsection presents evidence from panel studies, pure time-series

investigations, and country case-studies. The third subsection examines industry and firm level

analyses that provide direct empirical evidence on the mechanisms linking finance and growth.

Then, I summarize existing work on the relationship between financial structure – the degree to

which an economy is bank-based or market-based – and economic growth. Finally, I mention

recent research on whether financial development influences income distribution and poverty.

       The organization of the empirical evidence advertises an important weakness in the

finance and growth literature: there is frequently an insufficiently precise link between theory

and measurement. Theory focuses on particular functions provided by the financial sector –

producing information, exerting corporate governance, facilitating risk management, pooling

savings, and easing exchange – and how these influence resource allocation decisions and

economic growth. Thus, I would prefer to organize the empirical section around studies that

precisely measure each of the functions stressed by theory. Similarly, while empirical studies

focus on measures of the size of banks or stock markets, Petersen and Rajan (1997), Demirguc-

Kunt and Maksimovic (2001), and Fisman and Love (2003) show that firms frequently act as

financial intermediaries in providing trade credit to related firms. This source of financial
                                                                                                  39

intermediation may be very important, especially in countries with regulatory restrictions on

financial intermediaries and in countries with undeveloped legal systems that do not effectively

support formal financial development. This further advertises the sub-optimal connection

between theory and measurement in the finance and growth literature.

       While fully recognizing this problem, many of the biggest advances in empirical studies

of finance and growth have been methodological. Thus, I organize the discussion around

econometric approaches. While serious improvements have been made in measuring financial

development, which I discuss below, future research that more concretely links the concepts

from theory with the data will substantively improve our understanding of the finance and

growth link.

III.A. Cross-Country Studies of Finance and Growth

       1. Goldsmith, the question, and the problems

       Goldsmith (1969) motivated his path breaking study of finance and growth as follows.

       One of the most important problems in the field of finance, if not the single most
       important one, … is the effect that financial structure and development have on
       economic growth. (p. 390)

       Thus, he sought to assess whether finance exerts a causal influence on growth and

whether the mixture of markets and intermediaries operating in an economy influences economic

growth. Toward this end, Goldsmith (1969) carefully compiled data on 35 countries over the

period 1860 to 1963 on the value of financial intermediary assets as a share of economic output.

He assumed, albeit with ample qualifications, that the size of the financial intermediary sector is

positively correlated with the quality of financial functions provided by the financial sector.

       Goldsmith (1969) met with varying degrees of success in providing confident answers to

these questions. After showing that financial intermediary size relative to the size of the
                                                                                                40

economy rises as countries develop, Goldsmith graphically documented a positive correlation

between financial development and the level of economic activity. Goldsmith just as clearly

asserted his unwillingness to draw causal interpretations from his graphical presentations. Thus,

Goldsmith ultimately did not take a stand on whether financial development causes growth. In

terms of the relationship between economic growth and the structure of the financial system,

Goldsmith was unable to provide much cross-country evidence because of the absence of data on

securities market development for a broad range of countries.

       Goldsmith’s (1969) work raises several problems, all of which Goldsmith presciently

stresses, that subsequent work has tried to resolve.

   (1) The investigation involves only 35 countries.

   (2) It does not systematically control for other factors influencing economic growth.

   (3) It does not examine whether financial development is associated with productivity
       growth and capital accumulation, which theory stresses.

   (4) The indicator of financial development, which measures the size of the financial
       intermediary sector, may not accurately gauge the functioning of the financial system.

   (5) The close association between financial system size and growth does not identify the
       direction of causality.

   (6) The study did not shed light on whether financial markets, non-bank financial
       intermediaries, or the mixture of markets and intermediaries matter for economic growth.


       2. More countries, more controls, and predictability

       In the early 1990s, King and Levine (1993a, henceforth KL) built on Goldsmith’s work.

They study 77 countries over the period 1960-1989, systematically control for other factors

affecting long-run growth, examine the capital accumulation and productivity growth channels,

construct additional measures of the level of financial development, and analyze whether the
                                                                                                    41

level of financial development predicts long-run economic growth, capital accumulation, and

productivity growth.

       In terms of measures of financial development, KL first examine DEPTH, which is

simply a measure of the size of financial intermediaries. It equals liquid liabilities of the

financial system (currency plus demand and interest-bearing liabilities of banks and nonbank

financial intermediaries) divided by GDP. They also construct the variable BANK that measures

the relative degree to which the central bank and commercial banks allocate credit. BANK

equals the ratio of bank credit divided by bank credit plus central bank domestic assets. The

intuition underlying this measure is that banks are more likely to provide the five financial

functions than central banks. There are two notable weaknesses with this measure, however.

Banks are not the only financial intermediaries providing valuable financial functions and banks

may simply lend to the government or public enterprises. KL also examine PRIVY, which

equals credit to private enterprises divided by GDP. The assumption underlying this measure is

that financial systems that allocate more credit to private firms are more engaged in researching

firms, exerting corporate control, providing risk management services, mobilizing savings, and

facilitating transactions than financial systems that simply funnel credit to the government or

state owned enterprises. While BANK and PRIVY seek to improve upon DEPTH by capturing

who is doing the allocating and to whom society’s savings are flowing, these measures still do

not directly proxy for the five financial functions stressed in theoretical models of finance and

growth. KL find very consistent results across the different financial development indicators.

       KL then assess the strength of the empirical relationship between each of these indicators

of the level of financial development averaged over the 1960-1989 period and three growth

indicators also averaged over the 1960-1989 period. The three growth indicators are as follows:
                                                                                                    42

(1) the average rate of real per capita GDP growth, (2) the average rate of growth in the capital

stock per person, and (3) total productivity growth, which is a "Solow residual" defined as real

per capita GDP growth minus (0.3) times the growth rate of the capital stock per person. In other

words, if F(i) represents the value of the ith indicator of financial development averaged over the

period 1960-1989, G(j) represents the value of the jth growth indicator (per capita GDP growth,

per capita capital stock growth, or productivity growth) averaged over the period 1960-1989, and

X represents a matrix of conditioning information to control for other factors associated with

economic growth (e.g., income per capita, education, political stability, indicators of exchange

rate, trade, fiscal, and monetary policy ), then they estimated the following regressions on a

cross-section of 77 countries:


               G(j) = α + βF(i) + γX + ε.


       Table 1 is adapted from KL and indicates that there is a strong positive relationship

between each of the financial development indicators, F(i), and the three growth indicators G(i),

long-run real per capita growth rates, capital accumulation and productivity growth. The sizes of

the coefficients are economically large. Ignoring causality, the coefficient on DEPTH implies

that a country that increased DEPTH from the mean of the slowest growing quartile of countries

(0.2) to the mean of the fastest growing quartile of countries (0.6) would have increased its per

capita growth rate by almost 1 percent per year. This is large. The difference between the

slowest growing 25 percent of countries and the fastest growing quartile of countries is about

five percent per annum over this 30-year period. Thus, the rise in DEPTH alone eliminates 20

percent of this growth difference. King and Levine (1993b,c) confirm these findings using

alternative econometric methods and robustness checks.
                                                                                                    43

       To examine whether finance simply follows growth, KL study whether the value of

financial depth in 1960 predicts the rate of economic growth, capital accumulation, and

productivity growth over the next 30 years. Table 2 summarizes these results. The dependent

variable is, respectively, real per capital GDP growth, real per capita capital stock growth, and

productivity growth averaged over the period 1960-1989. The financial indicator in each of

these regressions is the value of DEPTH in 1960. The regressions indicate that financial depth in

1960 is a good predictor of subsequent rates of economic growth, physical capital accumulation,

and economic efficiency improvements over the next 30 years even after controlling for income,

education, and measures of monetary, trade, and fiscal policy. The relationship between the

initial level of financial development and growth is economically large. For example, the

estimated coefficients suggest that if in 1960 Bolivia had increased its financial depth from 10

percent of GDP to the mean value for developing countries in 1960 (23 percent), then Bolivia

would have grown about 0.4 percent faster per annum, so that by 1990 real per capita GDP

would have been about 13 percent larger than it was. These examples do not consider what

actually causes the change in financial development. They simply illustrate the potentially large

long-term growth effects from changes in financial development.

       La Porta et al (2001) use an alternative indicator of financial development. They

examine the degree of public ownership of banks around the world. To the extent that publicly-

owned banks are less effective at acquiring information about firms, exerting corporate

governance, mobilizing savings, managing risk, and facilitating transactions, then this measure

provides direct evidence on connection between economic growth and the services provided by

financial intermediaries. The authors show that (1) higher degrees of public ownership are
                                                                                                 44

associated with lower levels of bank development and (2) high levels of public ownership of

banks are associated with slower economic growth.

       While addressing many of the weaknesses in earlier work, cross-country growth

regressions do not eliminate them. Thus, while KL show that finance predicts growth, they do

not deal formally with the issue of causality. While researchers improve upon past measures of

financial development, they only focus on one segment of the financial system, banks, and their

indicators do not directly measure the degree to which financial systems ameliorate information

and transaction costs.

       3. Adding stock markets to cross-country studies of growth.

       There are good reasons to study the relationship between long-run economic growth and

the operation of equity markets. First, as stressed above, theoretical debate exits on whether

larger, more liquid equity markets exert a positive or negative influence on economic growth,

capital accumulation, and productivity growth. Second, as stressed above, some theories focus

on the competing roles of banks and markets in funding corporate expansion, while others stress

that banks and markets may arise, coexist, and prosper by providing different financial functions

to the economy, and still other theories stress complementarities between banks and markets.

Thus, simultaneously considering the potential roles of banks and markets permits one to

distinguish among competing theories and provide evidence to policy makers on the independent

roles of markets and banks in the process of economic growth.

       Levine and Zervos (1998a, henceforth LZ) construct numerous measures of stock market

development to assess the relationship between stock market development and economic growth,

capital accumulation, and productivity growth in a sample of 42 countries over the period 1976-
                                                                                                     45

93.12 They control for many other potential growth determinants, including banking sector

development. Their study builds on pioneering work by Atje and Jovanovic (1993).

         For brevity, I focus on only one of LZ’s liquidity indicators, the turnover ratio. This

equals the total value of shares traded on a country's stock exchanges divided by stock market

capitalization (the value of listed shares on the country's exchanges). The turnover ratio is not a

direct measure of trading costs or of the ability to sell securities at posted prices. Rather, the

turnover ratio measures trading relative to the size of the market. It therefore reflects trading

frictions and information that induces transactions. This ratio exhibits substantial cross-country

variability. Very active markets such as Japan and the United States had turnover ratios of

almost 0.5 during the 1976-93 period, while less liquid markets, such as Bangladesh, Chile, and

Egypt have turnover ratios of 0.06 or less.

         As summarized in Table 3, LZ find that the initial level of stock market liquidity and the

initial level of banking development (Bank Credit) are positively and significantly correlated

with future rates of economic growth, capital accumulation, and productivity growth over the

next 18 years even after controlling for initial income, schooling, inflation, government

spending, the black market exchange rate premium, and political stability. Bank credit equals

bank credit to the private sector as a share of GDP.13

         These results are consistent with the view that stock market liquidity facilitates long-run

growth (Levine, 1991; Holmstrom and Tirole, 1993; Bencivenga et al., 1995), but inconsistent

with models that emphasize the negative aspects of stock markets liquidity (Bhide, 1993).

Furthermore, the results do not lend much support to models that emphasize the tensions

12
     These measures build on Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (1996a,b).
13
  Note, King and Levine’s (1993) PRIVY measures total credit flowing to the private sector,
while Levine and Zervos’s (1998) Bank Credit measures credit by banks to the private sector.
                                                                                                 46

between bank-based and market-based systems. Rather, the results suggest that stock markets

provide different financial functions from those provided by banks, or else they would not both

enter the growth regression significantly.

       The sizes of the coefficients also suggest an economically meaningful relationship. For

example, the estimated coefficient implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in initial stock

market liquidity (0.30) would increase per capita GDP growth by 0.80 percentage points per year

(2.7*0.3). Accumulating over 18 years, this implies real GDP per capita would have been over

15 percentage points higher by the end of the sample. Similarly, the estimated coefficient on

Bank Credit implies a correspondingly large growth effect. That is, a one-standard deviation

increase in Bank Credit (0.5) would increase growth by 0.7 percentage point per year (1.3*0.5).

Taken together, the results imply that if a country had increased both stock market liquidity and

bank development by one-standard deviation, then by the end of the 18-year sample period, real

per capita GDP would have been almost 30 percent higher and productivity would have been

almost 25 percent higher. As emphasized throughout, these conceptual experiments do not

consider the underlying causes of the change in the operation of the financial sector. The

examples simply illustrate the potential growth effects of financial development. LZ go onto

argue that the link between stock markets, banks, and growth runs most robustly through

productivity growth, rather than physical capital accumulation, which is consistent with some

theoretical models (Levine, 1991; Bencivenga, Smith, and Starr, 1995).

       LZ also find that stock market size, as measured by market capitalization divided by

GDP, is not robustly correlated with growth, capital accumulation, and productivity

improvements. This is consistent with theory. Simply listing on the national stock exchange
                                                                                                    47

does not necessarily foster resource allocation. Rather, it is the ability to trade the economy’s

productive technologies easily that influences resource allocation and growth.

       There are a number of weaknesses, however, associated with the LZ approach.

       First, while they show that stock market liquidity and bank development predict

economic growth, they do not deal formally with the issue of causality.

       Second, there are difficulties in measuring liquidity as discussed by Grossman and Miller

(1988). LZ do not measure the direct costs of conducting equity transactions. Furthermore, they

do not control for the possibility that the arrival of information and the processing of that

information may differ across countries and thereby induce cross-country differences in trading

that does not reflect liquidity as defined by theory. While LZ confirm their results using three

additional measures of liquidity, measurement issues remain.14

       Third, more broadly, the liquidity indicators measure domestic stock transactions on a

country's national stock exchanges. The physical location of the stock market, however, may not

necessarily matter for the provision of liquidity unless there are impediments to cross-location

transactions. Physical location will matter less – and this measurement problem will matter more

-- if economies become more financially integrated. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2002),

however, find that local financial conditions matter even in a single country – Italy. They show

that local financial conditions influence economic performance across the different regions of

Italy. That is, local financial development is an important determinant of the economic success

of an area even within a single country. Their results suggest that international financial



14
   LZ examine three additional measures of liquidity. First, the value traded ratio equals the total
value of domestic stocks traded on domestic exchanges as a share of GDP. This measures
trading relative to the size of the economy. The next two measures of liquidity measure trading
relative to stock price movements: (1) the value traded ratio divided by stock return volatility,
and (2) the turnover ratio divided by stock return volatility.
                                                                                                       48

integration is unlikely to eliminate the importance of national financial systems in the near

future.15

        Fourth, even more generally, the link between trading and future economic growth may

not represent a link between liquidity and growth as suggested by some theories (Levine, 1991;

Bencivenga, Smith, and Starr, 1995). The liquidity-stock market link may be generated by a

third factor that produces both a surge in trading and a subsequent acceleration in economic

growth, but where trading does not induce the growth acceleration. For instance, positive news

about a technology shock may elicit different opinions about which sectors and firms will benefit

most from the innovation. This would produce lots of trading today because of these differences

of opinion. The subsequently surge in economic growth is due to the positive technology shock,

not the increase in stock transactions. In this “model,” trading does not necessarily facilitate the

ability of the economy to exploit the growth benefits of the technology shock. From this

perspective, it is difficult to interpret the LZ results as implying that liquidity fosters economic

growth.

        Fifth, while LZ include measures of the functioning of stock markets and banks, they

exclude other components of the financial sector, e.g., bond markets and the financial services

provided by nonfinancial firms. Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2001) show that in many

countries private bond market capitalization is more than half the capitalization of national

equity markets and public bond markets are frequently larger than stock markets. Furthermore,

over the period 1980-1995, new issuances of private bonds were greater than public offerings of


15
   Levine and Schmukler (2003, 2004) find that international cross-listing by emerging market
firms can hurt the operation of the emerging market itself with potentially adverse implications
for economic development according to the conclusions in Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2002).
In terms of international banking, Levine (2004) finds that regulatory restrictions on foreign bank
entry hurt the efficiency of domestic banking sector operations.
                                                                                                     49

stock in many countries. Fink, Haiss, and Hristoforova (2003) examine the impact of bond

market development on real output in 13 highly developed economies over the period 1950-

2000. Using Granger causality tests and co-integration methods, the bulk of their evidence

indicates that bond market development influences real economic activity. Furthermore, Beck,

Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2001) show that life insurance and private pension fund assets rival

banks in some countries, while Berger, Hasan, and Klapper (2004) indicate that small,

community banks boost growth in many developing countries. Thus, more work remains on

incorporating bond markets and nonbank institutions into finance-growth literature.

       Sixth, stock markets may do more than provide liquidity. Stock markets may provide

mechanisms for hedging and trading the idiosyncratic risk associated with individual projects,

firms, industries, sectors, and countries. While a vast literature examines the pricing of risk,

there exists very little empirical evidence that directly links risk diversification services with

long-run economic growth. While LZ do not find a strong link between economic growth and

the ability of investors to diversify risk internationally, they have extremely limited data on

international integration. Future work needs to more fully assess the links between stock

markets, banks, and economic growth.


       4. Using instrumental variables in cross-country studies of growth

       While KL and LZ show that financial development predicts economic growth, these

results do not settle the issue of causality. It may simply be the case that financial markets

develop in anticipation of future economic activity. Thus, finance may be a leading indicator

rather than a fundamental cause.

       To assess whether the finance-growth relationship is driven by simultaneity bias, one

needs instrumental variables that explain cross-country differences in financial development but
                                                                                                  50

are uncorrelated with economic growth beyond their link with financial development and other

growth determinants. Levine (1998, 1999) and Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) use the La

Porta et al (henceforth LLSV, 1998) measures of legal origin as instrumental variables. In

particular, LLSV (1998) show that legal origin – whether a country’s Commercial/Company law

derives from British, French, German, or Scandinavian law – importantly shapes national

approaches to laws concerning creditors and the efficiency with which those laws are enforced.

Since finance is based on contracts, legal origins that produce laws that protect the rights of

external investors and enforce those rights effectively will do a correspondingly better job at

promoting financial development. 16 Indeed, LLSV (1998), Levine (1998, 1999, 2001), and

Levine, Loayza, and Beck (2000) trace the effect of legal origin to laws and enforcement and

then to financial development. Since most countries obtained their legal systems through

occupation and colonization, the legal origin variables may be plausibly treated as exogenous.

       Following Levine, Loayza, and Beck’s (henceforth LLB, 2000) analysis of 71 countries,

consider the generalized method of moments (GMM) regression:

               G(j) = α + βF(i) + γX + ε.

G(j) is real per capita GDP growth over the 1960-95 period. The legal origin indicators, Z, are

used as instrumental variables for the measures of financial development, F(i). X is treated as an

included exogenous variable. LLB use linear moment conditions, which amounts to the

requirement that the instrumental variables (Z) be uncorrelated with the error term (ε). The

economic meaning of these conditions is that legal origin may affect per capita GDP growth




 In terms of identifying why legal tradition influences the operation of the financial system, see
16

Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003b, 2004a).
                                                                                                   51

only through the financial development indicators and the variables in the conditioning

information set, X.

       LLB extend the King and Levine (1993a,b) measures of financial intermediary

development through to 1995, improve the deflating of the financial development indicators, and

add a new measure of overall financial development.17 The new measure of financial

development, Private Credit, equals the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private

sector divided by GDP. The measure isolates credit issued to the private sector and therefore

excludes credit issued to governments, government agencies, and public enterprises. Also, it

excludes credits issued by central banks. Unlike the LZ Bank Credit measures, Private Credit

included credits issued by non-deposit money bank. Not surprisingly, there is enormous cross-

country variation in Private Credit. Private Credit is less than 10 percent of GDP in Zaire, Sierra

Leone, Ghana, Haiti, and Syria, while it is greater than 85 percent of GDP in Switzerland, Japan,

the United States, Sweden, and the Netherlands.

       The LLB results indicate a very strong connection between the exogenous component of

financial intermediary development and long-run economic growth. They use various measures

of financial intermediary development and different conditioning information sets, i.e., different

X’s. They find that the exogenous component of financial development is closely tied to long-

run rates of per capita GDP growth. Furthermore, the data do not reject the test of the over-

identifying restrictions. The inability to reject the orthogonality conditions plus the finding that


17
   LLB (2000) improves upon past measures of financial intermediary development by more
accurately deflating nominal measures of financial intermediary liabilities and assets.
Specifically, while financial intermediary balance sheet items are measured at the end of the
year, GDP is measured over the year. LLB deflate end-of-year financial balance sheet items by
end of year consumer price indices (CPI) and deflate the GDP series by the annual CPI. Then,
they compute the average of the real financial balance sheet item in year t and t-1 and divide this
average by real GDP measured in year t.
                                                                                                       52

the legal origin instruments (Z) are highly correlated with financial intermediary development

indicators (i.e., the null hypothesis that the legal origin variables does not explain the financial

intermediary indicators is rejected at the 0.01 significance level), suggest that the instruments are

appropriate. These results indicate that the strong link between financial development and

growth is not due to simultaneity bias. The estimated coefficient can be interpreted as the effect

of the exogenous component of financial intermediary development on growth.

       LLB’s (2000) instrumental variable results also indicate an economically large impact of

financial development on growth. For example, India’s value of Private Credit over the period

1960-95 was 19.5 percent of GDP, while the mean value for developing countries was 25 percent

of GDP. The estimated coefficients in LLB suggest that an exogenous improvement in Private

Credit in India that had pushed it to the sample mean for developing countries would have

accelerated real per capita GDP growth by an additional 0.6 of a percentage point per year.18

Similarly, if Argentina had moved from its value of Private Credit (16) to the developing country

sample mean, it would have grown more than one percentage point faster per year. This is large

considering that growth only averaged about 1.8 percent per year over this period. As

emphasized throughout, however, these types of conceptual experiments must be treated as

illustrative because they do not account for how to increase financial intermediary development.

       While LLB interpret their results as implying that financial development boosts steady-

state growth, Aghion, Howitt, and Mayer-Foulkes (2005) challenge that conclusion. They first

develop a model of technological change that predicts that countries with levels of financial

development above a critical, threshold level will converge in growth rates. Among these
                                                                                                   53

countries, financial development positively influences the rate of convergence, so the financial

development exerts positive but diminishing influence on steady-state levels of real per capita

output. They find empirical support for the model’s predictions. Financial development

explains (i) whether there is convergence or not, and (ii) the rate of convergence (when there is

convergence), but Aghion, Howitt, and Mayer-Foulkes (2005) find that financial development

does not exert a direct effect on steady-state growth.



III.B. Panel, Time-Series, and Case-Studies of Finance and Growth

       Studies of finance and growth have also employed panel data techniques, pure time-series

methodologies, and case-studies to ameliorate a number of statistical problems with pure cross-

country investigations. This section discusses the panel approach in some depth and finishes

with shorter discussions of pure time-series and case-study approaches.

       1. The dynamic panel methodology

       LLB (2000) and Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000, henceforth BLL) use a panel GMM

estimator that improves upon pure cross-country work in three respects.

       The regression equation in levels can be specified in the following form:

              yi ,t = α ' X 1i ,t −1 + β ' X i2,t + µ i + λ t + ε i ,t
                                                                                   (1)

where y represents the dependent variable, X1 represents a set of lagged explanatory variables

and X2 a set of contemporaneous explanatory variables, µ is an unobserved country-specific




18
   To get this, note that LLB take logarithms of the financial intermediary indicators to reduce
the effect of outliers, so that the change in financial development is ln(25) - ln(19.5) = 0.25.
Then, use their smallest parameter estimate on Private Credit from their Table 3, which equals
2.5. Thus, the acceleration in growth is given by 2.5*(0.25) = 0.63.
                                                                                                                            54

effect , λ is a time-specific effect, ε is the time-varying error term, and i and t represent country

and (5-year) time period, respectively.

       The first benefit from moving to a panel is the ability to exploit the time-series and cross-

sectional variation in the data. LLB construct a panel that consists of data for 77 countries over

the period 1960-95. The data are averaged over seven non-overlapping five-year periods.

Moving to a panel incorporates the variability of the time-series dimension. Specifically, the

within-country standard deviation of Private Credit is 15%, which in the panel estimation is

added to the between-country standard deviation of 28%. Similarly, for real per capita GDP

growth, the within-country standard deviation is 2.4% and the between-country standard

deviation is 1.7%.19 This also raises a potential disadvantage from moving to panel data. With

panel data, we employ data averaged over five-year periods, yet the models we are using to

interpret the data are typically models of steady-state growth. To the extent that five years does

not adequately proxy for long-run relationships, the panel methods may imprecisely assess the

finance growth link.

       The second benefit from moving to a panel is that it avoids biases associated with cross-

country regressions: With cross-country regressions, the unobserved country-specific effect is

part of the error term so that correlation between µ and the explanatory variables results in biased

coefficient estimates. Furthermore, if the lagged dependent variable is included in X1 (which is

the norm in cross-country regressions), then the country-specific effect is certainly correlated

with X1. First differencing the regression equation eliminates the country-specific effect.

                yi ,t − yi ,t −1 = α '( X 1i ,t −1 − X 1i ,t − 2) + β '( X i2,t − X i2,t −1) + (ε i ,t − ε i ,t −1)
                                                                                                                      (2)

19
   The within-country standard deviation is calculated using the deviations from country
averages, whereas the between-country standard deviation is calculated from the country
averages.
                                                                                                        55

This, however, introduces correlation between the new error term ε i,t - ε i,t-1 and the lagged

dependent variable y i,t-1 – y i,t-2 when it is included in X1i,t-1 – X1i,t-2. One can use lagged values of

the explanatory variables in levels as instruments. Assuming (i) no serial correlation and (ii) the

explanatory variables X (X= [X1 X2]) are weakly exogenous, the following moment conditions

hold.

                 E [ X i ,t − s ⋅ (ε i ,t − ε i ,t −1)] = 0   for s ≥ 2; t = 3,..., T   (3)

This difference estimator consists of the regression in differences plus equation (3).

        The third benefit from moving to a panel is that it permits the use of instrumental

variables for all regressors and thereby provides more precise estimates of the finance-growth

relationship. As discussed, researchers use legal origin instruments to extract the exogenous

component of financial development. These pure cross-sectional estimators, however, do not

control for the endogeneity of all the other explanatory variables. This can lead to inappropriate

inferences on the coefficient on financial development.

        Building on this difference panel estimator, Arellano and Bover (1995) propose a system

estimator that jointly estimates the regression in levels (equation 1) and the equation in

differences (equation 2) in order to (i) re-incorporate the cross-country variation from the levels

regression and (ii) reduce the likelihood that weak instruments bias the estimated coefficients

and standard errors.

        2. Dynamic panel results on financial intermediation and growth

        LLB use the system estimator to examine the relationship between financial intermediary

development and growth, while BLL examine the relationship between financial development

and the sources of growth, i.e., productivity growth, physical capital accumulation, and savings.

They examine an assortment of indicators of financial intermediary development and also use a
                                                                                                    56

variety of conditioning information sets to assess the robustness of the results (Levine and

Renelt, 1992). Here, we summarize the results in Table 4 using the Private Credit measure of

financial development described above and a simple set of control variables.

       The results indicate a positive relationship between the exogenous component of

financial development and economic growth, productivity growth, and capital accumulation.

The regressions pass the standard specification tests. Table 4 presents both (1) instrumental

variable results using a pure a cross-sectional analysis where the legal origin variables are the

instruments and (2) the dynamic panel results just described. Remarkably the coefficient

estimates are very similar using the two procedures and economically significant. Thus, the

large, positive relationship between economic growth and Private Credit does not appear to be

driven by simultaneity bias, omitted country-specific effects, or the routine use of lagged

dependent variables in cross-country growth regressions. While BLL go on to argue that the

finance-capital accumulation link is not robust to alternative specifications, they demonstrate a

robust link between financial development indicators and both economic growth and

productivity growth.

       The regression coefficients suggest an economically large impact of financial

development on economic growth. For example, Mexico's value for Private Credit over the

period 1960-95 was 22.9% of GDP. An exogenous increase in Private Credit that had brought it

up to the sample median of 27.5% would have resulted in a 0.4 percentage point higher real per

capita GDP growth per year.20

       While BLL and LLB examine linear models, recent research suggests that the impact of

financial development on capital accumulation, productivity growth, and overall real per capita
                                                                                                     57

GDP growth may depend importantly on other factors. Using the same econometric methods

and data, Rioja and Valev (2004a) find that finance boosts growth in rich countries primarily by

speeding-up productivity growth, while finance encourages growth in poorer countries primarily

by accelerating capital accumulation. Furthermore, Rioja and Valev (2004b) find that the impact

may be nonlinear. They find that countries with very low levels of financial development

experience very little growth acceleration from a marginal increase in financial development,

while the affect is larger for rich countries and particular large for middle-income countries. It

would be nice to know, however, what produces these nonlinearities. Finally, Rousseau and

Wachtel (2002) show that the positive impact of financial development on growth diminishes

with higher rates of inflation.

         Emphasizing that not all indicators of financial development measure the same forces,

Benhabib and Spiegel (2001) examine the relationship between an assortment of financial

intermediary development indicators and economic growth, investment, and total factor

productivity growth. While they use a panel estimator, they do not use the system estimator

described above that allows for the endogeneity of all the regressors and the routine use of

lagged dependent variables. They find that the indicators of financial development are correlated

with both total factor productivity growth and the accumulation of both physical and human

capital. Their paper raises an important qualification, however. Different indicators of financial

development are linked with different components of growth (total factor productivity, physical

capital accumulation, and human capital accumulation). Their findings reiterate an important

qualification running throughout this survey: it is difficult to measure financial development and

link empirical constructs with theoretical concepts.

20
     This results follows from Ln (27.5) – Ln (22.9) = 0.18 and 0.18*2.4=0.43, where 2.4 is the
                                                                                                    58

       Loayza and Ranciere (2002) extend this line of empirical inquiry by differentiating

between the long-run and short-run relationships connecting finance and economic activity.

They note that short-run surges in bank lending can actually signal the onset of financial crises

and economic stagnation. They stress that it is therefore crucial to consider simultaneously the

short-run and long-run effects of financial development. For instance, while finance is positively

associated with economic growth in a broad cross-section of countries, this relationship does not

hold in Latin America, which has been subject to severe and repeated banking crises. Using a

panel, Loayza and Ranciere (2002) estimate an encompassing model of long-run and short-run

effects. Using the LLB measure of financial intermediary development (Private Credit), they

find that a positive long-run relationship between financial development and growth co-exists

with a generally negative short-run link.21


       3. Dynamic panel results and stock market and bank development

       Rousseau and Wachtel (2000) examine the relationship between stock markets, banks,

and growth, using annual data and the difference estimator. Beck and Levine (2004) use data

averaged over five-year periods to focus on longer-run growth factors, use the system estimator




parameter estimate from the panel regression.
21
  For more on distinguishing the short-run and long-run effects of financial development, see
Fisman and Love (2004).
                                                                                                    59

to mitigate potential biases associated with the difference estimator, and extend the sample

through 1998 (from 1995).22

       Table 5 indicates that the exogenous component of both stock market development and

bank development help predict economic growth. As shown, the coefficient estimates from the

two methods are very similar. The panel procedure passes the standard specification tests, which

increases confidence in the assumptions underlying the econometric methodology. While not

shown, stock market capitalization is not closely associated with growth. Thus, it is not listing

per se that is important for growth; rather, it is the ability of agents to exchange ownership claims

on an economy’s productive technologies that is relevant for economic growth.

       The Table 5 estimates are economically meaningful and consistent with magnitudes

obtained using different methods. If Mexico’s Turnover Ratio had been at the average of the

OECD countries (68%) instead of the actual 36% during the period 1996-98, it would have

grown 0.6 percentage points faster per year. Similarly, if its Bank Credit had been at the average

of all OECD countries (71%) instead of the actual 16%, it would have grown 2.6 percentage

points faster per year. These results suggest that the exogenous components of both bank and

stock market development have an economically large impact on economic growth.

4. Time series studies

       A substantial time-series literature examines the finance-growth relationship using a

variety of time-series techniques. These studies frequently use Granger-type causality tests and

vector autoregressive (VAR) procedures to examine the nature of the finance-growth relationship

22
  There are additional econometric problems created when studying stock markets, banks, and
economic growth. There are many fewer countries and years when incorporating stock markets,
which can lead to over-fitting of the data and potential mis-leading inferences. Beck and Levine
(2004) describe and use variants of the dynamic panel estimator to reduce the likelihood that
over-fitting biases the results.
                                                                                                   60

(e.g., Arestis and Demetriades, 1997). Research has progressed by using better measures of

financial development, employing more powerful econometric techniques, and by examining

individual countries in much greater depth.

       Some initial time-series studies emphasize the importance of measuring financial

development accurately, suggesting that studies that use more precise measures of financial

development tend to find a growth-enhancing impact of financial development. Jung (1986) and

Demetriades and Hussein (1996) use measures of financial development such as the ratio of

money to GDP. They find the direction of causality frequently runs both ways, especially for

developing economies. However, Neusser and Kugler (1998) use measures of the value-added

provided by the financial system instead of simple measures of the size of the financial system.

They find that finance boosts growth. Furthermore, Rousseau and Wachtel (1998) conduct time-

series tests of financial development and growth for five countries over the past century using

measures of financial development that include the assets of both banks and non-banks. They

document that the dominant direction of causality runs from financial development to economic

growth. Finally, Arestis, Demetriades and Luintel (2000) substantially augment time-series of

finance and growth by using measures of both stock market and bank development. They find

additional support for the view that finance stimulates growth but raise some cautions on the size

of the relationship. They use quarterly data and apply time series methods to five developed

economies and show that while both banking sector and stock market development explain

subsequent growth, the effect of banking sector development is substantially larger than that of

stock market development. The sample size, however, is very limited and it is not clear whether

the use of quarterly data and a vector error correction model fully abstract from high frequency
                                                                                                     61

factors influencing the stock market, bank, and growth nexus to focus on long-run economic

growth.

       Additional econometric sophistication has also been brought to bear on the finance and

growth question. In a broad study of 41 countries over the 1960-1993, Xu (2000) uses a VAR

approach that permits the identification of the long-term cumulative effects of finance on growth

by allowing for dynamic interactions among the explanatory variables.23 Xu (2000) rejects the

hypothesis that finance simply follows growth. Rather, the analyses indicate that financial

development is important for long-run growth. More recently, Christopoulos and Tsionas (2004)

note that many time-series studies yield unreliable results due to the short time spans of typical

data sets. Thus, they use panel unit root tests and panel cointegration analyses to examine the

relationship between financial development and economic growth in ten developing countries to

yield causality inferences within a panel context that increases sample size. In contrast to

Demetriades and Hussein (1996), Christopoulos and Tsionas (2004) find strong evidence in

favor of the hypothesis that long-run causality runs from financial development to growth and

that there is no evidence of bi-directional causality. Furthermore, they find a unique

cointegrating vector between growth and financial development, and emphasize the long-run

nature of the relationship between finance and growth.

       There has also been a movement away from applying time-series methods to a variety of

countries and toward examining individual countries, which allows research to design country-

specific measures of financial development and expand the time-series dimension of the analyses

in some cases. Rousseau and Sylla (1999) expand Rousseau’s (1998) examination of the

historical role of finance in U.S. economic growth to include stock markets. They use a set of
                                                                                                  62

multivariate time-series models that relate measures of banking and equity market activity to

investment, imports, and business incorporations over the 1790-1850 period. Rousseau and

Sylla (1999) find strong support for the theory of “finance led growth” in United States. Moving

beyond the U.S., Rousseau and Sylla (2001) study seventeen countries over the period 1850-

1997. They also find evidence consistent with the view the financial development stimulated

economic growth in these economies. In a study of the Meiji period in Japan (1868-1884),

Rousseau (1999) uses a variety of VAR procedures and concludes that the financial sector was

instrumental in promoting Japan’s explosive growth prior to the First World War. In a different

study, Rousseau (1998) examines the impact of financial innovation in the U.S. on financial

depth over the period 1872-1929. Innovation is proxied by reductions in the loan-deposit spread.

The impact on the size of the financial intermediary sector is assessed using unobservable

components methods. The paper finds that permanent reductions of 1% in the spread of New

York banks are associated with increases in financial depth that range from 1.7% to nearly 4%.

While not a direct link to growth, these findings develop a direct link running from financial

innovation to increases in financial depth, which is commonly associated with economic growth

in other studies.

        Bekaert, Harvey, Lundblad (2001, 2004) examine the effects of opening equity markets

to foreign participation.24 One statistical innovation in their work is the use of over-lapping data.

Many time-series studies use annual observations and even quarterly data to maximize the

information included their analyses. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2004), however, use data

23
  In a narrower study, Luintel and Khan (1999) find some evidence of bi-directional causality
between finance and growth in VAR analysis of developing countries.
24
   For further analyses on the growth effects of international financial liberalization, see Henry
(2000, 2003), Levine and Zervos (1998b), Edison, et al (2002), and Klein and Olivei (2002) and
the references therein.
                                                                                                 63

averaged over five-year periods to focus on growth rather than higher frequency relationships,

but they use over-lapping data to avoid the loss of information inherent in using non-over-

lapping data. Specifically, one observation includes data averaged from 1990-1995 and the next

period includes data averaged from 1991-1996. They adjust the standard errors accordingly and

conduct an array of sensitivity checks, though the procedure does not formally deal with

simultaneity bias. Consistent with Levine and Zervos (1998a), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad

(2001, 2004) show that financial liberalization boosts economic growth by improving the

allocation of resources and the investment rate


5. Novel case-studies

       Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) undertake a fascinating examination of the impact of

finance on economic growth by examining individual states of the United States. Since the early

1970s, 35 states relaxed impediments on intrastate branching. They estimate the change in

economic growth rates after branch reform relative to a control group of states that did not

reform. They use a pooled time-series, cross-sectional dataset to assess the impact of liberalizing

branching restrictions on state growth.

       Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) show that branch reform boosted bank-lending quality and

accelerated real per capita growth rates, while Dehejia and Lleras-Muney (2003) confirm and

extend these findings by also examining the impact of deposit insurance. By comparing states

within the United States, the paper eliminates problems associated with country-specific factors.

The paper also uses a natural identifying condition, the change in branching restrictions, to trace

through the impact of financial development on economic growth. Importantly, the paper finds

little evidence that branch reform boosted lending. Rather, branch reform accelerated economic
                                                                                                      64

growth by improving the quality of bank loans and the efficiency of capital allocation.25 Some

issues remain, however. While Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) control for state investment and tax

receipts, it is difficult to control fully for other factors influencing growth in the individual states.

Similarly, while the authors show that (i) there is no correlation between the business cycle and

the timing of regulation and (ii) deregulation does not forecast a boom in lending, it is difficult to

rule out the possibility that states liberalize banking due to expected growth-enhancing structural

changes in the economy that do require more lending but better lending. Dehejia and Lleras-

Muney (2003) also examine the growth experiences of states across the U.S. They too find that

financial development boosts growth, but they also show that deposit insurance frequently

induced indiscriminate credit expansions with adverse effects on growth. Again, the results

suggest that it is the quality, not the quantity, of lending that matters. In sum, these innovative

studies provide empirical support for the view that well-functioning banks improve the allocation

of capital and hence economic growth.

        In terms of the early years of the United States, Wright (2002) provides a lucid and

detailed examination of how the U.S. financial system drove America’s transformation after

1780 from an agricultural economy to a thriving industrial power. The book’s core thesis is that

“… the U.S. financial system created the conditions necessary for the sustained domestic

economic growth … that scholars know occurred in the nineteenth century. Most impressively,

Wright’s (2002) research is filled with specific examples of the emergence of new financial

arrangement to facilitate the acquisition of information about firms (p. 26-50), to monitor


25
  Note, Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) show that with bank deregulation, better-managed, lower
costs banks expand at the expense of inefficient banks. On an international level, Demirguc-
Kunt, Laeven, and Levine (2003) show that regulatory restrictions reduce banking sector
efficiency and Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003d) find that regulatory restrictions on
bank competition tend to increase the fragility of banks.
                                                                                                       65

managers and to align the interests of creditors and firm insiders (p.37-41), and to facilitate the

trading, hedging, and pooling of risk (p. 51 75). For example, in response to principal-agent

problems, U.S. corporations in the 18th century increasingly forced managers to hold large

quantities of stock in the corporation to align their personal financial interests with those of the

firm (p. 39). As another example, after suffering through high default rates, U.S. bankers

quickly learned to monitor borrowers more carefully by continuously reviewing the cash-flows

of borrowers to identify unusual activity, forcing debtors to report their actions at regular board

meetings and granting additional privileges only to debtors demonstrating good behavior, and

forcing borrowers to allocate funds toward very specific investments along with other very

restrictive covenants (p.34-35). While the book does not provide formal statistical evidence that

financial development accelerated economic growth in the early decades after U.S.

independence, Wright (2002) make a different, distinguishing contribution: He documents how

specific financial contracts, markets, and institutions arose to ease information and transactions

costs and hence influence the resource allocation decisions of a country.

        Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2002) examine the individual regions of Italy. Using an

extraordinary dataset on households and financial services across Italy, they examine the effects

of differences in local financial development on economic activity across the regions of Italy.

Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2002) find that local financial development (i) enhances the

probability that an individual starts a business, (ii) increases industrial competition, and (iii)

promotes the growth of firms. These results are weaker for large firms, which can more easily

raise funds outside of the local area. This study ameliorates many of the weaknesses associated

with examining growth across countries.
                                                                                                   66

       Consider also Haber’s (1991, 1997) impressive comparison of industrial and capital

market development in Brazil, Mexico, and the United States between 1830 and 1930. Using

firm-level data, he finds that capital market development affected industrial composition and

national economic performance. Specifically, Haber shows that when Brazil overthrew the

monarchy in 1889 and formed the First Republic, it also dramatically liberalized restrictions on

Brazilian financial markets. The liberalization gave more firms easier access to external finance.

Industrial concentration fell and industrial production boomed. While Mexico also liberalized

financial sector policies, the liberalization was much more mild under the Diaz dictatorship

(1877-1911), which “ . . . relied on the financial and political support of a small in-group of

powerful financial capitalists." (p. 561) As a result, the decline in concentration and the increase

in economic growth were much weaker in Mexico than it was in Brazil. Haber (1997) concludes

that (1) international differences in financial development significantly impacted the rate of

industrial expansion and (2) under-developed financial systems that restrict access to institutional

sources of capital also impeded industrial expansion.

       In a recent firm-level study of China, Allen, Qian, and Qian (2005) find that the linkages

between the law, finance and growth are complex. Consistent with broad cross-country findings

discussed above, they find that poor legal protection of minority shareholder rights hinders the

growth of publicly listed firms (as well as state-owned firms). However, private firms and firms

owned by local governments have grown rapidly in absence of sound formal rules governing

shareholder rights. This suggests the existence of effective alternative governance and financing

mechanisms that promote firm growth. Additional evidence comes from Cull and Xu (2004),

who find that private ownership is associated with firm reinvesting a greater proportion of their

earnings than in firms with greater public sector ownership.
                                                                                                   67

       Firm-level evidence from France also suggests the importance of well-functioning

financial intermediaries for economic growth. Bertrand, Schoar, and Thesmar (2004) examine

the impact of deregulation in 1985 that eliminated government intervention in bank lending

decisions and fostered greater competition in the credit market. They find that after deregulation,

banks bailed out poorly performing firms less frequently, increased the cost of capital to poorly

performing firms, and induced an increase in allocative efficiency across firms. This lowered

industry concentration ratios and boosted both entry and exit rates for firms. While not directly

tied to growth, the paper suggests that better functioning banks not only influence bank-firm

relations they also exert a first-order impact on the structure and dynamic of product markets.

       In two classic studies, Cameron, Crisp, Patrick, and Tilly (1967) and McKinnon (1973)

study respectively (1) the historical relationships between banking development and the early

stages of industrialization for England (1750-1844), Scotland (1750-1845), France (1800-1870),

Belgium (1800-1875), Germany (1815-1870), Russia (1860-1914), and Japan (1868-1914) and

(2) the relationship between the financial system and economic development in Argentina,

Brazil, Chile, Germany, Korea, Indonesia, and Taiwan in the post World War II period. This

research does not use formal statistical analysis to resolve causality issues. Instead, the

researchers carefully examine the evolution of the political, legal, policy, industrial, and financial

systems of the country. The country-case studies document critical interactions among financial

intermediaries, financial markets, government policies, and the financing of industrialization.

While well-aware of the analytical limitations, these authors bring a wealth of country specific

information to bear on the role of finance in economic growth. Cameron (1967b) concludes that

especially in Scotland and Japan, but also in Belgium, Germany, England, and Russia, the
                                                                                                   68

banking system played a positive, growth-inducing role.26 McKinnon (1973) interprets the mass

of evidence emerging from his country-case studies as suggesting that better functioning

financial systems support faster economic growth. Disagreement exists over many of these

individual cases, and it is extremely difficult to isolate the importance of any single factor in the

process of economic growth. Nonetheless, the body of country-studies suggests that, while the

financial system responds to demands from the nonfinancial sector, well-functioning financial

systems have, in some cases during some time periods, importantly spurred economic growth.


III.C. Industry and Firm Level Studies of Finance and Growth

       To better understand the relationship between financial development and economic

growth, researchers have employed both industry-level and firm-level data across a broad cross-

section of countries. These studies seek to resolve causality issues and to document in greater

detail the mechanisms, if any, through which finance influences economic growth.




26
   A valuable debate exists concerning the case of Scotland between 1750 and 1845. Scotland
began the period with per capita income of less than one-half of England's. By 1845, however,
per capita income was about the same. While recognizing that the "... dominant political event
affecting Scotland's potentialities for economic development was the Union of 1707, which made
Scotland an integral part of the United Kingdom" (Cameron, 1967a, p. 60), Cameron argues that
Scotland's superior banking system is one of the few noteworthy features that can help explain its
comparatively rapid growth. Some researchers, however, suggest that England did not suffer
from a dearth of financial services because nonfinancial enterprises provided financial services in
England that Cameron's (1967a) measures of formal financial intermediation omit. Others argue
that Scotland had rich natural resources, a well-educated work force, access to British colonial
markets, and started from a much lower level of income per capita than England. Consequently,
it is not surprising that Scotland enjoyed a period of rapid convergence. Finally, still others
disagree with the premise that Scotland had a well-functioning financial system and emphasize
the deficiencies in the Scottish system (Sidney Pollard and Dieter Ziegler, 1992).
                                                                                                    69


       1. Industry level analyses

       Consider first the influential study by Rajan and Zingales (henceforth RZ, 1998). They

argue that better-developed financial intermediaries and markets help overcome market frictions

that drive a wedge between the price of external and internal finance. Lower costs of external

finance facilitate firm growth and new firm formation. Therefore, industries that are naturally

heavy users of external finance should benefit disproportionately more from greater financial

development than industries that are not naturally heavy users of external finance. From this

perspective, if researchers can identify which industries are “naturally heavy users” of external

finance – i.e., if they can identify which industries rely heavily on external finance in an

economy with few market frictions – then this establishes a natural test: Do industries that are

naturally heavy users of external finance grow faster in economies with better developed

financial systems? If they do, then this supports the view that financial development spurs

growth by facilitating the flow of external finance.

       RZ assume that (1) financial markets in the U.S. are relatively frictionless, (2) in a

frictionless financial system, technological factors influence the degree to which an industry uses

external finance, and (3) the technological factors influencing external finance are constant (or

reasonably constant) across countries. They then examine whether industries that are

technologically more dependent on external finance – as defined by external use of funds in the

U.S. – grow comparatively faster in countries that are more financially developed. This

approach allows RZ (1) to study a particular mechanism, external finance, through which finance

operates rather than simply assessing links between finance and growth and (2) to exploit within-

country differences concerning industries.
                                                                                                      70

        RZ develop a new methodology to examine the finance-growth relationship. Consider

their formulation.


Growthi ,k = ∑ α j Country j + ∑ β l Industryl + γSharei ,k + δ ( External k * FDi ) + ε i ,k . (4)
               j                  l



Growthi,k is the average annual growth rate of value added or the growth in the number of

establishments, in industry k and country i, over the period 1980-90. Country and Industry are

country and industry dummies, respectively. Sharei,k is the share of industry k in manufacturing

in country i in 1980. Externalk is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal

funds for U.S. firms in the industry k between 1980-90. FDi is an indicator of financial

development for country i. RZ interact the external dependence of an industry (External) with

financial development (FD), where the estimated coefficient on the interaction, δ1, is the focus of

their analysis. Thus, if δ is significant and positive, then this implies that an increase in financial

development (FDi) will induce a bigger impact on industrial growth (Growthi,k) if this industry

relies heavily on external finance (Externalk) than if this industry is not a naturally heavy user of

external finance. They do not include financial development independently because they focus

on within-country, within-industry growth rates. The dummy variables for industries and

countries correct for country and industry specific characteristics that might determine industry

growth patterns. RZ thus isolate the effect that the interaction of external dependence and

financial development/structure has on industry growth rates relative to country and industry

means. By including the initial share of an industry, this controls for a convergence effect:

industries with a large share might grow more slowly, suggesting a negative sign on γ. RZ

include the share in manufacturing rather than the level to focus on within-country, within-

industry growth rates.
                                                                                                    71

       RZ use data on 36 industries across 42 countries, though the U.S is dropped from the

analyses since it is used to identify external dependence. To measure financial development, RZ

examine (a) total capitalization, which equals the summation of stock market capitalization and

domestic credit as a share of GDP and (b) accounting standards. As RZ discuss, there are

problems with these measures. Stock market capitalization does not capture the actual amount of

capital raised in equity markets. Indeed, some countries provide tax incentives for firms to list,

which artificially boosts stock market capitalization without indicating greater external financing

or stock market development. Also, as discussed above, stock market capitalization does not

necessarily reflect how well the market facilitates exchange. The accounting standards indicator

is a rating of the quality of the annual financial reports issued by companies within a country.

The highest value is 90. RZ use the accounting standards measure as a positive signal of the ease

with which firms can raise external funds, while noting that it is not a direct measure of the

actual amount of external funds that are raised. Beck and Levine (2002) confirm the RZ findings

using alternative measures of financial development.

       As summarized in Table 6, RZ find that the coefficient estimate for the interaction

between external dependence and total capitalization measure, Externalk*Total Capitalizationi, is

positive and statistically significant at the one-percent level. This implies that an increase in

financial development disproportionately boosts the growth of industries that are naturally heavy

users of external finance. 27




27
  Fisman and Love (2003b) critique the Rajan and Zingales (1998) methodology, arguing that it
does not accurately test whether financial development boosts growth in externally dependent
industries. They argue that the method simply tests whether financial intermediaries allow firms
to respond to global shocks to growth opportunities, rather than the extent to which financial
systems foster the growth of industries with an inherent financial dependence.
                                                                                                   72

       RZ note that the economic magnitude is quite substantial. Compare Machinery, which is

an industry at the 75th percentile of dependence (0.45), with Beverages, which has low

dependence (0.08) and is at the 25th percentile of dependence. Now, consider Italy, which has

high total capitalization (0.98) at the 75th percentile of the sample, and the Philippines, which is

at the 25th percentile of total capitalization with a value of 0.46. Due to differences in financial

development, the coefficient estimates predict that Machinery should grow 1.3 percent faster

than Beverages in Italy in comparison to the Philippines.28 The actual difference is 3.4, so the

estimated value of 1.3 is quite substantial. Thus, financial development has a substantial impact

on industrial growth by influencing the availability of external finance. RZ conduct a large

number of robustness checks and show that financial development influences industrial growth

both through the expansion of existing establishments and through the formation of new

establishments.29

       Instead of examining the impact of banking sector development on the growth of

externally dependent firms, recent work studies the impact of banking market structure and bank

competition on industrial development. Cetorelli and Gambera (2001) examine the role played

28
   More specifically, let I indicate Italy, P indicate the Philippines, M indicate machinery, B
indicate beverages, and g represent the growth of an industry in a country, then the differential
growth rate of machinery and beverages in Italy from the difference in growth rate of machinery
and beverages in the Philippines is as follows: [{g(I,M)} – {g(P,M}] – [{g(I,B)} – {g(P,B}].
Now, inserting estimates one obtains 1.3 =

[{0.069*0.45*0.98} – {0.069*0.45*0.46}] – [{0.069*0.08*0.98} – {0.069*0.08*0.46}].
29
   Beck (2002, 2003) extends the work by RZ to examine the linkages between financial
development and international trade patterns. Beck (2002) develops a theoretical model in which
higher levels of financial development provide countries with a comparative advantage in sectors
with greater scale economies and presents econometric evidence consistent with this prediction.
Using cross-industry and cross-country data on trade flows, Beck (2003) finds that countries with
more developed financial systems tend to be net exporters in industries that are heavy users of
external finance. The results of both papers are consistent with the view that financial
development influences the structure of trade balances.
                                                                                                 73

by banking sector concentration on firm access to capital. Using the RZ methodology, they

show that bank concentration promotes the growth of industries that are naturally heavy users of

external finance, but bank concentration has a depressing effect on overall economic growth.

Claessens and Laeven (2004) disagree, however. They note that industrial organization theory

indicates that market concentration is not necessarily a good proxy for the competitiveness of an

industry. Consequently, they estimate an industrial organization-based measure of banking

system competition. Claessens and Laeven (2004) then show that industries that are naturally

heavy users of external finance grow faster in countries with more competitive banking systems.

They find no evidence that banking industry concentration explains industrial sector growth.

The results support the view that banking sector competition fosters the provision of growth

enhancing financial services.

       Building on RZ, Claessens and Laeven (2003) examine the joint impact of financial

sector development and the quality of property rights protection on the access of firms to

external finance and the allocation of resources. In particularly, they show that financial sector

development hurts growth by hindering the access of firms to external finance and insecure

property rights hurts growth by leading to a suboptimal allocation of resources by distorting

firms into investing excessively in tangible assets. Thus, even when controlling for property

rights protection, financial development continues to influence economic growth. This

conclusion is different, however, from Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff’s (2002) study of post-

communist countries. They find that property rights dominate access to external finance in

explaining the degree to which firms reinvest their profits.

       Extending the RZ approach, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Laeven, and Levine (2004) highlight

another channel linking finance and growth: removing impediments to small firms. They
                                                                                                     74

examine whether industries that are naturally composed of small firms grow faster in financially

developed economies. More specifically, as in RZ, they assume that U.S. financial markets are

relatively frictionless, so that the sizes of firms within industries in the U.S. reflect technological

factors, not financial system frictions. Based on the U.S., they identify the benchmark average

firm-size of each industry. Then, comparing across countries and industries, Beck et al (2004)

show that industries that are naturally composed of smaller firms grow faster in countries with

better-developed financial systems. This result is robust to controlling for the RZ measure of

external dependence. These results are consistent with the view that small firms face greater

informational and contracting barriers to raising funds than large firms, so that financial

development is particularly important for the growth of industries that, for technological reasons,

are naturally composed of small firms.

       Using a different strategy, Wurgler (2000) also employs industry-level data to examine

the relation between financial development and economic growth. Using industry-level data

across 65 countries for the period 1963-1995, he computes an investment elasticity that gauges

the extent to which a country increases investment in growing industries and decreases

investment in declining ones. This is an important contribution because it directly measures the

degree to which each country’s financial system reallocates the flow of credit. Wurgler (2000)

uses standard measures of financial development. He shows that countries with higher levels of

financial development both increase investment more in growing industries and decrease

investment more in declining industries than financial underdeveloped economies.

       2. Firm level analyses of finance and growth

       Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (henceforth DM, 1998) examine whether financial

development influences the degree to which firms are constrained from investing in profitable
                                                                                                  75

growth opportunities. They focus on the use of long-term debt and external equity in funding

firm growth. As in RZ, DM focuses on a particular mechanism through which finance

influences growth: does greater financial development remove impediments to the exploitation

of profitable growth opportunities. Rather than focusing on the external financing needs of an

industry as in RZ, DM estimate the external financing needs of each individual firm in the

sample.

       DM note that simple correlations between firms’ growth and financial development do

not control for differences in the amount of external financing needed by firms in the same

industry in different countries. These differences may arise because firms in different countries

employ different technologies, because profit rates may differ across countries, or because

investment opportunities and demand may differ. To control for these differences at the firm-

level, DM calculate the rate at which each firm can grow using (1) only its internal funds and (2)

only its internal funds and short-term borrowing. They then compute the percentage of firms that

grow at rates that exceed each of these two estimated rates. This yields estimates of the

proportion of firms in each economy relying on external financing to grow.

       The firm-level data consist of accounting data for the largest publicly traded

manufacturing firms in 26 countries. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Levine, and Maksimovic (2001)

confirm the findings using an extended sample. DM estimate a firm’s potential growth rate

using the textbook “percentage of sales” financial planning model (Higgins 1974). This approach

relates a firm’s growth rate of sales to its need for investment funds, based on three simplifying

assumptions. First, the ratio of assets used in production to sales is constant. Second, the firm’s

profits per unit of sales are constant. Finally, the economic deprecation rate equals the
                                                                                                     76

accounting depreciation rate. Under these assumptions, the firm’s financing need in period t of a

firm growing at gt percent per year is given by

                EFN t = g t * Assetst − (1 − g t ) * Earningst * bt                   (5)

where EFNt is the external financing need and BT is the fraction of the firm’s earnings that are

retained for reinvestment at time t. Earnings are calculated after interest and taxes. While the first

term on the right-hand side of equation (5) denotes the required investment for a firm growing at

gt percent, the second term is the internally available funds for investment, taking the firms’

dividend payout as given.

       The short-term financed growth rate STFGt is the maximum growth rate that can be

obtained if the firm reinvests all its earnings and obtains enough short-term external resources to

maintain the ratio of its short-term liabilities to assets. To compute STFGt, we first replace total

assets in (5) by assets that are not financed by new short-term credit, calculated as total assets

times one minus the ratio of short-term liabilities to total assets. STFGt is then given by

                           SGt = ROLTCt /(1 − ROLTCt )                        (6)

where ROLTCt is the ratio of earnings, after tax and interest, to long-term capital. The definition

of STFG thus assumes that the firm does not access any long-term borrowings or sales of equity

to finance its growth.30




30
   The estimates of internally financed growth (IFG) and short-term financed growth (STFG) are
conservative. First, they assume that a firm utilizes the unconstrained sources of finance- trade
credit in the case IFG and trade credit and short-term borrowing in the case of STFG - no more
intensively than it is currently doing. Second, firms with spare capacities do not need to invest
and may grow at a faster rate than predicted without accessing external resources. Third, the
financial planning model abstracts from technical advances that reduce the requirements for
investment capital. Thus, it may overstate the costs of growth and underestimate the maximum
growth rate attainable using unconstrained sources of financing.
                                                                                                   77

       DM then calculate the proportion of firms whose growth rates exceed the estimate of the

maximum growth rate that can be financed by relying only on internal and short-term financing,

PROPORTION_FASTER.

       To analyze whether financial development spurs firm growth, DM run the following

cross-country regression

              PROPORTION _ FASTER = β 1 FDi ,t + β 2 CVi ,t , + ε i ,t              (7)

where FD is financial development, CV is a set of control variables, and ε is the error term. To

measure financial development, DM use (a) the ratio of market capitalization to GDP (Market

Capitalization/GDP), (b) Turnover, which equals the total value of shares traded divided by

market capitalization, and (c) Bank Assets/GDP, which equals the ratio of domestic assets of

deposit banks divided by GDP. Thus, DM include all domestic assets of deposit banks, not just

credit to the private sector. As control variables, DM experiment with different combinations of

control variables, including economic growth, inflation, the average market to book value of

firms in the economy, government subsidies to firms in the economy, the net fixed assets divided

by total assets of firms in the economy, the level real per capita GDP, the law and order tradition

of the economy.

       As summarized in Table 7, DM (1998) find that both banking system development and

stock market liquidity are positively associated with the excess growth of firms. Thus, in

countries with high Turnover and high Bank Assets/GDP a larger proportion of firms is growing

at a level that requires access to external sources of long-term capital, holding other things

constant. Note, consistent with LZ, the size of the domestic stock markets is not related to the

excess growth of firms. After conducting a wide-array of robustness checks, DM conclude that

the proportion of firms that grow at rates exceeding the rate at which each firm can grow with
                                                                                                   78

only retained earnings and short-term borrowing is positively associated with stock market

liquidity and banking system size.

       Love (2003) and Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005) also use firm level data

to examine whether financial development eases financing constraints, though they do not

explicitly examine aggregate economic growth. Love finds that the sensitivity of investment to

internal funds is greater in countries with more poorly developed financial system. Greater

financial development reduces the link between the availability of internal funds and investment.

Thus, the paper is consistent with the findings of DM and RZ. The paper also shows that

financial development is particularly effective at easing the constraints of small firms. Beck,

Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2005) use a different dataset and methodology to investigate

the effect of financial development on easing the obstacles that firms face to growing faster.

They show that financial development weakens the impact of various barriers to firm growth and

that small firms benefit the most from financial development.31 In sum and consistent with the

industry-level work by Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, Laeven, and Levine (2004), these firm-level

studies indicate that financial development removes impediments to firm expansion and exerts a

particularly beneficial impact on small firms.

       Dyck and Zingales (2003) provide additional firm-level evidence on the mechanisms

through which financial development influences growth by examining whether financial

development influences the private benefits of controlling a firm. If there are large private

benefits of control, this implies that insiders can exploit their positions and help themselves at the

expense of the firm. The resultant loss of corporate efficiency could have aggregate growth

effects. Dyck and Zingales (2003) estimate the value of control in 393 control transactions
                                                                                                   79

across 39 countries over the period 1990-2000. They find that the benefits of control are greater

in countries with poorly-developed financial systems. While not linked with aggregate growth,

this suggests that financial development improves the corporate governance of firms. 32

III.D. Are bank- or market based systems better? Evidence

       As noted earlier, Goldsmith (1969) asked whether (1) financial development influences

economic growth and whether (2) financial structure – the mix of financial markets and

intermediaries operating in an economy -- affects economic growth. As we have seen, a growing

body of evidence using very different methodologies and datasets find that financial

development exerts a first-order impact on economic growth. We now turn to the empirical

analysis of financial structure: Does having a bank-based or market-based financial system

matter for economic growth?

       Much of the empirical work on financial structure over the last century involves studies

of Germany and Japan as bank-based systems and the United States and the United Kingdom as

market-based systems.33 As summarized by Allen and Gale (2000), Demirguc-Kunt and Levine

(2001a), and Stulz (2001), this research has produced illuminating insights into the functioning

of these financial systems. Nonetheless, it is difficult to draw broad conclusions about the long-

run growth effects of bank-based and market-based financial systems based on only four


31
   Kumar, Rajan, and Zingales (2001) show that financial development is associated with larger
firms, suggesting that low levels of financial development constraint firm growth.
32
  Dyck and Zingales (2003) also find that non-standard institutions are very important, such as
the effectiveness of the media. Dyck and Zingales (2002) go on to further stress the role of the
media in influencing corporate managers. This work extends our conception of the institutions
involved in exerting corporate control over firms.
33
  See Goldsmith (1969), Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1990), Allen and Gale (1995), Levine
(1997), Mork and Nakkamura (1999), Weinstein and Yafeh (1998) and Wenger and Kaserer
(1998).
                                                                                                 80

countries, especially four countries that have very similar long-run growth rates. Indeed, given

the similarity of their long-run growth rates, many observers may conclude that differences in

financial structure obviously did not matter much. Broadening the analysis to a wider array of

national experiences is important for garnering greater information on the bank-based versus

market-based debate.

       Recently, empirical research has expanded the study of financial structure to a much

broader set of countries. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2001) construct a large cross-

country, time-series database on the mixture of financial markets and intermediaries across 150

countries for the period 1960-1995, data permitting. Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001b)

classify countries according to the degree to which they are bank-based or market-based. They

also examine the evolution of financial structure across time and countries. They find that banks,

nonbank financial intermediaries (insurance companies, pension funds, finance companies,

mutual funds, etc.) and stock markets are larger, more active, and more efficient in richer

countries and these components of the financial system grow as countries become richer over

time. Also, as countries become richer, stock markets become more active and efficient relative

to banks. There is a tendency, not without exceptions, for national financial systems to become

more market-based as they become richer. Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2001b) also show that

countries with better functioning legal systems and institutions tend to have more market-based

financial systems, a point also emphasized by Ergungor (2004).

       Turning to economic growth, an expanding body of empirical work uses these newly

developed measures of financial structure and assortment of econometric methodologies to study

the impact of financial structure and growth. This work employs the same methodologies used

in the financial development and growth literature: (1) cross-country regressions, including
                                                                                                     81

instrumental variables regressions, (2) industry-level studies, and (3) firm-level investigations.

Since I have already reviewed these methodologies, this subsection succinctly discusses the

findings on financial structure and growth.

       Using very different econometric methodologies, the literature finds, albeit with

exceptions, astonishingly consistent results.

       First, in a cross-country context, there is no general rule that bank-based or market-based

financial systems are better at fostering growth. Levine (2002) finds that after controlling for the

overall level of financial development, information on financial structure does not help in

explaining cross-country differences in financial development. These results hold when using

instrumental variables to control for simultaneity bias. This research also assesses whether bank-

based systems are better at promoting growth in poor countries or countries with poor legal

systems or otherwise weak institutions. Allowing for these possibilities, however, did not alter

the conclusion: after controlling for overall financial development, cross-country comparisons do

not suggest that distinguishing between bank-based and market-based financial systems is a first-

order concern in understanding the process of economic growth. Tadesse (2002), however,

argues that while market-based systems outperform bank-based systems among countries with

developed financial sectors, bank-based systems are far better among countries with

underdeveloped financial sectors.

       Second, using industry-level data, research finds that financially-dependent industries do

not expand at higher rates in bank-based or market-based financial systems. Beck and Levine

(2002) confirm that greater financial development accelerates the growth of financially

dependent industries. Financial structure per se, however, does not help explain the differential

growth rates of financially-dependent industries across countries.
                                                                                                  82

       Third, firms’ access to external finance is not easier, and firms do not grow faster in

either market-based or bank-based financial systems. Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (2002)

extend their earlier study and show that overall financial development helps explain the excess

growth of firms across countries, i.e., the proportion of firms that grow at rates exceeding the rate

at which each firm can grow with only retained earnings and short-term borrowing is positively

associated with overall financial development. However, the degree to which countries are

bank-based or market-based does not help explain excess growth.

       I want to make two cautionary remarks about this research. First, these studies do not

necessarily imply that institutional structure is unimportant for growth. Rather, the results may

imply that there is not one optimal institutional structure for providing growth-enhancing

financial functions to the economy (Merton and Bodie, 2004). While the emergence of financial

systems that ameliorate information, contracting, and transactions costs may be crucial for

accelerating economic growth, the growth-maximizing mixture of markets and intermediaries

may depend on legal, regulatory, political, and other factors that have not been adequately

incorporated into current theoretical or empirical research. Second, recent research on financial

structure and growth use aggregate, cross-country indicators of the degree to which countries are

bank-based or market-based. These indicators may not sufficiently capture the comparative roles

of banks and markets. They may not be sufficiently country-specific to gauge accurately

national financial structure. Thus, the conclusion from these studies that financial structure is not

a particularly useful indicator of the degree to which a financial system promotes growth must be

viewed cautiously (Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2001a).

       Finally, Carlin and Mayer (2003) extend the recent work on financial structure and

economic growth by examining the relationship between the structure of the financial system and
                                                                                                 83

types of activities conducted in different countries. They find a positive association between

information disclosure (as measured by the effectiveness of the accounting system), the

fragmentation of the banking system (as measured by low bank concentration), and the growth of

equity-financed and skill-intensive industries. This is consistent with models by Allen and Gale

(2000) and Boyd and Smith (1998) that emphasize that high technology firms require financial

systems that allow for diverse views, such as equity markets rather than banks which provided

more standardized monitoring. This result is also consistent with models by Dewatripont and

Maskin (1995) that focus on renegotiations, where fragmented banking systems tend to impose

short-term, tighter budget constraints. This may be more appropriate for new, higher-risk firms

where the threat of bankruptcy must be credibly imposed. In contrast, concentrated banks with

long-run relationships with firms can more easily renegotiate constructs and will have a

correspondingly more difficult time credibly committing to not renegotiate. Thus, concentrated

banks will tend to be associated with more mature, less risky firms. While not directly linked to

aggregate economic growth, this sector-based work improves our understanding of the

relationship between financial structure and the types of activities occurring in different

economies.

III.E. Finance, Income Distribution, and Poverty Alleviation: Evidence

       I conclude the review of empirical work on finance and growth by discussing some very

recent research on whether financial development influences income distribution and poverty.

As discussed above, theory offers conflicting predictions about the nature of the interactions

between finance, income distribution, and poverty.

       In cross-country regressions, Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2004) examine whether

the level of financial intermediary development influences (i) the growth rate of Gini coefficients
                                                                                                   84

of income inequality, (ii) the growth rate of the income of the poorest quintile of society, and (iii)

the fraction of the population living in poverty. The results indicate that finance exerts a

disproportionately large, positive impact on the poor and hence reduces income inequality. Even

when controlling for the growth rate of real per capita GDP, the data indicate that (i) Gini

coefficients fall more rapidly in countries with higher levels of financial intermediary

development, (ii) the income of the poorest quintile grows faster than the national average with

better-developed financial intermediaries, and (iii) the percentage of the population living on less

than one or two dollars per day falls more rapidly in economies that have higher levels of

financial development. These results hold when using instrumental variables to control for the

endogenous determination of financial development and changes in income distribution and

poverty alleviation. The findings lend cautious support to the view that financial development

disproportionately boosts the income of the poor and reduces income inequality.34 At the same

time, the extensive battery of methodological weaknesses associated with cross-country

regression reviewed above can certainly be levied against these initial findings on finance,

income distribution, and poverty. Consequently, applying diverse econometric techniques and

datasets to bear on the question of whether financial development influences income distribution

and poverty is likely to be an active area of research.




34
  See Clarke, Xu, and Zou (2003), who study the cross-country relationship between financial
intermediary development and the level of the Gini coefficient, rather than the relationship
between financial intermediary development the growth rate of the Gini coefficient.
                                                                                                     85


IV. Conclusions

        This paper reviewed theoretical and empirical work on the relationship between financial

development and economic growth. Theory illuminates many of the channels through which the

emergence of financial instruments, markets and institutions affect -- and are affected by --

economic development. A growing body of empirical analyses, including firm-level studies,

industry-level studies, individual country-studies, time-series studies, panel-investigations, and

broad cross-country comparisons, demonstrate a strong positive link between the functioning of

the financial system and long-run economic growth. While subject to ample qualifications and

countervailing views noted throughout this article, the preponderance of evidence suggests that

both financial intermediaries and markets matter for growth even when controlling for potential

simultaneity bias. Furthermore, microeconomic-based evidence is consistent with the view that

better developed financial systems ease external financing constraints facing firms, which

illuminates one mechanism through which financial development influences economic growth.

Theory and empirical evidence make it difficult to conclude that the financial system merely --

and automatically -- responds to economic activity, or that financial development is an

inconsequential addendum to the process of economic growth.

        In the remainder of this Conclusion, I discuss broad areas needing additional research. In

terms of theory, Section II raised several issues associated with modeling finance and growth.

Here I simply make one broad observation. Our understanding of finance and growth will be

substantively advanced by the further modeling of the dynamic interactions between the

evolution of the financial system and economic growth (Smith, 2002). Existing work suggests

that it is not just finance following industry. But, neither is there any reason to believe that it is

just industry following finance. Thus, we need additional thought on the co-evolution of finance
                                                                                                   86

and growth. Technology innovation, for instance, may only foster growth in the presence of a

financial system that can evolve effectively to help the economy exploit these new technologies.

Furthermore, technological innovation itself may substantively affect the operation of financial

systems by, for example, transforming the acquisition, processing, and dissemination of

information. Moreover, the financial system may provide different services at different stages of

economic development, so that the financial system needs to evolve if growth is to continue.

These are mere conjectures and ruminations that I hope foster more careful thinking.

       In terms of empirical work, this paper continuously emphasized that all methods have

their problems but that one problem plaguing the entire study of finance and growth pertains to

the proxies for financial development. Theory suggests that financial systems influence growth

by easing information and transactions costs and thereby improving the acquisition of

information about firms, corporate governance, risk management, resource mobilization, and

financial exchanges. Too frequently empirical measures of financial development do not directly

measure these financial functions. While a growing number of country-specific studies develop

financial development indicators more closely tied to theory, more work is needed on improving

cross-country indicators of financial development.

       Much more research needs to be conducted on the determinants of financial development.

To the extent that financial systems exert a first-order impact on economic growth, we need a

fuller understanding of what determines financial development. There are at least two levels of

analysis. There is a growing body of research that examines the direct laws, regulations, and

macroeconomic policies shaping financial sector operations. There is a second research agenda

that studies the political, cultural, and even geographic context shaping financial development.
                                                                                                  87

       Some research examines how legal systems, regulations, and macroeconomic policies

influence finance. LLSV (1997, 1998) show that laws and enforcement mechanisms that protect

the rights of outside investors tend to foster financial development. Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and

Levine (2003b, 2004b) show that legal system adaptability is crucial. The financial needs of the

economy are continuously changing, so that more flexible legal systems do a better job at

promoting financial development than more rigid systems. Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2004,

2005) and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2005) show that regulations and supervisory

practices that force accurate information disclosure and promote private sector monitoring, but

do not grant regulators excessive power, boost the overall level of banking sector and stock

market development.35 Monetary and fiscal policies may also affect the taxation of financial

intermediaries and the provision of financial services (Bencivenga and Smith, 1992; Huybens

and Smith, 1999; Roubini and Sala-i-Martin, 1992, 1995). Indeed, Boyd, Levine, and Smith

(2001) show that inflation has a large – albeit non-linear – impact on both stock market and bank

development.

       At a more primitive level, some research studies the forces shaping the laws, regulations,

and institutions underlying financial development. LLSV (1998) stress that historically-

determined differences in legal tradition shape the laws governing financial transactions. Haber

(2004b), Haber, Maurer, and Razo (2003), Pagano and Volpin (2001), Roe (1994), and Rajan

and Zingales (2003a) focus on how political economy forces shape national policies toward


35
  Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2003c) go on to show that bank supervisory practices that
force accurate information disclosure ease external financing constraints facing firms, while
countries that grant substantial power to government controlled regulators actually make external
financing constraints more severe by increasing the degree of corruption in bank lending.
Caprio, Laeven, and Levine (2003) show that legal protection of shareholders is more effective at
boosting the valuation of banks than strong official bank regulation and supervision. Bodenhorn
                                                                                                 88

financial development. Guiso, Sapienza, and Zingales (2004) examine the role of social capital

in shaping financial systems, while Stulz and Williamson (2003) stress the role of religion in

influencing national approaches to financial development. Finally, some scholars emphasize the

impact of geographical endowments on the formation of long-lasting institutions that form the

foundations of financial systems (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997, 2002; Acemoglu, Johnson, and

Robinson, 2001; Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003a; Easterly and Levine 2003). This

broad spectrum of work suggests that political, legal, cultural, and even geographical factors

influence the financial system and that much more work is required to better understand the role

of financial factors in the process of economic growth.




(2002) examines the influences of political forces, fiscal demands, and regulations on the
development of banking sectors in individual states of the United States.
                                                                                             89


                                       References
Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, and F. Zilibotti (2003), “Distance to Frontier, Selection, and
     Economic Growth:, National Bureau of Economic Growth, Working Paper No. 9066.

Acemoglu, D. and F. Zilibotti (1997), “Was Prometheus Unbound by Chance? Risk,
     Diversification, and Growth”, Journal of Political Economy, 105: 709-775.

Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson and J. A. Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
     Development: An Empirical Investigation”, American Economic Review, 91: 1369-
     1401.

Aghion, P., M. Angeletos, A. Banerjee, and K. Manova (2004), “Volatility and Growth: The
      Role of Financial Development”, Harvard University (Department of Economics),
      mimeo.

Aghion, P. and P. Bolton (1997), “A Trickle-Down Theory of Growth and development with
      Debt Overhang”, Review of Economic Studies 64, 151-72.

Aghion, P., M. Dewatripont, and P. Rey (1999), “Competition, Financial Discipline and
      Growth”, Review of Economic Studies, 66: 825-852.

Aghion, P., Howitt, and D. Mayer-Foulkes (2005), “The Effect of Financial Development on
      Convergence: Theory and Evidence”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.

Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1992), "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction",
      Econometrica, 60: 323-351.

Allen, F. (1990), “The Market for Information and the Origin of Financial Intermediaries”,
       Journal of Financial Intermediation, 1: 3-30.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1995), "A Welfare Comparison of the German and U.S. Financial
       Systems”, European Economic Review, 39: 179-209.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1997), “Financial Markets, Intermediaries, and Intertemporal Smoothing”,
        Journal of Political Economy, 105: 523-546.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1999), “Diversity of Opinion and Financing of New Technologies”,
       Journal of Financial Intermediation, 8: 68-89.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), “Comparing Financial Systems, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press

Allen, F., J. Qian, and M. Qian (2005), “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in China”, Journal
        of Financial Economics, forthcoming.
                                                                                                90

Arellano, M. and S. Bond (1991), “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo
       Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations”, Review of Economic Studies,
       58: 277-297.

Arellano, M. and O. Bover (1995), “Another Look at the Instrumental-Variable Estimation of
       Error-Components Models”, Journal of Econometrics, 68: 29-52.

Arestis, P., P. O. Demetriades and K. B. Luintel (2001), “Financial Development and Economic
        Growth: The Role of Stock Markets”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 33: 16-41.

Arestis, P. and P. Demetriades (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth:
        Assessing the Evidence”, Economic Journal, 107: 783-799.

Atje, R. and B. Jovanovic (1993), "Stock Markets and Development”, European Economic
       Review, 37: 632-640.

Bagehot, W. (1873), Lombard Street, Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin, (1962 Edition).

Banerjee, A. and A. Newman (1993), “Occupational Choice and the Process of Development”,
       Journal of Political Economy 101, 274-98.

Barth, J. R., G. Caprio Jr. and R. Levine (2001a), “The Regulation and Supervision of Banks
        Around the World: A New Database”, In: Brooking-Wharton Papers on Financial
        Services, Eds: Litan, R. E. and R. Herring, Washington, DC, Brookings Institution: 183-
        250.

Barth, J. R., G. Caprio Jr. and R. Levine (2001b), “Banking Systems Around the Globe: Do
        Regulations and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” In: Prudential
        Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, Ed: Mishkin, F.S., University of Chicago
        Press: 31-96.

Barth, J. R., G. Caprio Jr. and R. Levine (2004), “Bank Regulation and Supervision: What
        Works Best?”, Journal of Financial Intermediation, 13: 205-248.

Barth, J. R., G. Caprio Jr. and R. Levine (2005), Rethinking Bank Supervision and Regulation:
        Until Angels Govern, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, forthcoming.

Beck, T. (2002), “Financial Development and International Trade: Is There a Link?”, Journal of
       International Economics, 57: 107-131.

Beck, T. (2003), “Financial Dependence and International Trade”, Review of International
       Economics, 11: 296-316.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, L. Laeven, and R. Levine (2004), “Finance, Firm Size, and
       Growth”, World Bank mimeo.
                                                                                            91

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2000), “A New Database on Financial Development
       and Structure”, World Bank Economic Review, 14: 597-605

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2001), “The Financial Structure Database”, In:
       Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison of Banks,
       Markets, and Development, Eds: Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine. Cambridge, MA:
       MIT Press: 17-80.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2003a), “Law, Endowments, and Finance”, Journal
       of Financial Economics, 70: 137-181.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2003b), “Law and Finance: Why Does Legal Origin
       Matter?” Journal of Comparative Economics, 31: 653-675.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2003c), “Bank Supervision and Corporate Finance”,
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 9620.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2003d), “Bank Concentration and Crises”, National
       Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 9921.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2004a), “Law and Firms’ Access to Finance”,
       American Law and Economics Review, forthcoming.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt and R. Levine (2004b), “Finance, Inequality and Poverty: Cross-
       Country Evidence”, University of Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), mimeo.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, R. Levine, and V. Maksimovic (2001), “Financial Structure and
       Economic Development: Firm, Industry, and Country Evidence”, In: Financial Structure
       and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and
       Development, Eds: Demirguc-Kunt, A. and R. Levine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 189-
       242.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and V. Maksimovic (2005), “Financial and Legal Constraints to
       Firm Growth: Does Size Matter?”, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Beck, T. and R. Levine (2002), “Industry Growth and Capital Allocation: Does Having a
       Market- or Bank-Based System Matter?”, Journal of Financial Economics, 64: 147-180.

Beck, T. and R. Levine (2004), “Stock Markets, Banks and Growth: Panel Evidence”, Journal of
       Banking and Finance, 423-442.

Beck, T., R. Levine and N. Loayza (2000), “Finance and the Sources of Growth”, Journal of
       Financial Economics, 58: 261–300.

Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad (2001), “Emerging Equity Markets and Economic
       Development”, Journal of Development Economics, 66: 465-504.
                                                                                            92



Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey and C. Lundblad (2004), "Does Financial Liberalization Spur
       Growth?”, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Bencivenga, V. R. and B. D. Smith (1991), "Financial Intermediation and Endogenous Growth”,
      Review of Economics Studies, 58: 195-209.

Bencivenga, V. R. and B. D. Smith (1992), "Deficits, Inflation and the Banking System in
      Developing Countries: The Optimal Degree of Financial Repression”, Oxford Economic
      Papers, 44: 767-790.

Bencivenga, V. R. and B. D. Smith (1993), "Some Consequences of Credit Rationing in an
      Endogenous Growth Model”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17: 97-122.

Bencivenga, V. R., B. D. Smith and R. M. Starr (1995), "Transactions Costs, Technological
      Choice, and Endogenous Growth”, Journal of Economic Theory, 67: 53-177.

Benhabib, J. and M. M. Spiegel (2000), “The Role of Financial Development in Growth and
      Investment”, Journal of Economic Growth, 5: 341-360.

Berle, A. A. and G. C. Means (1932), The Modern Corporation and Private Property, New York:
       Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

Bhattacharya, S. and P. Pfleiderer (1985), “Delegated Portfolio Management”, Journal of
       Economic Theory, 36: 1-25.

Berger, A.N., I. Hasan, and L.F. Klapper (2004), “Further Evidence on the Link between Finance
       and Growth: An International Analysis of Community Banking and Economic
       Performance”, Journal of Financial Services Research, forthcoming.

Bertrand, M., A.S. Schoar, and D. Thesmar (2004), “Banking Deregulation and Industry
       Structure: Evidence from the French Banking Reforms of 1985”, Centre for Economic
       Policy Research, Discussion Paper No. 4488.

Bhide, A. (1993), “The Hidden Costs of Stock Market Liquidity”, Journal of Financial
       Economics, 34: 1-51.

Black, S. W. and M. Moersch (1998), “Financial Structure, Investment and Economic Growth in
       OECD Countries”, In: Competition and Convergence in Financial Markets: The German
       and Anglo-American Models, Eds: S.W. Black and M. Moersch, New York: North –
       Holland Press: 157-174.

Blackburn, K. and V.T.Y. Hung (1998), “A Theory of Growth, Financial Development, and
      Trade”, Economica, 65: 107-24.
                                                                                              93

Bodenhorn, H. (2003), State Banking in Early America: A New Economic History, New York:
      Cambridge University Press.

Boot, A.W.A., S. J. Greenbaum and A. Thakor (1993), “Reputation and Discretion in Financial
       Contracting”, American Economic Review, 83: 1165-1183.

Boot, A.W.A. and A. Thakor (1997), “Financial System Architecture”, Review of Financial
       Studies, 10: 693-733.

Boot, A.W.A. and A. Thakor (2000), “Can Relationship Banking Survive Competition?”, Journal
       of Finance, 55: 679-713.

Boyd, J. H., R. Levine and B. D. Smith (2001), “The Impact of Inflation on Financial Sector
       Performance”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 47: 221-248.

Boyd, J. H. and E. C. Prescott (1986), "Financial Intermediary-Coalitions”, Journal of
       Economics Theory, 38: 211-232.

Boyd, J. H., and B. D. Smith (1992), “Intermediation and the Equilibrium Allocation of
       Investment Capital: Implications for Economic Development”, Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 30: 409-432.

Boyd, J. H. and B. D. Smith (1994), "How Good Are Standard Debt Contracts? Stochastic
       Versus Nonstochastic Monitoring in a Costly State Verification Environment”, Journal of
       Business, 67: 539-562.

Boyd, J. H. and B. D. Smith (1996), "The Co-Evolution of the Real and Financial Sectors in the
       Growth Process”, World Bank Economic Review, 10: 371-396.

Boyd, J. H. and B. D. Smith (1998), “The evolution of debt and equity markets in economic
       development”, Economic Theory, 12: 519-560.

Calomiris, C., and C. Kahn (1991), “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal
      Banking Arrangements”, American Economic Review 81, 497-513.

Cameron, R., O. Crisp, H. T. Patrick and R. Tilly (1967), Banking in the Early Stages of
      Industrialization: A Study in Comparative Economic History, New York: Oxford
      University Press.

Cameron, R. (1967a), Scotland, 1750-1845, in Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization:
      A Study in Comparative Economic History, Eds. R. Cameron et al., New York: Oxford
      University Press, 60-99.

Cameron, R. (1967b), Conclusion, in Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization: A Study in
      Comparative Economic History, Eds. R. Cameron et al., New York: Oxford University
      Press, 290-321.
                                                                                             94



Caprio Jr., G., L. Laeven, and R. Levine (2003), “Governance and Bank Valuation”, National
       Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 10158..

Caprio Jr., G. and R. Levine (2002), “Corporate Governance in Finance: Concepts and
       International Observations” in Financial Sector Governance: The Roles of the Public and
       Private Sectors, Eds. R.E. Litan, M. Pomerleano, and V. Sundararajan, Washington DC:
       The Brookings Institution, 17-50.

Carlin, W. and C. Mayer (2003), “Finance, Investment, and Growth”, Journal of Financial
        Economics, 69: 191-226.

Carosso, V. (1970), Investment Banking in America, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Cetorelli, N. and M. Gambera (2001), “Banking Structure, Financial Dependence and Growth:
       International Evidence from Industry Data”, Journal of Finance, 56: 617–648.

Charkham, J. (1994), Keeping Good Company: A Study of Corporate Governance in Five
      Countries, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Chakraborty, S. and R. Ray (2004), “Bank-Based versus Market-Based Financial Systems: A
      Growth-Theoretic Analysis”, University of Oregon (Department of Economics), mimeo.

Checkland, S. G. (1975), Scottish Banking: A History, 1695-1973, Glasgow: Collins.

Christopoulos, D. K. and E. G. Tsionas (2004), “Financial Development and Economic Growth:
       Evidence from Panel Unit Root and Cointegration Tests”, Journal of Development
       Economics, 73: 55-74.

Claessens, S. and L. Laeven (2003), “Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth”,
       Journal of Finance, 58: 2401-36.

Claessens, S. and L. Laeven (2004), “Financial Sector Competition, Finance Dependence, and
       Economic Growth”, Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Claessens, S.; S. Djankov, J. Fan, L. Lang (2002), “Disentangling the Incentive and
       Entrenchment Effects of Large Shareholdings”, Journal of Finance, 57: 2741-2771.

Clarke, G., L.C. Xu and H. Zou (2003), “Finance and Income Inequality, Test of Alternative
       Theories”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, #2984.

Coase, R. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm”, Economica, 4: 386-405.

Cowen, T. and R. Kroszner (1989), "Scottish Banking before 1845: A Model for Laissez-Faire?"
      Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 21: 221-231.
                                                                                               95

Cull, R. and L. Xu (2004), “Institutions, Ownership, and Finance: The Determinants of Profit
       Reinvestment Among Chinese Firms”, World Bank mimeo.

DeAngelo, H. and L. DeAngelo (1985), “Managerial Ownership of Voting Rights: A Study of
     Public Corporations with Dual Classes of Common Stock”, Journal of Financial
     Economics, 14: 33-69.

DeAngelo, H. and E. Rice (1983), “Anti-Takeover Amendments and Stockholder Wealth”,
     Journal of Financial Economics, 11: 329-360.

De Gregorio, J. (1996), "Borrowing Constraints, Human Capital Accumulation, and Growth”,
      Journal of Monetary Economics, 37: 49-71.

Dehejia, R. and A. Lleras-Muney (2003), “Why Does Financial Development Matter? The
       United States from 1900 to 1940”, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working
       Paper No. 9551.

De la Fuente, A. and J. M. Marin (1996), “Innovation, Bank Monitoring, and Endogenous
       Financial Development”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 38: 269-301.

De Long, J. B. (1991), "Did Morgan's Men Add Value? An Economist's Perspective on Finance
      Capitalism”, In: Inside the Business Enterprise: Historical Perspectives on the Use of
      Information, Ed: P. Temin, Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 205-236.

Demetriades, P. and K. Hussein (1996), “Does Financial Development Cause Economic
      Growth? Time Series Evidence from 16 Countries”, Journal of Development Economics,
      51: 387-411.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., L. Laeven, and R. Levine (2004), “Regulations, Market Structure,
      Institutions, and the Cost of Financial Intermediation”, Journal of Money, Credit, and
      Banking, 36: 593-622.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine (1996), "Stock Market Development and Financial
      Intermediaries: Stylized Facts”, World Bank Economic Review, 10: 291-322.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine (2001a), “Financial Structure and Economic Growth:
      Perspectives and Lessons”, In: Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-
      Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Eds: A. Demirguc-Kunt and
      R. Levine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 3-14.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine (2001b), “Bank-Based and Market-Based Financial Systems:
      Cross-Country Comparisons”, In: Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-
      Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Eds: A. Demirguc-Kunt and
      R. Levine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 81-140.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and R. Levine (2001c), Financial Structures and Economic Growth: A Cross-
      Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
                                                                                            96



Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (1996), "Stock Market Development and Firm
      Financing Choices." World Bank Economic Review, 10: 341-370.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (1998), "Law, Finance, and Firm Growth”, Journal of
      Finance, 53: 2107-2137.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (1999), “Institutions, Financial Markets and Firm Debt
      Maturity”, Journal of Financial Economics, 54: 295-336.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (2001), “Firms as Financial Intermediaries: Evidence
      from Trade Credit Data”, World Bank mimeo.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic (2002), “Funding Growth in Bank-Based and Market-
      Based Financial Systems: Evidence from Firm Level Data”, Journal of Financial
      Economic, 65: 337-363.

Demsetz, H. and K. Lehn (1985), “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and
      Consequences”, Journal of Political Economy, 93: 1155-175.

Devereux, M. B., and G. W. Smith (1994), "International Risk Sharing and Economic Growth”,
      International Economic Review, 35: 535-550.

Dewatripont, M. and E. Maskin (1995), “Credit Efficiency in Centralized and Decentralized
      Economies”, Review of Economic Studies, 62: 541-555.

Diamond, D. W. (1984), "Financial Intermediation and Delegated Monitoring”, Review of
      Economic Studies, 51: 393-414.

Diamond, D. W. (1991), “Monitoring and Reputation: The Choice Between Bank Loans and
      Directly Placed Debt”, Journal of Political Economy, 99: 689-721.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity”,
      Journal of Political Economy, 91: 401-419.

Diamond, D. W. and R. Rajan (2001), “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial
      Fragility: A Theory of Banking”, Journal of Political Economy, 109: 289-327.

Diamond, D. W. and R. E. Verrecchia (1982), "Optimal Managerial Contracts and Equilibrium
      Security Prices”, Journal of Finance, 37: 275-287.

Dyck, A. and L. Zingales (2002), “The Corporate Governance Role of the Media”, in The Right
      to Tell: The Role of Mass Media in Economic Development, Ed: R. Islam, Washington,
      DC: World Bank, p. 107-140.
                                                                                               97

Dyck, A. and L. Zingales (2004), “Private Benefits of Control: An International Comparison”,
      Journal of Finance, 59: 537-600.

Easterbrook, F. and D. Fischel (1991), The Economic Structure of Corporate Law, Cambridge,
       MA: Harvard University Press.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (1997), “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Division”,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112: 1203-1250.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2001), “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth”,
       World Bank Economic Review, 15: 177-219.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2003), “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
       Economic Development”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50: 3-39.

Edison, H., R. Levine, L. Ricci and T. Slok (2002), “International Financial Integration and
       Economic Growth”, Journal of International Money and Finance, 21: 749-776.

Engerman, S. L. and K. L. Sokoloff (1997), "Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential
      Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic Historians of
      the United States”, In: How Latin America Fell Behind, Ed: S. Haber, Stanford, CA:
      Stanford University Press: 260-304.

Engerman, S. L. and K. L. Sokoloff (2002), "Factor Endowments, In: Equality, and Paths of
      Development Among New World Economies”, National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper No. 9259.

Ergungor, O.E. (2004), “Market- vs. Bank-Based Financial Systems: Do Rights and Regulations
      Really Matter?”, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.

Fama, E. and M. Jensen (1983a), “Separation of Ownership and Control”, Journal of Law and
      Economics, 27: 301-325.

Fama, E. and M. Jensen (1983b), “Agency Problems and Residual Claims”, Journal of Law and
      Economics, 26: 327-349.

Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard and B. C. Petersen (1988), "Financing Constraints, and
       Investment”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 141-206.

Fink, G., P. Haiss, and S. Hristoforova (2003), “Bond Markets and Economic Growth”, Research
       Institute for European Affairs, Working Paper 49, April.

Fisman, R.J. and I. Love (2003a), “Trade Credit, Financial Intermediary Development, and
      Industry Growth”, Journal of Finance, 58: 353-374.
                                                                                              98

Fisman, R.J. and I. Love (2003b), “Financial Development and Growth Revisited”, National
      Bureau of Economic Research Paper No. 9582.

Flannery, M. (1994), “Debt Maturity and the Deadweight Cost of Leverage: Optimally Financing
       Banking Firms”, American Economic Review 84, 320-331.

Furfine, C.H. (2001), “Banks as Monitors of Other Banks: Evidence from the Overnight Federal
       Funds Market”, Journal of Business, 74: 33-57.

Gale, D. and M. Hellwig (1985), "Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-Period
       Problem”, Review of Economics Studies, 52: 647-663.

Galetovic, A. (1996), “Specialization, Intermediation and Growth”, Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 38: 549-59.

Galor, O. and J. Zeira (1993), "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics", Review of Economic
       Studies, 60: 35-52

Gerschenkron, A. (1962), Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective — A Book of
      Essays, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Goldsmith, R. W. (1969), Financial Structure and Development, New Haven, CT: Yale
      University Press.

Gorton, G. and G. Pennacchi, (1990), “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity Creation”, Journal
       of Finance, 45: 49-71.

Greenwood, J. and B. Jovanovic (1990), "Financial Development, Growth, and the Distribution
      of Income”, Journal of Political Economy, 98: 1076-1107.

Greenwood, J. and B. Smith (1996), "Financial Markets in Development, and the Development
      of Financial Markets”, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21: 145-181.

Grossman, S.J. and O. Hart (1980), “Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of
      the Corporation”, Bell Journal of Economics, 11: 42-64.

Grossman, S.J. and O. Hart, (1986), “The Cost and Benefit of Ownership: A Theory of Lateral
      and Vertical Integration,” Journal of Political Economy, 94: 691-719.

Grossman, S. J., and M. H. Miller (1988), "Liquidity and Market Structure”, Journal of Finance,
      43: 617-633.

Grossman, S. J. and J. Stiglitz (1980), "On the Impossibility of Informationally Efficient
      Markets”, American Economic Review, 70: 393-408.
                                                                                              99

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2004), “The Role of Social Capital in Financial
       Development”, American Economic Review, 94: 526-556.

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza and L. Zingales (2002), “Does Local Financial Development Matter?”,
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8922.

Gurley, J. G. and E. S. Shaw (1955), "Financial Aspects of Economic Development”, American
       Economic Review, 45: 515-538.

Haber, S. H. (1991), "Industrial Concentration and the Capital Markets: A Comparative Study of
       Brazil, Mexico, and the United States, 1830-1930”, Journal of Economic History, 51:
       559-580.

Haber, S. H. (1997), “Financial Markets and Industrial Development: A Comparative Study of
       Governmental Regulation, Financial Innovation and Industrial Structure in Brazil and
       Mexico, 1840-1940”, In: How Latin America Fell Behind?, Ed: S. Haber, Stanford, CA:
       Stanford University Press: 146-178.

Haber, S.H. (2004a), “Mexico’s Experiment with Bank Privatization and Liberalization, 1991-
       2004”, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.

Haber, S. H. (2004b), “Political Competition and Economic Growth: Lessons from the Political
       Economy of Bank Regulation in the United States and Mexico” Stanford University,
       mimeo.

Haber, S. H.; N. Maurer; and A. Razo (2003), The Politics of Property Rights: Political
       Instability, Credible Commitments, and Economic Growth in Mexico, Cambridge
       University Press.

Harrison, P., O. Sussman and J. Zeira (1999), “Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence”,
       Washington, DC: Federal Reserve Board (Division of Research and Statistics), mimeo.

Hellwig, M. (1991), “Banking, Financial Intermediation, and Corporate Finance”, In: European
       Financial Integration, Eds: Giovanni, A. and C. Mayer, Cambridge University Press,
       Cambridge, England: 35-63.

Henry, P. (2000), “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?” Journal of
       Financial Economics, 58: 301-334.

Henry, P. (2003), “Capital Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic Growth”,
       American Economic Review, 93: 91-96.

Hicks, J. (1969), A Theory of Economic History, Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Higgins, R. C. (1977), “How Much Growth Can a Firm Afford?”, Financial Management, 6: 3-
       16.
                                                                                               100



Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1993), "Market Liquidity and Performance Monitoring”, Journal of
      Political Economy, 101: 678-709.

Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (1998), “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity”, Journal of
      Political Economy, 106: 1-40.

Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap and D. Sharfstein (1990), "Bank Monitoring and Investment: Evidence
       from the Changing Structure of Japanese Corporate Banking Relationships”, In:
       Asymmetric Information, Corporate Finance and Investment, Ed: R.G. Hubbard,
       Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 105-126.

Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap and D. Sharfstein (1991), “Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and
       Investment: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 27:
       33-60.

Huybens, E. and R. Smith (1999), “Inflation, Financial Markets, and Long-Run Real Activity”,
      Journal of Monetary Economics, 43: 283-315.

Jacoby, H.G. (1994), “Borrowing Constraints and Progress Through School: Evidence from
       Peru”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 76: 151-160.

Jacklin, C. (1987), "Demand Deposits, Trading Restrictions, and Risk Sharing, In: Contractual
        Arrangements for Intertemporal Trade”, Eds: E. D. Prescott and N. Wallace,
        Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press: 26-47.

Jacoby, H.G. (1994), “Borrowing Constraints and Progress Through School: Evidence from
       Peru”, Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 151-60.

Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan (1996), “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
       Branch Deregulation”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111: 639-670.

Jayaratne, J. and P. E. Strahan (1998), “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution, and Dynamic
       Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking”, Journal of Law and Economics, 41:
       239-273.

Jensen, M. (1993), “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal Control
       Systems”, Journal of Finance, 48: 831-880.

Jensen, M. and W. R. Meckling (1976), "Theory of the Firm, Managerial Behavior, Agency
       Costs and Ownership Structure”, Journal of Financial Economics, 3: 305-360.

Jensen, M. and K. Murphy (1990), “Performance Pay and Top Management Incentives”, Journal
       of Political Economy, 98: 225-263.
                                                                                            101

Johnson, S., J. McMillan, and C. Woodruff (2002), “Property Rights and Finance”, American
      Economic Review, 92: 1335-1356.

Jorgenson, D. W. (1995), Productivity, Cambridge, MA. MIT Press.

Jorgenson, D.W. (2005), “Growth Accounting,” in Handbook of Economic Growth. Eds.: P.
       Aghion and S. Durlauf, Amsterdam: North-Holland Elsevier Publishers, Chapter 12 of
       this volume.

Jung, W. S. (1986), "Financial Development and Economic Growth: International Evidence”,
       Economic Development and Cultural Change, 34: 333-346.

Kashyap, A., J. Stein and R. Rajan (2002), “Banks as Providers of Liquidity: An Explanation for
      the Co-Existence of Lending and Deposit-Taking”, Journal of Finance, 57: 33-73.

Kerr, A.W. (1884), History of Banking in Scotland, Glasgow (3rd Ed: London: A&C Black,
       1918).

King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993a), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right”,
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108: 717-738.

King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993b), "Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and
       Evidence”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 32: 513-542.

King, R. G. and R. Levine (1993c), "Financial Intermediation and Economic Development”, In:
       Financial Intermediation in the Construction of Europe, Eds: C. Mayer and X. Vives,
       London: Centre for Economic Policy Research: 156-189.

King, R. G. and R. Levine (1994), “Capital Fundamentalism, Economic Development and
       Economic Growth”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 40: 259-
       292.

King, R. G. and C. I. Plosser (1986), "Money as the Mechanism of Exchange”, Journal of
       Monetary Economics, 17: 93-115.

Klein, M., and G. Olivei (2001), “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth, and
       Economic Growth”, (unpublished; Somerville, MA: Tufts University.

Kumar, K. B., R. G. Rajan and L. Zingales (2001), “What Determines Firm Size”, University of
      Chicago, mimeo.

Krebs, T. (2003), “Human Capital Risk and Economic Growth”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 118: 709-44.

Kyle, A. S. (1984), "Market Structure, Information, Futures Markets, and Price Formation”, In:
       International Agricultural Trade: Advanced Readings in Price Formation, Market
                                                                                              102

       Structure, and Price Instability, Eds: G. G. Storey, A. Schmitz and A. H. Sarris, Boulder,
       CO: Westview.

Laeven, L. (2001), “Insider Lending: The Case of Russia”, Journal of Comparative Economics,
      29: 207-29.

Laeven, L. and R. Levine (2004), “Is There a Diversification Discount in Financial
      Conglomerates?”, University of Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), mimeo.

Lamoreaux, N. (1995), Insider Lending: Banks, Personal Connections, and Economic
      Development in Industrial New England, New York: Cambridge University Press.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (1999), “Corporate Ownership
       Around the World,” Journal of Finance, 54: 471-517.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer (2002), “Government Ownership of
       Commercial Banks”, Journal of Finance, 57: 265-301.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer (2005), “What Works in Securities Laws? ”,
       Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny (1997), “Legal Determinants of
       External Finance”, Journal of Finance, 52: 1131-1150.

La Porta, R. , F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny (1998), "Law and Finance”,
       Journal of Political Economy, 106: 1113-1155.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and G. Zamarripa (2003), “Related lending”, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics.

Levhari, D. and T. N. Srinivasan (1969),"Optimal Savings Under Uncertainty”, Review of
       Economic Studies, 35: 153-163.

Levine, R. (1991), "Stock Markets, Growth, and Tax Policy”, Journal of Finance, 46: 1445-1465.

Levine, R. (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda”, Journal
       of Economic Literature, 35: 688-726.

Levine, R. (1998), “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-Run Economic Growth”, Journal
       of Money, Credit, and Banking, 30:596-613.

Levine, R. (1999), “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth”, Journal of Financial Intermediation,
       8: 36-67.

Levine, R. (2002), “Bank-Based or Market-Based Financial Systems: Which Is Better?”, Journal
       of Financial Intermediation, 11: 398-428.
                                                                                           103



Levine, R. (2003), “Napoleon, Bourses, and Growth: With A Focus on Latin America”, In:
       Market Augmenting Government, Eds: O. Azfar and C. Cadwell, Ann Arbor, MI:
       University of Michigan Press, 49-85.

Levine, R. (2004), “Denying Foreign Bank Entry: Implications for Bank Interest Margins,” in
       Bank Market Structure and Monetary Policy Eds: Luis Antonio Ahumada and J. Rodrigo
       Fuentes, Santiago, Chile: Banco Central de Chile, 2004, pp. 271-292.

Levine, R., N. Loayza and T. Beck (2000), “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
       Causes”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 46: 31-77.

Levine, R. and D. Renelt (1992), "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
       Regressions”, American Economic Review, 82: 942-963.

Levine, R. and S. Schmukler (2003), “Migration, Spillovers, and Trade Diversion: The Impact of
       Internationalization on Stock Market Liquidity”, National Bureau of Economic Research
       Working Paper No. 9614.

Levine, R. and S. Schmukler (2004), “Internationalization and the Evolution of Corporate
       Valuations”, University of Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), mimeo.

Levine, R. and S. Zervos (1998a), “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth”, American
       Economic Review, 88: 537-558.

Levine, R. and S. Zervos (1998b), “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
       Development”, World Development, 26: 1169-1184.

Loayza, N. and R. Ranciere (2002), “Financial Fragility, Financial Development, and Growth”,
      World Bank mimeo.

Love, I. (2003), “Financial Development and Financing Constraint: International Evidence from
       the Structural Investment Model”, Review of Financial Studies, 16: 765-791.

Lucas, R. E. (1988), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development”, Journal of Monetary
       Economics, 22: 3-42.

Luintel, K and M. Khan (1999), “A Quantitative Reassessment of the Finance-Growth Nexus:
       Evidence from a Multivariate VAR, Journal of Development Economics, 60: 381-405.

Manne, H. (1965), “Mergers and the Market for Corporate Control”, Journal of Political
      Economy, 73: 110-131.

Maurer, N. and S. Haber (2004), “Related Lending and Economic Performance: Evidence from
      Mexico”, Stanford University, mimeo.
                                                                                            104

McKinnon, R. I. (1973), Money and Capital in Economic Development, Washington, DC:
     Brookings Institution.

Meier, G. M. and D. Seers (1984), Pioneers in Development, New York: Oxford University
       Press.

Merton, R. C. (1987), "A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete
      Information”, Journal of Finance, 42: 483-510.

Merton, R. C. (1992), "Financial Innovation and Economic Performance”, Journal of Applied
      Corporate Finance, 4: 12-22.

Merton, R. C. (1995), “A Functional Perspective of Financial Intermediation”, Financial
      Management, 24: 23-41.

Merton, R. C. and Z. Bodie (1995), "A Conceptual Framework for Analyzing the Financial
      Environment”, In: the Global Financial System: A Functional Perspective, Eds: D. B.
      Crane, et al., Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press: 3-31.

Merton, R. C. and Z. Bodie (2004), “The Design of Financial Systems: Towards a Synthesis of
      Function and Structure”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper Number
      10620.

Miller, M. H. (1998), "Financial Markets and Economic Growth", Journal of Applied Corporate
        Finance, 11: 8-14.

Morales, M.F. (2003), “Financial Intermediation in a Model of Growth Through Creative
      Descruction”, Macroeconomic Dynamics, 7: 363-93.

Morck, R. and M. Nakamura (1999), “Banks and Corporate Control in Japan”, Journal of
      Finance, 54: 319-340.

Morck, R., D. Stangeland, and B. Yeung (2000), “Inherited Wealth, Corporate Control, and
      Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease,” in Concentrated Corporate Ownership. Ed:
      Randall Morck. National Bureau of Economics Research.

Morck, R., D. Wolfenzon, and B. Yeung (2005), “Corporate Governance, Economic
      Entrenchment and Growth,” Journal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

Morck, R., B. Yeung, and W. Yu (2000), “The Information Content of Stock Markets: Why Do
      Emerging Markets Have Synchronous Stock Price Movements”, Journal of Financial
      Economics, 58: 215-260.

Morgan, D. (2002), “Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Industry”, American
      Economic Review, 92: 874-88.
                                                                                          105

Myers, S. C., and N. Majluf (1984), "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms
       Have Information that Investors Do Not Have”, Journal of Financial Economics, 13: 187-
       221.

Neusser, K. and M. Kugler (1998), “Manufacturing Growth and Financial Development:
      Evidence from OECD Countries”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 80: 636-646.

North, D. C. (1981), Structure and Change in Economic History, New York: Norton.

Obstfeld, M. (1994), "Risk-Taking, Global Diversification, and Growth”, American Economic
       Review, 84: 1310-1329.

Pagano, M. and P. Volpin (2001), “The Political Economy of Finance”, Oxford Review of
      Economic Policy, 17: 502-519.

Patrick, H. (1966), "Financial Development and Economic Growth in Underdeveloped
        Countries”, Economic Development Cultural Change, 14: 174-189.

Peek, J. and E.S. Rosengren (1998), “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks: The
        Case of Japan”, American Economic Review, 87: 495-505.

Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1994), "The Benefits of Lending Relationships: Evidence from
       Small Business Data”, Journal of Finance, 49: 3-37.

Petersen, M. A. and R. G. Rajan (1997), “Trade Credit: Some Theories and Evidence”, Review
       of Financial Studies, 10: 661-692.

Pollard, S. and D. Ziegler (1992), "Banking and Industrialization: Rondo Cameron Twenty Years
       On”, In: Finance and Financiers in European History 1880-1960, Ed.: Y. Cassis, New
       York, Cambridge University Press: 17-38.

Rajan, R. G. (1992), "Insiders and Outsiders: The Choice Between Informed and Arms Length
       Debt”, Journal of Finance, 47: 1367-1400.

Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth”, American Economic
       Review, 88: 559-586.

Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (1999), “Which Capitalism? Lessons From the East Asian Crisis”,
       Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 11: 40-48.

Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales (2003a), Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, New York, NY:
       Random House.

Ramakrishnan, R.T.S. and A. Thakor (1984), “Information Reliability and a Theory of Financial
      Intermediation”, Review of Economic Studies, 51: 415-432.
                                                                                                106



Rioja, F. and N.Valev (2004a), “Finance and the Sources of Growth at Various Stages of
        Economic Development”, Economic Inquiry, 42: 27-40.

Rioja, F. and N. Valev, (2004b), “Does One Size Fit All?: A Reexamination of the Finance and
        Growth Relationship”, Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming

Robinson, J. (1952), "The Generalization of the General Theory”, In: the Rate of Interest and
      Other Essays, London: MacMillan.

Roe, M. (1994), Strong Managers, Weak Owners: The Political Roots of American Corporate
      Finance, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Roubini, N. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1995), "A Growth Model of Inflation, Tax Evasion, and
      Financial Repression”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 35: 275-301.

Roubini, N. and X. Sala-i-Martin (1992), "Financial Repression and Economic Growth”, Journal
      of Development Economics, 39: 5-30.

Rousseau, P. L. (1999), “Finance, Investment, and Growth in Meiji-Era Japan”, Japan and the
      World Economy, 11: 185-198.

Rousseau, P. L. (1998), “The Permanent Effects of Innovation on Financial Depth: Theory and
      US Historical Evidence from Unobservable Components Models”, Journal of Monetary
      Economics, 42: 387-425

Rousseau, P. L. and R. Sylla (1999), “Emerging Financial Markets and Early U.S. Growth”,
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7448.

Rousseau, P. L. and R. Sylla (2001), “Financial System, Economic Growth, and Globalization”,
      National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8323.

Rousseau, P. L. and P. Wachtel (1998), “Financial Intermediation and Economic Performance:
      Historical Evidence from Five Industrial Countries”, Journal of Money, Credit and
      Banking, 30: 657-678.

Rousseau, P. L. and P. Wachtel (2000), “Equity Markets and Growth: Cross-Country Evidence
      on Timing and Outcomes, 1980-1995”, Journal of Business and Finance, 24: 1933-1957.

Rousseau, P.L. and P. Wachtel (2002), “Inflation Thresholds and the Finance-Growth Nexus”,
      Journal of International Money and Finance.

Saint-Paul, G. (1992),"Technological Choice, Financial Markets and Economic Development”,
       European Economic Review, 36: 763-781.
                                                                                              107

Scharfstein, D. (1988), "The Disciplinary Role of Takeovers”, Review of Economic Studies, 55:
       185-199.

Schumpeter, J. A. (1912), “Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwicklung. Leipzig: Dunker &
     Humblot”, [The Theory of Economic Development, 1912, translated by R. Opie.
     Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1934.]

Sirri, E. R. and P. Tufano (1995),"The Economics of Pooling”, In: The Global Financial System:
        A Functional Approach, Eds: D. B. Crane, et al., Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
        Press: 81-128.

Shan, J. Z., A. G. Morris and F. Sun (2001), “Financial Development and Economic Growth: An
       Egg and Chicken Problem?” Review of International Economics, 9: 443-454.

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1996), “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 94: 461-488.

Shleifer, A. and R. W. Vishny (1997), “A Survey of Corporate Governance”, Journal of Finance,
       52: 737-783.

Shleifer, A. and L. Summers (1988), "Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers”, In: Corporate
       Takeovers: Causes and Consequences, Ed.: A. Auerbach, Chicago: University of Chicago
       Press: 33-56.

Smith, A. (1776), An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, London: W.
       Stahan & T. Cadell.

Smith, B.D. (2002), “Taking Intermediation Seriously”, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking,
       forthcoming.

Stein, J. C. (1988), "Takeover Threats and Managerial Myopia”, Journal of Political Economy,
        96: 61-80.

Stiglitz, J. E. (1985), "Credit Markets and the Control of Capital”, Journal of Money, Credit and
        Banking, 17: 133-152.

Stiglitz, J. and A. Weiss (1983), "Incentive Effects of Terminations: Applications to Credit and
        Labor Markets”, American Economic Review, 73(5): 912-927.

Stulz, R. (1988), “Managerial Control of Voting Rights: Financing Policies and the Market for
        Corporate Control,” Journal of Financial Economics, 20: 25-54.

Stulz, R. M. (2001), “Does Financial Structure Matter for Economic Growth? A Corporate
        Finance Perspective”, In: Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country
        Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, Eds: A. Demirguc-Kunt and R.
        Levine. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press: 143-188.
                                                                                              108



Stulz, R. M. and R. Williamson (2003), “Culture, Openness, and Finance”, Journal of Financial
        Economics, forthcoming.

Sussman, O. (1993), “A Theory of Financial Development”, In: Finance and Development:
      Issues and Experience, Ed: A. Giovannini, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press):
      29-64.

Sylla, R.E. (1998), “U.S. Securities Markets and the Banking System, 1790-1840”, Federal
        Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review”, 80: 83-104.

Tadesse, S. (2002), "Financial Architecture and Economic Performance: International
      Evidence", Journal of Financial Intermediation, 11: 429-454.

Temple, J. (1999), “The New Growth Evidence”, Journal of Economic Literature, 37: 112-156.

Tilly, R. (1967), "Germany, 1815-1870”, In: Banking in the Early Stages of Industrialization: A
        Study in Comparative Economic History, Eds: R. Cameron et al., New York: Oxford
        University Press: 151-182.

Townsend, R. M. (1979), "Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly State
      Verification”, Journal of Economic Theory, 21: 265-293.

Weinstein, D. E. and Y. Yafeh (1998), “On the Costs of a Bank-Centered Financial System:
      Evidence from the Changing Main Bank Relations in Japan”, Journal of Finance, 53:
      635-672.

Wenger, E. and C. Kaserer (1998), “The German system of corporate governance: a model
      which should not be imitated”, In: Competition and Convergence in Financial Markets:
      The German and Anglo-American Models, Eds: Black, S.W. and Moersch, M., North –
      Holland Press, New York: 41-78.

Williamson, S. D. and R. Wright (1994), "Barter and Monetary Exchange under Private
       Information”, American Economic Review, 84: 104-123.

Wright, R.E. (2002), The Wealth of Nations Rediscovered: Integration and Expansion in
       American Financial Markets, 1780-1850, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Wurgler, J. (2000), “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital”, Journal of Financial
      Economics, 58: 187-214.

Xu, Z. (2000), “Financial Development, Investment, and Growth”, Economic Inquiry, 38: 331-
        344.

Zingales, L. (1994), “The Value of the Voting Right: A Study of the Milan Stock Exchange
       Experience”, The Review of Financial Studies, 7: 125-148.
                                                                                            109



Zingales, L. (1995), “What Determines the Value of Corporate Votes?” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 110: 1047-1073.
                                                                                                       110




Table 1: Growth and Financial Intermediary Development, 1960-89

Dependent Variable                                         Depth    Bank   Privy

Real per Capita GDP Growth                                 2.4** 3.2** 3.2**
                                                          (0.007) (0.005) (0.002)
R2                                                          0.50    0.50    0.52

Real per Capita Capital Growth                             2.2** 2.2** 2.5**
                                                          (0.006) (0.008) (0.007)
R2                                                          0.65    0.62    0.64

Productivity Growth                                        1.8** 2.6** 2.5**
                                                          (0.026) (0.010) (0.006)
R2                                                          0.42    0.43    0.44

Source: King and Levine (1993b), Table VII
* significant at the 0.10 level, ** significant at the 0.05 level
(p-values in parentheses)
Observations: 77

Variable definitions:
DEPTH = Liquid Liabilities/GDP
BANK = Deposit bank domestic credit/[deposit bank domestic credit + central bank domestic credit
PRIVY = Gross claims on the private sector / GDP
Productivity Growth = Real per capita GDP growth - (0.3)*(Real per capita Capital growth)

Other explanatory variables included in each of the nine regression results reported above:
logarithm of initial income, logarithm of initial secondary school enrollment, ratio of government consumption
expenditures to GDP, inflation rate, and ratio of exports plus imports to GDP.


Notes: King and Levine (1993b) define 2 percent growth as 0.02. For comparability with subsequent tables,
we have redefined 2 percent growth as 2.00 and adjusted the coefficients by a factor of 100.
                                                                                                      111



Table 2: Growth and Initial Financial Depth, 1960-89

Dependent Variable                                                                        Depth in 1960

Real per Capita GDP Growth, 1960-89                                                            2.8**
                                                                                              (0.001)
R2                                                                                             0.61

Real per Capita Capital Growth, 1960-89                                                        1.9**
                                                                                              (0.001)
R2                                                                                             0.63

Productivity Growth, 1960-89                                                                   2.2**
                                                                                              (0.001)
R2                                                                                             0.58

Sources: King and Levine (1993b), Table VIII; and Levine (1997), Table 3
* significant at the 0.10 level, ** significant at the 0.05 level
(p-values in parentheses). Observations: 57
Variable definitions:
DEPTH = Liquid Liabilities/GDP
Productivity Growth = Real per capita GDP growth - (0.3)*(Real per capita Capital growth)
Other explanatory variables included in each of the regression results reported above:
logarithm of initial income, logarithm of initial secondary school enrollment, ratio of government consumption expenditures
to GDP, inflation rate, and ratio of exports plus imports to GDP.


Notes: King and Levine (1993b) and Levine (1997) define 2 percent growth as 0.02. For comparability with subsequent
tables, we have redefined 2 percent growth as 2.00 and adjusted the coefficients by a factor of 100.
                                                                                                      112




Table 3: Stock Market and Bank Development Predict Growth, 1976-1993

       Dependent Variable (1976-93)                   Independent Variables (1976)
                                                        Bank Credit    Turnover                R2

Real per Capita GDP Growth                                  1.31**             2.69**          0.50
                                                           (0.022)            (0.005)

Real per Capita Capital Growth                              1.48**             2.22**          0.51
                                                           (0.025)            (0.024)

Productivity Growth                                         1.11**             2.01**          0.40
                                                           (0.020)            (0.029)

Source: Levine and Zervos (1998), Table 3.
* significant at the 0.10 level, ** significant at the 0.05 level. (p-values in parentheses)
Observations: 42 for the real per capita GDP growth regression and 41 for the others.
Variable definitions:
Bank Credit = Bank credit to the private sector / GDP in 1976 or the closest date with data.
Turnover = Value of the trades of domestic shares on domestic exchanges as a share of market
capitalization of domestic shares in 1976 or the closest date with data.
Productivity Growth = Real per capita GDP growth - (0.3)*(Real per capita Capital growth)
Other explanatory variables included in each of regression results reported above:
logarithm of initial income, logarithm of initial secondary school enrollment, ratio of government
consumption expenditures to GDP, inflation rate, black market exchange rate premium, and frequency
of revolutions and coups.
Notes: Levine and Zervos define 2 percent growth as 0.02. For comparability with subsequent tables,
we have redefined 2 percent growth as 2.00 and adjusted the coefficients by a factor of 100.
Table 4: Growth, Productivity Growth, and Capital Accumulation, Panel GMM and OLS, 1960-1995

1. Dependent Variable: Real per Capita GDP Growth
                                                                                                                    Sargan test2 (p- Serial correlation test3
                                                                                                               1
Estimation Procedure                            Private Credit          Countries         Obs.       OIR-test           value)              (p-value)

IV-Cross-Country                      2.22**                                 63            63          0.577
                                     (0.003)
GMM-Panel                             2.40**                                 77           365                               0.183             0.516
                                     (0.001)
2. Dependent Variable: Productivity Growth
                                                                                                                    Sargan test2 (p- Serial correlation test3
                                                                                                               1
Estimation Procedure                            Private Credit          Countries         Obs.       OIR-test           value)              (p-value)

IV-Cross-Country                      1.50**                                 63            63          2.036
                                     (0.004)
GMM-Panel                             1.33**                                 77           365                               0.205             0.772
                                     (0.001)
3. Dependent Variable: Capital per Capita Growth
                                                                                                                    Sargan test2 (p- Serial correlation test3
                                                                                                               1
Estimation Procedure                            Private Credit          Countries         Obs.       OIR-test           value)              (p-value)

IV-Cross-Country                                     2.83**                  63            63          6.750
                                                    (0.006)
GMM-Panel                                            3.44**                  77           365                               0.166             0.014
                                                    (0.001)
Source: Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000)
1
    The null hypothesis is that the instruments used are not correlated with the residuals from the respective regression
    Critical values for OIR-Test (2 d.f.): 10%= 4.61; 5%= 5.99
2
    The null hypothesis is that the instruments used are not correlated with the residuals from the respective regression
3
  The null hypothesis is that the errors in the first-difference regression exhibit no second-order serial correlation
* significant at the 0.10 level, ** significant at the 0.05 level (p-values in parentheses)
IV-Cross-Country: Cross-country instrumental variables with legal origin as instruments, estimated using GMM
GMM-Panel: Dynamic panel (5-year averages) generalized method of moments using system estimator
Other explanatory variables: logarithm of initial income per capita, average years of schooling
PRIVATE CREDIT: Logarithm (credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions to the private sector divided by GDP.)
                                                                                                                                    114
Table 5: Stock Markets, Banks, and Growth: Panel GMM and OLS, 1975-1998

Dependent Variable: Real per Capita GDP Growth
                                                                                                     Sargan
                                           Bank                                                      test1 (p- Serial correlation
Estimation Procedure                       Credit        Turnover          Countries       Obs.       value)    test2 (p-value)

OLS-Cross-Country                          1.47**          0.79**               40
                                          (0.001)         (0.025)

GMM-Panel                                  1.76**          0.96**               40             146    0.488          0.60
                                          (0.001)         (0.001)

Source: Beck and Levine (2004), Tables 2 and 3
* significant at the 0.10 level, ** significant at the 0.05 level. (p-values in parentheses)
OLS: Ordinary Least Squares with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.
GMM: Dynamic panel Generalized Method of Moments using system estimator.
  1
      The null hypothesis is that the instruments used are not correlated with the residuals.
  2
   The null hypothesis is that the errors in the first-difference regression exhibit
     no second-order serial correlation.
Bank Credit = logarithm (credit by deposit money banks to the private sector as a share of GDP.)
Turnover = logarithm (Value of the trades of domestic shares on domestic exchanges as a share of market capitalization of
domestic shares)
Other explanatory variables included in each of the regression results reported above:
logarithm of initial income and logarithm of initial secondary school enrollment.
                                                                                                                                       115


Table 6: Industry Growth and Financial Development


Dependent Variable:                                              Growth of value added of industry k in country i, 1980-1990


                                                                                                 Externalk *
    Share i,k of industry k in                                              Externalk * Total
                                                                                                 Accounting      R2     Observations
       country i in 1980                                                    Capitalizationi
                                                                                                 Standardsi

                        -0.912                                                        0.069                     0.29           1217
                       (0.246)                                                       (0.023)

                        -0.643                                                                     0.155        0.35           1067
                       (0.204)                                                                    (0.034)

Notes:
Source: Rajan and Zingales (1998), Table 4.

The table above
reports the results
from the regression:
 Growthi ,k = ∑ α j Countryj + ∑ β l Industryl + γSharei ,k + δ 1 ( Externalk * FDi ) + ε i ,k
               j                  l




Two regressions are reported corresponding to two values of FDi, Total Capitalization and Account
Standards respectively.
(Heteroskedasticity robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.)
Externalk is the fraction of capital expenditures not financed with internal funds for U.S. firms in
industry k between 1980-90.
Total Capitalization is stock market capitalization plus domestic credit.
Accounting Standards is an index of the quality of corporate financial reports.
                                                                                                                      116



Table 7: Excess Growth of Firms and External Financing


Dependent Variable: Proportion of firms that grow faster than their predicted growth rate1


   Market Capitalization/GDP      Turnover     Bank Assets/GDP       Adj. R2 Countries

              -0.106               0.311***         0.162***          0.48        26
             (0.058)               (0.072)          (0.050)


Notes:
Source: Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Table V
(White's heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors in parentheses)
*** indicates statistical significance at the 1 percent level.

1. The proportion of firms whose growth rates exceed the estimate of the maximum growth rate
that can be financed by relying only on internal and short-term financing.
Market Capitalization/GDP: The value of domestic equities listed on domestic exchanges as a share of GDP.
Turnover: The total value of trades of domestic shares on domestic exchanges as a share of market capitalization.
Other regressors: rate of inflation, the law and order tradition of the economy, i.e., the extent to which citizens
utilize existing legal system to mediate disputes and enforce contracts, growth rate of real GDP per capita, real
GDP per capita, government subsidies to private industries and public enterprises as a share of GDP, and net
fixes assets divided by total assets.
Time period: The dependent variable is averaged over the 1986-1991 period. All regressors are averaged over
the 1980-1985 period, data permitting.
