                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     THE OPTIMAL USE OF FINES AND IMPRISONMENT
                           WHEN WEALTH IS UNOBSERVABLE

                                          A. Mitchell Polinsky

                                          Working Paper 10761
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10761


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




This research was supported by the John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics at Stanford Law School.
I received helpful comments from Nuno Garoupa, Jason Johnston, Daniel Rubinfeld, Steven Shavell, Kathryn
Spier, and Robert Weisberg. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by A. Mitchell Polinsky. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Optimal Use of Fines and Imprisonment When Wealth is Unobservable
A. Mitchell Polinsky
NBER Working Paper No. 10761
September 2004
JEL No. D31, D62, H23, K14, K42

                                           ABSTRACT

This article studies the optimal use of fines and imprisonment when an offender’’s level of wealth
is private information that cannot be observed by the enforcement authority. In a model in which
there are two levels of wealth, I derive the optimal mix of sanctions, including the imprisonment
sentence imposed on offenders who do not pay the fine – referred to as the “alternative”
imprisonment sentence. Among other things, I demonstrate that if imprisonment sanctions are used,
the optimal alternative imprisonment sentence is sufficiently high that high-wealth individuals prefer
to pay a fine exceeding the wealth level of low-wealth individuals and bear a lower (possibly no)
imprisonment sentence rather than to pretend to be low-wealth individuals. I also show that if the
optimal enforcement system would rely exclusively on fines when wealth is observable, the inability
to observe wealth is detrimental because higher fines then could not be levied on higher-wealth
individuals. In this case, it may be desirable when wealth is unobservable to impose an imprisonment
sentence on offenders who do not pay the fine – who will be low-wealth offenders – in order to
induce high-wealth offenders to pay the fine. However, if the optimal enforcement system would
employ both fines and imprisonment sentences when wealth is observable, the inability to observe
wealth is not detrimental. In this case, the same sanctions would be chosen if wealth is unobservable
and these sanctions lead high-wealth individuals to pay more than low-wealth individuals.

A Mitchell Polinsky
Stanford Law School
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
polinsky@stanford.edu
I. Introduction

         Individuals have many ways of hiding assets from government enforcers, including by

hoarding cash, transferring assets to relatives or friends, or moving money to offshore bank

accounts. Notwithstanding these opportunities, prior analyses of optimal sanctions nearly always

have assumed that an offender’s level of wealth is costlessly observable by the enforcement

authority. Knowing wealth levels, the enforcement authority then chooses the sanctions to

impose, fines and/or imprisonment sentences. The contribution of the present article is to

consider optimal sanctions when an offender’s level of wealth is private information that cannot

be observed by the enforcement authority.1

         My analysis is based on a model in which there are two types of risk-neutral potential

offenders — a low-wealth type and a high-wealth type. If an offender is caught, he is sanctioned

with a fine and, possibly, an imprisonment sentence. If he claims that he cannot pay the fine

because he is a low-wealth individual, a higher imprisonment sentence might be imposed on

him — referred to as the “alternative” imprisonment sentence. The enforcement authority’s

problem is to choose the following policy instruments to maximize social welfare: the fine and

imprisonment sentence for committing the offense; the alternative imprisonment sentence if an

offender claims that he cannot pay the fine; and the probability of detecting the offense.

         The optimal enforcement system when wealth is unobservable takes one of three forms,

depending on the cost of imprisonment. At one extreme, if the cost of imprisonment is relatively

low, it may be optimal to impose both fines and imprisonment sentences on offenders and to

employ an alternative imprisonment sentence that is high enough so that high-wealth individuals


         1
          I discuss in Section V the most relevant prior literature on this topic — Levitt (1997), Chu and Jiang
(1993), and Polinsky (2004) — and how this article relates to it.



                                                    -2-
prefer to pay the fine and bear the corresponding imprisonment sentence rather than to pretend to

be low-wealth individuals. At the other extreme, if the cost of imprisonment is sufficiently high,

it will be optimal to rely exclusively on fines to sanction offenders; because wealth is

unobservable, the fine cannot exceed the wealth level of low-wealth individuals. An

intermediate case also is possible, in which offenders who pay the fine are not also imprisoned,

but those who do not pay the fine bear an (alternative) imprisonment sentence; in this case, too,

the optimal alternative imprisonment sentence is high enough to discourage high-wealth

individuals from pretending to be low-wealth individuals. In each of these cases, I derive the

optimal sanctions and discuss whether low-wealth and high-wealth individuals are underdeterred

or overdeterred relative to the first-best outcome.

       Perhaps surprisingly, I show that information about wealth levels may or may not be

helpful. The key point is that such information is useful only if the enforcement authority would

want to impose higher sanctions on high-wealth individuals than on low-wealth individuals, for

if this is the case, high-wealth individuals would pretend to be low-wealth individuals if wealth

could not be observed. Conversely, if the enforcement authority would want to impose lower

sanctions on high-wealth individuals than on low-wealth individuals, high-wealth individuals

will voluntarily bear such sanctions. I show that both of these possibilities can occur.

       A notable result from my analysis is that, if wealth is unobservable, it may be worthwhile

to use an alternative imprisonment sentence to induce high-wealth offenders to pay more than

low-wealth offenders even if imprisonment is so costly that that it would not be used if wealth

were observable. In other words, when wealth is not observable, it may be desirable to impose a

costly sanction — imprisonment sentences — on low-wealth offenders in order to better deter




                                            -3-
high-wealth offenders through a cheap sanction — fines. If wealth were observable, it would not

be necessary to incur this cost.

          Section II presents the general framework used in this article. Section III derives the

optimal enforcement system under different assumptions about the cost of imprisonment.

Section IV compares the results to the case when wealth is observable. Section V discusses the

prior literature in relation to the analysis here. Section VI considers various generalizations.



II. General Framework

          In the model, individuals contemplate whether to commit an offense that causes harm.

Each individual is identified by the benefit he would obtain from committing the offense and by

his level of wealth. For simplicity, I assume that there are two levels of wealth and that an

individual’s benefit is independent of his wealth level.2 An individual who commits the offense

is detected with a probability that is determined by the enforcement expenditures of the state.3 If

detected, he may be sanctioned with a fine and/or an imprisonment sentence. If he does not pay

the fine, he may be subject to a higher alternative imprisonment sentence. I assume for

simplicity that individuals are risk neutral with respect to fines and imprisonment sentences, and

that they bear the same disutility from a given sentence.4 Fines are treated as socially costless




          2
              I discuss in Section VI why my general results should continue to hold if there is a continuum of wealth
levels.
          3
          This probability is assumed to be independent of the individual’s level of wealth. This makes sense in
many, if not most, enforcement contexts.
          4
           An individual who is risk neutral with respect to an imprisonment sentence only cares about the expected
value of the sentence length. I explain in Section VI why my general results would not be affected if individuals are
not risk neutral with respect to fines or imprisonment sentences, or if they differ in terms of their disutility from time
in prison.



                                                       -4-
sanctions, while the cost of imprisonment to the state is assumed to be proportional to the length

of the sentence.

       The following notation will be used.

       h = harm caused if the offense is committed; h > 0;

       b = benefit from committing the offense; b $ 0;

     r(b) = probability density of b; r is positive for all b $ 0;

      wL = level of wealth of low-wealth individuals; wL $ 0;

      wH = level of wealth of high-wealth individuals; wH > wL;

       θ = fraction of individuals with a low level of wealth;

        e = enforcement expenditures of the state; e $ 0;

     p(e) = probability of detection; p(0) = 0; p'(e) > 0; p"(e) < 0;

           f = fine for committing the offense; f $ 0;5

        s = imprisonment sentence for committing the offense

               if the fine f is paid; s $ 0;

        sN = alternative imprisonment sentence for committing the

               offense if less than f is paid; sN $ 0; and

        c = cost to the state per unit of imprisonment sentence; c > 0.

The state is assumed to know the distribution of wealth levels among the population, but not the

wealth level of a particular individual. Imprisonment sentences are measured in units of time

such that one unit of an imprisonment sentence corresponds to one dollar’s worth of disutility to




       5
           This is the nominal fine. An individual might not have sufficient wealth to pay this fine.



                                                    -5-
an individual. Thus, an imprisonment sentence of length s imposes a cost on an individual equal

to s.

         Individual Behavior. Let

        bL = critical value of benefit below which a low-wealth individual will

                 not commit the offense and at and above which he will,6

and define bH analogously. Thus, the higher bL or bH, the greater the level of deterrence.

         If the fine f is less than or equal to a low-wealth individual’s level of wealth wL, then

clearly everyone can be made to pay f and bear the imprisonment sentence s. Any alternative

imprisonment sentence sN $ f + s will accomplish this. In this case,

                                                bL = bH = p(e)(f + s).                                              (1)

         If f exceeds wL, a low-wealth individual will not be able to pay the fine. Such individuals

can be made to pay wL, however, if the state threatens to impose a sufficiently high imprisonment

sentence, say sNN $ wL + sN , on anyone who does not pay at least wL. A low-wealth individual

therefore will pay wL and bear the imprisonment sentence sN, in which case

                                             bL = p(e)(wL + sN ).                                                   (2)

A high-wealth individual has the choice of paying the fine f and bearing the imprisonment

sentence s,7 or claiming that he is a low-wealth individual and paying wL and bearing the

alternative imprisonment sentence sN. Hence,

                                       bH = p(e)min(f + s, wL + sN ).                                               (3)




         6
             I assume without loss of generality that he will commit the offense if he is indifferent.
         7
          It is obvious that there is no advantage to the enforcement authority from setting the fine in excess of the
wealth level of the high-wealth individuals.



                                                       -6-
I assume without loss of generality that if f + s = wL + sN, a high-wealth individual will pay the

fine f and bear the imprisonment sentence s.

         Social welfare. Social welfare is the sum of the benefits obtained by individuals who

commit the offense, less the harm done, less the private and public cost of imprisonment, and

less the cost of detection. It will be convenient to state social welfare in two cases.

         If the fine f is less than or equal to wL, then social welfare is

                                   4
                                   I[b – h – p(e)(1 + c)s]r(b)db – e.                                               (4)
                               p(e)(f + s)

Everyone whose benefit equals or exceeds p(e)(f + s) commits the offense, resulting in a benefit

b and a harm h. With probability p(e) such individuals are detected and made to bear an

imprisonment sentence s. The social cost of imprisonment is the sum of the private cost s and

public cost cs. The state also incurs enforcement expenditures e. The fines that individuals pay

do not enter social welfare directly because they are transfer payments.

         If the fine f exceeds wL and high-wealth individuals pay f, social welfare is

                    4
                  θI[b – h – p(e)(1 + c)sN ]r(b)db
              p(e)(wL + sN )
                                                 4                                                                  (5)
                                    + (1 – θ)I[b – h – p(e)(1 + c)s]r(b)db – e.
                                             p(e)(f + s)

The interpretation of (5) is the same as that of (4), though now low-wealth and high-wealth

individuals face different sanctions because low-wealth individuals cannot pay f.8

         The state’s problem. The state’s problem is to maximize social welfare through the

choice of the fine f, the imprisonment sentence s, the alternative imprisonment sentence sN, and


         8
           It is not necessary to state social welfare for the case in which f exceeds wL and high-wealth individuals
pay wL; I demonstrate below that this case cannot occur in the optimal enforcement system.



                                                           -7-
enforcement expenditures e.9 Monetary payments by low-wealth and high-wealth individuals

cannot exceed their respective levels of wealth. I do not impose an upper bound on

imprisonment sentences; it will be evident below that there is no reason to expect the optimal

imprisonment sentences to be maximal, so any corner solution resulting from limiting

imprisonment sentences would not be particularly interesting.

         Asterisks are used to denote the solution to the state’s problem, which I assume is unique.

I also assume that some enforcement is optimal, that is, e* > 0; otherwise, the problem is

uninteresting.



III. Analysis

         There are three cases to consider, depending on whether imprisonment is used to sanction

all offenders, or used just to sanction those who do not pay the fine, or not used at all.10 In this

section I describe the optimal enforcement system through propositions that correspond to these

cases. Following the proof of each proposition is an informal discussion of the results.

         Proposition 1. If the public cost of imprisonment c is sufficiently low, it may be optimal

to use imprisonment both to sanction offenders who pay the fine as well as those who do not; that

is, both s* and sN * may be positive. In this case,

         (a) the optimal fine is maximal: f* = wH;

         (b) the optimal alternative imprisonment sentence (imposed if the fine is not paid)

exceeds s*: sN * > s*;


         9
            Because my objective is to derive the socially optimal enforcement policy, I ignore the issue of whether
the state’s policy is credible.
         10
          Using imprisonment just to sanction offenders who pay the fine obviously is not feasible because then no
one would pay the fine.



                                                    -8-
        (c) high-wealth individuals pay the fine f* rather than a payment equal to the wealth level

of a low-wealth individual wL;

        (d) the burden of the sanctions imposed on low-wealth individuals exceeds that imposed

on high-wealth individuals: wL + sN * > f* + s*; and

        (e) both groups may be underdeterred or overdeterred.

        Proof: (i) I first show that if s* > 0, it must be that f* $ wL. Suppose otherwise, that s* >

0 and f* < wL. Then it would be possible to raise f (with f remaining below wL) and lower s so as

to keep f + s constant without affecting behavior, but raising social welfare by reducing the cost

of imprisonment (see (4)).

        (ii) Now suppose that s* > 0 and f* = wL. This cannot be optimal either. It would be

possible to set sN equal to s* and then raise f above wL and lower s by the same amount. This

would increase social welfare because neither group’s behavior would be affected, yet the cost of

imprisoning high-wealth individuals would decline (see (5)).

        (iii) Hence, if s* > 0, it must be that f* > wL. But if f < wH, social welfare can be

increased by raising f and lowering s by the same amount, without changing sN ; again, the cost of

imprisonment declines for high-wealth individuals. Hence, if s* > 0, it must be that f* = wH,

establishing part (a).

        (iv) To prove part (b), suppose the contrary, that sN * < s*. Then, since f* = wH > wL,

high-wealth individuals would prefer to pay wL and bear the imprisonment sentence sN *, the same

sanctions borne by low-wealth individuals. But this cannot be optimal by the type of argument

used in step (ii). This establishes part (b). Part (c) follows from the same reasoning.




                                             -9-
        (v) I next show that if s* > 0, sN * and s* are such that wL + sN * > wH + s*. If s* > 0, then

the first-order condition with respect to s derived from (5) is, with f = wH and after dividing

through by –(1 – θ)p(e),

                          (1 + c)[1 – R(bH)] + [bH – h – p(e)(1 + c)s]r(bH) = 0,                      (6)

where bH = p(e)(wH + s). The derivative of social welfare with respect to sN is

                        –θp(e){(1 + c)[1 – R(bL)] + (bL – h – p(e)(1 + c) sN )r(bL)},                 (7)

where bL = p(e)(wL + sN ). Consider this derivative at the value of sN such that wL + sN = wH + s*,

that is, at sN = s* + (wH – wL). At this value of sN, (7) can be written as

                  –θp(e){(1 + c)[1 – R(bL)] + (bL – h – p(e)(1 + c)s*)r(bL)}
                                                                                                      (8)
                                         + θp(e)2[(1 + c)(wH – wL)]r(bL),

where bL = p(e)(wL + sN ) = p(e)(wH + s*). Since bL at this sN equals bH at s*, (6) implies that the

first term in (8) is zero. The second term in (8) clearly is positive, so (8) is positive at sN = s* +

(wH – wL), implying that sN * > s* + (wH – wL) or, equivalently, wL + sN * > wH + s*. This

establishes part (d).

        (vi) I next address whether individuals will be underdeterred or overdeterred relative to

the first-best outcome. First consider low-wealth individuals and the derivative of social welfare

with respect to sN (7). Evaluated at sN such that bL = p(e)(wL + sN ) = h, it is clear that the sign of

(7) is the same as the sign of p(e)sN r(h) – [1 – R(h)]. The first term could be very low, for

example if p(e) is low, in which case the sign of (7) would be negative; this implies that sN should

be chosen such that bL < h, resulting in underdeterrence. Conversely, the second term could be

very low — if R(h) is close to one — in which case the sign of (7) would be positive and bL

would exceed h, so there would be overdeterrence. Similar observations apply to high-wealth

individuals. This establishes part (e).


                                               - 10 -
         (vii) Finally, I demonstrate that there exists a sufficient condition for the optimal

imprisonment sentence s* to be positive. Given f* = wH, it can be shown from (5) that if the

public cost of imprisonment c is zero, the derivative of social welfare with respect to s is positive

at s = 0 if

                                     h > wH + sup{[1 – R(pwH)]/r(pwH)}.                                               (9)
                                               p 0 [0, 1]

Thus, if (9) is satisfied and c is sufficiently low, s* > 0.▪

         It is obvious that it might be socially beneficial to use imprisonment despite its cost if the

harm from the offense is sufficiently high. For example, if the harm far exceeds the wealth level

of high-wealth individuals, using fines alone will result in substantial underdeterrence even if

detection is certain; the additional deterrence from employing imprisonment will be socially

desirable if the cost of imprisonment is not too great. Because the private cost of imprisonment

per unit of deterrence is unavoidable,11 this means that the public cost of imprisonment c must be

sufficiently low.

         That the fine should be maximal before imprisonment is used follows from well-known

logic. Specifically, since fines are socially cheaper sanctions than are imprisonment sentences,

fines should be used to their fullest extent before the state resorts to using imprisonment.

         The key insight from Proposition 1 is that the optimal alternative imprisonment sentence

imposed on individuals who do not pay the fine is high enough to make high-wealth individuals

prefer to pay the fine. The reason it is optimal to impose such a high imprisonment sentence on

individuals who do not pay the fine, all of whom are low-wealth individuals, can be explained as

follows (in a way that parallels the proof). Consider an alternative imprisonment sentence sN


         11
           To create a dollar’s worth of disutility to an offender by imprisoning him necessarily causes a dollar’s
worth of social cost.


                                                   - 11 -
borne by low-wealth individuals that, combined with a monetary payment equal to their wealth

level wL, creates the same degree of deterrence as for high-wealth individuals, given their

payment of the fine f and bearing of the imprisonment sentence s. Obviously, the imprisonment

sentence borne by the low-wealth individuals must be higher. Now raise the imprisonment

sentence borne by each group. The effect on social welfare from the additional deterrence is the

same for each group since the level of deterrence initially is the same (and the distribution of

benefits is assumed to be the same for both groups). But because the imprisonment sentence

borne by low-wealth individuals is longer, the social benefit of raising the imprisonment

sentence is greater for them — society saves more on imprisonment costs for each low-wealth

individual deterred from committing the offense. Thus, it is optimal to impose a higher

imprisonment sentence on low-wealth individuals than that which would equalize the deterrence

of both groups. Consequently, high-wealth individuals prefer to pay the fine and thereby bear a

lower total burden from the combined sanctions.

       The explanation why both groups may be underdeterred or overdeterred is based on a

familiar argument. Consider low-wealth individuals first, and suppose that their monetary

payment and the (alternative) imprisonment sentence applicable to them are such that their

expected combined sanction equals the harm. If the imprisonment sentence is raised, there is no

first-order effect on social welfare with respect to the benefit and harm from committing the

offense because the marginal individuals who are deterred from committing the offense were

obtaining a benefit equal to the harm. But raising the sentence does have two effects on the cost

of imprisonment. On one hand, the cost of imprisonment tends to increase because those

individuals who continue to commit the offense now bear a longer sentence if they are detected.

On the other hand, the cost of imprisonment tends to decrease because fewer individuals commit


                                           - 12 -
the offense and serve imprisonment sentences. Either effect could dominate, possibly making it

desirable to raise the imprisonment sentence — resulting in overdeterrence — or to lower the

imprisonment sentence — resulting in underdeterrence. Analogous observations apply to high-

wealth individuals.

       The next proposition addresses the case in which offenders who pay the fine are not also

subject to an imprisonment sentence, but offenders who do not pay the fine do bear an

imprisonment sentence.

       Proposition 2. It may be optimal to use imprisonment only to sanction offenders who do

not pay the fine; in other words, it is possible that s* = 0 and sN * > 0. In this case,

       (a) the optimal fine exceeds the wealth level of low-wealth individuals but might not be

maximal: wL < f* # wH;

       (b) high-wealth individuals pay the fine f* rather than a payment equal to the wealth

level of a low-wealth individual wL;

       (c) the burden of the sanctions imposed on low-wealth individuals equals or exceeds that

imposed on high-wealth individuals: wL + sN * $ f*; and

       (d) both groups may be underdeterred, but only low-wealth individuals may be

overdeterred.

       Proof: (i) I first show that if s* = 0 and sN * > 0, it must be that f* > wL. Suppose

otherwise, that s* = 0, sN * > 0, and f* # wL. Given these sanctions, both groups pay f* and do not

bear an imprisonment sentence. Any value of sN , including sN = 0, would result in the same

outcome, contradicting the uniqueness of sN *. Hence, if s* = 0 and sN * > 0, it must be that f* >




                                            - 13 -
wL. That f* can be less than wH is demonstrated in the analytical example in step (v) below; this

example also can be modified to show that f* = wH is possible.12 This establishes part (a).

         (ii) Suppose, given s* = 0, sN * > 0, and f* > wL, that high-wealth individuals prefer to pay

wL and bear the imprisonment sentence sN *. In other words, suppose wL + sN * < f*. Then both

groups would be paying wL and bearing the sentence sN *. This cannot be optimal because it

would be possible to improve social welfare by lowering f to wL + sN *, in which case high-wealth

individuals now pay f and are deterred to the same extent, and the cost of imprisonment declines

because they no longer bear imprisonment sentences. This proves part (b).

         (iii) The prior step showed that wL + sN * < f* cannot hold. Hence, it must be that wL + sN *

$ f*. The analytical example in step (v) below shows that strict inequality can occur. I show

here that equality also is possible. The derivative of social welfare with respect to s derived from

(5) is

                           –(1 – θ)p(e){(1 + c)[1 – R(bH)] + [bH – h – p(e)(1 + c)s]r(bH)},           (10)

where bH = p(e)(f + s). Since s* = 0, (10) must be non-positive at s = 0, which implies that

                                   (1 + c)[1 – R(bH)] + [bH – h]r(bH) $ 0,                            (11)

where bH = p(e)f. The derivative of social welfare with respect to sN is (7), where bL = p(e)(wL +

sN ). Consider this derivative at the value of sN such that wL + sN = f*, that is, at sN = f* – wL. At this

value of sN, (7) can be written as

                              –θp(e){(1 + c)[1 – R(bL)] + (bL – h)r(bL)}
                                                                                                      (12)
                                                  2
                                           + θp(e) [(1 + c)( f* – wL)]r(bL),




         12
              See note 13 below.



                                                - 14 -
where bL = p(e)(wL + sN ) = p(e)f*. Since bL at this sN equals bH at f*, (11) implies that the first

term in (12) is non-positive. The second term in (12) is positive. If (12) is non-positive, then it

will not be optimal to raise sN above sN = f* – wL. A sufficient condition for (12) to be negative is

that r(bL) is sufficiently low. Then sN * = f* – wL, or wL + sN * = f*. Thus, wL + sN * $ f* can hold

with equality or strict inequality, proving part (c).

        (iv) The logic used in step (vi) of the proof of Proposition 1 implies here as well that the

low-wealth individuals can be underdeterred or overdeterred. If they are underdeterred, then the

high-wealth individuals also must be underdeterred because of part (c) of the present proposition.

If the low-wealth individuals are overdeterred, however, it would never be optimal to set f such

that the high-wealth individuals are overdeterred since f could be lowered to h/p(e), leading high-

wealth individuals to be first-best deterred.

        (v) Finally, I provide an analytical example in which s* = 0 and sN * > 0. Suppose wL < h

< wH and, for simplicity, that the probability of detection can be set at any level at no cost (this

assumption is not essential). Then, clearly, p(e*) = 1; this allows high-wealth individuals to be

first-best deterred by setting f = h and results in low-wealth individuals being deterred to the

greatest extent feasible by a monetary payment alone. If high-wealth individuals can be first-

best deterred by a fine alone, the optimal imprisonment sentence would be s = 0. Low-wealth

individuals, however, would be underdeterred by a monetary payment alone because wL < h. To

see whether it is desirable to employ an alternative imprisonment sentence sN sufficiently large so

that high-wealth individuals prefer to pay f = h, consider the derivative of social welfare (5) with

respect to sN evaluated at sN such that wL + sN = h, that is, at sN = h – wL. Assuming that p = 1, this

derivative is positive at sN = h – wL if

                                     (h – wL)r(h) – [1 – R(h)] > 0.                                    (13)


                                             - 15 -
It is evident that (13) can be satisfied — for instance, if R(h) is sufficiently close to one — in

which case sN * > h – wL. High-wealth individuals therefore prefer to pay f* = h rather than wL +

sN * > h.13 Clearly, other examples in which s* = 0 and sN * > h – wL could be constructed similar

to this one even if it is costly to raise the probability of detection.▪

         That this case can occur should not be surprising. Because high-wealth individuals can

be deterred by fines to a greater extent than low-wealth individuals, the value of deterring high-

wealth individuals further by imposing an imprisonment sentence on them is lower. Thus, given

the cost of imprisonment, it might not be worthwhile to impose an imprisonment sentence on

high-wealth offenders who pay the fine, even though it may be desirable to impose an

imprisonment sentence on low-wealth offenders who cannot pay the fine.

         Although much of Proposition 2 parallels Proposition 1, there are three notable

differences. First, the optimal fine no longer is necessarily maximal. It is maximal in the case

described by Proposition 1 because high-wealth offenders are subject to an imprisonment term,

and fines, being a socially cheaper sanction, should be used to the fullest extent possible before

imprisonment is employed. Here, high-wealth individuals do not bear an imprisonment

sentence, so this argument does not apply. It is possible, therefore, that the optimal fine is less

than maximal. For example, given the probability of detection, it might not be necessary to raise

the fine to the maximal level in order to achieve first-best deterrence.

         Second, while in Proposition 1 the burden of the sanctions imposed on low-wealth

offenders strictly exceeds that imposed on high-wealth offenders, here they can be equal. The


         13
             To see that this example can be modified so that f* = wH, suppose that the probability of detection can be
raised to h/wH < 1 at no cost, and that it is excessively costly to raise it higher; thus, p* = h/wH. Then setting f = wH
and s = 0 leads to first-best deterrence of high-wealth individuals since p*f = h, and analogous reasoning to that used
in step (v) implies that wL + sN * > wH can hold, so high-wealth individuals again prefer to pay f*.



                                                    - 16 -
earlier argument stemmed from the fact that when both low-wealth and high-wealth offenders

are subject to imprisonment sentences, deterring a low-wealth offender generates greater savings

in imprisonment costs because low-wealth offenders have to bear longer imprisonment sentences

to achieve the same level of deterrence. This argument is not applicable here because high-

wealth offenders are not subject to an imprisonment sentence. Now, starting from a situation in

which both low-wealth and high-wealth individuals are equally deterred, with an imprisonment

sentence imposed only on low-wealth offenders, it may not be desirable to raise the

imprisonment sentence (whether it is depends on the desirability of the additional deterrence, the

imprisonment cost savings from the additional deterrence, and the additional imprisonment costs

due to undeterred low-wealth offenders serving longer sentences). If a higher imprisonment

sentence is not desirable, then both groups will bear an equal burden from the sanctions.14

        Finally, while both groups could be underdeterred or overdeterred in the case examined

in Proposition 1, here the high-wealth group never is overdeterred. The only rationale for

overdeterring either group is to reduce the burden of imprisonment costs by reducing the number

of offenders. Because high-wealth offenders here are not bearing an imprisonment sanction, this

argument does not apply to them.

        The last proposition considers the case in which fines alone are used. Although the

results are straightforward, I include this case for completeness.

        Proposition 3. If the public cost of imprisonment c is sufficiently high, it will be optimal

to rely exclusively on fines to sanction offenders. In this case,

        (a) the optimal fine equals the wealth level of low-wealth individuals: f* = wL;


        14
           The low-wealth offenders cannot bear a lower burden, for then high-wealth offenders could not be
induced to pay the fine f.



                                                 - 17 -
       (b) everyone pays the fine f*; and

       (c) both groups are underdeterred.

       Proof: (i) I first show that it must be that f* $ wL. Suppose otherwise, that f* < wL. Then

it would be possible to raise f and lower e so as to keep p(e)f constant without affecting behavior,

but reducing enforcement costs. If f > wL, high-wealth individuals would not pay f unless there is

a positive alternative imprisonment sentence sN, which would then be borne by low-wealth

offenders, contradicting the premise that imprisonment costs make the imposition of

imprisonment sentences socially undesirable. This proves part (a).

       (ii) Everyone can be made to pay f* = wL by the threat of an alternative imprisonment

sentence sN such that sN $ wL. Since no one actually bears this sentence, the premise of this

proposition is not contradicted. This establishes part (b).

       (iii) The first-order condition for determining e* from (4) can be written as (h –

p(e)f)[dR(p(e)f)/de] = 1, which implies that p(e)f < h, proving part (c).

       (iv) Starting from the outcome when fines alone are used, the marginal benefit of

additional deterrence due to the use of an alternative imprisonment sentence sN is at most the

harm h (it is h – p(e*)wL for each low-wealth individual deterred by the imposition of sN and for

each high-wealth individual deterred by setting f = wL + sN ). The marginal cost of employing an

alternative imprisonment sentence, starting at sN = 0, is θp(e*)(1 + c)[1 – R(p(e*)wL)]. Therefore,

if the public cost of imprisonment c is high enough, the marginal cost of imprisonment at sN = 0

will exceed the marginal benefit of imprisonment, and it will be optimal to rely exclusively on

fines to sanction offenders.▪

       It is not surprising that it will be socially desirable to rely exclusively on fines if the cost

of imprisonment is sufficiently great. The fine should be as high as possible because, by well-


                                            - 18 -
known logic, this allows the probability of detection to be lowered, saving enforcement costs.

But the fine cannot exceed the wealth level of low-wealth individuals because, to induce high-

wealth individuals to pay a higher fine, it would be necessary to impose an (alternative)

imprisonment sentence on low-wealth individuals; by assumption, an imprisonment sentence

would not be desirable, given its cost. Given a fine equal to the wealth level of low-wealth

individuals, everyone can be induced to pay the fine.

       The explanation why both groups are underdeterred is based on a familiar argument.

Suppose that the probability of detection is such that the expected fine equals the harm. If the

probability is lowered, there is no first-order effect on social welfare due to the lower level of

deterrence because the marginal individuals who are induced to commit the offense obtain a

benefit equal to the harm. But lowering the probability saves enforcement costs. Hence, some

underdeterrence is socially desirable.



IV. Comparison to the Case of Observable Wealth

       If wealth is observable, the enforcement authority can choose the mix of sanctions for

each group separately. In particular, to induce high-wealth individuals to pay more than low-

wealth individuals, the enforcement authority no longer needs to employ an alternative

imprisonment sentence and make the burden of the sanctions for low-wealth offenders at least as

high as that for high-wealth offenders. If the state can observe wealth, it can simply command

that individuals in each group pay any amount up to their wealth level and bear any

corresponding imprisonment sentence.

       It would seem, therefore, that information about wealth levels would be socially valuable.

Perhaps surprisingly, I will show in this section that such information may or may not be helpful.


                                            - 19 -
The key point is that information about wealth is useful only if the enforcement authority would

want to impose higher sanctions on high-wealth individuals than on low-wealth individuals, for

if this is the case, high-wealth individuals would pretend to be low-wealth individuals if wealth

could not be observed. Conversely, if the enforcement authority would want to impose lower

sanctions on high-wealth individuals than on low-wealth individuals, high-wealth individuals

will voluntarily bear such sanctions. The following propositions show that both of these

possibilities can occur.15

         Proposition 4. If wealth is observable, suppose that the optimal enforcement system

would rely exclusively on fines to sanction offenders. In this case, if wealth is not observable,

         (a) social welfare would be lower; and

         (b) the optimal enforcement system might rely exclusively on fines; or

         (c) the optimal enforcement system might employ alternative imprisonment sentences as

well as fines.

         Proof: (i) Let fL and fH be the fines paid by low-wealth and high-wealth individuals,

respectively, when wealth is observable. I show in this step that f*L = wL.16 Assume, to the

contrary, that f*L < wL, and first suppose that f*H < wH. Then there would exist a p(e) < p(e*), an fL

> f*L , and an fH > f*H such that p(e)fL = p(e*)f*L and p(e)fH = p(e*)f*H. Since the behavior of low-

wealth and high-wealth individuals will not have changed, but enforcement costs will have

declined, f*L < wL could not have been optimal. Now suppose that f*L < wL and f*H = wH. Observe


         15
            The first proposition below corresponds to Proposition 3, in which fines are used alone, while the second
proposition below corresponds to Proposition 1, in which an imprisonment sentence and a monetary sanction are
imposed on both low-wealth and high-wealth offenders. For brevity, I do not consider the case corresponding to
Proposition 2, in which an imprisonment sentence and a monetary sanction are imposed on low-wealth offenders,
but only a fine is imposed on high-wealth offenders. In this case, information about wealth may or may not be
valuable, essentially for the reasons illustrated by the other cases.




                                                   - 20 -
first that it must be that p(e*)f*H # h; otherwise, the resulting overdeterrence could be eliminated

at no cost by reducing fH. Since wL < wH, it must be that p(e*)wL < h. Thus, the underdeterrence

associated with f*L < wL could be reduced at no cost by raising fL, contradicting the presumed

optimality of f*L . Hence, it must be that f*L = wL.

        (ii) I demonstrate in this step that f*H > wL. Assume otherwise, that f*H # wL. Suppose first

that f*H < wL. Note that p(e*)f*L = p(e*)wL # h, since otherwise the resulting overdeterrence of

low-wealth individuals could be eliminated at no cost by reducing fL. This implies that p(e*)f*H <

h. But then the underdeterrence of high-wealth individuals could be eliminated at no cost by

raising fH, contradicting the presumed optimality of f*H < wL. Now suppose f*H = wL. Then by

step (iii) of the proof of Proposition 3, p(e*) must be such that p(e*)wL < h. But this implies that

the underdeterrence of the high-wealth individuals could be reduced at no cost by raising fH,

contradicting the presumed optimality of f*H = wL. Therefore, f*H > wL.

        (iii) If wealth is not observable, it is now straightforward to see that social welfare must

be lower than when wealth is observable. If fines are used alone when wealth is not observable,

recall from Proposition 3 that all offenders pay f* = wL. This outcome is feasible when wealth is

observable and fines are used alone, but step (ii) shows that it is not optimal. If imprisonment

sentences are used when wealth is not observable, the resulting outcome also must be inferior

because the same outcome could have been chosen when wealth is observable, but the premise of

the present proposition is that the optimal enforcement system when wealth is observable relies

exclusively on fines. This establishes part (a).

        (iv) Clearly, part (b) holds if the public cost of imprisonment c is sufficiently high.


        16
          The results in this and the next step were demonstrated by Polinsky and Shavell (1984, pp. 96-97).
Because the proofs are short, I reproduce them here for completeness.



                                                 - 21 -
                                                F       F           I
         (v) To establish part (c), let SWO, SWU, and SWU be the limiting values of social welfare

as the fraction of low-wealth individuals θ goes to zero when, respectively, wealth is observable

and fines are used alone, wealth is unobservable and fines are used alone, and wealth is

unobservable and an alternative imprisonment sentence is used in addition to fines. I claim that
    F         I       F                             F         F
SWU < SWU = SWO. It is obvious that SWU < SWO since, if wealth is unobservable, all offenders

pay a fine of wL, whereas if wealth is observable, high-wealth offenders pay a fine of f*H > wL. If

wealth is unobservable and an alternative imprisonment sentence is used, set sN = f*H – wL and f =

f*H. High-wealth offenders will pay f = f*H (since f = wL + sN ) while low-wealth offenders will pay

wL and bear an imprisonment sentence of sN = f*H – wL. In the limit, as θ goes to zero, the cost of

imprisonment goes to zero. Thus, if the enforcement authority picks the same probability of
                                                                                            I       F
detection when wealth is unobservable as when wealth is observable, SWU = SWO. This result

holds regardless of the public cost of imprisonment c. Thus, even if fines are used alone when

wealth is observable because of the high cost of imprisonment, it will be optimal to employ an

alternative imprisonment sentence when wealth is unobservable if θ is sufficiently low.17 This

proves part (c).▪

         A notable aspect of the present proposition is that, if wealth is unobservable, it may be

worthwhile to use an alternative imprisonment sentence to induce high-wealth offenders to pay

more than low-wealth offenders even though imprisonment is so costly that that it would not be

used if wealth were observable. In other words, when wealth is not observable, it may be

desirable to impose a costly sanction — imprisonment sentences — on low-wealth offenders in


         17
             There is no inconsistency between the premise of Proposition 3 — that if the public cost of imprisonment
c is sufficiently high, it will be optimal to rely exclusively on fines — and the result here that if the fraction of low-
wealth individuals θ is low enough, it will be optimal to employ an alternative imprisonment sentence regardless of
the cost of imprisonment. The premise of Proposition 3 involves raising c, holding θ constant, whereas the claim
here involves lowering θ, holding c constant.


                                                     - 22 -
order to better deter high-wealth offenders through a cheap sanction — fines. If wealth were

observable, it would not be necessary to incur this cost.

        Proposition 5. If wealth is observable, suppose that the optimal enforcement system

would rely both on imprisonment sentences as well as fines to sanction offenders. In this case, if

wealth is not observable,

        (a) social welfare is not affected; and

        (b) the optimal enforcement system is the same.

        Proof: Let sL and sH be the imprisonment sentences borne by low-wealth and high-

wealth individuals, respectively, when wealth is observable. The premise of this proposition is

that s*L > 0 and s*H > 0. Clearly, then, it must be that f*L = wL and f*H = wH (or the fine could be

raised and the imprisonment sentence lowered). The argument used in step (v) of the proof of

Proposition 1 implies that wL + s*L > wH + s*H. Hence, when wealth is not observable, if s = s*H, sN

= s*L , and enforcement expenditures are the same as those made when wealth is observable, the

outcome can duplicate that when wealth is observable. Clearly, this is the social-welfare-

maximizing outcome when wealth is unobservable, proving parts (a) and (b).▪



V. Prior Literature

        To my knowledge, the only prior article to have systematically studied optimal sanctions

under the assumption that an offender’s level of wealth is unobservable is Levitt (1997).18 His

model differs in significant respects, however, from mine. In Levitt’s framework, “rich” and


        18
           Several articles have studied optimal sanctions when variations in wealth are assumed to be costlessly
observable. See Friedman (1981), Polinsky and Shavell (1984, pp. 95-98), Polinsky and Shavell (1991), and
Garoupa (1998, pp. 484-87). (Garoupa examines the case in which the enforcement authority costlessly observes an
underestimate of individuals’ wealth levels.)



                                                 - 23 -
“poor” individuals are distinguished not in terms of their wealth levels (both types are assumed

to be capable of paying any fine the state imposes), but instead in terms of their disutility from

time in jail (rich individuals suffer greater disutility). He also assumes that the benefit from

committing the offense is the same for every individual of a given type, but differs between the

types, and that the benefit is less than the harm from the offense, so that ideal deterrence involves

complete deterrence. In his formal analysis, Levitt considers the choice between an

imprisonment sentence and a fine, not the optimal combination of the two, as I do here (though

he does discuss this issue informally). My results show that whenever imprisonment sanctions

are employed, monetary sanctions should be too.

       Levitt’s main point is that, in contrast to the situation when individuals’ wealth levels can

be costlessly observed, the availability of fines as an alternative to imprisonment might not result

in higher social welfare. This is because, in his analysis, the introduction of a fine as an

alternative to a jail term cannot increase deterrence — if the fine were more burdensome, the

offender would choose the jail term. Consequently, Levitt suggests that the case for using

imprisonment sentences as sanctions is stronger than is generally appreciated.

       In an article slightly predating Levitt’s, Chu and Jiang (1993) examine optimal sanctions

when there are three types of individuals in terms of wealth levels and a continuum of offenses

that individuals can commit, each corresponding to a different level of harm. Because Chu and

Jiang assume that the fine is proportional to the level of harm, they in effect assume that the

enforcement authority cannot observe offenders’ wealth levels, though this is not the focus of

their attention. Their main point is that, because of marginal deterrence considerations and

differences among individuals in their responses to imprisonment (wealthier individuals have a

higher opportunity cost of time in prison), it may be desirable to use imprisonment sentences


                                            - 24 -
combined with less-than-maximal fines. Like Levitt, they emphasize the desirability of

imprisonment sentences relative to fines. My analysis differs from theirs in that I do not impose

any restrictions on the choice of fines (aside from wealth constraints), whereas, as noted, they

assume that the fine is proportional to the level of harm. Our conclusions differ as well. I find,

contrary to Chu and Jiang’s result, that imprisonment sentences should not be used unless the

party subject to the sentence also makes a monetary payment equal to his wealth level.19

         In a companion article — Polinsky (2004) — I derive optimal fines when an offender’s

level of wealth can be determined after a costly audit. In contrast to the present analysis, I do not

consider imprisonment sanctions. The focus of my other article is on characterizing the optimal

audit rate and on deriving the optimal fine for misrepresenting one’s wealth level, issues ignored

here.



VI. Concluding Remarks

         The key result from my analysis is that, even though offenders’ wealth levels cannot be

observed, the optimal mix of sanctions may induce high-wealth offenders to pay more than low-

wealth offenders because they would bear more burdensome (or at least as burdensome)

sanctions if they did not. In particular, this result holds whenever imprisonment sentences are

employed, even if only for offenders who do not pay the fine.

         I made several simplifying assumptions in order to keep the analysis tractable. The most

notable ones are that individuals bear the same disutility from time in prison regardless of their


         19
            Also of some relevance to the present article is the analysis by Lott (1987) of the question whether
individuals should be allowed to spend freely on their defense in criminal cases. In his model, offenders bear the
same imprisonment sentence regardless of their wealth level, and higher-wealth individuals are assumed to suffer
greater disutility from the sentence. Lott’s argument is that allowing higher-wealth individuals to spend more on




                                                   - 25 -
wealth level; that individuals are risk-neutral with respect to fines and imprisonment; and that

there are only two levels of wealth. I discuss these briefly here and suggest why modifying them

would not change the point that if optimally chosen sanctions include imprisonment sentences,

such sanctions will induce higher-wealth individuals to pay more than lower-wealth individuals.

         Suppose that high-wealth individuals have a greater distaste for jail time than low-wealth

individuals, as the other authors discussed in Section V assumed. The following argument shows

that this assumption would not affect my principal conclusion. Given this assumption, suppose

the sanctions were such that both groups chose to pay an amount of money equal to the wealth

level of low-wealth individuals wL and to bear the alternative imprisonment sentence sN. This

outcome could not be optimal, for it would be possible to choose some fine f > wL and some

imprisonment sentence s < sN such that high-wealth individuals are indifferent between the

primary (f and s) and alternative (wL and sN ) sanctions. Hence, they could be induced to choose

the primary sanctions, resulting in an increase in social welfare due to a reduction in the

imprisonment sentence borne by high-wealth individuals. In other words, optimally chosen

sanctions still will induce high-wealth individuals to pay a fine that exceeds the wealth level of

low-wealth individuals.

         If individuals are not risk neutral with respect to fines or imprisonment, the optimal

sanctions would change, but the same argument used in the preceding paragraph demonstrates

that my main result would not be affected. Suppose, given a different set of assumptions about

the risk preferences of low-wealth and high-wealth individuals (but assuming that all high-wealth

individuals have the same preferences and all low-wealth individuals have the same preferences),


their defense reduces the overdeterrence that otherwise would occur. For further discussion of this point, see
Garoupa and Gravelle (2003).



                                                   - 26 -
that the sanctions were such that both groups chose to pay wL and to bear the alternative

imprisonment sentence sN. Again, this outcome could not be optimal, for it would be possible to

choose some fine f > wL and some imprisonment sentence s < sN such that high-wealth

individuals would be just willing to choose the primary sanctions, thereby lowering

imprisonment costs.

       If wealth levels varied continuously among individuals, the optimal enforcement system

would include a menu of choices for offenders — various combinations of fines and

imprisonment sentences. Based on reasoning employed in this article, the optimal menu should

have the property that the sum of the sanctions declines (or at least does not rise) with the fine

paid, which would induce individuals to pay the highest fine possible. Specifically, start with a

menu of sanctions — fines and imprisonment sentences — such that each combination in the

menu generates the same level of deterrence. Obviously, the higher the fine, the lower the

imprisonment sentence. The social benefit from raising the imprisonment sentences from these

initial levels would always be greater the higher is the initial sentence since society saves more

on imprisonment costs by deterring an individual who would have borne a longer sentence. This

implies that in the optimal menu the sum of the sanctions declines with the fine paid, causing

each offender to pay the highest fine he is capable of paying.




                                            - 27 -
References

Chu, C.Y. Cyrus, and Neville Jiang “Are Fines More Efficient than Imprisonment?” Journal of

       Public Economics, Vol. 51, No. 3 (July 1993), pp. 391-413.

Friedman, David, “Reflections on Optimal Punishment, Or: Should the Rich Pay Higher Fines?”

       Research in Law and Economics, Vol. 3 (1981), pp. 185-205.

Garoupa, Nuno, “Optimal Law Enforcement and Imperfect Information when Wealth Varies

       Among Individuals,” Economica, Vol. 65 (1998), pp. 479-90.

Garoupa, Nuno, and Hugh Gravelle, “Efficient Deterrence Does Not Require that the Wealthy

       Should Be Able to Buy Justice,” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics,

       Vol. 159, No. 3 (September 2003), pp. 545-552.

Levitt, Steven, “Incentive Compatibility Constraints as an Explanation for the Use of Prison

       Sentences Instead of Fines,” International Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 17, No. 2

       (June 1997), pp. 179-92.

Lott, Jr., John R., “Should the Wealthy Be Able to ‘Buy Justice’?,” Journal of Political

       Economy, Vol. 95, No. 6 (December 1987), pp. 1307-16.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, “Optimal Fines and Auditing When Wealth is Costly to Observe,”

       Working Paper No. 286, John M. Olin Program in Law and Economics, Stanford Law

       School, August 2004.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell, “The Optimal Use of Fines and Imprisonment,”

       Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 24, No. 1 (June 1984), pp. 89-99.

Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell, “A Note on Optimal Fines When Wealth Varies

       Among Individuals,” American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 3 (June 1991), pp. 618-

       21.


                                          - 28 -
