                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            EFFECTS OF CHILD HEALTH ON SOURCES OF PUBLIC SUPPORT

                                          Nancy E. Reichman
                                            Hope Corman
                                            Kelly Noonan

                                         Working Paper 10762
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10762


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




This research was supported by Grants #R01-HD-45630 and #R01-HD-35301 from the National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development and Grant # KN03-NPC02 from the National Poverty Center at the
University of Michigan. We are grateful for valuable input from William Greene, Michael Grossman,
Jennifer Marogi, and Ofira Schwartz-Soicher. We appreciate the comments of Kerwin Charles and other
conference participants at the National Poverty Center at the University of Michigan, and of the health
economics group participants at the Institute for Health, Health Care Policy, and Aging Research at Rutgers
University. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Nancy E. Reichman, Hope Corman, and Kelly Noonan. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Child Health on Sources of Public Support
Nancy E. Reichman, Hope Corman, and Kelly Noonan
NBER Working Paper No. 10762
September 2004
JEL No. I38, I12

                                           ABSTRACT

We estimate the effects of having a child in poor health on the mother's receipt of both cash
assistance and in-kind public support in the form of food, health care, and shelter. We control for a
rich set of covariates, include state fixed effects, and test for the potential endogeneity of child
health. Mothers with children in poor health are 5 percentage points (20%) more likely to rely on
TANF and 16 percentage points more likely to rely on cash assistance (TANF and/or SSI) than those
with healthy children. They are also more likely than those with healthy children to receive Medicaid
and housing assistance, but not WIC or food stamps.

Nancy E. Reichman
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey
97 Paterson Street, Room 435
Camden, NJ
reichmne@umdnj.edu

Hope Corman
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
corman@rider.edu

Kelly Noonan
Rider University
2083 Lawrenceville Road
Lawrenceville, NJ 08648
and NBER
knoonan@rider.edu
Introduction

       A growing body of research reveals that not only does low income lead to poor child

health, but poor child health can have deleterious effects on family resources that may contribute

to health and economic disadvantages over the life course. Corman & Kaestner (1992), Mauldon

(1992), and Joesch & Smith (1997) found that married couples are more likely to divorce when

their child has a serious health problem, and Reichman, Corman & Noonan (2004) found that

one-year-old children with serious health problems are less likely than their healthy peers to live

with their fathers. Having a child in poor health reduces mothers’ labor force participation (see

Powers 2003 and Corman, Noonan & Reichman—forthcoming), and it also appears to have

increased reliance on cash assistance through the former Aid to Families with Dependent

Children (AFDC) program (Wolfe and Hill 1995).

       The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) of

1996 dramatically restricted eligibility for cash assistance in the United States by establishing

term limits on the receipt of welfare, expanding work requirements for those receiving or seeking

welfare, and allowing states to impose stricter sanctions for non-compliance with work

requirements or other guidelines. Reflecting this new paradigm, it replaced the former Aid to

Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program with Temporary Assistance to Needy

Families (TANF). Other features of the 1996 legislation were the imposition of a more stringent

definition of child disability for Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits (after the criteria

had been eased in 1990) and the de-linking of eligibility for Medicaid from that for cash

assistance, so that needy families can be eligible for Medicaid even if they do not meet their

state’s new cash assistance requirements.




                                                                                                     2
        In this paper, we estimate the effects of having a young child in poor health on mothers’

reliance on TANF and other sources of public support within this new regime. The effects on

maternal labor supply found in other studies would suggest that having a child in poor health

would increase reliance on welfare. However, this may not be the case under TANF, since

mothers with children in poor health may: (1) have difficulty complying with TANF work

requirements and therefore may choose not to participate (or have even had their benefits

eliminated for this reason), (2) be more likely to delay participating in order to “bank” their

lifetime benefit allotment, (3) have less of an incentive to participate in TANF since eligibility

for Medicaid is no longer automatically tied to welfare participation, or (4) be more likely than

before PRWORA to substitute SSI for TANF since the former has both higher financial benefits

and fewer restrictions. Additionally, having a child in poor health may increase reliance on other

sources of public support, such as food stamps, for which there are no restrictions such as work

requirements or time limits.1

        We estimate the effects of having a child in poor health on the mother’s receipt of both

cash assistance (TANF, SSI) and in-kind subsidies that provide food, health care, and shelter

(WIC, food stamps, Medicaid, housing). We control for a rich set of covariates and test for the

potential endogeneity of child health. The results have implications for our understanding of the

processes underlying children’s health and income trajectories in low-income families. They also

contribute to the literature on determinants of welfare participation and further our understanding

of how the limited safety net under PRWORA is affecting families who are particularly

vulnerable because they have a child in poor health.


1
 An exception is that PRWORA required states to reduce or eliminate food stamps benefits to recipients who have
had a TANF sanction imposed. Under the former AFDC program, food stamp benefits were generally increased to
offset, at least to some extent, sanctions that reduced a family’s cash assistance grant (see Bloom and Winstead
2002).


                                                                                                                   3
Background

        There is an extensive literature on the determinants of participation in both TANF and its

predecessor, AFDC. There is another large literature evaluating the effects of policies, including

the 1996 PRWORA legislation, on program participation.2 Within both of these literatures, there

are studies relevant to our research question. We discuss this research below, first focusing on

pre-welfare-reform literature and then reviewing relevant post-welfare-reform studies.

Pre-welfare reform studies

        A seminal study by Blank (1989) examined the relationship between medical need and

AFDC participation. In the AFDC era, health insurance through the Medicaid program was

strongly linked to AFDC participation. Blank posited that a mother who had medical problems

herself (or had a family member with medical problems) would have an incentive to participate

in AFDC for two reasons: a diminished capacity to work (directly, as a result of her own

disability, or indirectly, due to caretaking burden for a disabled family member) and to obtain

public health insurance through Medicaid. Using the National Medical Care Utilization and

Expenditure Survey, Blank compared individuals’ likelihood of AFDC participation in states

with and without programs that had Medically Needy provisions for Medicaid; such provisions

expanded coverage to certain financially or categorically ineligible individuals. She found that

poor health of a mother or one of her family members increased the likelihood of AFDC

participation among single mothers, but that participation was unrelated to whether or not the

state had a Medically Needy provision. Thus, poor health increased AFDC participation because

it limited the mother’s ability to work, not because AFDC provided access to public health

insurance.


2
  See Blank (2002) and Moffitt (2002) for reviews of the major changes in US welfare policy over the 1990s and
related research.


                                                                                                                 4
       Using the 1984 panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), Wolfe

and Hill (1995) separately analyzed the effects of child disability (a serious activity limitation)

and mother's poor or fair health on labor force participation. They simulated mothers’ eligibility

for a number of hypothetical public health insurance plans and found that those that would cover

children for health insurance regardless of AFDC participation would have a large positive

impact (up to 22 percentage points) on labor force participation of mothers of disabled children.

They inferred that welfare participation of mothers of disabled children would decrease

substantially with increased health insurance coverage for working mothers. The much stronger

effects of health policy found in this study than in the Blank study may reflect the different

measures of health/disability that they used. Blank used an average measure of health for the

family, whereas Wolfe and Hill used specific and distinct measures of child disability and

maternal health status.

       Two recent studies assessed the effects of poor child health on exits from welfare. Acs

and Loprest (1999), using data from the 1990 SIPP, found that child disability (defined as a

limitation to usual activities) increased the probability that a mother of a child under 6 left

welfare by about 14 percentage points within a short period (1 to 2 ½ years) but that it did not

increase the probability that she left welfare in order to work. This result suggests that mothers

may have left welfare to obtain more generous benefits from other sources such as SSI.3 Meyers,

Brady and Seto (2000) estimated the likelihood of transitioning off of welfare using panel data

on participants in the California Work Pays Demonstration Project from 1992 to 1996 (just prior

to implementation of PRWORA). They found, using a hazard model and holding constant the

mother’s age, ethnicity, number of children, presence of a partner in the household, county of

residence, and own disability status, that having a severely disabled child reduced the probability




                                                                                                      5
of getting off of cash assistance at all (AFDC or SSI) but increased the likelihood of leaving

AFDC for SSI.

        Two studies examined the effects of AFDC or SSI generosity on child SSI participation.

Black, McKinnish and Sanders (1998) found that states with lower levels of AFDC generosity

had higher rates of child SSI participation, holding constant other factors. Garrett and Glied

(2000), who also used state-level data, obtained results similar to those of Black, McKinnish and

Sanders and also found that the Zebley decision of 1990, which liberalized the definition of child

disability before PRWORA made it more stringent in 1996, resulted in a significant increase in

child SSI participation. In a related study using data from the National Health Interview Survey

(from 1987 to 1994, covering pre- and post- Zebley decision years), Kubik (1999) found that

greater numbers of children were diagnosed with chronic impairments after the Zebley decision.

That study also found that children in states with high net SSI benefits4 were more likely to be

diagnosed with a disability than those in states with low benefits. These results indicate that

policies that make welfare less generous or less accessible, or that make SSI more generous and

more accessible, tend to shift participation from welfare to SSI. In a study that did not focus on

children, Schmidt and Sevak (2004), using data from the March Current Population Survey from

1988-1997, found that female-headed households in states aggressively pursuing welfare reform

were 21.6 percent more likely to receive SSI than those in less aggressive states. An implication

of this set of studies is that welfare reform may have increased SSI participation and decreased

TANF participation among mothers of young children with severe health problems.




3
 Individuals are eligible for SSI disability benefits if they are both poor and disabled.
4
 Kubik computed the difference in benefits between having children on SSI versus AFDC. In all cases, child SSI
was more generous than AFDC.


                                                                                                                 6
Post-welfare reform studies

        Two recent studies addressed the effects of having a child with chronic illness on

employment, TANF receipt, and medical coverage in the post welfare reform era. Smith et al.

(2002), who studied 500 low-income parents of children with chronic illnesses (asthma, diabetes,

sickle cell anemia, epilepsy, hemophilia, cerebral palsy, or cystic fibrosis) in Texas in 2001,

found that mothers have extreme difficulties combining work and caring for their unhealthy

children, and that they are more likely than mothers with healthy children to rely on TANF. Wise

et al. (2002) investigated the impact of chronic illnesses in children (asthma, mental retardation,

cerebral palsy, autism, attention deficit disorder, muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, sickle-cell

anemia, diabetes, arthritis, and congenital heart disease) on labor force participation and program

receipt of poor families using the 1998 National Health Interview Survey. Like Smith et al., they

found that mothers of children with chronic conditions are more likely to receive TANF and less

likely to work than those with healthy children. They also found that although welfare reform

was supposed to eliminate the link between cash assistance and medical assistance, TANF-

enrolled children are more likely to have health insurance than poor children not on TANF.5 In a

study that did not consider the role of child health or disability, Pati, Romero, and Chavkin

(2002) found that as TANF rolls decreased in poor Manhattan neighborhoods after PRWORA,

Medicaid and food stamp enrollments also declined.

        Brandon (2000) investigated the effects of child disability on exits from TANF using data

from the SIPP. He used a proportional hazard model to estimate the probability of leaving

welfare over a four-year period, beginning in 1996. He found that child disability, based on a




5
  The Wise et al. (2002) study examined the relationship between TANF and health coverage, controlling only for
the child's age.


                                                                                                                  7
measure that included limitations in communication, mobility, self-care, or cognition, had a

significant negative effect on exiting from welfare.

       No previous study has assessed the effects of poor child health on TANF participation as

well as reliance on the other forms of public support that may either complement or substitute for

welfare. We fill this gap by estimating the effects of having a young child with a severe health

problem on whether mothers receive TANF, TANF and/or SSI, WIC, Medicaid, food stamps,

and housing. We address the potential endogeneity of child health. We also (1) incorporate

information about the baby’s father and (2) assess the effects of poor child health among children

who are the same age. In terms of the former, paternal health and human capital are likely to

affect both the mother’s reliance on public assistance and the child’s health. Most studies do not

include paternal characteristics at all, or do so only for fathers who are present in the household

or married to the mother. In terms of the latter, although needs of children vary at different ages,

most samples do not include enough children of the same age to allow for multivariate analyses

on a single cohort. Rather, most studies include age variables in their models, assuming by

default that age does not interact with the other covariates.6



Analytical Framework

       We consider the following model to estimate the effect of poor child health on whether

mothers rely on a specific type of public support:

 (1) Program participation = f (Mother’s and father’s wages, quality and quantity of children,
     labor market opportunities, availability of public support, µ)

       Program participation is a function of the each parent’s earning capacity (wage), the

quality and quantity of their children (together and with other partners), their labor market




                                                                                                      8
opportunities, and the availability of public support. The program participation function may also

contain another set of factors, µ, that are unobserved. To estimate this model, we need good

measures or proxies for parents’ wages, the quantity and quality of their children, their local

labor markets, and the availability of public assistance. For wages, we use a set of characteristics

including age, race/ethnicity, nativity, education, work history, and health status. We also include

measures of the parents’ relationship status, which may play a role in decisions about program

participation. We focus on the participation effects of one measure of child quality—child health,

but we also consider the child’s gender. For quantity of children, we include whether the parents

have other children together and whether each has children with other partners. For local labor

markets, we include city unemployment rates, average full-time female wages, and the cost of

living. Finally, we include state fixed effects to capture differences in availability of public

support by state within the post-PRWORA regime.



Data

         The Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study follows a cohort of new parents and

their children in 20 large U.S. cities (in 15 states).7 Baseline interviews were conducted from

1998 to 2000 with 4,898 sets of new, mostly unwed parents shortly after their children’s births.

Baseline response rates were 86 percent among eligible mothers and 78 percent among eligible

fathers; 89 percent of the mothers who completed baseline interviews were re-interviewed when

their children were between 12 and 18 months old. By design, about three-quarters of the births

were to unmarried parents.


6
  Some studies analyze children within specific age ranges, say 0 to 6, but even within such ranges there still may be
differential effects of poor child health by age.
7
  Additional background on the research design of the Fragile Families and Child Wellbeing Study is available in
Reichman et al. (2001).


                                                                                                                     9
       The Fragile Families data are well suited for analyzing the effects of child health on

reliance on public assistance because they were collected as part of a longitudinal birth cohort

study and include: (1) data on the child’s health from birth; (2) information about receipt of

different types of public assistance; (3) measures of human capital (e.g., health status, education)

of both fathers and mothers; (4) data on the fathers regardless of whether they ever lived with

their children; and (5) detailed information on the parents’ relationship status, living

arrangements, and other children (together and with other partners) at the time of the birth. We

also are able to include local labor market characteristics and state fixed effects in our models.

Because the Fragile Families study sampled births exclusively in large cities and oversampled

nonmarital births within those cities, the mothers in our sample are more likely than the

population of new mothers in the United States to receive public assistance.



Descriptive Analysis

       The purpose of this paper is to estimate the effects of poor child health on mothers’

reliance on public assistance. Below we describe the measures we use in our analyses, present

summary statistics, and point out many salient characteristics of the sample. Unless indicated

otherwise, all covariates are measured at baseline. In general, we use mother reports for

information about the mother and father reports for information about the father. However, in

cases where the father's data are missing, we use mother reports about the father if these are

available. We restrict our sample to the cases in which there were no missing data on any of the

analysis variables. The characteristics of the sample are presented in Table 1.

       Mothers were asked at the one year follow-up interview whether they had received any

assistance from TANF in the past 12 months and whether they had received any food stamps




                                                                                                     10
during the same time period. They were asked whether they had received any benefits from WIC

since the child was born. Positive responses to these questions were used to code receipt of

TANF, food stamps, and WIC, respectively. Mothers were asked to specify what other kinds of

local state or federal agencies helped them since the child was born (excluding welfare or TANF)

and whether they, a child who lived with them, or both they and a child who lived with them had

received any cash assistance from SSI in the past 12 months. We coded the mother as having

received SSI if she specified “disability” or “SSI” in response to the first question or if she

responded affirmatively to the second. Mothers were asked whether they or their child(ren) who

live with them currently received health insurance through Medicaid or another “public federal,

or state assistance program which pays for medical care.” If the mother responded affirmatively

to that question, she was coded as having received Medicaid. Finally, mothers were asked

whether the federal, state, or local government was currently helping them pay their rent and

whether they live in a housing project. We coded them as receiving housing support if they

responded affirmatively to either of these two questions or if they specified “housing assistance”

in response to the question referred to above about other kinds of local state or federal agencies

(other than welfare or TANF) helped them since the child was born.

       Almost one quarter (24%) of mothers received some cash assistance through TANF. A

slightly higher fraction (26%) received TANF and/or SSI. Over a third of mothers (36%)

received food stamps and over half (56%) received Medicaid. A very large proportion (72%) of

the mothers in the sample participated in the WIC program. Housing was the least commonly

relied upon source of assistance in this sample; 20 percent of mothers reported at one year that

they were receiving housing assistance or lived in a housing project.




                                                                                                   11
        Following Reichman, Corman and Noonan (2004), we consider a child to have poor

health if at least one of the following criteria is met (all are from mothers’ reports): the child

weighed less than 4 pounds at birth (2.4%);8 the mother reported at follow-up that the child had a

physical disability (2.0%); or, if the child was at least 12 months old at follow-up, the child had

neither walked nor crawled (0.8%) (figures not shown in table). We used a stringent definition of

low birth weight rather than the typical 5.5-pound cutoff, in order to better identify cases of

serious and chronic health problems (most heavier low birth weight children do not experience

long-term health problems). Almost five percent of the children in our sample met at least one of

these three criteria and are therefore characterized as having poor child health.9

        We include several additional measures of child quality and quantity that may affect the

mother’s reliance on public assistance, and possibly child health: the gender of the focal child,10

whether the parents had any other children together, and whether each parent had at least one

child with another partner. Approximately one third of the parents had other children (together)

at the time of the focal child’s birth; about the same proportion of mothers had at least one child

with another partner at that time. About one third of fathers had at least one child with another

partner at the time of the mother’s follow-up interview, according to mothers’ reports.11

        We go beyond whether the father was present in the mother’s household to characterize

the parents’ relationship at the time of the birth; we consider whether the parents were married,

cohabiting, romantically involved or friends, or rarely or never talked. About 74 percent of the


8
  In a separate analysis, we compared mother respondents’ reports of birth weight with the corresponding figures
from the hospital records for a sub-sample of over 1800 cases. The correlation of babies’ birth weight from the two
sources was .94. To ensure adequate sample sizes for analysis, we used 4 pounds rather than the typical 3.5 pound
cutoff used to designate very low birthweight.
9
  The percentages for the individual measures sum to more than 5 because some children fit more than one criterion.
10
   Recent studies (see, for example, Dahl and Moretti 2004) indicate that fathers have stronger commitments to their
families when they have sons rather than daughters.
11
   Data limitations make it impossible to ascertain whether the father had any children with another partner at the
time of the baseline.


                                                                                                                 12
new parents were unmarried at baseline; half (51%) of the unmarried parents lived together.

Overall, 95 percent of the parents were in some type of relationship.

       We take advantage of the longitudinal nature of our data by estimating models that

control for mother’s Medicaid status at the time of the baseline interview. Sixty one percent of

the births were covered by Medicaid or another government assistance program. Since 41

percent of the births are first births, this measure is a more accurate proxy of financial eligibility

for TANF at baseline than any other measure of program participation. It is important to note,

however, that since financial eligibility for Medicaid is much more liberal for this sample (who

gave birth) than that for TANF, this measure captures some mothers who are near-poor but

would not meet the stricter eligibility criteria for TANF. Later, we explore possible interactions

of child health with baseline Medicaid status and other proxies for poverty status.

       We include several sociodemographic characteristics that have been associated with both

reliance on public assistance and child health (race/ethnicity, nativity, and education), as well as

two direct measures of the mother’s human capital—her health status and whether she worked

within the two-year period preceding the child’s birth. We include many of the same

characteristics for fathers. The sample consists predominantly of minority and disadvantaged

parents. Indeed, only 22 percent of the mothers are white and non-Hispanic. One third of the

mothers did not complete high school. Over half did not live with both parents when they were

15 years old.12

       Finally, we include city-level unemployment rates, cost of living, and mean full-time

wages of females to characterize local labor markets, as well as the mother’s baseline state of

residence to capture state policies and environments that may impact both child health and

reliance on public support.




                                                                                                    13
Modeling Strategy

           We are interested in estimating the effect of a child’s poor health on the mother’s reliance

on public assistance. We can express Equation (1) from our analytical framework as follows:

 (2) Receipt of public assistance = f (child health, other measures of child quality and quantity,
     parent relationship status, mother and father characteristics, city labor market
     characteristics, state policy and economic environments, µ)

           Estimation of equation (2) would be straightforward if the measured child health were

truly random (exogenous). It is possible, however, that there are non-random components of

child health that are correlated with unobserved determinants of the receipt of public assistance

(µ). If so, child health would be endogenous and its estimated effect on receipt of public

assistance would be biased.

            We minimized the potential endogeneity problem by attempting to define poor child

health as an exogenous or random shock, including a rich set of covariates (including baseline

Medicaid status) that may be related to both child health and reliance on public assistance, and

including state fixed effects. However, because we cannot be certain that we have eliminated the

potential endogeneity problem, we modeled a system with two equations, one of which expresses

child health as a function of parental characteristics and health care inputs, as follows:


(3) Child Health = g (mother & father characteristics, prenatal & perinatal health inputs, e)


           Because the outcome measures in both equations (2) and (3) are dichotomous, we use a

bivariate probit specification that allows us to test for the endogeneity of child health.13 We allow




12
     See Solon et al. (1988) for a discussion about the intergenerational aspects of welfare dependency.
13
     Models using an instrumental variables specification produced similar results (not shown).


                                                                                                           14
for correlation between the error terms in the child health and public assistance equations, which

we assume are normally distributed.14

        In order to identify the bivariate probit model, we include certain variables (identifiers) in

the health equation but not in the public assistance equation. For identifiers to be valid, they need

to satisfy two conditions: They must be significant predictors of poor child health (prediction)

and they must be uncorrelated with the mother’s reliance on public assistance (exclusion). If

these two conditions are met, and ρ (the correlation of the error terms in the two equations) is

not significantly different from zero, it follows that child health can be considered exogenous

and that a standard probit is the more appropriate model.15 The following two identifiers satisfied

both conditions: the number of obstetricians/gynecologists in 1996 in the city in which the child

was born and the price of a carton of cigarettes in the city and year of the birth (expressed in

1998 dollars).16 The former may be related to availability of health care for the mother during the

pregnancy. The latter reflects the price of unhealthy prenatal behaviors. In addition, ρ was

insignificant, indicating that a single-equation model is appropriate.



Results

        We estimate multivariate models of reliance on both cash assistance and in-kind public

support. For the former, we estimate whether the mother received any cash assistance from

TANF and from TANF and/or SSI during the 12 months prior to her follow-up interview.17 For

reasons discussed above, we focus on the single-equation probit estimates.18 For in-kind support,


14
   For a more detailed description of this estimation strategy, see Reichman, Corman and Noonan (2003).
15
   Passing these two tests indicates that the equation has been overidentified.
16
   The tests were run for the models of TANF participation and TANF and/or SSI participation using the full sample
of 3755 mothers (results available upon request).
17
   We do not have adequate sample sizes to examine the effects of poor child health on SSI alone.
18
   The bivariate probit estimates for the models of cash assistance are presented in the Appendix.


                                                                                                               15
we estimate probit models for whether the mother relied on each of the following—WIC,

Medicaid, food stamps, and housing. In all models, state fixed effects are included (estimates not

shown) and the standard errors are corrected for city clustering of observations using the Huber-

White method.

Cash Assistance

       The probit results for the models of reliance on cash assistance are presented in Table 2.

Estimates for whether the mother received any TANF (whether or not she received SSI) are in

the second column. Because the coefficients in probit models are not easy to interpret, we also

present marginal effects in the third column. We find that mothers of children in poor health

were 5 percentage points (20%) more likely to receive TANF than those with healthy children.

The next two columns present the probit estimates and marginal effects for whether the mother

received TANF and/or SSI in the 12 months prior to her follow-up interview. We find that

having a child in poor health increased the likelihood that the mother relied on one or both cash

assistance programs by 16 percentage points—an increase of about 60 percent. This last result is

not surprising since we have attempted to identify cases of severe child health problems and the

SSI program is designed to provide cash assistance to disabled children and adults.

       The coefficients for the other covariates generally have the expected signs. Having other

children, having less than a high school education, being on Medicaid at the time of the birth,

being U.S.-born, and living in a city with a high unemployment rate all are associated with an

increased likelihood that a mother received cash assistance a year later. Interestingly, the weaker

the tie between the mother and father at baseline, the more likely it is that the mother received

cash assistance. Mothers who had no relationship with the baby’s father at the time of the birth

were about twice as likely to receive cash assistance one year later as those who cohabited with




                                                                                                    16
the baby's father at the time of the birth. Baseline non-cohabiters who had no relationship with

the father were over 10 percentage points more likely to receive cash assistance than those who

had a friendly or romantic non-cohabiting relationship with the father at baseline. Father's

education is associated with the mother’s receipt of cash assistance—in general, the more

educated the father, the less likely that the mother relied on TANF and on TANF and/or SSI.19

         We next refine the analysis by assessing the effects of poor child health on the receipt of

TANF (and TANF and/or SSI) among mothers likely to be eligible to receive cash assistance,

such as those who were on Medicaid at baseline. Additionally, those with low levels of education

and those who were U.S.-born were much more likely to be eligible than those with higher levels

of education or immigrants. By eliminating non-Medicaid, highly educated, or immigrant

mothers from the sample, we are better able to understand decision-making at the relevant

margin. 20 We thus estimated probit models for mothers who were on Medicaid at baseline,

mothers who were not college graduates, and mothers who were born in the United States. The

estimated effects of poor child health for these subgroups, along with the sample means (the

proportions of each sample that received the different types of support) are presented in Table 3.

Each probit model includes the full set of covariates used in the previous analyses. For ease of

comparison to the full sample, we report marginal effects and z-values from all models and show

the corresponding figures for the full sample. As expected, we find that the effects of having a

child in poor health on receipt of cash assistance were larger for U.S.-born mothers, those who

had received Medicaid, and those with lower educational attainment than for the overall sample,

which includes immigrants, non-poor, and highly educated mothers.

19
  The associations of the control variables other than child health with receipt of cash assistance should not be
interpreted as causal because we did not address potential selection bias in those estimates.




                                                                                                                    17
In-Kind Sources of Support

        Table 4 shows probit estimates of the effects of poor child health on receipt of food

stamps, Medicaid, WIC, and housing support. Each model includes the full set of covariates. The

first row of figures indicates the effects of poor child health on receipt of food stamps, WIC,

Medicaid, and housing for the full sample. The subsequent rows indicate the corresponding

effects for the subgroups of mothers who were on Medicaid at the time of the birth, were not

college graduates, and were U.S.-born. As in the previous table, marginal effects and z-values

are presented, with the relevant sample mean following each multivariate estimate. In the full

sample, poor child health is not statistically significant in predicting Medicaid, although the

magnitude of the marginal effect is substantial (8 percentage points). Additionally, the effects on

Medicaid are large and statistically significant among mothers who were not college graduates

and among those who were U.S.-born. Poor child health also has large effects on the likelihood

of receiving housing assistance—although the effect was not statistically significant for the full

sample, the marginal effect was almost 10 percentage points among mothers who were on

Medicaid at the time of the birth and highly significant, 5 percentage points among mothers who

had not graduated from college at the time of the birth, and 5 percentage points among mothers

who were U.S.-born. We do not find evidence that poor child health is related to receipt of food

assistance, either through food stamps or the WIC program.

        Overall, these results indicate that having a young child in poor health not only increases

the likelihood a mother will receive TANF and cash assistance defined more broadly as TANF

and/or SSI, it also increases the likelihood that she will rely on Medicaid and housing assistance.



20
  Limiting the sample on the basis of multiple characteristics (for example, excluding both college graduates and
immigrants) yielded sample sizes inadequate for analysis. In general, because cell sizes become quite small in some
of the subgroup analyses, the results are not always conclusive and should be interpreted with caution.


                                                                                                                 18
In contrast, poor child health does not appear to increase the likelihood of receiving food

assistance in the form of food stamps or through WIC.



Conclusion

       We have investigated the effects of having a child in poor health on the likelihood that

the mother relies on a number of different sources of public support in the post-PRWORA

program environment. We found that mothers with children in poor health are 5 percentage

points (20%) more likely to rely on TANF and 16 percentage points more likely to rely on cash

assistance (TANF and/or SSI) than those with healthy children. They are also more likely than

those with healthy children to receive Medicaid and housing assistance. These effects pertain to a

very short period of time (12 – 18 months after the child’s birth). Since some serious health

problems can be diagnosed or occur at older ages, we may be underestimating the effects of poor

child health on whether their mothers rely on public support.

       Our results have both positive and negative implications for families with children in

poor health. The positive implication is that families who are particularly needy because they

have unhealthy children are getting extra financial help in the form of cash assistance, health

insurance, and housing. The negative implication is that they are more likely than those with

healthy children to rely on TANF, which is a much more precarious source of support than its

predecessor, AFDC. TANF recipients are subject to work requirements and other restrictions

with which mothers who have children in poor health may have difficulty complying. In

addition, this form of assistance is now time limited. Housing assistance, too, is increasingly

being provided with strings (such as community service requirements) attached. Ultimately,

families with unhealthy children may have fewer resources with which to invest in their




                                                                                                  19
children's health, which may have negative effects on the children’s health and economic

trajectories.




                                                                                           20
References

Acs, G. and P. Loprest. (1999). "The Effect of Disabilities on Exits from AFDC." Journal of
       Policy Analysis and Management 18(1): 28-49.

American Hospital Association. (1998). "AHA Annual Survey Database FY 1998." The
      American Hospital Association.

Black, D. A., T. G. McKinnish and M. Sanders. (1998). "Are AFDC and SSI Substitutes?"
       Working Paper, University of Kentucky. Retrieved at
       http://gatton.uky.edu/Academic/Economics/WorkingPapers/BlackssiAFDC.pdf.

Blank, R. M. (1989). "The Effect of Medical Need and Medicaid on AFDC Participation." The
       Journal of Human Resources 24(1): 54-87.

-------. (2002). "Evaluating Welfare Reform in the United States." Journal of Economic
          Literature XL: 1105-1166.

Bloom, D. and D. Winstead. (2002). "Sanctions and Welfare Reform." Welfare Reform and
      Beyond Policy Brief No. 12. Brookings Institution, Washington, DC. Retrieved at
      http://www.brookings.edu/wrb/publications/pb/pb12.pdf.

Brandon, P. D. (2000). "Child Care Utilization Among Working Mothers Raising Children with
      Disabilities." Journal of Family and Economic Issues 21(4): 343-364.

Corman, H. and R. Kaestner. (1992). "The Effects of Child Health on Marital Status and Family
      Structure." Demography 29(3): 389-408.

Corman, H., K. Noonan and N. E. Reichman. (Forthcoming). "Mothers' Labor Supply in Fragile
      Families: The Role of Child Health." Eastern Economic Journal.

Dahl, G. and E. Moretti. (2004). "The Demand for Sons: Evidence from Divorce, Fertility, and
       Shotgun Marriage." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #10281.

Garrett, B. and S. Glied. (2000). "Does State AFDC Generosity Affect Child SSI Participation?"
        Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 19(2): 275-295.

Joesch, J. M. and K. R. Smith. (1997). "Children's Health and Their Mothers' Risk of Divorce or
       Separation." Social Biology 44(3-4): 159-169.

Kubik, J. D. (1999). "Incentives for the Identification and Treatment of Children with
       Disabilities: The Supplemental Security Income Program." Journal of Public Economics
       73: 187-215.

Mauldon, J. (1992). "Children's Risks of Experiencing Divorce and Remarriage: Do Disabled
      Children Destabilize Marriages?" Population Studies 46(2): 349-62.



                                                                                              21
Meyers, M. K., H. E. Brady and E. Y. Seto. (2000). "Expensive Children in Poor Families: The
      Intersection of Childhood Disabilities and Welfare." Public Policy Institute of California.
      San Francisco, CA.

Moffitt, R. (2002). "The Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program." National Bureau
       of Economic Research Working Paper # 8749.

Pati, S., D. Romero and W. Chavkin. (2002). "Changes in Use of Health Insurance and Food
         Assistance Programs in Medically Underserved Communities in the Era of Welfare
         Reform: An Urban Study." American Journal of Public Health 92(9): 1441-1445.

Powers, E. T. (2003). "Children's Health and Maternal Work Activity: Static and Dynamic
      Estimates under Alternative Disability Definitions." Journal of Human Resources 38(3):
      522-556.

Reichman, N. E., H. Corman and K. Noonan. (2003). "Effects of Child Health on Parents'
      Relationship Status." National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #9610.

-------. (2004). "Effects of Child Health on Parents' Relationship Status." Demography 41(3):
          569-584.

Reichman, N. E., J. O. Teitler, I. Garfinkel and S. S. McLanahan. (2001). "Fragile Families:
      Sample and Design." Children and Youth Services Review 23(4/5): 303-326.

Schmidt, L. and P. Sevak. (2004). “AFDC, SSI, and Welfare Reform Aggressiveness: Caseload
      Reductions versus Caseload Shifting.” Journal of Human Resources 39(3): 792-812.

Smith, L. A., D. Romero, P. R. Wood, N. A. Wampler, W. Chavkin and P. H. Wise. (2002).
       "Employment Barriers Among Welfare Recipients and Applicants With Chronically Ill
       Children." American Journal of Public Health 92(9): 1453-1457.

Solon, G., M. Corcoran, R. Gordon and D. Laren. (1988). "Sibling and Intergenerational
       Correlations in Welfare Program Participation." The Journal of Human Resources 23(3):
       388-396.

Wise, P. H., N. A. Wampler, W. Chavkin and D. Romero. (2002). "Chronic Illness Among Poor
       Children Enrolled in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program." American
       Journal of Public Health 92(9): 1458-1461.

Wolfe, B. L. and S. C. Hill. (1995). "The Effect of Health on the Work Effort of Single
       Mothers." The Journal of Human Resources 30(1): 42-62.




                                                                                                22
 Table 1: Sample Characteristics (means)

Sources of Public Support (from follow-up interview)                  Mother Characteristics
                                                                                                                                     25.1
   TANF                                                    .24           Age
                                                                                                                                     (6.0)
   TANF and/or SSI                                         .26           Less than High School*                                       .33
   Food Stamps                                             .36           High School Grad                                             .30
   WIC                                                     .72           Some College                                                 .25
   Medicaid                                                .56           College                                                      .12
   Housing                                                 .20           Medicaid Birth                                               .61
                                                                         White*                                                       .22
                                                                         African-American                                             .47
Child Quality and Quantity                                               Hispanic                                                     .27
                                                                         Non-White/Non-African-American/
  Child is in Poor Health                                  .05                                                                        .04
                                                                         Non-Hispanic
  Child is Male                                            .53           Immigrant                                                    .16
  Parents Have Other Child(ren)
                                                           .32           Lived with Both Parents at Age 15                            .43
  Together
  Mother Has Child(ren) with Other
                                                           .09           Worked Within 2 Years Before Birth                           .81
  Father(s)
  Father Has Child(ren) with Other
                                                           .34           Health is Very Good or Excellent                             .67
  Mother(s)
                                                                         Attends Religious Services Several
                                                                                                                                      .39
                                                                         Times/Month
                                                                         # Months Since Baseline Interview                            14.8
Parents’ Relationship at Baseline
                                                                         (Child’s Age)                                               (3.46)
  # Months Mother Knew Father                             59.0
  Married*                                                .26         Father Characteristics
                                                                                                                                     27.7
  Cohabiting                                               .38           Age
                                                                                                                                     (7.2)
  Romantic or Friends                                      .31           Less than High School*                                       .32
  Rarely/Never Talk                                        .05           High School Grad                                             .34
                                                                         Some College                                                 .23
City Characteristics                                                     College                                                      .11
  Unemployment Rate                                       5.39
                                                                         White*                                                       .20
                                                         (1.93)
  Average Full-Time Female Earnings                     28,358
                                                                         African-American                                             .49
  (dollars)                                             (3,962)
  Cost of Living Index                                  115.62
                                                                         Hispanic                                                     .27
                                                        (24.03)
  Price of Cigarettes Index                              31.13           Non-White/Non African-American/
                                                                                                                                      .04
                                                         (8.18)          Non-Hispanic
  # Ob/Gyns Per 10,000 Women                             20.91
                                                                         Health is Very Good or Excellent                             .64
                                                        (11.71)
                                                                         Health Status Missing                                        .12

                                                                      Number of Observations                                         3,755
 Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses; * excluded category in regression models
  † Data on unemployment rates, earnings and population were obtained from the 2000 U.S. Census at the following link:
 http://factfinder.census.gov/servlet/DTGeoSearchByListServlet?ds_name=DEC_2000_
 SF1_U&_lang=en&_ts=73400311652; data on ob/gyns were obtained from the American Medical Association and data on the price of
 cigarettes was obtained from the ACCRA Cost of Living Index (www.coli.org).




                                                                                                                                23
Table 2: Probit Estimates of Cash Assistance Participation
                                                     TANF                       TANF and/or SSI
                                          Coefficient      Marginal         Coefficient     Marginal
                                         (Standard Error)   Effect         (Standard Error)  Effect
Child Quality and Quantity
                                             0.193*                          0.525***
  Child is in Poor Health                                   0.049                            0.163
                                             (0.109)                         (0.127)

                                                0.032                          0.074
  Child is Male                                                0.007                         0.019
                                               (0.061)                        (0.054)

  Parents Have Other Child(ren)                0.182**                        0.146**
                                                               0.044                         0.038
  Together                                     (0.071)                        (0.066)

  Mother Has Child(ren) with Other             0.315***                      0.260***
                                                               0.077                         0.070
  Father(s)                                    (0.078)                       (0.069)

  Father Has Child(ren) with Other             0.133*                         0.139*
                                                               0.031                         0.037
  Mother(s)                                    (0.078)                        (0.074)

Parents’ Relationship at Baseline
                                                -0.001                         -0.000
  # Months Mother Knew Father                                  -0.000                        -0.000
                                               (0.001)                        (0.001)

                                               0.550***                      0.523***
  Cohabiting                                                   0.136                         0.142
                                               (0.079)                       (0.089)

                                               0.811***                      0.745***
  Romantic or Friends                                          0.217                         0.215
                                               (0.119)                       (0.105)

                                               1.009***                      0.993***
  Rarely/Never Talk                                            0.330                         0.341
                                               (0.137)                       (0.142)

Mother Characteristics
                                                -0.045                         -0.013
  Age                                                          -0.010                        -0.003
                                               (0.036)                        (0.042)

                                                0.001                          0.000
  Age Squared                                                  0.000                         0.000
                                               (0.001)                        (0.001)

                                               -0.197**                      -0.219**
  High School Grad                                             -0.044                        -0.054
                                                (0.089)                       (0.088)

                                              -0.374***                      -0.400***
  Some College                                                 -0.079                        -0.094
                                               (0.107)                        (0.097)

                                              -0.761***                      -0.777***
  College Grad                                                 -0.127                        -0.146
                                               (0.157)                        (0.158)

                                               0.407***                         0.372***
  Medicaid Birth                                               0.089                           0.091
                                               (0.068)                           (0.046)
                                                                                continued on next page
* Significant at 10% level; ** Significant at 5% level; *** Significant at 1% level
Notes: (City) clustered robust standard errors in parentheses; all models include state fixed
effects (results not presented).




                                                                                                         24
Table 2: Probit Estimates of Cash Assistance Participation
                                                        TANF                    TANF and/or SSI
                                             Coefficient     Marginal       Coefficient     Marginal
                                            (Standard Error)  Effect       (Standard Error)  Effect
Mother Characteristics (continued)
                                                0.082                          0.060
  Hispanic                                                     0.019                         0.016
                                               (0.111)                        (0.093)

                                               0.269**                        0.274**
  African-American                                             0.063                         0.071
                                               (0.134)                        (0.108)

  Non-White/Non-African-                        0.104                          0.080
                                                               0.025                         0.021
  American/Non-Hispanic                        (0.182)                        (0.171)

                                              -0.575***                      -0.639***
  Immigrant                                                    -0.107                        -0.131
                                               (0.109)                        (0.110)

                                              -0.121***                      -0.103**
  Lived with Both Parents at Age 15                            -0.028                        -0.026
                                               (0.042)                        (0.041)

                                              -0.242***                      -0.349***
  Worked Within 2 Years Before Birth                           -0.060                        -0.098
                                               (0.055)                        (0.053)

                                               -0.114**                      -0.127**
  Health Is Very Good or Excellent                             -0.027                        -0.033
                                                (0.054)                       (0.055)

  Attends Religious Services Several            -0.079                         -0.068
                                                               -0.018                        -0.017
  Times/Month                                  (0.056)                        (0.060)

  # Months Since Baseline Interview           -0.026***                      -0.027**
                                                               -0.006                        -0.007
  (Child’s Age)                                (0.010)                        (0.011)

Father Characteristics
                                                0.037                          0.014
  Age                                                          0.009                         0.003
                                               (0.023)                        (0.028)

                                               -0.001**                        -0.000
  Age Squared                                                  -0.000                        -0.000
                                                (0.000)                       (0.000)

                                              -0.175***                      -0.145***
  High School Grad                                             -0.039                        -0.036
                                               (0.047)                        (0.045)

                                              -0.220***                      -0.139**
  Some College                                                 -0.048                        -0.035
                                               (0.079)                        (0.068)

                                                -0.327                         -0.174
  College Grad                                                 -0.066                        -0.042
                                               (0.199)                        (0.148)

                                                0.019                          0.014
  Hispanic                                                     0.004                         0.004
                                               (0.084)                        (0.099)

                                               0.215**                           0.232**
  African-American                                             0.050                           0.060
                                               (0.099)                           (0.095)
                                                                                continued on next page
* Significant at 10% level; ** Significant at 5% level; *** Significant at 1% level
Notes: (City) clustered robust standard errors in parentheses; all models include state fixed
effects (results not presented).
                                                                                                         25
Table 2: Probit Estimates of Cash Assistance Participation
                                                       TANF                   TANF and/or SSI
                                            Coefficient     Marginal      Coefficient     Marginal
                                           (Standard Error)  Effect      (Standard Error)  Effect
Father Characteristics (continued)
  Non-White/Non-African-                       0.246                         0.238
                                                              0.064                        0.067
  American/Non-Hispanic                       (0.165)                       (0.188)

                                               -0.007                        -0.024
  Health is Very Good or Excellent                            -0.002                       -0.006
                                              (0.047)                       (0.042)

                                               0.214                        0.188**
  Health Status Missing                                       0.054                        0.052
                                             (0.098)**                      (0.092)

Local Labor Market
                                              0.163***                      0.136***
  Unemployment Rate in City                                   0.038                        0.035
                                              (0.017)                       (0.018)

  Average Full-Time Female Earnings           0.000***                      0.000***
                                                              0.000                        0.000
  in City                                     (0.000)                       (0.000)

                                              -0.011**                       -0.002
  Cost of Living                                              -0.003                       -0.001
                                               (0.005)                      (0.006)

                                              -1.859**                      -2.021**
Constant
                                               (0.796)                       (0.931)

Number of Observations                         3755           3755           3755           3755

Log Likelihood                               -1560.27        -1560.27      -1617.79       -1617.79

* Significant at 10% level; ** Significant at 5% level; *** Significant at 1% level
Notes: (City) clustered robust standard errors in parentheses; all models include state fixed
effects (results not presented).




                                                                                                     26
Table 3: Effects of Poor Child Health on Cash Assistance Participation, by Subgroup
                                    TANF                             TANF and/or SSI
                       Marginal Effect                      Marginal Effect
                                          Sample Mean                            Sample Mean
                              (z)                                  (z)
Full Sample                  .049                                 .163
                                               .238                                 .256
n=3755                      (1.64)                               (3.61)

Medicaid Births
                            .071                                .175
Only                                          .325                                 .345
                           (1.50)                              (3.49)
n=2353

Non-College
                            .062                                .184
Graduates Only                                .266                                 .286
                           (1.77)                              (3.61)
n=3322

U.S.-Born Only              .054                                .181
                                              .264                                 .285
n=3169                     (1.46)                              (3.62)




                                                                                               27
Table 4: Effects of Poor Child Health on Reliance on Different Types of In-Kind Public Support, by Subgroup
                        Food Stamps                     WIC                     Medicaid                 Housing
                     Marginal                   Marginal                  Marginal                 Marginal
                                   Sample                      Sample                  Sample                  Sample
                      Effect                     Effect                     Effect                  Effect
                                    Mean                        Mean                    Mean                     Mean
                        (z)                        (z)                        (z)                     (z)
Full Sample            .006                       .005                       .081                    .041
                                     .361                       .720                     .556                    .196
n=3755                 (.12)                      (.17)                     (1.39)                  (1.73)

Medicaid
                      -.003                     -.017                     .041                     .098
Births Only                        .489                       .866                    .734                     .263
                      (-.04)                    (-.65)                    (.99)                   (3.43)
n=2353

Non-College
Graduates             -.007                     -.000                      .089                    .052
                                   .403                       .788                    .611                     .218
Only                  (-.12)                    (-.00)                    (1.77)                  (1.83)
n=3322

U.S.-Born
                      .027                       .018                      .121                    .050
Only                               .393                       .720                    .562                     .205
                      (.46)                      (.60)                    (2.00)                  (1.78)
n=3169




                                                                                                             28
Appendix Table 1(a): Bivariate Probit Estimates for TANF
                                                  TANF         Child is in Poor Health
                                               Coefficient           Coefficient
                                            (Standard Error)     (Standard Error)
Child Quality and Quantity
                                                  0.546
  Child is in Poor Health
                                                 (0.610

                                                 0.028                0.109*
   Child is Male
                                                (0.061)               (0.062)

   Parents Have Other Child(ren)                0.185***              -0.095
   Together                                     (0.071)               (0.098)

   Mother Has Child(ren) with Other             0.314***              -0.008
   Father(s)                                    (0.078)               (0.066)

   Father Has Child(ren) with Other             0.135*                -0.091
   Mother(s)                                    (0.077)               (0.084)


Parents’ Relationship at Baseline
                                                 -0.001                0.000
   # Months Mother Knew Father
                                                (0.001)               (0.001)

                                                 0.544                 0.146
   Cohabiting
                                                (0.079)               (0.124)

                                                0.798***              0.311**
   Romantic or Friends
                                                 (0.118               (0.147)

                                                1.001***               0.157
   Rarely/Never Talk
                                                (0.140)               (0.225)
Mother Characteristics
                                                 -0.044               -0.026
   Age
                                                (0.035)               (0.054)

                                                 0.001                 0.001
   Age Squared
                                                (0.001)               (0.001)

                                                -0.197**               0.013
   High School Grad
                                                 (0.089)              (0.082)

                                               -0.374***              -0.003
   Some College
                                                (0.108)               (0.072)

                                               -0.764***               0.138
   College Grad
                                                (0.156)               (0.120)

                                                0.399***               0.183*
   Medicaid Birth
                                                (0.064)               (0.101)
                                                                  continued on next page



                                                                                           29
Appendix Table 1(a): Bivariate Probit Estimates for TANF
                                                  TANF         Child is in Poor Health
                                               Coefficient           Coefficient
                                            (Standard Error)     (Standard Error)
Mother Characteristics (continued)
                                                  0.090              -0.321***
  Hispanic
                                                 (0.110)              (0.109)

                                                0.268*                -0.031
   African-American
                                                (0.137)               (0.105)

   Non-White/Non-African-                        0.101                 0.029
   American/Non-Hispanic                        (0.183)               (0.239)

                                               -0.571***              -0.001
   Immigrant
                                                (0.108)               (0.149)

                                               -0.120***              -0.015
   Lived with Both Parents At Age 15
                                                (0.042)               (0.090)

                                               -0.235***              -0.159
   Worked Within 2 Years Before Birth
                                                (0.059)               (0.106)

                                                -0.105*              -0.202***
   Health Is Very Good or Excellent
                                                (0.059)               (0.077)

   Attends Religious Services Several            -0.085               0.155**
   Times/Month                                  (0.057)               (0.068)

   # Months Since Baseline Interview           -0.026***
   (Child’s Age)                                (0.010)

Father Characteristics
                                                 0.035                 0.062
   Age
                                                (0.024)               (0.037)

                                                -0.001*               -0.001
   Age Squared
                                                (0.000)               (0.001)

                                               -0.173***              -0.033
   High School Grad
                                                (0.050)               (0.084)

                                               -0.212***             -0.245***
   Some College
                                                (0.080)               (0.082)

                                                 -0.313               -0.395*
   College Grad
                                                (0.197)               (0.208)

                                                 0.013                0.216**
   Hispanic
                                                (0.084)               (0.108)

                                                0.216**               -0.018
   African-American
                                                (0.100)              (0.126)
                                                                 Continued on next page




                                                                                          30
Appendix Table 1(a): Bivariate Probit Estimates for TANF
                                                         TANF         Child is in Poor Health

                                                      Coefficient           Coefficient
                                                   (Standard Error)      (Standard Error)

Father Characteristics (continued)
   Non-White/Non-African-American/Non-                   0.248               -0.102
   Hispanic                                             (0.163)              (0.247)

                                                         -0.009               0.069
   Health is Very Good or Excellent
                                                        (0.049)              (0.070)

                                                        0.219**              -0.160
   Health Status Missing
                                                        (0.100)              (0.114)


City Characteristics
                                                       0.164***
   Unemployment Rate
                                                       (0.018)

                                                       0.000***
   Average Full-Time Female Earnings
                                                       (0.000)

                                                                             0.012**
   Price of Cigarettes
                                                                             (0.005)

                                                        -.012**
   Cost of Living
                                                         (.006)

                                                                              0.007
   # Ob/gyns per 10,000 Women
                                                                             (0.007)

                                                       -1.855**             -2.962***
Constant
                                                        (0.781)              (0.734)

Number of Observations                                   3755                 3755

                                                         -.169                 -.169
Rho
                                                         (.275)               (.275)

Log Likelihood                                           -2261.35           -2261.35
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                31
Appendix Table 1(b): Bivariate Probit Results for TANF and/or SSI
                                                   TANF and/or SSI    Child is in Poor Health
                                                      Coefficient           Coefficient
                                                   (Standard Error)     (Standard Error)
Child Quality and Quantity
                                                        0.473
  Child is in Poor Health
                                                       (0.341)

                                                        0.075                0.105*
   Child is Male
                                                       (0.054)               (0.060)

                                                       0.145**                -0.100
   Parents Have Other Child(ren) Together
                                                       (0.067)               (0.097)

                                                      0.260***                -0.009
   Mother Has Child(ren) with Other Father(s)
                                                      (0.069)                (0.070)

                                                       0.138*                 -0.086
   Father Has Child(ren) with Other Mother(s)
                                                       (0.073)               (0.086)

Parents’ Relationship at Baseline
                                                        -0.000                0.000
   # Months Mother Knew Father
                                                       (0.001)               (0.001)

                                                      0.524***                0.146
   Cohabiting
                                                      (0.090)                (0.126)

                                                      0.746***               0.311**
   Romantic or Friends
                                                      (0.107)                (0.147)

                                                      0.993***                0.142
   Rarely/Never Talk
                                                      (0.143)                (0.233)

Mother Characteristics
                                                        -0.013                -0.029
   Age
                                                       (0.041)               (0.054)

                                                        0.000                 0.001
   Age Squared
                                                       (0.001)               (0.001)

                                                      -0.219**                0.002
   High School Grad
                                                       (0.088)               (0.072)

                                                      -0.400***               -0.016
   Some College
                                                       (0.097)               (0.065)

                                                      -0.776***               0.125
   College Grad
                                                       (0.157)               (0.116)
                                                                         continued on next page




                                                                                                32
Appendix Table 1(b): Bivariate Probit Results for TANF and/or SSI
                                                    TANF and/or SSI     Child is in Poor Health
                                                        Coefficient           Coefficient
                                                     (Standard Error)     (Standard Error)
Mother’s Characteristics (continued)
                                                         0.373***              0.182*
  Medicaid Birth
                                                         (0.043)               (0.100)

                                                          0.058               -0.323***
   Hispanic
                                                         (0.091)               (0.110)

                                                         0.274**                -0.030
   African-American
                                                         (0.107)               (0.106)

   Non-White/Non-African-American/Non-                    0.080                 0.029
   Hispanic                                              (0.171)               (0.237)

                                                        -0.640***               -0.002
   Immigrant
                                                         (0.110)               (0.145)

                                                        -0.103**                -0.016
   Lived with Both Parents at Age 15
                                                         (0.041)               (0.090)

                                                        -0.350***               -0.149
   Worked Within 2 Years Before Birth
                                                         (0.054)               (0.101)

                                                        -0.128**              -0.200***
   Health Is Very Good or Excellent
                                                         (0.055)               (0.077)

   Attends Religious Services Several                     -0.067               0.153**
   Times/Month                                           (0.059)               (0.068)

   # Months Since Baseline Interview                    -0.027**
   (Child’s Age)                                         (0.011)

Father Characteristics
                                                          0.014                 0.062
   Age
                                                         (0.029)               (0.039)

                                                          -0.000                -0.001
   Age Squared
                                                         (0.000)               (0.001)

                                                        -0.145***               -0.030
   High School Grad
                                                         (0.045)               (0.083)

                                                        -0.140**              -0.245***
   Some College
                                                         (0.069)               (0.080)

                                                          -0.176               -0.386*
   College Grad
                                                         (0.150)               (0.205)
                                                                           continued on next page




                                                                                              33
Appendix Table 1(b): Bivariate Probit Results for TANF and/or SSI
                                                          Received TANF      Child is in Poor Health

                                                             Coefficient           Coefficient
                                                          (Standard Error)      (Standard Error)
Father Characteristics (continued)
                                                                0.015               0.217**
   Hispanic
                                                               (0.100)              (0.108)

                                                               0.232**               -0.014
   African-American
                                                               (0.095)              (0.124)

   Non-White/Non-African-American/Non-                          0.238                -0.092
   Hispanic                                                    (0.187)              (0.243)

                                                                -0.024               0.070
   Health is Very Good or Excellent
                                                               (0.042)              (0.069)

                                                               0.187**               -0.155
   Health Status Missing
                                                               (0.092)              (0.118)

City Characteristics
                                                              0.136***
   Unemployment Rate
                                                              (0.018)

                                                              0.000***
   Average Full-Time Female Earnings
                                                              (0.000)

                                                                                    0.012**
   Price of Cigarettes
                                                                                    (0.005)

                                                                -0.002
   Cost of Living
                                                               (0.006)

                                                                                     0.008
   # Ob/gyns per 10,000 Women
                                                                                    (0.007)

                                                              -2.022**             -2.922***
Constant
                                                               (0.934)              (0.757)

   Number of Observations                                       3755                 3755

                                                                 .025                 .025
   Rho
                                                                (.161)               (.161)

    Log Likelihood                                              -2319.00           -2319.00
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%




                                                                                                   34
