NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORRUPTION AND REFORM: AN INTRODUCTION
Edward L. Glaeser
Claudia Goldin
Working Paper 10775
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10775
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

This essay is an introduction to Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s History (edited by Edward
L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin) a collection of papers presented at a conference held during July 30, 31, 2004
at the Hawthorne Hotel, Salem MA. The conference was funded by the Center for American Political Studies
(CAPS) and the pre-conference and planning session that preceded it were funded by the National Bureau
of Economic Research. The editors thank both CAPS and the NBER for their generosity. References to the
conference papers are referred to as “this volume” and are listed at the end of the reference section. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Corruption and Reform: An Introduction
Edward L. Glaeser and Claudia Goldin
NBER Working Paper No. 10775
September 2004
JEL No. H1, N4, O1
ABSTRACT
The United States today, according to most studies, is among the least corrupt nations in the world.
But America's past was checkered with political scandal and widespread corruption that would not
seem unusual compared with the most corrupt developing nation today. We construct a "corruption
and fraud index" using word counts from a large number of newspapers for 1815 to 1975,
supplemented with other historical facts. The index reveals that America experienced a substantial
decrease in corruption from 1870 to 1920, particularly from the late-1870s to the mid-1880s and
again in the 1910s. At its peak in the 1870s the "corruption and fraud index" is about five times its
level from the end of the Progressive Era to the 1970s. If the United States was once considerably
more corrupt than it is today, then America's history should offer lessons about how to reduce
corruption. How did America become a less corrupt polity, economy, and society? We review the
findings and insights from a series of essays for a conference volume, Corruption and Reform:
Lessons from America'
s History, for which this paper is the introduction that attempt to understand
the remarkable evolution of corruption and reform in U.S. history.
Edward Glaeser
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Claudia Goldin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
cgoldin@harvard.edu

I.

Political Corruption: Today and Yesterday
To most Americans today, corruption is something that happens to less fortunate people.

A growing literature in economic development has documented the extent and consequences of
corruption in transition economies and poor nations. Corruption harms economic growth, as
demonstrated by a number of studies using cross-national data.1
Most international measures of corruption rank the United States today among the lowest
10 percent of corrupt countries worldwide. But America’s reputation as an untarnished republic
is a modern phenomenon. Conventional histories of nineteenth century America portray its
corrupt elements as similar, and at times equal, to those found in today’s modern transition
economies and developing regions.
Nineteenth-century American urban governments vastly overpaid for basic services such
as street cleaning and construction in exchange for kickbacks given to elected officials, and these
governments gave away public services for nominal official fees and healthy bribes.2 As late as
the 1950s, notes Robert A. Caro (2002), cash-filled paper bags floated in the hallowed halls of
the U.S. Senate. Harry S. Truman made it into the Senate as an agent of the notoriously corrupt
Pendergast machine (McCullough 1992). Some of the greatest U.S. higher educational
institutions were funded by individuals infamous for their roles in extracting public resources
through allegedly corrupt political influence—Leland Stanford and George D. Widener, whose
surname adorns Harvard’s largest library, come to mind. The Presidential legacies of Ulysses
Grant and Warren Harding were forever marred by the Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome
scandals, respectively.
If the United States was once more corrupt than it is today, then America’s history should
offer lessons about how to reduce corruption. After all, the dominant political movement of the
1

The literature begins with Mauro (1994) and includes, for example, Hellman, Jones, and Kaufman
(2003), and Leite and Weidmann (2002). Another part of this literature has examined the extent and
consequences of corruption within a country (e.g., Di Tella and Schargrodsky 2003; Gaviria 2002;
McMillan and Zoido 2004; and Swenson 2003). These empirical papers give support to a theoretical
literature (e.g., Rose-Ackerman 1975; Shleifer and Vishny 1993) about the negative consequences of
corruption.
2
See, for example, Glaeser (2003), Menes (this volume), and Steffens (1905).

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 1

early twentieth century—Progressivism—was dedicated to the elimination of corruption. From
1901 to 1917, under Presidents Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson, a legislative and administrative
agenda was justified in part by a need to reduce corruption. On a more local level, throughout
the twentieth century municipalities and states regularly elected reform slates that promised to
exercise a strong hand to root out corruption. Crusading journalists and ambitious prosecutors
have also frequently taken aim at corruption. While scholars can debate the impact of these
various forces, there is no debate that U.S. history offers many examples of reform movements
that claimed as a primary goal to reduce corruption, just like reformers in developing countries
today.
In the volume Corruption and Reform: Lessons from America’s History for which this
essay is an introduction, we take stock of corruption and reform in American history.3 The
essays address different aspects of understanding corruption. John Wallis, Rebecca Menes and
this introductory essay all discuss what we mean by “corruption.” Conceptual clarity is a precondition for measuring the amount of corruption over time and space. This introductory essay,
the Menes paper and that by Engerman and Sokoloff, all address the difficult problem of
measuring the extent of corruption over time. Because corruption is generally illegal, or at least
embarrassing, it tends to be hidden, and as the modern cross-national empirical literature has
found, measurement is difficult. We will argue that there is reason to believe that corruption
increased during the first three quarters of the nineteenth century or was at a high level in the
ante-bellum era with much temporal variance. We have better evidence documenting a decline
in American corruption from the mid-1870s to the 1920s.
After discussing the meaning and measurement of corruption, two of the essays in
Corruption and Reform address the consequences of corruption or of weak legal regimes more
generally. Lamoreaux and Rosenthal discuss the rise of corporations during the late nineteenth
century and how the rise was accompanied by decreased protection of minority shareholder
rights. Cutler and Miller look at the spread of clean water in America’s cities during an era of
legendary municipal corruption. Clearly corruption does not alone determine the extent of public
good formation. According to Lamoreaux and Rosenthal, the number of corporations in the late
3

See the end of the Reference list of this essay for the titles of the conference papers to which we refer.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 2

nineteenth century exploded, despite inadequate protection of minority shareholders, because
returns to scale in production increased. Cutler and Miller argue that the increasing availability
of municipal credit during the Gilded Age made large-scale water projects feasible. Of course,
the increase in municipal credit availability must have had something to do with improvements
in accountability suggesting that some forms of corruption had been curtailed.
After addressing corruption, the essays in Corruption and Reform turn to the causes and
consequences of reform. Bodenhorn’s essay reviews one of the first episodes of anti-corruption
reform in U.S. history: the fight against corruption in the chartering of New York banks during
the late 1830s. He argues that this reform emerged from political competition and a desire of the
Whigs to deprive their opponents—Van Buren’s Democratic Regency—of the rents of
patronage. Deregulation, therefore, was the weapon of choice against corruption since reducing
chartering requirements limited the ability of government to corruptly manage their monopoly.
Novak’s essay describes the legal environment in the late nineteenth century and depicts
an era of increasing regulatory activism. The regulation was often rationalized as a tool to
protect consumers, but as two of the essays, those by Fishback, and Law and Libecap, note the
situation was often more complex. Fishback looks at the rise of workplace safety regulation in
manufacturing and mining industries. He finds that workplace safety regulation was supported
by unions and opposed by manufacturers in the case of mining. But in manufacturing,
workplace safety laws were intended to raise costs for small firms as much as they were to
protect workers and were, therefore, championed by large firms. Law and Libecap look at the
introduction of the Food and Drug Administration. Passage of the FDA was driven by a
combination of producer interests and consumer concerns about food quality. However, there is
evidence suggesting that consumer outrage was manipulated and produced institutions that were,
at least in the short run, only moderately aimed at protecting their interests. Law and Libecap
also emphasize the role played by the press in creating support for state regulation.
The paper by Gentzkow, Glaeser, and Goldin documents the rise of the independent press
and the remarkable transformation in U.S. newspapers between 1870 and 1920. In 1870, the
press was partisan, histrionic, and prone to omit facts that went against acknowledged political

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 3

biases. In 1920, most newspapers had dropped party affiliations, used more moderate and civil
language, and made at least a pretense of reporting the facts of the day without spin. The article
argues that the rise of the press was fundamentally the result of the increasing financial returns to
selling newspapers rather than placating politicians for patronage and other reasons. While the
essay does not document the impact that the press may have had on corruption, it does discuss
circumstantial evidence suggesting that the rise of the independent press was an important factor
in movements to reform American political corruption.
Troesken looks at a particular outcome of these reform movements: public ownership of
utilities, specifically water. Troesken discusses evidence that suggests that both the move to
public ownership in the early twentieth century and the move away from public ownership 75
years later were associated with gains in service quality. He suggests that the evidence is either
compatible with the view that ownership was productive during the earlier corruption but less
productive today, or with Mancur Olson’s (1982) view that change in any direction reduces
corruption, at least in the short run, because of an ossification of bureaucracy.4
Finally, Wallis, Fishback, and Kantor look specifically at corruption in the provision of
public relief such as welfare and unemployment insurance. They argue that the move to federal
provision played a major role in reducing the level of corruption in the welfare system. The
institutional change came about because the effectiveness and credibility of the Roosevelt
administration would have been seriously hampered by allegations of corruption, at the same
time that it would not have received the same benefits that local leaders would from having a
corrupt system. Because of the separation between national and local authority, Roosevelt had
an incentive to put checks on corruption in place and these checks reduced the amount of
corruption in the system. This article, and the Bodenhorn essay, suggest the role that separation
of powers and inter-governmental competition can play in bringing about effective reform.

4

Thomas Jefferson’s often-cited quotation makes a similar point: “The tree of liberty must be refreshed
from time to time with the blood of patriots and tyrants.”

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 4

II.

Corruption: Definitions and Theory
As Wallis’s essay makes clear, the term corruption has its origins in an analogy between

the state and the human body. In its first incarnation, corruption referred to the process by which
a well-functioning system of government decays into one that fails to deliver and maltreats its
citizens. According to the Greek historian Polybius (c.200-120 BCE), monarchy corrupts into
tyranny, aristocracy into oligarchy, and democracy into mob rule.
During the nineteenth century, the view of corruption changed into a definition
specifically related to the bribery of public officials by private agents. Bribery was generally an
illicit payment in exchange for some government controlled resource, such as an overpayment
for a service or public property or an exemption from government regulation. These three forms
of corruption, as described by Menes, form the lion’s share of what is known about nineteenth
century municipal corruption. City governments were corrupt in the purchasing of inputs such as
street cleaning or construction services, and bribes were given in exchange for overpayment for
these inputs. City governments were also corrupt in the distribution of publicly-owned property
such as land or access to a port, all of which were sold not to the highest bidder for the good of
the citizens but to most generous briber for the benefit of the few. Finally city governments were
corrupt in the administration of rules, such as prohibitions on gambling and prostitution, and
accepted bribes for leniency in this administration.
These two views of corruption—the systematic or Polybian type and the venal or bribery
form—suggest a definitional synthesis. Corruption is the loss to the public from the subversion
of formal, or implicit, rules of government behavior. The losses may involve a classic welfare
loss, such as the loss from underinvestment because corrupt judges do not necessarily protect
property rights. The loss may instead or in addition be a reallocation from the public to
politicians or from the public to bribing businessmen. Within this broad definition of corruption,
there are several ways to parse corrupt behavior.
One reasonable division is to separate corruption into that which is legal and that which is
illegal. Most modern corruption is viewed as illegal, but there are also prominent forms of legal

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 5

corruption. In the framework of the definition, legal corruption involves losses due to the
evasion of implicit rules, not formal laws. Thus, going back to the ideas of Polybius, tyranny
may reflect an abuse of power that leads to large public welfare losses. But if there are no legal
barriers against the king, then the corruption is not illegal. In the more modern context, George
Washington Plunkitt’s description of honest graft is best thought of as legal corruption. Honest
graft, in Plunkitt’s terminology, is the gain of wealth by public officials through private
information, such as the proposed route of a new highway. The expropriation of this information
involved a loss of wealth to the public, but it was not necessarily illegal.
Since we define corruption as the loss or transfer of public wealth, corruption is “bad,” at
least relative to some ideal outcome. Of course, in some cases the relevant comparison is not an
abstract ideal. For example, as many authors have recognized, in the presence of social-welfare
decreasing rules, corruption that relaxes those rules may actually be socially beneficial. Of
course, a better outcome for the public would be to change the regulation or auction off permits
to violate the regulation where the proceeds from the auction are returned to the public treasury.
Still, there is always a question of the full social cost of corruption. In some cases, the
private returns to corrupt officials may be offset by paying officials lower wages in expectation
of corrupt gains (as in Becker and Stigler 1974). In other cases, corruption may ultimately
involve a transfer of wealth from one group to another without net social loss. In other instances,
corruption of the political system may lead to a breakdown in property rights enforcement that
causes economic collapse. Corruption in the education sector in the developing world appears
related to under-provision of schooling which may in turn seriously retard long run growth
(Reinikka and Svensson 2004). An important question, one that reappears frequently but which
is never adequately answered, is what the full cost of American corruption was.
The economic approach to corruption (as in Rose-Ackerman 1975) starts with the costs
and benefits facing potentially corrupt public officials. Since economics predicts that we should
expect to see corruption when the benefits are high and costs are low, it is worth analyzing what
factors should impact the benefits and costs of corrupt behavior by a government official. The
benefits from being corrupt are determined by the ability of a government official to increase

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 6

someone’s private wealth; the costs come from the expected penalties from being caught.
What determines the ability of a government official to increase someone’s private
wealth? The most obvious means is to pay the person out of the public purse. In extreme
circumstances, the person can just be the official himself; embezzlement is one example of
corrupt behavior. More usually, paying someone out of the public purse occurs in exchange for
services of some form, either labor or subcontracting. If fees are close to the costs of contracting
firms or the opportunity costs of workers, then the opportunities for corruption are limited. If
fees are significantly above free market prices, then there is opportunity for corruption in the
assignment of work. High public sector wages and discretion over hiring has traditionally
created some of the best opportunities for corrupt earnings.
This simple analysis helps us to understand some of the most popular reforms attempted
to arrest corruption. Civil service reform which would take patronage out of the hands of
politicians and replace discretion with test-based rules would naturally serve limit the
opportunity for corruption, especially when combined with a rigid pay scale for civil servants.5
Rules concerning procurement fees have also tended to be a popular tool against corruption.
Competitive bids for public projects linked to the requirement that the government accept the
low cost bid is one of the simplest means of limiting corruption in administration of government
projects. The approach relies on the existence of a competitive supply of contractors.
The second means that public officials have to create private wealth is to transfer
government property to private individuals for their own profit. The transfer of government land
to traction companies was a popular form of corruption in the nineteenth century. Information
about future government actions is a more subtle form of in-kind transfer. The returns to
corruption in these cases depend on the size of the assets at the government’s disposal and the
discretion that individuals have in the distribution of these assets.
The third primary means that governments have to create private wealth is the
manipulation of legal rulings or the enforcement of rules, such as regulations. Rules banning
5

See, for example, Johnson and Libecap (1994).

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 7

gambling and prostitution, for example, create the opportunity to extract bribes from potential
providers. These bribes can be extracted by any and all members in the chain of enforcement.
As the amount of regulation increases, the opportunity to extract bribes also rises and leads
reformers to fight against regulation and government monopoly (as in Bodenhorn’s essay).
Conversely, the connection between the intrusiveness of regulation and the ability to extract
bribes creates an incentive for politicians to push for further regulation.
Even in a libertarian’s dream world where the government is restricted to enforcing
disputes over property rights, there would still be considerable scope for corruption in the
arbitration of these disputes. Every dispute over ownership creates the possibility for a corrupt
ruling. After all, a corrupt judge can extract bribes even if when he rules in favor of the rightful
owner. As the legal system has the ability to redistribute all of the wealth in society, the
opportunities for corruption within the system are enormous. As corruption within the courts
destroys the clear definition of property rights, this corruption has the potential to turn the
libertarian dream into a Hobbesian nightmare. In practice, this ability may be limited by the
ability of private litigants to rely on private arbitration and avoid a corrupt legal system.
Together these factors suggest that the benefits of corruption will rise with the size and
discretion of the government and the amount of social and economic regulation. Benefits from
corruption will also rise when the size of assets or damages involved in property rights disputes
increases (as in Glaeser and Shleifer 2003). As we will discuss later, the late nineteenth century
was a period of increasingly larger governments, more valuable public assets, more aggressive
regulation (as discussed by Novak’s essay) and bigger stakes litigation. The potential benefits
from corruption rose during the period along almost every dimension.
The limits on corruption have customarily come from three sources: legal penalties,
career or social costs, and internal psychic pain. Thus, the overall costs of corruption come from
the size of the potential penalties and the probability that these costs are imposed which are in
turn a function of information flows, social opprobrium, and the legal system.
The most obvious parameter influencing the cost of legal corruption is the stated legal

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 8

penalty for corrupt practices. While this is certainly obvious, it is also important to remember
that these penalties have changed significantly over time. For example, while Plunkitt’s honest
graft—the use of insider information by politicians to enrich themselves—was surely corruption,
at least by our definition, it was completely legal during Plunkitt’s era. Even the gifts of railway
stock given to congressmen during the Crédit Mobilier scandal were perfectly legal at the time.
At the start of U.S. history, the number of laws on corruption was so modest that legal penalties
against corruption were often negligible. Since that time, there has been a steady increase in the
range of behaviors by public officials that are punishable by law and a steady increase in the
attempt to craft laws, such as the RICO statute, that render illegal as yet unspecified forms of
corrupt behavior.6
Laws always require enforcement, and while the range of legal behavior has generally
contracted over time, the time path of enforcement quality is far less clear. Enforcement both
requires some form of initial information about the corrupt action—reported either by a
government investigator or by some third party—and then a legal proceeding that acts on this
information. Public knowledge of corruption has been revealed mainly by third parties or by
investigators from some branch of government separated from the actual corruption. As the
Gentzkow, Glaeser and Goldin paper reminds us, the press has played a major role in exposing
scandals like Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome. However, in some cases, such as the famous
exposure of the Tweed Ring’s corruption by the press, exposure was initiated by a rival
politician. In our own era, journalistic careers, such as those of investigative reporters Robert
Woodward and Carl Bernstein writing for the Washington Post, have been made through intrepid
uncovering of governmental malfeasance.
Government does, however, occasionally police itself. Today there are hundreds of
prosecutions of state and local officials by federal investigators under the national Corrupt
Practices Act. The Tweed Ring faced legal prosecution not by local city police, who were
generally part of the ring, but rather through prosecution by officials of New York State. Today,
perhaps 80 percent of public corruption prosecutions are brought by federal officials (Corporate
6

RICO is the acronym for the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, passed by Congress
in 1970.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 9

Crime Reporter 2004). Separation of powers and federalism create rivalries between different
government actors and these rivalries create incentives to uncover and prosecute corruption. Of
course, the true importance of self-policing is understated because in cases where internal
monitoring functions well, corruption is unlikely to appear in the first place.
To generate legal penalties, the uncovering of corruption must then be followed by
successful legal prosecution, which in turn requires an independent judiciary. Effective
prosecution requires that judges are willing to convict officials who are proved to be corrupt.
Conviction will occur if the legal system is itself free from corruption, but even if judges are
themselves corrupt, they may still be willing to convict corrupt politicians if their political
interests conflict with those of the accused politicians. Judges appointed by a Republican
machine, even if they were completely complicit in that machine’s corruption, would still be
quite willing to convict a corrupt representative of an urban, Democratic machine. The rise of
professionalism in the judiciary has meant that it is increasingly less likely that a corrupt
politician can count on a friendly judge to let him off.
Even if the judicial system is dormant, the revelation of corruption can still create costs if
this revelation damages a politician’s career or social standing. For a politician, career costs
typically depend on the willingness of voters to oust corrupt officials. The track record of the
electorate is mixed in this area. There are many examples of notoriously corrupt officials being
regularly re-elected perhaps because the corruption is funneled back to voters or is offset by
other advantages or because voters are sufficiently cynical (or realistic) that they think that
political challengers are likely to be no less corrupt than the incumbents. The political career of
James Michael Curley, whose corrupt actions eventually landed him in jail, was only really in
danger when he faced political challengers who combined a clean image with the same
aggressive Hibernianism—Irish-Catholic jingoism—that Curley championed. Naturally, the role
of career concerns suggests that corruption will be more costly in areas with robust competition
between two or more political parties.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 10

III.

The Time Path of Corruption in the United States
Measuring corruption is a difficult task with certain similarities to the problem of

measuring crime. There are three ways of measuring crime: (1) crimes reported to the police, (2)
crimes leading to a conviction or trial, and (3) victimization surveys. The primary difference
between reported crimes and victimization surveys is that reported crimes are those reported to
the police and victimization surveys are crimes reported to surveyors. Victimization surveys are
generally thought to be the best measure of crime because they avoid the problem of
underreporting particularly in high crime areas. But such surveys are not available for the case
of corruption and corruption-related crimes reported to the police are also rare. Reports of
corruption generally come from newspaper articles about investigations not from the victims,
who are often all of the citizens.
As such, historical research on corruption must turn to other sources and methods. One
method, which we follow here, is to use public documents such as newspapers to proxy for
reported crimes. While there are no historical victimization surveys or crime reports that can be
used, corruption was reported in the press. Obviously, there are many reasons to question the
use of newspaper reporting as an indicator of underlying facts (indeed Gentzkow, Glaeser and
Goldin emphasize the changing bias of the media), but given the absence of other measures,
media coverage of corruption offers one possible means of assessing the amount of reported
corruption.
Another direction is to rely on trial records. The Corporate Crime Reporter (2004) has
recently ranked the 50 states on the basis of their public corruption convictions per capita. Given
that enforcement is generally federal and may not vary much by state, this measure may capture
the degree of corruption by state. The rankings that place Mississippi and Louisiana as the first
and third most corrupt states, and Oregon and New Hampshire as the second and third least
corrupt states, accord well with standard preconceptions. In principle, it might be possible to
collect a data base of public officials indicted for corruption, but that would be difficult.
With the advent of optical scanning technology, there are now a large number of digitally

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 11

searchable newspapers published in the United States, some going back to the late eighteenth
century. The drawback of using newspapers is that reporting often differs from the underlying
reality. Changes in reporting can reflect changes in the newspaper market rather than actual
changes in corrupt activity.
Our approach is to search for the words “corruption” and “fraud” (and their variants) and
to count the appearance of articles (or pages) containing these words. This count gives us a
measure of the amount of space newspapers gave to stories about corruption and fraud. We then
deflate these counts by the number of articles (or pages) containing the words “January” or
“political” (and its variants). This count gives us a measure of the overall size of the newspaper
(in the case of January) or the overall amount of attention given to politically-relevant stories.
Our results are not particularly sensitive to the exact choice of deflator words.7
We use two sources that are available electronically on-line in fully searchable editions:
the New York Times (Proquest) and a large group of small-town newspapers (Ancestry.com).8
The New York Times has several advantages. Because it is one newspaper the series does not
have a changing composition of papers. The Times is among the most serious American papers
and by the late nineteenth century it was unlikely to have made unsubstantiated claims about
corruption or knowingly omitted major stories on corruption.
Relying on the Times has the disadvantages that it affords us primarily a picture of New
York City and its reporting begins in 1851 with the establishment of the paper. To supplement
the evidence from the Times, we use a large collection of newspapers available from
www.ancestry.com, a website containing sources including the U.S. population censuses and
immigration records of particular value to genealogists.9 The papers are geographically spread
7

The difference between the “January” and “political” deflators is most pronounced in the early, pre-1860
era because the majority of newspaper stories in the ante-bellum period were political. As newsprint
prices plummeted, more attention was devoted to other types of stories and features.
8
By small town newspapers we mean papers such as the Bangor Daily Whig and Courier (Bangor ME),
the Lorain Standard (Elyria OH), the Adams Sentinel (Gettysburg PA), the Janesville Gazette (Janesville
WI), the Morning Oregonian (Portland OR), and the Statesville Landmark (Statesville NC).
9
Because the Ancestry.com site is updated almost daily, we did the counts during a short interval. At the
time of this writing a yearly membership for the entire website, including census and immigration data,
cost $200.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 12

throughout the United States mainly from small cities and towns and have fairly good coverage
by the early nineteenth century. The disadvantage is that the composition of papers changes over
time. Although neither series is perfect, they yield a remarkably similar picture for the century
of overlap.
We have presented in Figure 1 three series given as three-year centered moving averages
to smooth the data. The series that are deflated by “political” are remarkably close in the period
of overlap (the correlation coefficient between the two series is 0.943 for the period 1852 to
1960).10 If the variation in corruption reporting were caused by reporting fads or changes in the
market for news, these fads and market changes must have had a remarkable consistency
between New York City and small town America.
One check on the series is to see whether the reporting corresponds well with known
facts about corruption. Do peaks in the series occur during periods known to have contained
considerable be corruption? Table 1 gives thumbnail sketches of the major stories during the
local peaks in “corruption” and “fraud” in Figure 1.
The first great boom in corruption reporting occurs around the 1840 election. Stories of
corruption during this period focused on Tammany Hall and also Martin Van Buren, the first
President who owed his success to a political machine (for a description of Van Buren’s
activities in the banking sector, see the Bodenhorn essay).11 The next peak in corruption
reporting occurred between 1857 and 1861 and focused on voting irregularities in Kansas. There
is a global peak in the 1870s during the Grant administration. Top stories concerned Crédit
Mobilier, the Whiskey Ring, and Reconstruction and the Ku Klux Klan. Finally, there is a small
local peak in the late 1920s during the era of prohibition and the Teapot Dome scandal. The New
York Times series is similar and shows basic patterns which conform to our notions about periods
of major corruption in U.S. history.
Both series reveal one major trend—reporting on corruption declined between 1870s and
10

The correlation is likely enhanced by the copying by small town newspapers from the larger city papers
and also by the use of wire services.
11
There was also a brief advertising craze concerning remedies for “corrupted livers.”

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 13

the 1920s. The decline, moreover, is concentrated in both series from the mid-1870s to 1890 and
in the 1910s. In the 1870s our index (deflated by political) was greater than 0.8, but ever since
1930, the index has hovered around 0.2. If these series reflect anything about reality then it is
hard not to conclude that there was a significant secular decline in corruption.
The first period of sustained decreased reporting on corruption and fraud, from the mid1870s to 1890, was an era of reform when New York City under Honest John Kelly was far
“cleaner” than it had been under Boss Tweed. At the national level, no administration has ever
faced the litany of scandal that embarrassed Ulysses S. Grant. It seems reasonable that the
decline in our index reflects a cleansing of politics, even though the decline occurred during the
heart of the Gilded Age.
The first period of sustained decline in our index is followed by one of stability from
about 1895 to 1908. The period—a high point of the Progressive Era—does not seem likely to
have been a moment when reform stood still. Instead, a more reasonable reading of the data is
that even if reform continued, the vast attention paid to corruption by muckraking journalists
meant that the series was stable despite continuing reductions in corruption. Perhaps, it is
worthwhile noting that contrary to the view that Progressive Era muckrakers brought to the
media a new awareness of corruption, our series show that such attention was much higher
before. Our series, however, cannot reveal whether the informational content of the Progressive
Era muckrakers was substantially higher than the more histrionic reporting of the earlier era.
The second period of decline occurs between 1908 and 1917. This period was
legitimately one of significant reform, and it is certainly possible that corruption dropped
significantly during this era. Of course, it is also true that increasing coverage of the Great War
may well have pushed corruption off of the front pages. After this period, there is a rise in the
late 1920s, but even during this period, reporting on corruption never gets close to the levels of
the middle nineteenth century. At least if reporting is any kind of indication, by the 1930s,
corruption in the United States was nothing like the corruption of the nineteenth century.
The time path shown by these series is compatible with mainstream histories of the

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 14

period. The traditional view of much of the nineteenth century is that it was replete with great
corruption and the traditional view of the early twentieth century (see, for example, Hofstadter
1955) is that Progressive Era reforms were effective and that corruption actually fell.
Furthermore, scattered evidence on conviction in high places also supports the downward trend
observed in the index. For example, while charges of venal corruption were regularly leveled
against nineteenth century New York City mayors like Fernando Wood, Oakey Hall (a member
of the Tweed Ring), and Robert Van Wyck, no New York City Mayor since William O’Dwyer,
50 years ago, has been seriously accused of corrupt activity. Indeed, since Van Wyck more than
100 years ago, only O’Dwyer and James Walker seem to have been notably corrupt.
The time series gives clear evidence for a decline in corruption since the mid-1870s, but
the evidence on the early periods in the nineteenth century is less clear. The year-to-year
variation is large and it is hard to uncover any clear secular pattern. If the ante-bellum series are
taken seriously (and there is much noise in these figures) then there was a steady rise in reporting
about corruption between 1815 and 1850 and no change between around 1850 and 1870. This
time pattern corresponds with the views of some historians and it can be connected with the rise
in government budgets and the scale of the economy (as argued by Glaeser and Shleifer 2003).
While the data are consistent with the view that corruption followed an arc first rising between
1815 and 1850 and then falling after 1870, the evidence for the early rise is weaker than that
supporting the subsequent fall.
IV.

Reform and the Fight against Corruption
To understand changes in corruption and its prosecution over time, it is vital to have both

a theory of corruption as well as one of reform. The theory of corruption is the more
straightforward of the two because reform is rarely a unilateral decision. For example, reform
has seldom been credited to a particular political leader. There have been exceptions as in the
cases of the two Roosevelts and Woodrow Wilson, although even their efforts are best seen as
culminations of lengthy reform movements.
The essays in Corruption and Reform deal with three main theories about the rise of

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 15

reform. The first theory views institutional change as welfare maximizing and argues that
institutional reform is more likely to succeed the higher are the social benefits of reform. The
theory has an old pedigree: the reformers themselves argued that their proposed policies would
benefit society and the view dominated mid-twentieth century historical writings on reform (e.g.,
Hofstadter 1955). A second, revisionist theory follows Stigler (1971) and emphasizes the power
of certain producers in shaping regulation. According to this view, regulation and reform fit the
needs of big producers who want to increase their rival’s costs. Finally, a third theory (suggested
by Law and Libecap), argues that reform is driven by political entrepreneurs who sometimes
gain support both through manipulating popular opinion and the tools of government.
The welfare maximizing view of reform was that espoused by the reformers themselves.
The rhetoric used by Theodore Roosevelt, Woodrow Wilson, and intellectuals behind reform
such as Herbert Croly and John Landis, all suggested that reform was needed to solve a variety
of social ills. Some proponents of social choice theory suggest, perhaps optimistically, that
political outcomes will tend towards the Pareto frontier. They argue that if there are rents to be
gained (as there always are in systems away from the frontier), coalitions will form to extract
those rents. Modern work on reform and regulation occasionally adopts this view (as in Glaeser
and Shleifer 2003) and views reforms as welfare-maximizing in a world in which all institutions
are subject to different forms of corruption.
This view of reform implies that reform movements should arise when the net social
benefits of reform outweigh the costs. According to Wallis, Fishback, and Kantor, federal
oversight of New Deal relief eliminated corruption that had been endemic to transfer programs at
the state and local levels. If this view is correct, we should see corruption-reducing federal
control over welfare programs whenever the benefit exceeds the costs of central control, such as
a lesser ability to target welfare most accurately or a weighty bureaucracy or the fixed costs of
reform itself. More generally, we should expect to see more reform when corruption is high,
possibly resulting from an ossified system as in Olson (1965; see also Troesken), or because
exogenous variables have increased the returns to corruption (as in Glaeser and Shleifer 2003).
This view also predicts reform will occur when the cost of introducing reformed institutions
decreases, perhaps due to more-educated and better-informed elites with greater abilities to

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 16

monitor such institutions.
The second, revisionist, view of reform argues that reform is controlled by wellorganized special-interest groups. In the case of regulation of industry, the relevant interest
groups are big firms. This view predicts that regulation will cater to the needs of those
businesses. According to this view we should see more reform when the benefits it provides to
big firms are greater or when their political clout is greater. One somewhat surprising
implication of this Stiglerian view is that it suggests that Progressive era reform and regulation
may not have signaled the triumph of popular sovereignty over business interests, but rather the
triumph of particular businesses over the state.
Of course, business interests and social welfare are occasionally well aligned and in such
cases the first and second views of reform are difficult to disentangle. In many instances both
business and the public may want to make it difficult for public officials to extract protection
money from firms. In some cases, firms may be better off with relatively honest politicians who
do not try to extort income from new firms. In such an instance, both firms and society as a
whole might be better off with reforms that raise the costs to political actors of accepting bribes.
The third view of reform looks neither to special interest groups nor to public welfare as a
whole, but to political entrepreneurs. According to this view, reforms are put forward by
political entrepreneurs who seek either to get elected on a reforming ticket or be appointed to
some new administrative body created as a result of reform. In the case of a perfectly informed
electorate, this view and the first, welfare-maximizing, view of reform become identical. But in
cases where the electorate is less than perfectly informed and its opinions can be shaped by
entrepreneurs (as argued by Law and Libecap), this view of reform yields different positive
predictions about when we should expect to see reform. It also yields different predictions about
the welfare benefits of reform and implies that reform may be socially costly.
One variant on this theory is that the “cry of reform” is basically the natural complement
to accusing one’s opponent of being corrupt, and any challenger, unless the opponent is known
to be squeaky clean, will be tempted to make the accusation. One natural impediment to the “cry

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 17

of reform” occurs when the challenger has been part of the system and another is that reforms
generally reduce rents to politicians when they get elected. As such, reform is most likely to be
championed by political entrepreneurs who have not been part of the system and who are
unlikely to be able to take advantage of corruption. Real reform, therefore, will occur more often
when long-standing political control by one party is broken by another (as argued by
Bodenhorn).
The view predicts that we should expect to see more reform when there are greater
political returns to entrepreneurs who emphasize reform. These returns could be high because of
political variables, such as a tight race which might be decided by a group that can be influenced
to care about reform. If the returns to government office, or controlling a government
bureaucracy, have increased, then this will also increase the supply of reforming politicians.
Finally, changes in communications technology that will make it easier to convince people of the
benefits of reform (even if those benefits do not exist) will increase the amount of reform.
There is no question that each of these theories has been important during certain epochs
of reform. Certain railroad regulations benefited incumbent firms more than they did consumers.
Political entrepreneurs spearheaded reforms, like the Food and Drug Act of 1906, and in many
cases, the reform appears to have benefited politicians far more than the public at large. There
are even cases where public welfare seems to have benefited from attempts at reform.
It is also true that all three theories can potentially explain the broad time paths of reform
over the past 150 years. Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) argue that Progressive era reforms were
necessary because an increasing scale of enterprise made old institutions unable to handle
increasing incentives for corruption. As such, early twentieth century reform was a response to
the increased corruption created by increased scale. A Stiglerian view is that increased scale and
business power, naturally led to business-friendly reforms. Finally, changes in public literacy
and sophistication, the media, the size of government and the returns to offices, might have all
acted together to give political entrepreneurs greater ability and desire to sell reform to the
public. As such, it is difficult to disentangle the relative importance of the three theories of
reform. They are touched on by many of the essays in Corruption and Reform.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 18

V.

Conclusion
Corruption within the United States appears to have followed something of an arc—an

inverted, backwards J-shape beginning at a high level with a small increase and ending with a
spectacular decrease. The early period in U.S. history was probably a bit less corrupt than the
Gilded Age that followed. But rule-breaking in the modern era is far more circumspect than in
the early twentieth century. If there was a rise in corruption across the nineteenth century, the
rise can be easily explained by the increasing scale of both government and the economy. Vast
increases in the budgets of local governments greatly increased the potential benefits of
corruption. It would be surprising if corruption did not increase between 1800 and 1870.
But the decline in corruption between the mid-1870s and 1920 was not associated with
declining returns to corruption. The size of the government continued to rise and the returns
from corruption in the judiciary increased as well. The big change over the twentieth century has
been in the costs facing corrupt politicians. In 1900, many actions we would now prosecute were
legal. Governments rarely prosecuted themselves, and the higher levels of government were
sufficiently weak that they could not provide a check on local corruption. Newspapers had long
provided exposure of corrupt practices, but in many smaller cities the news media was
sufficiently tied to the political establishment that it was unlikely to trumpet information
unfavorable to that establishment.
By the early twentieth century, the full apparatus of modern checks on corruption were in
place. Rules had generally replaced discretion in many areas such as patronage. Different levels
of government more effectively patrolled each other. Greater competition and political
independence in the news media meant that corrupt activities and charges of corruption were
more likely to be reported everywhere in America, not just in the big cities. Finally, voter
expectations about corrupt behavior had changed and revealed corruption was more likely to lead
to political defeat.
Because the costs of corruption rose along so many margins, it is hard to determine what

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 19

particular factor or set of factors were most important. Still, American history does provide a
striking story of a country that changed from a place where political bribery were routine events
infecting politics at all levels to a nation that now ranks amongst the least corrupt in the world.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 20

References
Becker, Gary S., and George Stigler J. 1974. “Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and
Compensation of Enforcers,” Journal of Legal Studies 3(January): 1-18.
Caro, Robert A. 2002. The Years of Lyndon Johnson, Vol. 3: Master of the Senate. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf.
Corporate Crime Reporter. 2004. “Public Corruption in the United States.” Report.
Di Tella, Rafael, and Ernesto Schargrodsky. 2003. “The Role of Wages and Auditing during a
Crackdown on Corruption in the City of Buenos Aires,” Journal of Law and Economics, 46
(April): 269-92.
Gaviria, Alejandro. 2002. “Assessing the Effects of Corruption and Crime on Firm Performance:
Evidence from Latin America,” Emerging Markets Review 3(3): 245-68.
Glaeser, Edward. 2003. “Public Ownership in the American City.” In Urban Issues and Public
Finance: Essays in Honor of Dick Netzer, edited by Amy E. Schwartz. Northhampton, MA:
Edward Elgar.
Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” Journal of
Economic Literature 41(June): 401-25.
Hellman, Joel, Geraint Jones, and Daniel Kaufmann. 2003. “Seize the State, Seize the Day:
State Capture and Influence in Transition Economics,” Journal of Comparative Economics
31 (December): 751-73.
Hofstadter, Richard. 1955. The Age of Reform. New York: Vintage Books.
Leite, Carlos. and Jens. Weidmann. 2002. “Does Mother Nature Corrupt? Natural Resources,
Corruption, and Economic Growth.” In Governance, Corruption, and Economic
Performance, edited by George T. Abed and Sanjeev Gupta. Washington, D.C.:
International Monetary Fund, pp. 159-96.
Mauro, Paulo. 1995. “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (August):
681-712.
McCullough, David D. 1992. Truman. New York: Simon and Schuster.
McMillan, John, and Pablo Zoido. 2004. “How to Subvert Democracy: Montesinos in Peru.”
C.E.P.R. Discussion Paper no. 4361 (April).
Olson, Mancur. 1982. The Rise and Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagflation, and
Economic Rigidities. New Haven CT: Yale University Press.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 21

Olson, Mancur. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups.
Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan. 1975. “The Economics of Corruption,” Journal of Public Economics 4
(February): 187-203.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1993. “Corruption,”Quarterly Journal of Economics 108
(August): 599-617.
Steffens, Lincoln. 1904, reprinted 1957. The Shame of the Cities. New York: Amereon.
Stigler, George J. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2 (Spring): 3-21.
Ritva, Reinikka, and Jakob Svensson. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central
Government Transfer Program in Uganda,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (May): 679706.
Swenson, Jakob. 2003. “Who Must Pay Bribes and How Much? Evidence from a Cross Section
of Firms,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (February): 207-230.
List of Corruption and Reform Conference Volume Papers
Bodenhorn, Howard (Lafayette College and NBER)
“Bank Chartering and Political Corruption in Antebellum New York: Free Banking as Reform”
Cutler, David (Harvard University and NBER)
Miller, Grant (Harvard University)
“Water, Water Everywhere: Water Reforms in American Cities”
Engerman, Stanley (University of Rochester and NBER)
Sokoloff, Kenneth (UC, Los Angeles and NBER)
“Digging the Dirt at Public Expense: Corruption in the Building of the New York Canals”
Fishback, Price (University of Arizona and NBER)
“Corruption, Capture, and the Development of Workplace Safety Legislation”
Fishback, Price (University of Arizona and the NBER)
Kantor, Shawn (UC, Merced and NBER)
Wallis, John (University of Maryland and NBER_
“Politics, Relief, and Reform: The Transformation of America’s Social Welfare System during
the New Deal”
Gentzkow, Matthew (University of Chicago)
Glaeser, Edward (Harvard University and the NBER)

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 22

Goldin, Claudia (Harvard University and NBER)
“The Rise of the Fourth Estate: How Newspapers Became Informative and Why it Mattered”
Lamoreaux, Naomi (UC, Los Angeles and NBER)
Rosenthal, Jean Laurent Rosenthal (UC, Los Angeles)
“Corporate Governance and the Plight of Minority Shareholders in the United States before the
Great Depression”
Libecap, Gary (University of Arizona and NBER)
Law, Marc (University of Vermont)
“Corruption and Reform? The Emergence of the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act”
Menes, Rebecca (George Mason University and NBER)
“Corruption in Cities: Graft and Politics in American Cities at the Turn of the Twentieth
Century”
Novak, William (University of Chicago)
“Law and the Social Control of Business in the Progressive Era”
Troesken, Werner (University of Pittsburgh and NBER)
“Regime Change and Corruption: A History of Public Utility Regulation”
John Wallis, University of Maryland and NBER, “The Concept of Systematic Corruption in
American Political and Economic History”

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 23

Figure 1
Indexes of Corruption and Fraud: 1815 to 1975
Index of Corruption and Fraud
1.2

NYTimes (Corr, Fraud)/Political
Ancestry (Corr, Fraud)/January
Ancestry (Corr, Fraud)/Politic*

1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0
1810

1830

1850

1870

1890

1910

1930

1950

1970

Sources: NY Times: on-line, fully-searchable edition of the New York Times from ProQuest
Information and Learning Company, Ann Arbor, Michigan. Ancestry: Ancestry.com, part of
MyFamily.com, Inc., Provo, Utah.
Notes: The series for the New York Times gives counts of the words “corrupt*” and “fraud*”
divided by counts of the word “political,” where an asterisk (*) indicates that all variants are
selected. The search engine (Proquest) gives the number of separate articles containing at least
one “hit.” The series for Ancestry gives counts of the words “corrupt*” and “fraud*” divided by
counts of the word “politic*.” The search engine (Ancestry.com) gives the number of newspaper
pages containing at least one “hit.” The number of separate newspapers changes over time as
does the mix of papers. For example, the numbers at five year intervals from 1820 to 1935 are:
1820 3
1825 3
1830 10
1835 4
1840 6
1845 8
1850 10
1855 16
1860 18
1865 18
1870 19
1875 33
1880 42
1885 46
1890 53
1895 53
1900 45
1905 50
1910 48
1915 51
1920 47
1925 41
1930 37
1935 33
Because newspapers are constantly being added at Ancestry.com, these numbers apply to those
available as of July 2004. All series are expressed here as three-year centered moving averages.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 24

Table 1
Thumbnail Sketches of Events during Local Time-Series Peaks in Corruption and Fraud Activity
Year(s)
1820

Index
0.567

1837-45

0.611 to
0.870

1857-59

0.711 to
0.837

1870-79

0.876 to
1.03

1893

0.635

1925-28

0.264 to
0.274

1951-52

0.269

Corruption and Fraud Events
Impeachment proceedings against the governor of Pennsylvania (most of
the available newspapers in Ancestry.com were from PA).
Whig accusations of corruption by the Van Buren administration,
particularly in 1840 (election year). After Harrison died in office, the
Tyler assumption of the presidency brought charges of corruption by
those who thought he should be an interim president. Tammany Hall
corruption scandals also dotted the news.
Voting irregularities after the Kansas-Nebraska Act. The pro-slave
voting by Missourians in the Kansas elections and the “Lecompton
Constitution” were deemed fraudulent and corrupt.
Voter intimidation in the South by the Ku Klux Klan and various aspects
of Reconstruction (including carpetbaggers, use of Federal money by the
Radicals and the Freedmen’s Bureau) were deemed corrupt. The 1872
election, Greeley’s alleged connections to Tammany Hall. The Crédit
Mobilier corruption scandal and various criticisms of the Union Pacific
Railroad. Other corruption during the Grant administration, including the
Whiskey Ring. The 1876 Democratic candidate, Tilden, was known for
breaking the Tweed Ring and the Canal Ring and this made corruption a
major issue in the presidential election. The election was heavily
contested and although Tilden appears to have won the popular vote a
senatorial committee awarded the disputed electoral votes to Hayes.
No single or major issue. Financial panic appears to have led people to
place blame. Three major railroads collapsed and stock fraud was
discussed. Land grant fraud in the Northern Great Plains was alleged.
Corrupt appointments in the Cleveland administration were discussed as
were claims that continued exclusion of southern Democrats from
Congress would lead to corruption.
The Teapot Dome scandal of the early 1920s was raised during the 1928
presidential election as an indication of Coolidge’s corruption. Albert
Fall was tried for his involvement in Teapot Dome. Andrew Mellon,
Treasury Secretary was investigated. Also the barring and subsequent
reinstatement of Alfred Smith from his Senate seat for corrupt
fundraising. Speak-easies and other “corrupt” ways to get around
Prohibition and the power of organized crime. Congress passed the
“corrupt practices act” in 1925 governing campaign expenditures.
Scandal in the IRS led to the dismissal of many people and the discovery
of misuse of funds in the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Kefauver
headed Senate committee to examine influence of organized crime in the
government and exposed many.

Glaeser and Goldin, Corruption and Reform 25

