                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MARKETS IN CHINA AND EUROPE ON
                         THE EVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION

                                             Carol H. Shiue
                                             Wolfgang Keller

                                          Working Paper 10778
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10778


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We have benefited from comments and discussions with Gregory Clark, Dean Corbae, Brad DeLong,
Avinash Dixit, Michael Edelstein, Avner Greif, Peter Hansen, Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Max Stinchcombe,
and David Weil, as well as seminar participants at the International Monetary Fund, the Russell Sage
Foundation, the World Bank thematic group on Poverty and Inequality, the European Science Foundation
Conference on “Market Performance and the Welfare Gains of Market Integration in History” in Fiesole, the
NBER Summer Institute 2004 Development of the American Economy and Economic Fluctuations and
Growth meetings, the Macroeconomics Workshop at Brown University and Ohio State University, the
Economic History Workshop at University California Berkeley, Columbia University, Stanford University,
and University California Los Angeles, the Economics Department Seminar at University College London
and the University of Texas, and the International Economics Field Seminar at the London School of
Economics. We also thank Jörg Baten for the European weather data. Part of the paper was written while the
first author was Visiting Scholar at the Russell Sage Foundation, and their hospitality is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Carol H. Shiue and Wolfgang Keller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Markets in China and Europe on the Eve of the Industrial Revolution
Carol H. Shiue and Wolfgang Keller
NBER Working Paper No. 10778
September 2004
JEL No. O1, N0, N7

                                           ABSTRACT

Prevailing views suggest the Industrial Revolution began in Europe because markets had gradually
become more efficient and by the 18th century the scope of economic activity was far larger than in
other parts of the world. This paper compares the actual performance of markets in Europe and
China, two regions of the world that were relatively advanced in the pre-industrial period, but would
start to industrialize about 150 years apart. The analysis covers economies that account for about
two-fifths of the world's population in the mid-18th century, and it considers some three centuries
of data. Our findings suggest that relative levels of market function in China and Europe were similar
prior to the Industrial Revolution. Higher efficiency in Europe is seen only in the nineteenth century
when industrialization was already underway. Moreover, these improvements occurred in a dramatic
and sudden fashion, further casting doubt on an evolutionary view of market development. Rather
than being a key condition for subsequent growth, gains in efficiency appeared simultaneously with
the turning point of modern growth. We discuss the implications of these findings for a number of
explanations for long-run growth and the Industrial Revolution.

Carol H. Shiue
Department of Economics
University of Texas-Austin
BRB 2.126
Austin, TX 78712
shiue@eco.utexas.edu

Wolfgang Keller
Department of Economics
University of Texas-Austin
BRB 3.152
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
keller@eco.utexas.edu
1. Introduction

         Recent interpretations of the Industrial Revolution suggest that it started around 1770 in

Britain and spread to United States and Western Europe by the mid-19th century.1 The turning

point of modern economic growth was a remarkable event because it was the first time in human

history that per capita growth rates much above zero became sustainable over the long-run. How

did a world of static expansion make its way to one of sustained increase in GDP per capita, and

why did the Industrial Revolution start its spread from Europe and not elsewhere?

         Prevailing views place a great deal of emphasis on how efficient markets and good

institutions are necessary for modern growth. According to North and others, by 1700 Britain

and the Netherlands had developed a set of institutions—common law, property rights, and non-

distortionary pricing systems—that would lead to more efficient resource use and provide far

greater incentives to make investments that would raise income per capita (North and Weingast

1989, North 1981, North and Thomas 1973).2 The Industrial Revolution is thus seen as the

outcome of the evolution of European institutional forms, which has successfully taken root in

other countries as well in the last two centuries. The historical record of Europe attests to an

expansion of influence through trade and migration over long-distances (Chaswick and Hatton

2003, O’Rourke and Williamson 1999). European settlers, by bringing with them their heritage

of good institutions, in some cases created the basis of long-run growth in these countries

(Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson 2001).3

         Empirical studies focusing on the importance of market-supporting institutions on


1
  The year 1770 is often chosen as the starting date of the Industrial Revolution because a number of key
innovations, including the spinning jenny (1764), the water frame (1769), the steam engine (1774), and other
inventions in the cotton industry as well as ironmaking were introduced around this time. See Crafts (1985) and
Crafts and Harley (1992) for estimates on productivity growth rates between 1770 and 1861 in Britain. See
Maddison (1989) on international income comparisons in the last three centuries.
2
  See North and Thomas (1973).
3
  Banerjee and Iyer (2002) show how different colonial policies have led to cross-regional income variation in India.


                                                         1
economic incentives include Frankel and Romer (1999), who provide contemporary cross-

country evidence in support of a positive correlation between trade and growth, as well as the

influential work of Hall and Jones (1999), and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002). In the

framework of Hall and Jones, countries that were more strongly influenced by Europeans in past

centuries have social infrastructures more conducive to high levels of output per worker today.

In addition to these studies, microeconomic studies that focus on private sector investment and

the return to investment projects have generally found a positive association between

government policies that protect property rights and returns (Isham and Kaufmann 1999,

McMillan 2002).

       This paper contributes to the literature on institutions and long-run growth by analyzing

the relative efficiency of European markets over three centuries. Certainly, a more efficient

economic system should be more productive. It is also very likely that large increases in

incentives to invest occurred only after the onset of the Industrial Revolution, when the returns

were much higher. The possible endogeneity of efficient markets and growth makes it difficult

to ascertain causal direction. However, if better market-supporting institutions were a pre-

condition for European growth, and European institutions were in some way exceptional, we

would expect to find that European markets were more efficient compared to markets in non-

European economies well before Europe started to industrialize.

       To see whether markets were very different in the pre-industrial world, this paper

compares the actual efficiency of markets using data on the spatial dispersion of grain prices

from the 17th to the 19th century. We focus on China and Europe, two regions of the world that

were relatively advanced as of the mid-18th century, and yet would start industrializing about 150

years apart. The aim is to see whether European markets were already outperforming markets in




                                                 2
China before the period of its industrialization, or whether large efficiency differences in

commodity markets are a relatively recent phenomenon.

       The analysis in this paper uses a number of empirical methodologies to assess different

aspects of market efficiency. Overall, the methods give results that are consistent with each

other. The main results of the paper suggest that as late as 1780, markets in China were as

efficient as those in Europe. The efficiency of English markets at this time, however, was

greater than that found in the most advanced parts of Continental Europe as well as China.

Furthermore, market efficiency in Europe improved between 1780 and 1830, and the

improvement occurred dramatically and suddenly in comparison to what came before.

       This paper relates to many contributions on the Industrial Revolution and cross-country

comparisons, some of which are discussed further in section II. It is the first study, as far as we

know, to provide a quantitative comparison of markets across Europe and most of China in the

pre-industrial era. In addition, our starting point is somewhat different from the convention that

assumes good institutions => market efficiency => growth. We do not assume that efficiency

Europe was higher because it was the first to industrialize. In addition, efficiency may be a

function of many factors, and these remain to be untangled. Thus, in our view: {good

institutions, geography, factor endowments, incentive to innovate, and other factors} => market

efficiency => growth. In addition to North’s incentive arguments mentioned above, other writers

have suggested numerous potential explanations for the Industrial Revolution, including

geography (Diamond 1997, Sachs 2003), technological diffusion (Mokyr 1990), human capital

accumulation (Inkster 1991, Mitch 1999), household labor organization (de Vries 1994), ecology

(Wrigley 1988), religion and Protestant ethics (Weber 1903), and the discovery of new frontiers

(Webb 1952). Institutional outcomes might have also arisen from interactions with these




                                                 3
explanations (Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson 2002, Sokoloff and Engerman 2000). Sokoloff and

Engerman (2000), for example, focus on how local factor endowments exert an influence over

institutional outcomes. A better understanding of changing patterns in market efficiency should

provide a more complete picture of industrialization on many fronts as there are few explanations

of growth that do not depend on the existence of, or have implications for, efficient markets.

         Our analysis also sheds new light on a number of specific questions surrounding the

industrial revolution. One is whether the Industrial Revolution was a uniquely British

phenomenon, or whether the more advanced countries of Europe, such as France, China and

other non-Western areas of the world were equally plausible contenders (Crafts 1995, Pomeranz

2000, Goldstone 2002). Overall comparisons of relative living standards remain elusive, in part

because cross-country income differences in the 18th century were relatively small, but there is

general agreement that within China, the Yangzi Delta was one of the most developed.4 In a

prominent recent study, Pomeranz maintains that whatever advantages England had over the

Yangzi Delta, it was not in its markets, and that more generally, “China comes closer the

neoclassical ideal of a market economy than Europe.”5 This paper distinguishes England from

the rest of Europe, and compares both to markets in the Yangzi Delta and in China overall.

         Another issue on which we can bring new evidence to bear is whether the sources of

growth in Europe might have originated from a long process of development stretching back for

many centuries (perhaps as far back as the year 1000), or emerged rather recently in the last

couple of centuries.6 Because we follow the same economies over several centuries, this reduces

many important identification problems because persistent factors unique to Europe—such as


4
  For living standard comparisons, see for instance Allen (2002, 2001) and Bairoch (1975, 3-17).
5
  Pomeranz (2000, 17). See Huang (2002) on the “involution” thesis.
6
  There appears to be no evidence of there being any dramatic shifts in economic growth until at least the 19th
century. See Crafts (1994, 45).


                                                          4
geography, customs, intellectual and ethical tradition, or language are held constant.

        A comparison of the scope of incentives should have more general implications for

existing theories on long-run economic growth to the extent that these theories depend on

efficiency considerations. More generally, the question of market functioning is also important

in furthering understanding of the origins of modern growth, how it can be sustained, and how it

may be spread across economies today.



2.1 Market efficiency and prices across locations: a simple framework

        We compare the efficiency of markets in China and Europe using prices in different

locations. The failure of prices of identical goods to equalize between sites—the failure of the

law of one price to hold—is indicative of limited trade possibilities. There are several notions of

market efficiency in the literature, each of which focuses on different aspects as well as different

underlying causes. To guide our discussion below, we introduce a simple general framework.

        Consider an economy with many locations, n = 1,…, N, where consumers in all locations

have the same preferences. In each location there are many producers with the same technology

for producing a grain crop, which cannot be stored to the next period. Output is a function of the

local harvest (Hnt), which is affected by random shocks due to weather (climate, rainfall, etc).

All else equal, we expect that the local price in location n at time t can be written as

(1)     Pnt = f ( H nt ) , with f ' (.) < 0.

With random weather shocks, local prices will vary randomly as well, unless trade between

locations is feasible. In the extreme, if grain is perfectly tradable—there are no trade barriers—

its price in period t will be equalized across locations: Pnt = Pt ,∀n, t , or, the law of one price

holds. This is a standard interpretation of market efficiency.



                                                    5
        One reason why prices might not equalize is that the markets are geographically

separated. Recent work in international trade suggests that some of its major features can be

explained by geographic considerations (Fujita, Krugman, and Venables 1998). Take the

widely-used case of iceberg transport costs, for example: exporters in location n have to send z >

1 units for every one unit of the good that arrives in the destination market j (a fraction 1 − 1 / z

melts in transit). With iceberg transport costs, the price of location n relative to the price in

region j can be anywhere in

        1 Pnt
(2)      ≤    ≤z,
        z Pjt

which corresponds to Heckscher’s (1916) commodity points of trade. According to equation (2),

the full equalization of prices cannot be achieved: the presence of transport costs means that

prices in locations n and j are in equilibrium whenever they are in the range (1/z, z). As long as

the pre-trade prices are such that

(2’)     Pnt − Pjt < z − 1 ,

there will be no trade between locations n and j in period t.

        Moreover, trade is more likely to occur within neighboring locations because

transportation costs are relatively low. Let d nj be the distance between locations n and j; we

expect that z is a function of distance, z ( d nj ) , with z (.) > 0 . This will mean that the equilibrium

range of no trade is larger the larger is the distance between markets:

(3)      Pnt − Pjt < z (d nj ) − 1 .
                          (+)



        A natural measure of market efficiency in this context is the degree to which prices in

locations n and j differ from each other for a given bilateral distance d nj , because this can be




                                                    6
viewed as an estimate of the transport cost function: the larger are the differences between Pnt

and Pjt for a given distance, the lower is the efficiency of the market. Below, we present

evidence on the width of the equilibrium price band for a given distance to compare market

efficiency in China and Europe.

           In addition to geography there are other factors that impact on the degree to which

arbitrage will equalize prices between markets.7 The presence of national borders, for example,

may be one important factor (Engel and Rogers 1996, Shiue 2004a). Governments often collect

tariff revenues or impose other trade costs at national borders. These measures may be viewed

as man-made transportation costs, and these can be easily accommodated in this framework. In

addition, there may be other costs associated with trading across national borders, for instance,

translation costs if different languages are spoken in the two locations n and j. Let ẑnj denote the

trade costs between markets n and j conditional on distance. This suggests that zˆnj = zˆ (τ nj , bnj ) ,

with partial derivatives zˆτ > 0 , zˆb > 0 , where τ nj are trade policy barriers between markets n and

j, and bnj captures other national border-related trade costs.

           Trade costs may incorporate other transactions costs. First, arbitrariness and the absence

of the rule-of-law tend to raise transactions costs. If there is a positive probability of

expropriation by the government, this will act as a tax on trade, just as the risk that a merchant

might be robbed en-route to his destination will reduce trade. Both raise the expected costs of

trade, and in our framework lead to a wider band of ‘no trade’. Similarly, if property rights are

not well-established or not well-enforced, this will reduce the efficiency of markets. For

instance, if a buyer (from location i) lacks the means to ensure that a seller in location j will not


7
    Anderson and van Wincoop (2003) survey several of the trade costs we discuss in the following.


                                                          7
cheat once the former has made his payment, this will reduce the buyer’s incentive to engage in

the transaction—and this makes the band of no trade wider.

         Another set of issues that might affect the efficiency of markets is the monopoly power of

local incumbents. Local producers have an incentive to prevent the import of lower-cost goods,

and may try to influence local officials to impose additional costs on suppliers from the outside.8

Powerful vested interests may lead to restricted market access, so that the equilibrium price band

becomes wider and market efficiency declines. Summarizing, if we let ~
                                                                     znj denote the trade costs

between markets n and j conditional on distance, the previous considerations suggests that in

equilibrium, prices in n and j can lie anywhere in the range of ~
                                                                znj ≤ Pnt / Pjt ≤ ~
                                                                   −1
                                                                                  znj , and there will

be no trade if and only if the pre-trade prices satisfy

                                                                                
(4)       Pnt − Pjt < ~znj − 1 ,      ~
                                      z nj = ~
                                             z τ nj , bnj , a nj , rnj , v nj  .
                                                 (+) (+) (+) (−) (+) 

In equation (4), anj stands for risks associated with bandits, or more generally, anarchy, rnj

denotes strong property rights, and vnj captures the strength of vested interests (e.g., guilds), with

the expected partial effects given below each variable.

         Our comparison of market efficiency captures the joint effect of many of the key

arguments of why the Industrial Revolution first took root in Europe, and not in China, even

though it does not distinguish between them. First, Smithian arguments of the size of the market

are captured directly by the degree of price dispersion conditional on distance. Differences in

market size may in turn be determined by the existing quality and costs of transportation

technology in Europe, versus China. A number of recent growth theories suggest that the rate of

8
  In the case of grain, local officials tried to keep markets open for imports, at least in times of bad harvests, because
they feared food riots and a general loss of legitimacy. During normal times foreign suppliers often faced special
permits and other regulation that were only suspended in times of crisis (Seiffert 1893), consistent with the influence
of vested local interests.


                                                                   8
innovation is a function of market size because the return to innovation increases with market

size.9 Second, the trade policy influence on the costs of arbitrage in equation (4) captures the

degree to which European national versus Chinese provincial governments imposed trade

restrictions that distorted or prevented trade.

         Third, the border variable captures a host of different influences, which seem on the

whole to favor China, since it was a unified empire at the time.10 The fourth influence, anarchy,

is often associated with the extent of rule of law, government expropriation, general security, and

the absence of war. The fifth variable, property rights, discussed earlier, has been emphasized by

North and Thomas (1973), in their argument that weak property rights restrict the effective size

of the market, and thereby limit the scope of specialization and the division of labor. And sixth,

it has been frequently noted that vested interests, for instance guilds, might have been a major

force of retardation in some economies.11



2.2 Measuring market efficiency

         A number of different methods are used to assess market efficiency. First, we study the

variability of grain prices in a given location one at a time. Segmented markets tend to show

relatively high price variability compared to integrated markets because the local price is

determined by random shocks to the local harvest (see equation 1). This single-market measure

has the advantage of capturing the influence of other markets without imposing a particular trade

structure.

         Our second method is to examine the relationship between pairs of markets. Specifically,


9
  See Aghion and Howitt (1998) for an overview, and Jones (1995) for a critique.
10
   Note, however, that different spoken dialects are used in China.
11
   Olson (1965), Landes (1969); the latter for instance argues that it required the guilds to move aside for
competition to become self-enforcing in Europe; page 19.


                                                           9
the strength of bilateral price correlation conditional on distance is used to study the width of the

no trade band (see equation 4).12 If there were differences between Europe and China in terms of

the leading suspected causes for the Industrial Revolution, our discussion above indicates that

their combined effect can be gauged from a comparison of market efficiency (measured by ~
                                                                                        z ).

         Third, we employ cointegration techniques to look for evidence of a long-run equilibrium

relationship between two price series as an additional way of comparing market efficiency in the

two continents. If there is a long-run equilibrium relationship—i.e., there is a tendency to move

to the band of no trade in equation (4)—this provides evidence on the strength of the forces of

market arbitrage. A specific version of this cointegration approach allows also for formal testing

of the (absolute) law of one price (this corresponds to ~
                                                        z = 1) and the estimation of the speed of

adjustment to the long-run equilibrium. These three methods produce largely the same basic

result, and we believe that other standard methods would yield similar conclusions as those

found in this paper.13

         The focus is on the grain market not only because it is of major importance in pre-

industrial economies, but also because it remains an important market once the process of

industrialization has begun. While cotton textiles, the energy generating industry (steam engine),

and the iron and steel industry dominated the growth of manufactured output, there is ample

evidence suggesting that productivity growth occurred in the agricultural sector as well, albeit in




12
   One reason for studying price correlations instead of absolute price gaps lies in the multitude of currencies in 18th
century Europe, together with imperfect data on exchange rates. One can show that for a given distance, a smaller
(larger) range in terms of absolute prices implies a higher (lower) correlation of prices. For an analysis of absolute
price gaps for a more limited set of markets in 19th century Europe, see Shiue (2004a).
13
   Each of the three methods—although rarely all three—has been widely used in historical or contemporaneous
studies of market integration, of the law of one price, as well as of purchasing power parity (e.g. O’Rourke and
Williamson 2004, Persson 1999). Other approaches to estimating market efficiency include threshold autoregression
models (Taylor 2001) and spatial regression models (Keller and Shiue 2003); we think that these as well as other
methods would yield the same qualitative conclusions as this study.


                                                          10
a more broadly diffused manner.14 One might ask whether the efficiency of grain markets has

implications for the efficiency of markets in these economies overall. In general, although the

Industrial Revolution is commonly linked to manufacturing industries, as long as the source of

change was economy-wide in nature, its benefits should accrue to commodity trade in all

products. This would be especially true if the basis of Britain’s efficiency were in economy-

wide institutions, advanced transport and communication, and other shared technologies.

Moreover, linkages between the primary and secondary sectors, as well as general equilibrium

effects more generally (specifically, between goods and factor markets) also suggest that

processes affecting incentives will not be bottled up in a single market.15 Thus, a comprehensive

comparison of grain markets will shed light on economy-wide levels of market efficiency.

         Before presenting the empirical results, we give some background on China and Europe

in the 18th century, and discuss the major characteristics of the data.



3. Background on the economies: China and Europe

         The land area under analysis is roughly evenly divided between Chinese provinces and

European nation-states. In terms of population, available estimates indicate that the population

in the 10 Chinese provinces in our sample in the late 18th century was about 120 million. The

population of Europe at this time might have been 120 to 150 million (Durand 1960, McEvedy

and Jones 1978).

         Although foreign trade in the 18th century was not significant, China’s expansive empire

meant that even domestic trade involved distances large enough to be equivalent to international


14
   Harley (1999) attributes more than one-third of all productivity growth in the British Industrial Revolution to
agriculture.
15
   One reason, for example, why capital markets are important is that they allow more efficient trade in
commodities, permitting to import goods at some time while exporting at another.


                                                          11
trade in Europe. Trade between the fertile agricultural areas in the upper reaches of the Yangzi

River and the urban regions of Shanghai at the Yangzi Delta involved covering distances of at

least 1,200 kilometers, approximately the distance of the trade route between Antwerp and

Vienna. The maximum distance between markets in our sample for Europe is about 1,400 and

for China about 1,850 kilometers.

         Grain was the most important commodity produced and traded in the pre-industrial

world. In China in the 18th century, as in Europe, the labor force was predominately engaged in

agriculture. The majority of the population was engaged in small-scale, producer-cum-consumer

farming, and available estimates suggest that agricultural output made up at least 60 % of GNP

in pre-industrial economies.16 Grain was an important commodity not only in overall output but

in consumption as well. The share of cereals in the diet of urban dwelling northern Europeans,

who it is said ate more meat and fish than their southern neighbors, was still nearly 60%, a figure

also likely to be significantly lower than for the average farmer.17

         There is ample evidence that the Chinese state as well as individual European

governments tried to regulate grain supplies. China had state-run granaries for the purpose of

price stabilization, although the maintenance of these granaries was in serious decline by the late

18th century.18 In Europe, policies were used to help stabilize bread prices, and the presence of

many political borders likely made it easier in Europe, than in China, to regulate commodity

traffic. In both regions, it was the case that the fixing of grain prices by decree was seldom

carried out. Overall, it is unclear which economy had more regulations, or was more successful



16
   See Chang (1962, 291-325) for his estimate on the share of agriculture in China in the 18th century. Li, B. (1998)
cites Qing observers who put the percent of the population engaged in agriculture in the Yangzi Delta at 50% during
the late 17th century. In Britain in 1700, approximately 61.2% of male labor was employed in agriculture and 65%
of total income (from industry and agriculture) was in agriculture; see Table 3.1 in Crafts (1994).
17
   Spooner (1961).
18
   See Will and Wong (1991), Shiue (2004b and 2004c).


                                                         12
in carrying out stated objectives.

         Our analysis focuses on grain prices as opposed to the volume of grain traded for two

reasons. First, trade volume statistics are very spotty, and the resulting evidence would be weak

at best.19 Second, even if we had good data, there need not be a relationship between trade

volumes and market efficiency. In terms of the framework of section 2, the volume of grain that

needs to be traded between markets n and j in order to reach the band of no trade (e.g., equation

2) may be large or small, but either is associated with the same market efficiency (the width of

the band).

         We now turn to a discussion of the data set.



4. Prices in China and Europe

         This paper employs data on market prices in a large set of locations throughout Europe

and China.20 Figure 1 gives a graphical summary of the years of data available for each series;

the range is from the 15th to the 20th century, although we limit the empirical analysis to the 17th

to 19th century. The prices for the European markets are for wheat, the dominant grain in most

regions. The closest homogenous good that matches this characteristic in China is rice, and for

this reason we select the ten main rice producing provinces of China.21

         The Chinese series consists of 121 locations; at 54 years of data, it is relatively short

compared to the time series availability of some European markets. However, the geographical

19
   In Europe, rough calculations suggest that 1 % of total consumption of the Mediterranean area was traded in the
16th century, and the situation may have remained much the same in the 17th century (Braudel 1992, 127). In China,
the Yangzi Delta alone—with an area of 43,000 square kilometers and an estimated population in the range of 20-36
million inhabitants in the 18th century—may have imported as much as one-quarter of its total grain consumption
(population estimates for this period are imprecise; these are reported in Li, B. 1998, 19).
20
   With the exception of a portion of the London series, the European sources employed in this paper are all official
records of transactions at markets with many buyers and sellers (so-called mercuriales price series). Also the prices
for China are market prices; see, e.g., Wilkinson (1969).
21
   For the Chinese province of Hunan, we have information on both wheat and rice prices; a comparison of these
data suggests that grain type, wheat in Europe and rice in China, does not have a major influence on our results.


                                                         13
coverage of the Chinese price reports is much broader than it was in the European sample. The

Chinese data captures 121 contiguous markets, a region comprising about 60 % of the empire

and including the most commercialized areas as well as relatively remote regions. The combined

geographical scope of the European markets is narrower. Another difference is that nearly all the

European price data up to the 18th century are from regions that were fairly important markets.

Only in the 19th century does more contiguous data become available, which, as in the case for

France, begins to include records from small markets as well. Some of the smaller cities in the

Grand Duchy of Mecklenburg (located to the east of Hamburg), for which we have price records,

were not particularly central points of commerce either.

         Table 1 summarizes the key characteristics of the price series. The sources for each

series give quite detailed information on the method of collection of each series and the units of

account. Due to changes in units of account, all prices have been converted to common units of

currency per volume (or weight) within a series. We have not tried to account for changes in the

value of the currencies over time. Missing information on the (typically) silver content of the

coins would necessarily lead to low-quality estimates. However, while our overall sample

stretches over three centuries, the window of time for which we compare market efficiency are

typically only 25 years long. For this and a number of other reasons, we do not think that

inflation has a major impact on our findings.22

         The most important differences among the various price series have to do with the

method of collection and the degree of aggregation in the price information. What allows us to

measure the impact of differences in these respects is the fact that there are only a small number

22
  For instance, this analysis avoids times of high and volatile rates of inflation, such as the Napoleonic Wars. In
addition, prices were broadly trending upwards over time in both Europe and China, and it is not clear for which
markets inflation was higher (if any). On inflation in China, see Wang (1992). We have also investigated the
importance of inflation for our results by allowing for a trend in the deterministic component of the cointegration
relationship (equation 7 below); formal tests generally reject that hypothesis.


                                                         14
of different ways to collect market prices, and that there is enough data such that we can always

find several markets sharing commonalities in their method of recording prices. The key

differences are given in Table 1. Columns I through III give information on the location of the

market in today’s country, the name of the location in historic times, and the source of the data.

Columns IV through IX provide summaries of the differences among each series, which include

the frequency of observation (IV), the years available (V), the method of collection (VI), whether

minimum and maximum prices are recorded (VII), whether there is spatial aggregation in the

method of collection (VIII), and whether quantity data has been used to compute price averages

(IX). Additional details about these differences and references to units of each series used in this

paper can be found in the Data Appendix.



5. Empirical Results

5.1 Single-market price volatility

       Many previous studies have used the volatility of the price in a given market as an

indication of how segmented one market is from other markets, on the rationale that volatility

should decline as markets become more connected to other markets through trade (e.g.,

McCloskey and Nash 1984). During the period 1742 to 1785, the average coefficient of

variation for 15 European markets for which there is data is equal to 0.188, with a standard

deviation of 0.051. For the 121 markets in Chinese prefectures during the same period, the

average coefficient of variation is equal to 0.131 (standard deviation of 0.029).

       Instead of price levels, another widely used measure is the volatility of period-to-period

price changes (e.g., Engle and Granger 1991). Let pt denote the log of the price in period t.

Under the assumption that markets are efficient, prices fully reflect all known information, and




                                                15
the best forecast of the price next period is the price in the current period. This forecast will be

correct up to a random shock (εt), which is white noise. This random walk model is thus given

by

(5)             pt +1 − pt = ε t           for t = 1, … T-1;

where εt is independent and identically distributed with zero mean and variance σ ε . The
                                                                                       2




conditional mean is

(6)             E [ pt +1 | I t ] = pt ,

with It being the information set at time t. Allowing for seasonal effects extends equation (5) to

(5’)            pt +1 − pt = ϕ ' St + ε t ,


where S is a (1 x 2) vector of indicator variables.

       After estimating the parameters ϕ by ordinary least squares, we compute the standard

deviation of the estimated residual εˆt as our measure of volatility. On average, this volatility in

the 15 European markets is 0.127, with a standard deviation of 0.025. For the 121 Chinese

markets, the volatility is on average 0.092, with a standard deviation of 0.020. Both the

comparison of the price levels as well as of first differences suggests that the price volatility for

Chinese markets is comparable to or lower than price volatility among European markets. From

these results, it appears that the degree of market efficiency in Europe, as captured by these

volatility measures, was not exceptionally greater in comparison to that in China.




5.2 The correlation of prices across market pairs

        The price correlation between two markets gives another measure of market efficiency.



                                                          16
Higher correlation suggests more trade links, all else equal. Generally, price correlations

between markets decline as distance increases, because the costs of transport rise with distance.

In comparing efficiency across market pairs, it is useful to condition on transport costs and thus

hold distance constant.23 The average bilateral correlations are listed in Table 2a for the years

1742-95. We have formed a number of samples with markets selected for comparability and

commonality of period. For instance, the table gives the correlations for the provincial capital

prefectures of China. These places were important from a political point of view, but were not

necessarily well-linked by trade routes. For comparison, the table also tabulates correlations for

the Yangzi Delta region and among the Yangzi River prefectures.

         For Europe, the table includes results for 15 markets in today’s Germany, France,

Belgium, Netherlands, Austria, Luxembourg, Germany, and France (Table 2a, bottom). The

choice of locations is to some extent determined by the availability of data. For example, the

years over the Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars are for the most part avoided. The sample

was selected, however, to include the most advanced regions of Europe, or the early industrial

nations. As the first country to industrialize, England is a particularly interesting case, and is

presented separately from the results for Western Europe as a whole, along with France,

generally considered the most advanced on the Continent (Table 2a, lower part).

         The results of Table 2a confirm that, as expected, price correlations decline with distance.

There is also heterogeneity in market efficiency conditional on distance, both in China as well as

in Europe. For instance, in China the range of average correlations for distances between 150

and 300 kilometers is from 0.81 to 0.58, while in Europe the average correlations for distances

between 450 and 600 kilometers vary from 0.71 to 0.53. The following Table 2b shows results

23
  Distance might be correlated with some factors determining ~  z in equation (4) as well. If so, by conditioning on
distance we hold constant more than transport costs. This effect, however, should be of second order.


                                                         17
for price correlations in Europe starting in the 17th and 19th century, which are results that pre-

and post-date, respectively, those of Table 2a. These two tables contains too many figures to

fruitfully discuss all possible comparisons that might be of interest, and below we will highlight

a number of them using graphs. In addition to average price correlations for a given distance, we

have also analyzed computed the gradient of price correlation with distance using OLS

regressions. These results complement our analysis and are presented in Table 3.



        Turning to Figure 2, this shows the scatterplot of price correlation and distance for 15

European cities in the period 1770-1794. It also shows the price-distance relationship for two

samples of Chinese markets: those located on or near the Yangzi River, and the provincial capital

markets.24 If the results for the two Chinese samples are indicative of the range of efficiency in

China’s markets, it would seem that market efficiency in Western Europe was roughly

comparable to the efficiency of Chinese markets. This is suggested by Figure 2, since as the

figure shows, it is possible to identify markets in China where the price-distance relationship lies

above and where it lies below that for the European markets.

        Moreover, it appears that the degree of market efficiency attained in Europe as of the late

18th century had been roughly at that stage for some time. Figure 3 compared the estimate

between the late 17th century (1692-1716) and the late 18th century (1770-1794). The markets

underlying the sample for the two periods are not identical due to data availability, and there are

fewer series in the earlier sample, but there does not seem to be marked improvements in market

efficiency over this period. In particular, the estimated level and slope of the relationship

between correlation and distance for the later period lies fully within the confidence bands of the
24
  The maximum distance of coverage for the European markets is about 1000 kilometers. Given that the Chinese
sample includes markets with distances up to about 1,850 kilometers, it is possible to choose many different market
group configurations for the Chinese sample.


                                                        18
earlier period. It appears that levels market efficiency can remain in relative stasis for extended

periods of time.

         The lack of any dramatic shifts in market performance in Europe over the 80 years before

1770 is in contrast to the changes that would be seen in the 50 years after 1770. Figure 4 shows

the price correlation estimates for 15 cities across Western Europe between the years 1825 to

1849. The regression line and confidence band are above all other market groups (including

those for China). This figure also suggests that changes to the level of market efficiency can

make dramatic improvements over a relatively short period of time.25

         As noted above, the availability of data in Western Europe tends to be limited to the more

important urban centers of Europe. The data for China is different because it is fairly

comprehensive, and includes not just important marketing centers, but also relatively remote

places where one would not expect much trade. Figure 5 and Figure 6 show bilateral

correlations for all 121 markets in China, given by the 7260 circles in the plots. The 15

European markets are shown by the 105 squares, and they lie within the Chinese markets in

Figure 5. Figure 6 provides a striking contrast to Figure 5—it is clear that Europe has moved

ahead. While we do not have reliable data for China in the later period, we expect that there was

no equal advancement in market efficiency over these 45 years in China.

         Figure 7 compares the bilateral price correlation among the markets of the extended

Yangzi Delta with England. The maximum distance for the two samples is about 600

kilometers. The regression line for the English sample is located above the estimate for the

Yangzi Delta sample at virtually all distances. For distances up to 400 kilometers, the

25
  This improvement may be related to the reduction of trade barriers, of which the German Zollverein was the
major example. At the same time, the Zollverein liberalizations did not start until 1834, they came in many rounds
throughout the 19th century, and did not affect all of our European markets (see Shiue 2004a); which means that its
effect on our findings may have been limited.


                                                         19
confidence band of the extended Yangzi Delta crosses the English sample, indicating that the

two samples are not distinguishable for greater distances.

       The same statement could not be made for similar distances within nations of Continental

Europe. Figure 8 plots the price correlation and distance diagram for 10 cities in central France,

for an area considered to be a fairly well-integrated region within France. The plot, which also

gives the confidence bands for the French sample, together with the Yangzi Delta sample,

suggests that the two samples are indistinguishable at all distances.

       Markets in England as of 1770 thus appear to have had an advantage in market

efficiency, and were not only more integrated than in the most developed regions of China, but

also compared to regions in Western Europe as a whole. By the early 19th century, markets

across Europe improved to an extent that it looked similar to England.




5.3 Cointegration among markets

       This section compares market efficiency in China and Europe by employing time series

techniques. The concept of cointegration was introduced by Granger (1981), Engle and Granger

(1987) as a way of characterizing the long-run relationship among a set of variables. Formally,

cointegration refers to a situation in which a set of variables yn, n = 1,2,…,N, is each integrated

of order d > 0 (or, I(d)), while a linear combination of the yn variables is integrated of order (d –

b), (I(d-b)), with b > 0. Of particular interest is the case where d = 1 and b = 1, that is, where

each variable by itself is non-stationary (it has a unit root), while a linear combination of the

variables is stationary; this case is denoted as CI(1,1).

       In our context, a linear combination of grain prices that is stationary when each

individual price is not would support the idea that the grain prices evolve in a long-run


                                                  20
relationship in which arbitrage (that is, trade) prevents the prices to drift arbitrarily far apart. In

terms of the above framework, cointegration among two series means that there exists an

attractor—a line, or, due to transportation costs, risks, and other factors, a band; see equation

(2)—towards which the prices tend to attract over time. In this sense, testing for cointegration

provides evidence on market efficiency.

        We have used two different methods to study cointegration across the markets of our

sample. Primarily, we rely on the methodology proposed by Engle and Granger (1987). This

approach is quite robust and requires relatively few distributional assumptions. We have also

employed Johansen’s (1988) maximum likelihood method, which can give additional insights,

although at the cost of being more restrictive.26 Both of the methods lead to the same qualitative

findings, and in the following we focus on Engle and Granger’s (1987) technique. Appendix A

discusses results using Johansen’s techniques.

        Engle and Granger’s (1987) method may be described as follows. Consider the price

series in location 1 and in location 2, p1t and p2t, where for any location n, pnt = ln Pnt , and

t=1,…,T. The question is whether or not a long-run (cointegrating) relationship exists between

p1t and p2t. First, assume that both p1t and p2t are known to be I(1).27 Then, we estimate the

following OLS regression:

(7)               p1t = β 0 + β1 p2 t + et .


If p1t and p2t are cointegrated, there will be some β1 and β0 such that p1t − β 0 − β1 p2 t = 0 is


26
   Johansen’s method allows estimating both the cointegrating rank and the model parameters simultaneously using
an efficient one-step procedure, whereas Engle-Granger’s two-step procedure can entail a loss of efficiency. Another
advantage of Johansen’s method is that it allows for testing restrictions on the long-run relationship and for
estimating the speed of adjustment in a maximum likelihood framework. At the same time, Johansen’s method
requires errors to be normal, which is not necessary in the Engle and Granger approach; see, for example, Maddala
and Kim (1998) for more discussion.
27
   We have tested for that. Typically the null hypothesis of I(1) cannot be rejected using standard unit root tests.


                                                        21
satisfied. Here, et is the equilibrium error, and the vector β, β = [β 0 β1 ]' is the cointegrating

vector. The constant β 0 captures long-run differences in the price levels.28 The slope

coefficient β1 is an estimate of the degree to which prices in the two markets are moving

together ( β 0 = 0 and β1 = 1 means the absolute law of one price holds, while β 0 ≠ 0 and β1 > 0

means the relative law of one price holds). Engle and Granger’s approach to testing for

cointegration between p1t and p2t is to test whether et is stationary: the stationarity of et implies

that the linear combination of prices p1t and p2t is stationary, or, (p1t, p2t) are cointegrated.

         Our test of whether the estimated residual êt of equation (7) is stationary is based on the

unit root test proposed by Dickey and Fuller (1979):

(8)               ∆eˆt = δ1eˆt −1 + ε t .


Under the null hypothesis that êt is I(1), the parameter δ1 is equal to zero; failing to reject that

δ1 = 0 provides evidence that êt is I(1) and p1t and p2t are not cointegrated. More generally, the

stronger is the evidence that δ1 is below zero—i.e., the lower is the t-statistic of δˆ1 —the stronger

is the evidence that p1t and p2t are cointegrated. We compare the efficiency of markets in China

and Europe by comparing the evidence for cointegration in terms of this t-statistic for a number

of different samples.

         This method is implemented with a number of modifications. First, the dependent

variable lagged once is added as a regressor in (8) to reduce problems due to serial correlation

(turning this into an Augmented Dickey Fuller [ADF] test):29


28
   One reason why we need a constant is that some of the prices are quoted in different currencies and quantity units;
as noted above, we do not have reliable exchange rates for all times and currencies in Europe.
29
   Information criteria that trade off the increase in fit with the reduction in degrees of freedom are generally
recommended for choosing the number of lags to be included (Engle and Yoo 1987). We have used Schwarz Bayes


                                                         22
(8’)     ∆eˆt = δ1eˆt −1 + η∆eˆt −1 + ε t .


         Second, we include seasonal effects in the cointegrating relationship, equation (7), as

they are important for agricultural goods. Third, we reduce the effect from outliers in (7) by

adding indicator variables to the deterministic component for periods with exceptionally strong

price changes.30 Because these modifications affect the distribution of the critical values of

hypothesis tests based on the t-statistic of δˆ1 , the available t-statistics do not apply anymore. For

this reason, we look for general patterns in the ADF t-statistics as opposed to testing sharp

hypothesis.31



         Turning to the results, in Figure 9 the average ADF t-statistic is shown by distance class

for European markets during the years 1742 to 1795. Seven non-overlapping distance classes are

used, and with 15 markets, there are a total of 210 bilateral relations.32 We find the lowest ADF

t-statistics for the smallest distances—less than 150 kilometers—which is what one would

expect: the evidence in support of cointegration is strongest among relatively near markets. As

bilateral distance increases, the evidence for the existence of long-run relationships among

markets generally falls (higher values for the t-statistic of δˆ1 ). This is illustrated by the

logarithmic trend line for the European sample, also shown in Figure 9.33


Information Criterion (SIC; see, e.g., Maddala and Kim 1998, 77). For these data, the SIC generally suggests one or
zero lags of êt should be included.
30
   We treat a price change that is larger than one standard deviation as an outlier; some experimentation with other
definitions indicates that the main results are not sensitive to this choice.
31
   MacKinnon (1991) allows computing approximate small-sample critical values, which we report below.
Asymptotic critical values are tabulated in Engle and Yoo (1987). Note that the standard ADF critical values do not
apply because êt is estimated.
32
   We do not restrict the estimate of the cointegrating vector (if one obtains βˆ1 in one direction, one expects βˆ1−1 in
the other); in our case, not imposing this restriction plays no major role for the conclusions.
33
   While the average ADF t-statistic appears to be a good measure of the evidence for cointegration among different
markets, we have also computed other statistics, such as the median. Table 4 presents both for comparison,


                                                           23
         The lower line in Figure 9 summarizes the evidence on cointegration for the English

markets (40 counties, plus London) in our data set. Clearly, for a given distance, the average

ADF t-statistic is considerably below that for the European sample, or, the evidence for

cointegration among the English markets is higher than for the European sample as a whole.34

This difference may in part be due to the fact that the comparison is between markets in different

countries versus markets in one country (England), and, that border effects are important.

However, we have seen above that the English markets are relatively efficient even if compared

with other within-country samples, such as France. The relatively strong evidence for

cointegration for England is highly consistent with the results from bilateral price correlations.

More generally, these results highlight that there was a substantial amount of heterogeneity in

efficiency within Western European markets in the second half of the 18th century.

         How does the evidence on cointegration in Europe compare with that for China during

this period? Figure 10 shows how the ADF t-statistic varies with distance for the same sets of

Chinese prefectures, as in section 5.2 above; the values for the European 15 markets (from

Figure 9) are plotted again for comparison. For distances less than 150 kilometers, the evidence

for cointegration is stronger in Europe than in China, while for distances of 300-900 kilometers,

market efficiency in China appears to be ahead of Europe (on average). This is true of the China

River sample as well as the expanded Yangzi Delta markets (note that there are no markets in

this group greater than 750 kilometers in bilateral distance).

indicating that average and median are similar in this case. This table also reports the standard error of the average
ADF t-statistic. Analogous tables accompanying Figures 10-12 are not included for space reasons, but are available
upon request. Formal cointegration tests are not reported because—as noted above—there are no exact critical
values. However, as a point of reference, based on MacKinnon’s (1991) analysis, we compute approximate critical
values of -3.95 (-3.40) at the 1% (5%) significance level.
34
   We have adjusted the t-statistics for the English sample for comparability with the European sample based on
MacKinnon (1991). He shows that critical values for these cointegration tests are a function of T, the time series
length (on average, T=50 for the English and T=80 for the European market pairs; there are two monthly
observations per year). In essence, it becomes easier to find evidence in favor of cointegration the larger is T, so the
critical values need to be adjusted to hold the significance level constant.


                                                           24
       The group of Chinese provincial capital markets gives regional diversity. The ADF t-

statistic for this group lies always below that of the average European city (see Figure 10). This

is interesting because even though this sample represents the major city in each province, the

sample covers areas in China that, at that time, are clearly not among China’s most advanced

regions. The Chinese provincial capitals are also far apart, so it does not encompass distances of

less than 150 kilometers, where market efficiency in Europe appears to be relatively high.

       Finally, Figure 10 includes the average ADF t-statistic for the sample of all 121 Chinese

markets. The key results are best gleaned from the trend lines provided in Figure 11. The

evidence on cointegration from all 121 Chinese prefectures is weaker than in Europe for

distances up to about 400 km, and stronger than in Europe above that threshold. Figure 11 also

shows the trendline for the Yangzi Delta prefectures. There, the evidence for cointegration is

stronger than for Europe for all distances except those less than 150 kilometers.



       Overall, the evidence for cointegration is consistent with the analysis above in sections

5.1 and 5.2: there does not appear to be a large difference in terms of market efficiency between

China and Western Europe. But what about Britain? Figure 12 suggests that markets within

Britain were different from the average European markets. In addition, Figure 12 shows the

average cointegration statistics for the English markets, compared to the Yangzi Delta

prefectures. The evidence for cointegration among English markets is stronger than among

Yangzi Delta markets at all distances (up to 600 kilometers, the maximum distance between

markets in England). This supports the hypothesis that English markets were more efficient than

those in the most advanced part of China at this time.

       Thus, these results suggest that while the Yangzi Delta had similarly efficient, or possibly




                                                25
more efficient markets compared to Western Europe as a whole in the later 18th century,

Britain’s markets in the last three decades of the 18th century were more efficient still.35 The

gap between Britain and Western Europe was not large in the sense that the continent attained

the level of integration that Britain had at the end of the 18th century within the next several

decades. Figure 12 shows the cointegration statistics for European markets for the years 1825-

49, after the dust following the Napoleonic Wars had settled. Market efficiency was

substantially higher in Europe in the first half of the 19th century than in the late 18th century, but

this improvement led to a level of market efficiency that was not so different from Britain during

the years 1770 to 1794.



         Before we summarize and evaluate the results, we turn to a possible objection of our

analysis. The issue is whether our results may be driven by different weather patterns in Europe

and China. With agricultural products such as wheat and rice, weather will typically have a

major influence on the local price (equation 1). If weather would change quite differently across

geographic space in China than in Europe, this could lead to substantial differences in spatial

price correlations without any implications for trade and market efficiency. For this reason, we

have compared historical weather data for China and Europe to see whether the spatial weather

patterns could bias our comparison of market efficiency. Our analysis suggests that spatial

weather patterns have not been very different in the two continents, and specifically, it is

unlikely that the influence of weather has favored China over Europe in our comparison; see

Appendix B.



35
  The period for which we have English prices is slightly later than the Chinese sample (the samples are centered
around the year 1782, versus 1769, respectively), but ten to fifteen years per se does not make a big difference, as
we have confirmed by restricting the analysis for China to 1770-94.


                                                          26
Summary and discussion

       The above sections have used measures that exploit variations in cross-sectional price as

well as those that consider variations over time to measure the degree to which markets are

connected. The results are robust to several different well-known methods that assess market

efficiency.

       First, we find comparable degrees of market efficiency in China and Europe in the late

18th century. For short distances, Europe appears to have been slightly ahead of China—these

may correspond to distances within countries. Over longer distances, however, China was

ahead. We do not find evidence to support the idea that Europe (in a sample that includes

locations in the Netherlands, Britain, and Belgium, for example), had exceptionally efficient

markets by 1700. We do not see exceptional efficiency in European markets even at the end of

the 18th century, when Europe was on the verge of an industrial revolution. This contradicts

historical analyses that suggest good institutions created exceptionally efficient markets in

Europe early on.

       Second, we find that market efficiency in Britain stands out among Western European

countries in the late 18th century, and it is also higher than in China’s Yangzi Delta. That Britain

was ahead of Western Europe as a whole at this late date is an important result. In particular, the

lateness of the improvements in efficiency contradicts interpretations that place much emphasis

on the early, gradual, and definite institutional advantages that Europe had on this front. It also

shifts the focus away from the importance of slow-moving institutional improvements that were




                                                 27
accumulated bit by bit since medieval times.36 Even assuming that Britain and the Netherlands

were both pre-industrial and on par as of 1700, as has been claimed by North and others, the

brevity of time during which the paths of Britain and other Western European countries then

diverged may be taken as further evidence against theories that rely on highly persistent factors

that change only very gradually (e.g., morals, religion).37 Generally, the large difference

between Britain and Continental Europe suggests that in so far as the origins of the Industrial

Revolution are concerned, we need to look for differences between the two regions. The

differences may help to provide a theory in which over a relatively short period of time (1700-

1770) conditions emerge such that Britain industrializes while Western Europe as a whole does

not.

         Third, Continental Europe did develop more efficient markets compared to China, but it

acquired them swiftly and relatively late, in the 19th century. Sudden change in markets might

come about if the sudden change in Western European markets may be linked to a driving force

that can generate very rapid changes. It may be that an important difference between the

institutions of China and Europe was that in addition to offering equal incentives to efficiently

trade, European institutions also allowed flexibility and rapid changes to be made to existing

institutions. In addition, there may also be yet another non-institutional factor more directly

responsible for the sudden changes that we observe. Technological innovations, for instance,

could lead to sharp discontinuities in efficiency.38


36
   In a statement that seems to echo North’s thesis, E. Jones maintains, “Political insecurity and institutional rigidity
in feudal and medieval times so obviously held back productive investment that the course of their reduction is
virtually a history of development.” Jones (2003, 93).
37
   Certainly, complex systems can generate vastly different dynamics due to only a small change in very short time
(bifurcations). At the same time, we are not aware of evidence on such highly non-linear effects in this context.
Most of the empirical literature uses linear (not non-linear) regressions (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson
2001).
38
   Mokyr (1999), for instance, cites the sharp upward jump in patent statistics in Britain in the late 1750s, but argues
that the role that patent laws and institutions had in raising the return to innovation is overrated (pp. 42-43)


                                                           28
         Although 1770 is the date often associated with the onset of the Industrial Revolution, it

has been difficult to define the economic significance of what was going on in Britain.39 Europe

between the late 18th and the early 19th century provides a useful point of comparison because

there, we have documented changes that suggest a clear turning point.40 The fact that the degree

of efficiency seen in Europe by the mid-19th century are similar to Britain in the late 18th century

suggests that important economy-wide changes had indeed occurred in Britain by around 1770.

         In Continental Europe, higher efficiency precedes the more definite (and dramatic)

increases in economy-wide productivity that would appear later in the late 19th and early 20th

century. Can efficient markets, then, be taken as a causal explanation of why the industrial

revolution took place in Europe? While it’s tempting to answer in the affirmative, we do not

think that we can be sure about it. The fact that the large differences in efficiency emerge fairly

late might suggest the causality between efficiency and growth is bi-directional. The main issue

is that we can no longer place 1825-1849 as being strictly before the onset of industrialization for

Continental Europe because certain factors that were overtly important to European

industrialization had diffused to the continent over the 18th century. Already in the 18th century,

for instance, many of the early and key innovations of the British Industrial Revolution had

found its way to France, Belgium, Germany, Hungary, and Sweden.41 In addition, British skills

flowed to the continental in the form of human capital, and possibly other important sources of

growth were spread to there as well. The transportation revolution and intensive railway

construction is one example of a late 19th century development that increased measured market



39
   The fact that we find evidence of a British lead in 1770-1794 is notable in light of recent evidence from Crafts and
Harley (1992) suggesting growth rates growth in the late 18th century were a modest 0.24% per year, a finding that
has generated some debate about whether or not there might have been a significant break from the past before the
mid-19th century. Growth rates above 1% per year in real output per capita appeared in Britain only by the 1830s.
40
   See also Persson (1999).
41
   Clark (2002, 5).


                                                          29
efficiency, but these developments might not have been a source of growth so much as they were

the result of it. Thus, the sense in which efficiency precedes growth is qualified by the fact that

there were many cross-border flows of ideas and people between Britain and the continent, and

the increase in efficiency in Continental Europe occurs only after the British Industrial

Revolution. If market efficiency changes relatively quickly once the Industrial Revolution has

started to take hold, our finding of high market efficiency would be to some extent a reflection,

and not a cause of the Industrial Revolution.



Conclusions

       The efficiency benefits that emerged from European institutions holds a prominent place

in our understanding of economic growth, and it has also been offered as a leading explanation

for why Europe succeeded to industrialize first. In this paper we examine the similarities and

differences in markets in pre-industrial China and Europe from the 17th to 19th centuries. We use

a range of methods to assess market efficiency in China and Europe in around 1770, to see

whether we find one continent—specifically Europe—was clearly ahead.

       In the period right before the Industrial Revolution spread to Continental Europe, market

efficiency was not uniformly better than they were elsewhere in the world that did not

industrialize. Over relatively short distances of 150 km or less, markets in continental Europe

were more efficient. This edge over other advanced parts of the world however, is relatively

small when we consider what occurs right after the onset of industrialization. In the early 19th

century, soon after the dates associated with the start of British industrialization, European

markets become quickly and significantly more efficient than what had existed in prior centuries,

and the level of efficiency was similar to Britain at the onset of its Industrial Revolution. Secure




                                                 30
property rights, market-supporting institutions, and a well-functioning market economy may be

necessary, but not sufficient conditions for an industrial revolution.

       We find exceptionally well-performing markets in the times and places when we suspect

that an industrial revolution was already under way and not before. Thus, the improvements in

the degree of market efficiency in the 19th century in Western Europe may be largely a reflection

of the process of industrialization. This suggests not only that greater efficiency leads to growth,

but that this process is endogenous as well (efficiency <=> growth). If growth was a sudden

process that influences market efficiency, this could also explain the sudden change.

       Even allowing that all other conditions in Britain were just right for modern growth, the

findings do not rule out that the possibility that a third factor was responsible for triggering

improvements in growth, and that market efficiency is a response to these changes. Additional

research is necessary to understand how institutional change occurs, and to explore how different

institutional forms can be mapped into market outcomes. A particularly interesting direction for

future work is to identify the factors that are important for growth, and are really not reflected in

market efficiency, but were very different between Europe and other parts of the world.




                                                  31
DATA APPENDIX: SOURCES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PRICE SERIES

Goods: In general, these are prices for rice in China and for wheat in Europe. The exception is China’s
Hunan province, for which we have data on both rice and wheat. It has been used to confirm that the two
grains do not fundamentally differ for the purposes of our analysis. Prices in China are for mid-quality
rice; for Europe we do not have much specific information on quality, except for Bavaria (where
sometimes red instead of white wheat was sold; the former is less expensive). The sources indicate that
the quality of grains sold varied, and the price in Europe should be close to that for mid-quality wheat.

Price determination: For both China and Europe, these are market prices, with the exception of the Navy
Victualling series for London (see below). In Europe, the prices come typically from mercuriales, which
are official records of transactions at public markets.

Source and purpose of price records: In China, the data comes from price reports that prefects (the
heads of prefectures, an administrative level above the county- and below the province-level) sent to the
emperor in Beijing. Possibly, the empire-wide price reporting in China ensured a greater degree of
comparability than in Europe. The main purpose of the recording of grain prices both in China and
Europe was to prevent food crises.

Characteristics of the recorded prices: The price series vary in terms of temporal as well as spatial
aggregation. Most prices are at a monthly frequency, except for annual data for ten French regions
(Labrousse 1932; see below). The calculation of the monthly price varied, but the three most important
methods are (1) average price of first market day of month, (2) average price of all transactions in a
month, and (3) minimum and maximum during a month. The price averages are typically not quantity-
weighted; however, we have used prices and quantities available at a weekly frequency (e.g. for Cologne
and Munich) to compute the correct average prices, and found that the difference is negligible. If the
minimum and maximum price is available, we form the average price as (min+max)/2.
         There is spatial aggregation to a varying extent. For example, the average price for the Paris
series comes from two markets in the city, and the price for the Bretagne series covers all markets in the
Bretagne. For Chinese prefectures, the average price is computed as the average of the lowest price in any
market of the prefecture, plus the highest price in any market, divided by two. The area of some
prefectures is considerably larger than a city. To explore the influence of that, we have alternatively used
the lowest price in the prefecture: this tends to be the market in the prefectural capital, so there is little if
any spatial aggregation. These results did not differ much from the main results that are reported.
Similarly, we have explored the effects of spatial aggregation in Europe, and did not find major effects.
Gonzalo (1993) discusses the extent to which time series properties—order of integration, cointegration—
are preserved under temporal and cross-sectional (spatial) aggregation.

Selection of markets: The sample for China includes virtually all markets in the 10 provinces for which
rice was the major grain, which suggests that sample selection plays essentially no role. For Europe, our
data tends to be for markets of relatively big and relatively rich cities, because it was these cities that
spent the resources needed for price collection. For instance, the 50 French markets in Drame et al.
(1991), see below, are selected from some 900 markets as those where the greatest quantities were sold.

Missing data: There are substantial gaps in the sources; approximately 23 % (15%) is missing in an
average Chinese (European) series. We have used the TRAMO (Time Series Regression with ARIMA
Noise, Missing Observations and Outliers) program to interpolate series for which there was not too much
missing data (Gomez and Maravall 1997). This estimation of data does not critically affect our results.




                                                       32
Austria-Vienna
Source: Pribram, Alfred Francis. Materialien zur Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Österreich, Volume
I. Vienna: Carl Überreuters Verlag, 1938.
Overall years: 1692 to 1914; frequency: monthly; method: quantity-weighted average of all market days.
Quantity units: In “Wiener Metzen” (1692-1752), in “Niederösterreichen Landmetzen” (1752-1875), and
in “100 Kilogram” (1875-1914). Conversion rates: 1 Wiener Metzen = 0.76 Niederösterreiche
Landmetzen; 1 Niederösterreicher Landmetzen = 46.32 Kilogram.
Monetary Units: “Kreuzer” (1692-1752); “Kreuzer Konventionsmünze” (1752-1812); “Kreuzer Wiener
Währung” (1812-1858); “Kreuzer Österreichischer Währung” (1858-1897); “Heller Kronenwährung”
(1898-1914). Conversion rates: 1 Gulden = 60 Kreuzer = 60 Kreuzer Konventionsmünze = 150 Kreuzer
Wiener Währung = 105 Kreuzer Wiener Währung = 210 Heller Kronenwährung.
Original source: “Marktprotokolle der Stadt Wien”.

Belgium-Brussels
Source: For years 1568-1696, 1728-1795: Craeybeckx, J., “De Prijzen van Graan en van Brood te
Brussel”, in C. Verlinden (ed.) Dokumenten voor de Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in Vlaanderen en
Brabant, Vol. I. Bruges: De Tempel, 1959.
Source: For years 1800-1889: Vandenbroeke, C., “Brusselse Merkuriale van Granen, Aardappelen, Hooi,
Stro, Boter, Vlees, Koolzaad, Boskool en Steenkol”, in C. Verlinden (ed.) Dokumenten voor de
Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in Vlaanderen en Brabant, Vol. III. Bruges: De Tempel, 1972.
Overall years: 1568-1889, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average from the month’s first market
day.
Quantity units: In “Bruxelles setier” (1568-1696, 1728-1795); in “100 liters” (1800-1871), and in “100
Kilograms” (1872-1889). Conversion rates: 1 Bruxelles setier = 48.76 liters, and 79 kilograms = 100
liters.
Monetary units: In “Brabantse stuivers” (1568-1696, 1728-1795); in “French Francs” (1800-1817, 1833-
1889), and in “Dutch Guilders” (1817-1832). Conversion rates: 20 Brabantse stuivers = 1 Dutch Guilder;
and in 1816, 1 Dutch Guilder = 2.085 French Francs, and in 1832, 1 Dutch Guilder = 2.117 French
Francs.
Original source: “Algemeen Rijksarchief te Brussel, Terminatieboeken”.

Belgium-Brugge
Source: Vanderpijpen, W., “Brugse Merkuriale van Granen, Brood, Aardappelen, Boter en Vlees (1796-
1914)”, in C. Verlinden (ed.), Dokumenten voor de Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in Vlaanderen en
Brabant, Vol. IV. Bruges: De Tempel, 1973.
Overall years: 1796 to 1914, with few gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average from the month’s first
market day.
Quantity units: In “10 Kilograms” (1796-1802), in “100 liters” (1802-1890), and in “100 kilograms”
(1892-1914). Conversion: 100 liter = 79 kilograms.
Monetary units: In “French Francs” (1796-1817, 1833-1914), and in “Dutch Guilders” (1817-1832); see
notes on Belgium-Brussels.
Original sources: “Rijksarchief Brugge (R.A.B.), Leiedepartement, 1076-1080 en 2831-2846” (for 1796-
1812), and “Stadsarchief Brugge (S.A.B.), Gazette van Brugge” (for 1813-1914).

Belgium—Aalst
Source: Wyffels, A., “Prix du havot de froment à Alost”, in C. Verlinden (ed.), Dokumenten voor de
Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in Vlaanderen en Brabant, XV-XVIII Centuries, Bruges: De Tempel,
1959.
Overall years: 1729-1802, with major gaps before 1750; frequency: monthly; method: average, with
variations.
Quantity units: In “havot” (i.e., per barrel).


                                                  33
Monetary units: In “Gros de Flandre”.
Original source: “Alost, Archives communales, no 261”.

Belgium--Antwerp
Source: Craeybeckx, J., “De Prijzen van granen en van brood te Antwerpen van 1608 tot 1817”, in C.
Verlinden (ed.) Dokumenten voor de Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in Vlaanderen en Brabant, Vol.
I. Bruges: De Tempel, 1959.
Overall years: 1608 to 1817; frequency: monthly; method: average price on first market day of each
month.
Quantity units: In Antwerp “Viertel”.
Monetary units: In “Brabantse stuivers”.
Original sources: “Vierschaar, Antwerps Stadsarchief”, nr.18171; nr.1824bis; nr.18172; nr.18173; nr.1814;
nr.1815; nr.1816.

Luxemburg
Source: Helin, E., Prix des Cereales a Luxembourg aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siecles, Universite de Louvain,
1966; part of Joseph Ruwet et al. (1966), Marché des céréales à Ruremonde, Luxembourg, Namur et
Diest aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles, Leuven: Presse de l’Universite de Louvain, 1966.
Overall years: 1721 to 1794, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average of highest and lowest price
on first market day of month, with some variation.
Quantity units: In “bichet”, where 1 bichet (or setier) = 20.463 liters.
Monetary units: In “Sous”, where 1 Luxemburg Gulden is equal to 20 sous.
Original source: “Les Hallages de Luxembourg”.

China--121 Prefectural capitals
Source: Data collection by Carol H. Shiue. These are rice prices; the sample covers virtually all
prefectures of 10 provinces in China’s Central/South-Central area; see Shiue (2002) as well as Roehner
and Shiue (2000) for additional details.
Overall years: 1742 to 1795, with gaps; frequency: monthly (collected and used: 2nd and 8th lunar month);
method: highest and lowest price from all markets in a given prefecture. We take (highest price+lowest
price)/2 as the average price in the prefectural capital.
Quantity units: In “shi”, where 1 shi = about 103 liters.
Monetary units: In “liang”, which is a Chinese silver currency; it is also called “tael”.
Original source: Gongzhong liangjiadan [Grain price lists in the palace archives]. Number One Historical
Archives, Beijing.

China--13 Prefectural capitals from Hunan province
Source: Data collection by Peter Perdue; these are prices for rice and for wheat; see Perdue (1987) and
Wong and Perdue (1992) for additional findings on Hunan province.
Overall years: 1736 to 1856, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method and units of account: see notes on
China—121 Prefectural capitals.
Original source: Gongzhong liangjiadan [Grain price lists in the palace archives]. Number One Historical
Archives, Beijing.

England-London
Source: Beveridge, William H. B. Prices and Wages in England from the Twelfth to the Nineteenth
Century, Volume 1, (Price Tables: Mercantile Era; first edition 1939). London: Frank Cass & Co. Ltd.,
1965.
Overall years: 1683 to 1801, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average from prices for spot or
future (usually up to one month) delivery.



                                                   34
This series is conceptually different in that this series are not market, but British Navy procurement prices
for grain. The Navy Victualling Board met daily to contract with dealers for the supply of provisions.
There was a public announcement, after which the interested dealers were one-by-one asked to place their
bid. The Navy tried to achieve the competitive market price outcome (for instance, indications of
collusion among bidders resulted in the postponement of procurement activity). See pp.514-535 for
details.
Quantity units: In “Quarters”. Monetary units: In “Shillings”.

England-London and 40 Counties
Source: The London Gazette.
Overall years: 1770 to 1794, with gaps; frequency: we employ data for the months January, March, July,
and September (the source reports prices every week); method: average price of first week of month.
Quantity units: In “Standard Winchester Bushel of 8 gallons” (1770-93), and in “Standard Winchester
Quarter of 8 bushels” (1793-94).
Monetary units: In “Shillings” and “pence”.

France-Paris
Source: Baulant, Micheline and Jean Meuvret. Prix des céréales extraits de la mercuriale de Paris. Paris:
Ecole des Hautes Etudes, 1960.
Overall years: 1520 to 1698; frequency: monthly; method: average of maximum and minimum price on
the first market day of month.
Quantity units: In “setier de Paris”, where 1 setier = 156 liter.
Monetary Units: In “Livres turnois”.
Original source: “Mercuriale de Paris”.

France-Toulouse
Source: Bertrand Roehner’s preparation of figures in Frêche, Georges and Geneviève Frêche. Les prix des
grains, des vins et des legumes à Toulouse. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1967.
Overall years: 1486 to 1913; frequency: monthly; method: average of first market day of the month.
Quantity units: In “Hectoliter” (one hectoliter = 100 liter).
Monetary units: In “French Francs and Centimes”.
Conversions: The Frêche-Frêche data is in different quantity and monetary units for different periods; we
have followed the conversion rates applied in Drame et al. (1991).
Original source: “Mercuriale de Toulouse”.

France-Alençon, Amiens, Bourges, Bourgogne, Bretagne, Caen, Lyon, Riom, Rouen, Tours
Source: Labrousse, C.E. Esquisse du mouvement des prix et des revenus en France au 18e siècle. Paris:
Paris C. 1932. See Roehner and Shiue (2000) for additional details.
Overall years: 1756 to 1790, 1806 to 1900; frequency: annually; method: average. If the price is given for
a region (e.g. Bretagne), we use the location of the central city of the region. Note that administrative
boundaries were partly redefined during the French Revolution.
Quantity units: In “setier de Paris” (1756-1790), and in “Hectoliter” (1806-1900); conversion: one setier
de Paris = 156 liters.
Monetary units: In “100 livres” (1756-1790), and in “French Centimes”; conversion: 100 Centimes = 1
Francs = 1 livre.

France-50 cities in French departements
Source: Drame, Sylvie, Christian Gonfalone, Judith A. Miller, and Bertrand Roehner. Un Siècle de
Commerce du Blé en France, 1825-1913. Paris: Economica, 1991.
Overall years: 1825 to 1913; frequency: every 15 days (1825-1903), and every month (1903-1913);
method: quantity-weighted average from all market days in a given period (15 days, or a month).


                                                     35
Quantity units: In “Hectoliters”.
Monetary units: In “French Centimes”, where 100 Centimes = 1 French Francs.
Original source: Archives Nationales (Paris), F11* 1779-2678 and F11* 2877-2984.

Germany-Cologne
Source: Ebeling, Dietrich and Franz Irsigler, “Getreideumsatz, Getreide- und Brotpreise in Köln 1368-
1797, Erster Teil: Getreideumsatz und Getreidepreise: Wochen-, Monats- und Jahrestabelle”, in H.
Stehkämper (ed.), Mitteilungen aus dem Stadtarchiv von Köln, Vol. 65-66. Köln-Wien: Böhlau-Verlag,
1976.
Overall years: 1368 to 1797, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average from 4 to 5 weekly prices.
The source also lists weekly prices and quantities, which allows verifying that the difference between
quantity-weighted and –unweighted monthly price is typically less than one percent.
Quantity units: In “Kölner Malter”, which is approximately 150 liters or about 117 kilograms.
Monetary units: In “Albus”; conversions: 1 Albus = 12 Heller, where the value of Albus to Gulden and
Mark is 1 Gulden = 4 Mark = 24 Albus.
Original sources: “Die Fruchtpreisbücher von 1531-1674”, “Die Bäckerbescheidbücher von 1658-1773”,
and “Das Preise- und Umsatzverzeichnis von 1773-1797”.

Germany- Rostock, Schwerin, Wismar, Boizenburg, Parchim, and Grabow
Source: Die Getreidepreise im Grossherzogthum Mecklenburg-Schwerin während des Zeitraums von
1771 bis 1870, Beiträge zur Statistik Mecklenburgs. Schwerin: Mecklenburg-Schwerin Statistisches
Landesamt, 1873.
Overall years: 1771 to 1870, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average of mid-price of all market
days in a month.
Quantity units: For Rostock and Schwerin in “Rostocker Scheffel” (RS); for Wismar in “Wismarer
Scheffel” (WS); for Grabow and Parchim in “Maass” (M); and quantity units in Boizenburg are “ ¼
Sack” (¼ S). Conversions: 1 WS = 1.023331 RS, 1 M = 1.436 RS, and ¼ S = 1.077 RS, where 1 RS =
0.385371 Hectoliter.
Monetary units: In “Ganzen und Zehntel-Schillingen Courant” (i.e., in Courant, with decimals).
Original source: “Mecklenburgische Anzeigen” (a newspaper).

Germany-Munich
Source: Elsas, Moritz John. Umriss einer Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Deutschland vom
ausgehenden Mittelalter bis zum Beginn des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. Leiden: A.W. Sijthoff, 1936.
Overall years: 1690 to 1820, with gaps after 1779; frequency: monthly; method: average price of first
market day of the month.
Quantity units: In “Scheffel”, where 1 Scheffel = about 223 liters.
Monetary units: In “Alten (schwarzen) Rechnungspfennigen”.
Original source: “Schrannenzettel” of the city of Munich.

Germany—Augsburg, Bamberg, Bayreuth, Erding, Kempten, Landshut, Lindau, Memmingen,
Munich, Nördlingen, Nürnberg, Regensburg, Straubing, Würzburg, Zweibrücken
Source: Seuffert, Georg Karl Leopold. Statistik des Getreide- und Viktualien-Handels im Königreiche
Bayern mit Berücksichtigung des Auslandes. München: J.G. Weiss, 1857.
Overall years: 1815 to 1855 (Munich: 1790 to 1855); frequency: monthly; method: average price of all
market days in a month. For Munich, the Seuffert (1857) source also contains weekly prices (for each
Saturday). In principle, those are the prices listed in Elsas (1936); a comparison of the two sources
essentially confirms that, also suggesting that these prices are highly accurate.
Quantity units: In “Bavarian Scheffel”.
Monetary units: In “Gulden and Kreuzer”; 1 Gulden = 60 Kreuzer; conversion to prices for Munich from
Elsas (1936): 1 Kreuzer = 3.5 “Alte Rechnungspfennige”.


                                                   36
Italy-Siena
Source: Parente, Giuseppe. Prezzi e Mercato del Grano Siena 1546-1765. Florence: Carlo Cya, 1942.
Overall years: 1546 to 1765, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average from all prices of the
month.
Quantity units: In “Staio Senese”; 1 Staio Senese = 22.84 liters.
Monetary units: In “Soldi”; this source gives conversion factors to compute constant prices. They are for
the years 1542-1557: 0.23240; for the years 1558-1676: 0.22288; for the years 1677-1738: 0.21419; and
for 1739-1766, the conversion factor is 0.18912. We have experimented with both current and constant
prices, finding that the results are similar.
Original source: “Archivio degli Esecutori della Gabella”, Archives of the State of Siena, documents #
1283 to 1290.

The Netherlands-Utrecht
Source: Sillem, Jérome Alexandre. Tabellen van Marktprijzen van Granen te Utrecht in de Jaren 1393 tot
1644,Verhandelingen der Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam, Johannes Müller:
Amsterdam, 1901; a supplement with the 18th and 19th century figures is published in Posthumus, N.W.,
Inquiry into the history of prices in Holland, E.J. Brill: Leiden, 1964.
Overall years: 1534-1644, 1760-1814; frequency: monthly; average of all prices for a given month.
Quantity units: In “Modius"; 1 Modius = 88.93 kilograms.
Original source: “Rekeningen en weeklijsten der Domprossdij”.

The Netherlands-Nijmegen
Source: Tijms, W. Historia Agriculturae. Groningen: Nederlands Agronomisch-Historisch Instituut,
1977.
Overall years: 1558-1916, with gaps; frequency: monthly; method: average price of the first market day
of each month.
Quantity units: In “Malder” (1558-1822), and in “Hectoliter” (1824-1916); conversion: 1 Malder =
166.88 liter = 1.6688 Hectoliter.
Monetary Units: In “Guldens” (Dutch Guilders).

The Netherlands-Ruremonde
Source: Ruwet, J., F. Ladrier, E. Helin, and L. van Buyten (1966), Marché des céréales à Ruremonde,
Luxembourg, Namur et Diest aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles, Leuven: Presse de l’Universite de Louvain,
1966.
Overall years: 1599 to 1796; frequency: monthly; method: average of minimum and maximum of the first
market day of each month.
Quantity units: In “Malder”, where 1 Malder is about 170 liters (a range from 164.7 to 174.5 is given,
p.17).
Monetary units: In “Stuivers”, which in French are “patards”.




                                                   37
REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2002), “The Rise of Europe:
     AtlanticTrade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth”, NBER Working Paper #
     9378, Cambridge, MA, December.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson (2001), “The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review,
     91: pp. 1369-1401.

Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Allen, Robert C. (2002) “Involution, Revolution, or What? Agricultural Productivity, Income,
       and Chinese Economic Development.” Mimeograph, Department of Economics, Nuffield
       College, Oxford, September.

Allen, Robert C. (2001), “Real Wages in Europe and Asia: A First Look at the Long-Term
       Patterns.” Mimeograph, Department of Economics, Nuffield College, Oxford, August.

Anderson, J., and E. van Wincoop (2003), “Trade Costs”, working paper, Boston College.

Bairoch, Paul (1975), “The Main Trends in National Economic Disparities since the Industrial
       Revolution.” In P. Bairoch and M. Levy-Leboyer, eds., Disparities in Economic
       Development since the Industrial Revolution. New York: St. Martin’s Press.

Banerjee, Abhijit V. and Lakshmi Iyer (2002), “History, Institutions, and Economic
       Performance: The Legacy of Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India”, working paper,
       MIT.

Baten, Jörg (2000), “Climate, Grain Production and Nutritional Status in Southern Germany
       During the 18th Century”, mimeo, University of Munich.

Baulant, Micheline and Jean Meuvret (1960), Prix des céréales extraits de la mercuriale de
       Paris. Paris: Ecole des Hautes Etudes.

Beveridge, William H. B. (1965) Prices and Wages in England from the Twelfth to the
       Nineteenth Century, Volume 1. London: Frank Cass.

Braudel, Fernand (1992), The Structures of Everyday Life: The Limits of the Possible. Trans.
      Sian Reynolds. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Braudel Fernand and Frank C. Spooner (1967) “Prices in Europe from 1450 to 1750.” In The
      Cambridge Economic History of Europe, Volume IV, New York: Cambridge University
      Press.

Chang, Chung-li (1962), The Income of the Chinese Gentry. Seattle: University of Washington



                                               38
       Press, 1962.

Chaswick, Barry R. and Timothy Hatton (2003), “International Migration and the Integration of
      Labor Markets”, in Globalization in Historical Perspective, edited by Michael D. Bordo,
      Alan M. Taylor, and Jeffrey G. Williamson.

Clark, Gregory (2002), “The Spread of the Industrial Revolution, 1860-2000.” Chapter 5
       Mimeograph, Department of Economics, University of California at Davis.

Crafts, N. F. R. (1995), “Macroinventions, Economic Growth, and ‘Industrial Revolution’ in
        Britain and France,” Economic History Review, 48: pp.591-598.

Crafts, N. F. R. (1994), “The Industrial Revolution.” In R. Floud and D. McCloskey (eds.), The
        Economic History of Britain Since 1700, Volume I: 1700-1860, New York: Cambridge
        University Press, 1994.

Crafts, N. F. R. (1985), British Economic Growth During the Industrial Revolution. New York:
        Oxford University Press.

Crafts, N. F. R., and C. K. Harley (1992), “Output Growth and the Industrial Revolution: A
        Restatement of the Crafts-Harley View”, Economic History Review 45: 703-730.

De Vries, Jan (1994), “The Industrial Revolution and the Industrious Revolution,” Journal of
       Economic History, 54: pp. 249-270.

Diamond, Jared (1997), Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fate of Human Societies. New York:
      W.W. Norton & Co.

Dickey, David and Wayne A. Fuller (1979), “Distribution of the Estimates for Autoregressive
      Time Series with a Unit Root.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 74:
      pp. 427-431.

Drame, Sylvie, Christian Gonfalone, Judith A. Miller, and Bertrand Roehner (1991), Un Siècle
      de Commerce du Blé en France, 1825-1913. Paris: Economica.

Durand, John (1960), “The Population Statistics of China, A.D. 2 – 1953,” Population Studies 3,
      2: pp. 209-56.

Ebeling, Dietrich and Franz Irsigler (1976), Getreideumsatz, Getreide- und Brotpreise in Köln
       1368-1797, Volume 65. Cologne: Mitteilungen aus dem Stadtarchiv von Köln.

Elsas, Moritz John (1936), Umriss einer Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Deutschland vom
       ausgehenden Mittelalter bis zum Beginn des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. Leiden: A.W.
       Sijthoff.

Engel, C., and J. Rogers (1996), “How wide is the border?” American Economic Review 86:



                                              39
       1112-1125.

Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff (2002), “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and
      Paths of Development Among New World Economies”, NBER Working Paper # 9259,
      October 2002.

Engle, Robert F. and Clive W.J. Granger (1991), (eds.) Long-Run Economic Relationships,
       Readings in Cointegration. New York: Oxford University Press

Engle, Robert F. and Clive W.J. Granger (1987), “Co-integration and Error Correction:
       Representation, Estimation, and Testing.” Econometrica, 55(2): 251-276.
.
Engle Robert F. and Byung Sam Yoo (1987), “Forecasting and Testing in Cointegrated
       Systems”, Journal of Econometrics, 35(1): 143-59.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and David Romer (1999), “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
       Review, 89(3): 379-99.

Frêche, Georges and Geneviève Frêche (1967), Les prix des grains des vins et des legumes à
       Toulouse. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France.

Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A. Venables (1998), The Spatial Economy, MIT Press: Cambridge.

Glaser, Rüdiger (2001), Klimageschichte in Mitteleuropa seit dem Jahr 1000, Darmstadt.

Goldstone, Jack A. (2002), “Efflorences and Economic Growth in World History: Rethinking the
       “Rise of the West” and the Industrial Revolution,” Journal of World History, 13(2): pp.
       323-389.

Gomez, Victor and Agustin Maravall (1997), Program TRAMO (Time Series Regression with
     ARIMA Noise, Missing Observations, and Outliers) and SEATS (Signal Extraction in
     ARIMA Time Series). Instructions for the User. Madrid : Secretaria de Estado de
     Hacienda.

Gongzhong liangjiadan [Grain price lists in the palace archives]. Number One Historical
      Archives, Beijing.

Gonzalo, Jesus (1993), “Cointegration and Aggregation.” Richerche Economiche, 47(3): 281-
      291.

Granger, Clive W.J. (1981), “Some properties of time series data and their use in econometric
      model specification.” Journal of Econometrics, 16: 121-30.

Hall, Robert and Charles Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): pp. 83-116.




                                               40
Harley, C. Knick (1999), “Reassessing the Industrial Revolution: A Macro View”, in The British
       Industrial Revolution. An Economic Perspective, Joel Mokry (ed.), 2nd edition, Boulder:
       Westview Press.

Heckscher, E. (1916), “Växelkursens Grundval vid Pappersmyntfot”, Ekonomisk Tidskrift 18:
      309-312.

Huang, Philip C. C. (2002), “Development or Involution in Eighteenth-Century Britain and
      China?” The Journal of Asian Studies, 61(2): 501-538.

Inkster, Ian (1991), Science and Technology in History: An Approach to Industrial Development.
        New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

Isham, Jonathan and Daniel Kaufmann (1999), “The Forgotten Rationale for Policy Reform: The
       Productivity of Investment Projects”. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1): pp. 149-
       84.

Johansen, Soren (1988), “Statistical Analysis of Cointegration Vectors.” Journal of Economic
       Dynamics and Control 12: 231-254.

Jones, Eric J. (2003), The European Miracle. Environments, economies and geopolitics in the
       history of Europe and Asia, 3rd edition, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Jones, Charles (1995), “R&D-based Models of Economic Growth”, Journal of Political
       Economy 103: 759-784.

Keller, Wolfgang and Carol. H. Shiue (2003), “The Origins of Spatial Interaction”, NBER
        Working Paper # 10069, NBER, Cambridge, MA.

Labrousse, C. E. (1932), Esquisse du mouvement des prix et des revenus en France au 18e
      siècle. Paris: Paris C.

Landes, David S. (1969), The Unbound Prometheus, Technological Change and Industrial
      Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present. London (England):
      Cambridge University Press.

Li, Bozhong (1998), Agricultural Development in Jiangnan, 1620-1850. New York: St. Martin’s
       Press.

The London Gazette, London [England]: T.Neuman, Serial Publication Newspaper, on microfilm
      1666-1800. San Antonio College Libraries, San Antonio, Texas.

MacKinnon, James G. (1991), “Critical Values for Cointegration Tests.” In Long-Run Economic
     Relationships, Readings in Cointegration, R. Engle and C.W.J. Granger, (eds)., New
     York: Oxford University Press.




                                              41
Maddala, G. S. and In-Moo Kim (1998), Unit Roots, Cointegration, and Structural Change.
      Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Maddison, Angus. (1989), The World Economy in the 20th Century. Paris: OECD Publications
      and Information Center.

McCloskey, Donald and John Nash (1984), “Corn at Interest: The Extent and Cost of Grain
      Storage in Medieval England.” American Economic Review, 74(1): 174-187.

McEvedy, Colin and Richard Jones (1978), Atlas of World Population History, New York,
     Penguin.

McMillan, John (2002), Reinventing the Bazaar, A Natural History of Markets. New York:
      W.W. Norton.

Mecklenburg-Schwerin Statistisches Landesamt (1873), Beiträge zur Statistik Mecklenburgs.
      Schwerin: Grossherzogliches Statistisches Bureau.

Mitch, David (1999), “The Role of Education and Skill in the British Industrial Revolution,” in
       The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective, 2nd edition, edited by Joel
       Mokyr, Boulder: Westview Press.

Mokyr, Joel (1999), “Editor’s Introduction: The New Economic History and the Industrial
      Revolution”, in The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective, 2nd edition,
      edited by Joel Mokyr, Boulder: Westview Press.

Mokyr, Joel (1990), The Lever of Riches. Technological Creativity and Economic Progress. New
      York: Oxford University Press.

North, Douglas C. (1981), Structure and Change in Economic History. New York: Norton.

North, Douglas C. and Robert Paul Thomas (1973), The Rise of the Western World, A New
       Economic History. New York: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglas C. and Barry Weingast (1989), “Constitutions and Commitment: Evolution of
       Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth Century England.” Journal of
       Economic History 51, pp. 23-46.

Olson, Mancur (1965), The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

O’Rourke, K., and J. Williamson (2004), “From Malthus to Ohlin: Trade, Industrialization, and
      Distribution since 1500”, working paper, Trinity College Dublin and Harvard University.

O’Rourke, K., and J. Williamson (1999), Globalization and History: The Evolution of the 19th
      Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge: MIT Press.




                                               42
Parente, Giuseppe (1942), Prezzi e Mercato del Grano Siena (1546-1765). Florence: Carlo Cya.

Perdue, Peter (1987), Exhausting the Earth: State and Peasant in Hunan, 1500-1850. Chicago:
       Aldine Publishing.

Persson, Karl-Gunnar (1999), Grain Markets in Europe, 1500-1900, Integration and
       Deregulation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Pfister, Christian (2002), “The potential of documentary data for the reconstruction of past
         climates in Europe”, ESF-Holivar workshop, Lammi, Finland, April 17-20th 2002,
         http://www.gsf.fi/esf_holivar/pfister.pdf, accessed January 2004.

Pomeranz, Kenneth (2000), The Great Divergence. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Posthumus, N. W. (1964), Inquiry into the history of prices in Holland, Leiden: E.J. Brill.

Pribram, Alfred Francis (1938), Materialien zur Geschichte der Preise und Löhne in Österreich,
       Volume I. Vienna: Carl Überreuters Verlag.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi (2002), “Institutions Rule: The
       Primacy of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development”,
       NBER Working Paper # 9305, November.

Roehner, Bertrand and Carol H. Shiue (2000), “Comparing the Correlation Length of Grain
      Markets in China and France.” International Journal of Modern Physics C, 11(7): 1383-
      1410.

Ruwet, Joseph (1966), Marché des céréales à Ruremonde, Luxembourg, Namur et Diest aux
       XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles. Louvain: Bureau du recueil [de la] Bibiothèque de l'Université;
       Publications Universitaires de Louvain.

Sachs, Jeffrey (2003), “Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per-Capita
       Income”, NBER Working Paper # 9490, February.

Seiffert, K. (1893), “Beitrag zur Geschichte der Zölle und indirekten Steuern in Bayern”,
        Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Geschichte, NF 5: 882-894.

Seuffert, Georg Karl Leopold (1857), Statistik des Getreide- und Viktualien-Handels im
       Königreiche Bayern mit Berücksichtigung des Auslandes. München: J.G. Weiss.

Shiue, Carol H. (2004a), “From Political Fragmentation towards the Nation State: Border
       Effects of the German Zollverein, 1815 to 1855”, working paper, University of Texas-
       Austin, February.

Shiue, Carol H. (2004b), “Local Granaries and Central Government Disaster Relief: Moral
       Hazard and Intergovernmental Finance in 18th and 19th Century China”, Journal of


                                                43
       Economic History, March.

Shiue, Carol. H. (2004c), “The Political Economy of Famine Relief”, working paper, University
        of Texas-Austin, January.

Shiue, Carol H. (2002), “Transport Costs and the Geography of Arbitrage in Eighteenth Century
       China.” The American Economic Review, 92(5): 1406-1419.

Sillem, Jérome Alexandre (1901), Tabellen van Marktprijzen van Granen te Utrecht in de Jaren
        1393 tot 1644, uit de rekeningen en weeklijsten der Domprossdij. Amsterdam: J. Müller,
        1901.

Sokoloff, Kenneth L. and Stanley L. Engerman (2000), “Institutions, Factor Endowments, and
      Paths of Development in the New World”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3): pp.
      217-32.

Spooner, Frank C. (1961), “Régimes alimentaires d’autrefois: proportions et calculs en calories.”
      Annales E.S.C., pp. 568-74.

State Meteorological Society (1981), Zhongguo jin wubai nien hanloa fenbu tuji [Collected maps
       of droughts and floods in China in the past five hundred years], Beijing, Ditu chuban she.

Taylor, Alan M. (2001), “Potential Pitfalls for the Purchasing-Power-Parity Puzzle? Sampling
       and Specification Biases in Mean-Reversion Tests of the Law of One Price”,
       Econometrica 69: 473-498.

Tijms, W. (1977), Historia Agriculturae. Groningen: Nederlands Agronomisch-Historisch
       Instituut.

Verlinden, C. (1959), (ed.) Dokumenten voor de Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in
       Vlaanderen en Brabant, Vol. I. Bruges: De Tempel.

Verlinden, C. (1972), (ed.) Dokumenten voor de Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in
       Vlaanderen en Brabant, Vol. III. Bruges: De Tempel.

Verlinden, C. (1973), (ed.) Dokumenten voor de Geschiedenis van Prijzen en Lonen in
       Vlaanderen en Brabant, Vol. IV. Bruges: De Tempel.

Wang, Y. (1992), “Secular Trends of Rice Prices in the Yangzi Delta, 1638-1935”, In Chinese
      History in Economic Perspective, T. Rawski and L. Li (eds.), Los Angeles, University of
      California Press.

Webb, Walter Prescott (1952), The Great Frontier. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.

Weber, Max (1993), The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. London: Routledge,
      originally published 1905.



                                               44
Wilkinson, E. (1969), “The Nature of Chinese Grain Price Quotations, 1600-1900”, Transactions
       of the International Conference of Orientalists in Japan/Kokusai Toho Gakusha Kaigi
       Kiyo, Vol. 14: 54-65.

Will, Pierre-Etienne and R. Bin Wong (1991), Nourish the People. Ann Arbor: University of
        Michigan Press.

Wong, R. Bin and Peter Perdue (1992), “Grain Markets and Food Supplies in 18th Century
      Hunan.” In Chinese History in Economic Perspective, T. Rawski and L. Li (eds.), Los
      Angeles, University of California Press.

Wrigley, E.A. (1988), Continuity, Chance and Change: The Character of the Industrial
      Revolution in England. New York: Cambridge University Press.




                                             45
Table 1. Data Sources
      I                            II                             III                IV                   V                    VI              VII      VIII      IX
Country       Location                                 Source                    Frequency              Years                Method          Max/Min  Spatial  Quantity
                                                                                                                                              Obs.   Aggregate Weighted
Austria          Vienna                                Pribram (1938)       Monthly             1692-1914                  Average             no       no       yes
Belgium          Brussels                              Verlinden (1959)     Monthly             1568-1696                  First day           no       no        no
                                                       Verlinden (1972)     Monthly             1728-95,1800-89            First day           no       no        no
                 Bruges                                Verlinden (1973)     Monthly             1796-1914                  First day           no       no        no
                                                       Verlinden (1959,1973 Monthly             1564-1604                 Avg./1st day         no       no        no
            Diksmuide                                  Verlinden (1959)     Monthly             1482-1615                  Average             no       no        no
            Aalst                                      Verlinden (1959)     Monthly             1750-1802                  Average             no       no        no
            Antwerp                                    Verlinden (1959)     Monthly             1608-1817                  First day           no       no        no
China       Hunan province (13 pref.)*                 see Perdue (1987) Monthly                1738-1858                  First day           yes      yes       no
            121 Prefectures                            see Shiue (2002)     Monthly             1742-1795                  First day           yes      yes       no
            Anhwei province (13 pref.)                                           "
            Fujian province (12 pref.)                                           "
            Guangdong province (13 pref.)                                        "
            Guangxi province (13 pref.)                                          "
            Guizhou province (12 pref.)                                          "
            Hubei province (10 pref.)                                            "
            Hunan province (13 pref.)                                            "
            Jiangsu province (10 pref.)                                          "
            Jiangxi province (14 pref.)                                          "
            Zhejiang province (11 pref.)                                         "
England     London                                     Beveridge (1965)     Monthly             1683-1801                  Average              no            no        no
            London and 40 Counties                     London Gazette       Weekly              1770-1794                 Weekly avg.           no            yes       no
France      Toulouse                                   Freche (1967)        Monthly             1486-1913                  First day            no            no      in part
            Paris                                      Baulant (1960)       Monthly             1520-1698                  First day            yes           no        no
            10 Generalite (Regions)                    Labrousse (1932)     Annual              1756-90,1806-1900          Average              no          in part   in part
            50 Cities, 48 Departments                  Drame (1991)         Biweekly            1825-1903                  First day            no            yes       yes
Germany     Cologne                                    Ebeling (1976)       Monthly             1531-1797                  Average              no            no        no
            6 Cities Mecklenburg-Schwerin              Mecklenburg (1873) Monthly               1770-1870                  Average              no            no        no
            14 Cities in Bavaria                       Seuffert (1857)      Monthly             1815-1855                  Average              no            no        no
            Munich                                     Elsas (1936)         Monthly             1790-1855                  First day            no            no        no
Italy       Siena                                      Parenti (1942)       Monthly             1546-1765                  Average              no            no        no
Luxembourg Luxembourg                                  Ruwet (1966)         Monthly             1722-1795                  Variable           in part         no        no
Netherlands Nijmegen                                   Tijms (1977)         Monthly             1558-1916                  First day        start 1814        no        no
            Utrecht                                    Sillem (1901)        Monthly             1534-1647                  Average              no            no        no
                                                       Posthumus (1964)     Monthly             1774-1814                  Average              no            no        no
                 Ruremonde                             Ruwet (1966)         Monthly             1599-1796                  First day            yes           no      in part


Notes:
Column VI indicates whether the prices were calculated from the first market day of the month or with a temporal averaging method.
Column VII indicates if the data records a range of prices, ie, typically the minimum and maximum prices observed.
Column VIII notes if spatial aggregation is involved; these cases are only relevant for regions larger than a city market, such as departments or prefectures.
Column IX indicates if price averages have been quantity-weighted in the original source.
*Hunan series of monthly prices for both rice and wheat.
Table 2a. Price Correlations in China and Europe 1742-1794 in 25 year periods

                                       Dist range           1742-1766       1756-1780      1766-1790      1770-1794
Country   Sample                  N*     in km    n**       Mean stdev      Mean stdev     Mean stdev     Mean stdev

China     Yangzi Delta             9    <150       25         0.76 0.15      0.80 0.10      0.84 0.05      0.83 0.07
                                   9   150-300     11         0.73 0.13      0.74 0.08      0.81 0.04      0.81 0.06

          Yangzi D. expanded 26         <150       85         0.77   0.12    0.75   0.11    0.80   0.09    0.78   0.10
                             26        150-300    138         0.67   0.15    0.68   0.11    0.71   0.11    0.70   0.12
                             26        300-450     76         0.54   0.20    0.56   0.16    0.65   0.09    0.66   0.11
                             26        450-600     26         0.44   0.17    0.53   0.17    0.59   0.09    0.67   0.13

          Provincial Capitals     10   <150          0        ---            ---            ---            ---
                                  10 150-300         8        0.58   0.11    0.49   0.24    0.64   0.25    0.59   0.24
                                  10 300-450         7        0.53   0.20    0.50   0.32    0.61   0.33    0.61   0.36
                                  10 450-600         8        0.53   0.07    0.26   0.18    0.38   0.30    0.38   0.31
                                  10 600-750         6        0.32   0.23    0.29   0.27    0.29   0.41    0.31   0.35
                                  10 750-900         6        0.38   0.17    0.14   0.22    0.11   0.30    0.15   0.34
                                  10 900-1050        2        0.35   0.17    0.03   0.17   -0.10   0.08   -0.14   0.15
                                  10  >1050          8        0.23   0.14    0.13   0.24    0.10   0.25    0.08   0.22

          Yangzi River            34   <150   68              0.78   0.12    0.77   0.11    0.82   0.07    0.81   0.09
                                  34 150-300 124              0.68   0.14    0.69   0.12    0.75   0.09    0.74   0.12
                                  34 300-450 146              0.58   0.16    0.60   0.13    0.68   0.10    0.68   0.10
                                  34 450-600 120              0.54   0.16    0.55   0.13    0.65   0.09    0.66   0.09
                                  34 600-750  57              0.51   0.15    0.45   0.14    0.64   0.12    0.64   0.10
                                  34 750-900  34              0.50   0.10    0.42   0.11    0.61   0.11    0.61   0.11
                                  34 900-1050 12              0.42   0.13    0.31   0.11    0.56   0.08    0.57   0.08

England   London+40 counties 41         <150      328         ---            ---            ---            0.87   0.06
                             41        150-300    343         ---            ---            ---            0.77   0.06
                             41        300-450    133         ---            ---            ---            0.71   0.07
                             41        450-600     16         ---            ---            ---            0.71   0.08

France    Central France          10    <150       10         ---            0.88   0.04    0.80   0.09    0.80   0.09
                                  10   150-300     13         ---            0.82   0.07    0.70   0.15   0.74    0.14
                                  10   300-450     14         ---            0.74   0.07    0.58   0.09   0.65    0.09
                                  10   450-600      8         ---            0.74   0.07    0.55   0.08   0.63    0.08

Europe    {Mecklenburg(3),        15   <150        17         ---            ---            ---            0.83   0.09
          Belgium(3),London,      15 150-300       15         ---            ---            ---            0.65   0.15
          France(1),Austria(1),   15 300-450       13         ---            ---            ---            0.55   0.21
          Germany(2),             15 450-600       20         ---            ---            ---            0.53   0.17
          Luxembourg,             15 600-750       14         ---            ---            ---            0.39   0.15
          Netherlands(2),         15 750-900       11         ---            ---            ---            0.33   0.16
          Ruremonde}.             15 900-1050      10         ---            ---            ---            0.30   0.09
                                  15  >1050         5         ---            ---            ---            0.30   0.10

* Gives the number of markets in a sample
** Gives the number of bilateral relations in a specific distance range
Table 2b.    Price Correlation in Europe 1692-1716 and 1806-1855 in 25 year periods.

                                    Dist range            1692-1716       1806-1830      1815-1834      1825-1849      1831-1855
Country     Sample             N*     in km n**           Mean stdev      Mean stdev     Mean stdev     Mean stdev     Mean stdev

France      Central France 10         <150        10        ---            0.96   0.02    0.97   0.02    0.96   0.02    0.98   0.01
                           10        150-300      13        ---            0.93   0.03    0.95   0.02    0.94   0.03    0.97   0.01
                           10        300-450      14        ---            0.90   0.02    0.91   0.03    0.89   0.04    0.95   0.02
                           10         >450         8        ---            0.87   0.04    0.88   0.03    0.84   0.03    0.94   0.01

            France             51     <150      140                        ---            ---            0.91   0.07    0.94   0.05
                               51    150-300    344         ---            ---            ---            0.87   0.06    0.91   0.05
                               51    300-450    321         ---            ---            ---            0.82   0.07    0.88   0.05
                               51    450-600    276         ---            ---            ---            0.75   0.08    0.83   0.06
                               51    600-750    155         ---            ---            ---            0.71   0.08    0.81   0.06
                               51     <750       39         ---            ---            ---            0.70   0.05    0.79   0.03

Germany Bavaria                13     <150        37        ---            ---            0.98 0.01      0.97 0.02      0.98 0.02
                               13    150-300      41        ---            ---            0.96 0.02      0.93 0.03      0.95 0.02

            Bavaria &          20     <150        65        ---            ---            0.97   0.02    0.96   0.02    0.97   0.02
            Mecklenburg        20    150-300      40        ---            ---            0.95   0.02    0.93   0.03    0.95   0.02
                               20    300-450      18        ---            ---            0.81   0.05    0.78   0.06    0.84   0.05
                               20    450-600      42        ---            ---            0.76   0.04    0.73   0.04    0.78   0.04
                               20    600-750      25        ---            ---            0.74   0.04    0.71   0.03    0.75   0.05

Europe      {Belgium(2),       15     <150         8        ---            ---            ---            0.97   0.01    0.96   0.03
            France(4),         15    150-300       9        ---            ---            ---            0.90   0.06    0.94   0.03
            Germany(4),        15    300-450       9        ---            ---            ---            0.78   0.10    0.85   0.07
            Mecklenburg(3)     15    450-600      22        ---            ---            ---            0.77   0.08    0.83   0.06
            Austria(1),        15    600-750      25        ---            ---            ---            0.72   0.09    0.78   0.08
            Netherlands(1)}    15    750-900      12        ---            ---            ---            0.69   0.05    0.74   0.02
                               15   900-1050      10        ---            ---            ---            0.69   0.05    0.72   0.04
                               15   1050-1200     10        ---            ---            ---            0.54   0.11    0.57   0.12

Europe      {Belgium(1),        9     <150    4             0.89   0.03    ---            ---            ---            ---
            France(1),          9    150-300  2             0.88   0.06    ---            ---            ---            ---
            London,Italy(1),    9    300-450  4             0.55   0.27    ---            ---            ---            ---
            Austria(1),         9    450-600  5             0.29   0.24    ---            ---            ---            ---
            Germany(2),         9    600-750  3             0.43   0.08    ---            ---            ---            ---
            Netherlands(2)}     9    750-900  5             0.46   0.09    ---            ---            ---            ---
                                9   900-1050 10              0.4   0.16    ---            ---            ---            ---
                                9   1050-1200 3             0.36   0.09    ---            ---            ---            ---

* Gives the number of markets in a sample
** Gives the number of bilateral relations in a specific distance range
Table 3. Distance slope coefficients in China and Europe, 1742-1855 in 25 year periods.

                                                   Dist range         1742-1766      1756-1780         1766-1790         1770-1794
Country   Sample                          N*         in km        n** Slope R-sqr    Slope   R-sqr     Slope   R-sqr     Slope   R-sqr

                                               Shorter Distances
China     Yangzi Delta                    12       10 - 300      36 -0.06** 0.06      -0.06**   0.13   -0.03*** 0.11      -0.03**    0.10

England England without Wales             41       10 - 300       671     ---             ---             ---            -0.11***    0.56

                                               Medium Distances
China     Yangzi D. expanded              26       100 - 550    285 -0.20** 0.24      -0.16**   0.23   -0.13*** 0.23     -0.10***    0.56

England England without Wales             41       100 - 550      649     ---             ---             ---            -0.13***    0.45

France    Central France                  10       100 - 550       37     ---         -0.15** 0.35      -0.26*    0.39   -0.17**    0.35

                                               Longer Distances
China     Provincial Capitals             10      200 - 1400    45 -0.22** 0.376      -0.27*    0.27    -0.42*    0.37    -0.39*    0.33

Europe    {Mecklenburg(3),France(1)    15         200 - 1400       79     ---             ---             ---            -0.22**    0.27
          Belgium(3),London,Austria(1)
          Germany(2), Ruremonde,
          Luxembourg, Netherlands(2)}

                                                   Dist range         1806-1830      1815-1834         1825-1849         1831-1855
Country   Sample                          N*         in km        n** Slope R-sqr    Slope   R-sqr     Slope   R-sqr     Slope   R-sqr

                                             Shorter Distances
Germany Bavaria                            13    10 - 300      77         ---        -0.023*** 0.36    -0.042**   0.52   -0.03**     0.48

                                             Medium Distances
France    France                           51    100 - 550    942         ---             ---          -0.10***   0.29   -0.06**     0.22

Germany Bavaria &Mecklenburg               20      100 - 550      108     ---        -0.14***   0.79   -0.16***   0.79   -0.12***    0.77

                                             Longer Distances
Europe    {Mecklenburg(3),France(4)        15   200 - 1400    93          ---             ---          -0.18**    0.44   -0.21**     0.57
          Belgium(2),Austria(1),
          Germany(5),Netherlands(1)}

* Gives the number of markets in a sample
** Gives the number of bilateral relations in a specific distance range
Table 4: Engle-Granger Cointegration Results


                                   Europe 15 markets            England 40 county markets + London

Distance class           Mean ADF     S.e. of Mean Median ADF   Mean ADF   S.e. of Mean Median ADF
(km)                      t-stat*                    t-stat      t-stat*                   t-stat

0<x<150                   -4.450         0.131         -4.382    -4.582       0.031       -4.577

150<x<300                 -3.807         0.113         -3.757    -4.450       0.031       -4.451

300<x<450                 -3.757         0.145         -3.766    -4.382       0.058       -4.392

450<x<600                 -3.493         0.103         -3.375    -4.464       0.186       -4.254

600<x<750                 -3.163         0.190         -2.853

750<x<900                 -3.604         0.186         -3.533

900<x                     -3.582         0.169         -3.498


* As shown in Figure 9
                                                                                     Figure 1. Data Availability, selected locations.


                                                                                                                                                                           14 Bavarian
                                                                                                                                                                           32 French
                                                                                                                                  121 Chinese
                                                                                                                                                                   13 Chinese
                                                                                                          London                                                                                                            Siena
                                                                                                                                   Luxembourg                                                                               Toulouse
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Utrecht
                                                                                                                                                                                  50 French                                 Vienna
                                                 Brussels                                                                                                                                                                   Luxembourg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5 Mecklenburg Cities
                                                                                                          Antwerp
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Schwerin
                                                 Paris                                                                                                                                                                      Munich
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Nijmegen
                                                 Nijmegen                                                                                                                                                                   Paris
                                                 Cologne                                                                                                                                                                    Antwerp
                                                                                                          Munich                                                                                                            Brussels
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            50 French Markets
                                                                                                                                                                           Schwerin                                         Cologne
                                                                                                                                                                   5 Mecklenburg                                            London
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            121 Chinese Prefectures
                                                                                                          Vienna
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            32 French Regions
                                                                Ruremonde                                                                                                                                                   14 Bavarian Cities

                                            Utrech                                                                                                                                                                          Ruremonde

                                            t                                                                                                                                                                               13 Chinese prefectures
                                            Toulouse
                                             Siena
1486
       1500
              1514
                     1528
                            1542
                                   1556
                                          1570
                                                  1584
                                                         1598
                                                                1612
                                                                       1626
                                                                              1640
                                                                                     1654
                                                                                            1668
                                                                                                   1682
                                                                                                           1696
                                                                                                                  1710
                                                                                                                         1724
                                                                                                                                1738
                                                                                                                                       1752
                                                                                                                                              1766
                                                                                                                                                     1780
                                                                                                                                                            1794
                                                                                                                                                                    1808
                                                                                                                                                                           1822
                                                                                                                                                                                  1836
                                                                                                                                                                                         1850
                                                                                                                                                                                                1864
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1878
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1892
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1906
                           Figure 2. China and Europe, selected markets, 1770-1794




                    0.7
Price Correlation




                    0.3




                    -0.1


                            European Cities
                            Chinese River Prefectures
                            Chinese Provincial Capitals

                    -0.5
                             100              300           500        700   900
                                                          Kilometers
                          Figure 3. European locations, 17th and 18th century samples compared


                                                                             European Cities 1770-1794
                                                                             European Cities 1692-1716


                    0.8



                    0.6
Price Correlation




                    0.4



                    0.2



                    0.0


                             0      200      400      600       800   1000       1200         1400
                                                        Kilometers
       Figure 4. China and Europe, selected markets over 18th and 19th centuries
                                 Bilateral correlation on distance

1.1




0.7




0.3




-0.1
               European Cities 1770-1794
               Chinese River Prefectures 1770-1794
               Chinese Provincial Capitals 1770-1794
               European cities 1825-1849

-0.5
               100               300              500         700    900
                                               Kilome te rs
                                 Figure 5. China and Europe, 1770-1794



                    1.0




                    0.5
Price Correlation




                    0.0




                    -0.5




                    -1.0
                           300             800                1300       1800
                                                 Kilometers
                           Figure 6. China (1770-1794) and Europe (1825-1849)



                    1.0




                    0.5
Price Correlation




                    0.0




                    -0.5




                    -1.0
                           300             800                1300         1800
                                                 Kilometers
                                 Figure 7. England and the Yangzi Delta, 1770-1794




                    0.9




                    0.7
Price Correlation




                    0.5




                    0.3

                              Yangzi Delta
                              England


                    0.1
                          0       100        200    300        400     500       600   700
                                                      Kilometers
                                        Figure 8. Yangzi Delta and France, 1770-1794




                    0.9




                    0.7
Price Correlation




                    0.5




                    0.3

                              Central France
                              Yangzi Delta

                    0.1
                          0         100        200       300           400   500       600   700
                                                          Kilometers
                                  Figure 9. Cointegration in Europe and within England, 1742 to 1795

                           -3

                          -3.2

                          -3.4
Average ADF t-statistic




                          -3.6

                          -3.8

                           -4

                          -4.2

                          -4.4

                          -4.6

                          -4.8
                                   0<x<150     150<x<300   300<x<450   450<x<600      600<x<750   750<x<900 900<x<1050
                                                                  Distance class (km)

                                 European Cities 1742-95   English Counties 1770-94      Log. (European Cities 1742-95)
                                       Figure 10: Cointegration in China and Europe, 1742-95


                          -3.1


                          -3.3
Average ADF t-statistic




                          -3.5


                          -3.7


                          -3.9


                          -4.1


                          -4.3


                          -4.5
                                 0<x<150   150<x<300       300<x<450           450<x<600       600<x<750          750<x<900   900<x<1050
                                                                        Distance class (km)

                                              China River Prefectures                      European Cities
                                              China Yangzi Delta Prefectures               China Provincial Capitals
                                              China All Prefectures
                                            Figure 11. Cointegration in Europe and China: Logarithmic trendlines
                                      -3


                                     -3.2
                                               All Chinese markets
Average ADF t-statistic of delta_1




                                     -3.4


                                     -3.6


                                     -3.8


                                      -4
                                                                                              Yangzi delta
                                                                                              markets
                                     -4.2
                                                            European markets
                                     -4.4


                                     -4.6
                                              0<x<150      150<x<300     300<x<450       450<x<600         600<x<750   750<x<900   900<x<1050
                                                                                     Distance class (km)
                                 Figure 12. Cointegration in Yangzi Delta, England 18th Century, and
                                                        Europe 19th Century
                          -3.4


                          -3.6
Average ADF t-statistic




                          -3.8


                           -4


                          -4.2


                          -4.4


                          -4.6


                          -4.8
                                     0<x<150                150<x<300                    300<x<450             450<x<600
                                                                        Distance Class



                                          European Cities 1742-95                   English Counties 1770-94
                                          China Yangzi Delta Prefectures 1742-95    European Cities 1825-49
Appendix A: Estimation of Cointegrating Relationships using Maximum Likelihood

      This method, developed by Johansen (1988), is based on systems vector autoregression
(VAR) analysis. Consider the case of a first-order VAR:
(A.1)               pt = A1 pt −1 + ε t ,

where pt is the ( n × 1 ) vector (p1t, …,pnt)’, εt is the ( n × 1 ) vector (ε1t, …,εnt)’, and A1 is a ( n × n )
matrix of parameters. Assume that all elements of yt are known to be integrated of order 1 (I(1)).
Subtracting pt-1 from (A.1) and letting I be an ( n × n ) identity matrix yields
                    ∆pt    = − (I − A1 ) pt −1 + ε t
(A.2)
                           =         π p t −1 + ε t

Here π is the ( n × n ) matrix − (I − A1 ) and πij is the element in row i and column j of π.

        In equation (A.2), ∆pt and ε t are stationary while pt −1 is non-stationary, which means
that for consistency the matrix π must be less than of full rank (denoted by r). This appendix
considers only the case of n = 2 , which means that r is either 0 or 1. If the rank of π is equal to
zero, all elements πij are equal to zero and (A.2) becomes
(A.3)               ∆pt = ε t ⇔ pt = pt −1 + ε t .

In this case, there is no linear combination of the elements of pt that is stationary, or, p1t and p2t
are not cointegrated. Alternatively, if r = 1 , there is one cointegrating vector given by either row
of π. Each sequence {pit } can be written in error-correction form (given by A.2) with non-zero
parameters πij (Granger’s representation theorem).

      A normalization with respect to p1t-1 allows to write the system (A.2) in terms of
parameters α and β; let α1 = π 11 and βij = π ij / π 11 . The equation for ∆p1t , e.g., then reads

(A.4)               ∆p1t = α1 ( p1t −1 + β12 p2t −1 ) + ε 1t .

In the long-run, the {pit } will satisfy the relationship
(A.5)               p1t + β12 p2t = 0 .

Equation (A.5) corresponds to the cointegrating relationship for Engle and Granger’s (1987)
model discussed in the text, while the parameter α in equation (A.4) governs the speed of
adjustment to equilibrium. An attractive feature of Johansen’s (1988) method is that under
certain assumptions, one can estimate both the long-run parameters and the short-run parameters
by one-step maximum likelihood.1

        In summary, the Johansen method involves estimating the rank of the matrix π. In the
present context, if the rank of π is equal to 0, there is no cointegration, while if it is equal to 1,
the two series are cointegrated.2 The Johansen approach is relatively restrictive, for instance, the
errors must be Gaussian (in contrast, Engle and Granger’s 1987 method does not rely on that).

1
    Also Engle and Granger’s method allows estimating the speed-of-adjustment parameters, in a second step.
2
    Johansen’s method can also be used in the case of higher-order integration and n>2.
At the same time, Johansen’s method is also powerful in the sense that when it is appropriate, it
provides a number of new results.


An Application3

        Consider the prefectures Huizhou and Taicang, both located in the expanded Yangzi
delta, China’s most developed area in the 18th century. Huizhou is located in Anhwei province,
and Taicang is located in Jiangsu province, with a distance of about 286 kilometers between
them. Taicang is located right on the mouth of the Yangzi River, while Huizhou is further west,
and although it is not located directly on the Yangzi River, it is not far from it.

        Let the log rice price in Huizhou be denoted by p1t, while Taicang’s is given by p2t.
Figure A1 (“Huizhou Prefecture”) and Figure A2 (“Taicang Prefecture”) show these price series
both in levels (on top) and in first differences. The plots suggest that the price levels are non-
stationary while the first-differences are stationary, and formal tests confirm this. Cointegration
means that there is a linear long-run relationship between the two prices (plus, we allow for a
constant, β3, in the cointegration space):
(A.6)              B1 y1t + B2 y2 t + β 3 = 0
        We perform a number of auxiliary tests that explore whether the price series seem to be
suited for an application of Johansen’s technique, and which particular model seems most
appropriable.4 As an example, Figure A3 (“Diagnostic Analysis for Differenced Taicang Price
Series”) shows some basic characteristics and tests for the differenced Taicang series that help to
determine which model should be estimated. Based on this analysis, we make a number of
modifications to the base specification. First, we add a seasonal effect that controls for price
differences by month (spring or fall), and a number of indicator variables that eliminate the effect
of outliers. We denote these deterministic components by Dt . Second, we include the once-
lagged differences of ∆pt , that is, ∆pt −1 . The resulting specification is given by
(A.7)              ∆pt = Πpt −1 + Γ∆pt −1 + Φ Dt + ε t ,
where Γ and Φ are 2 × 2 matrices of parameters. If the rank of Π is equal to 0, there is no
cointegration, whereas if it is equal to one, the series are cointegrated. The elements of the Π
matrix are products of α ’s and β ’s, which are the short-run and long-run coefficients,
respectively, of the price equilibrium.
        To determine the rank of the Π matrix, recall that the rank of a matrix is equal to the
number of its eigenvalues that are different from zero. Johansen has developed several tests to
determine whether—with n = 2—one eigenvalue is sufficiently far away from zero so that one

3
  This is not meant to be representative; while we have studied cointegration among many prefectures using
Johansen’s technique, we have not done so for all 7260 bilateral relations. However, see the Engle-Granger results
based on all 7260 bilateral relations in Figure 11 above.
4
  These tests analyze the degree of serial and cross-series correlation, whether the errors appear to be normally
distributed, and whether there appears to be autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) effects. The
models that we consider differ in (i) what lag length (the number of differenced lags on the right hand side) to use,
(ii) whether to include seasonal effects and other deterministic components, (iii) how to identify and to treat outliers,
and other factors. See Maddala and Kim (1998) for a discussion.
can conclude that the rank of the Π matrix is one. The larger eigenvalue of the matrix Π in
equation (A.7) is estimated to be 0.254, with a (‘trace’) test statistic of 52.51. The relevant
critical value for the trace test is far lower than that (with a value of 17.79), which means that r =
1 is accepted, that is, the two series are cointegrated.46 Figure A4 (“The Estimated Cointegrating
vector between the Huizhou and Taicang Price Series”) shows the estimated cointegrating vector
 B1 p1t + B2 p2 t . The difference between the top and the bottom part of the figure is that the
bottom takes the deterministic components and the lagged difference ∆pt −1 into account whereas
the top does not. The plots suggest that at least for the larger parts of the time series, the
estimated linear combination of the two prices is stationary.

        A second question that can be addressed is whether an adjusted law of one price is
holding among these prefectures. Normalizing equation (A.6) by setting B1 to 1—the parameter
B1 and B2 are not separately identified—this amounts to testing whether in the long-run, B2 is
equal to 1, or, the price in Huizhou is equal to the price in Taicang (up to the constant β3). In that
case, (A.6) becomes p1t = p2 t − β 3 .
        In the unrestricted regression, B2 is estimated at 0.989, and consequently, the hypothesis
that B2 = 1 cannot be rejected at a 5% level (p-value of 3%). This means that there is evidence
for the (adjusted) law of one price. Moreover, the constant β 3 is estimated to equal 0.048,
suggesting that the long-run price in Taicang, at the mouth of the Yangzi, is above the long-run
price in Huizhou. The finding is very plausible, because on average, grain prices in China were
increasing as one moves from the inland regions of China’s west down the river to the larger
cities of the Yangzi Delta.

        Turning to the short-run dynamics, there are two questions of interest: first, do prices in
both markets respond to the respective other price, or is it primarily the change in one price that
brings the markets back to long-run equilibrium? This depends on the signs of the coefficients
α . In this case, α1 , in the ∆p1t equation, is estimated to be significantly negative, whereas α 2 in
the ∆p2 t equation is positive. This is plausible because stability of the long-run equilibrium
requires that an above-equilibrium value of y1t triggers a subsequent decline of p1t ( α1 negative),
and/or a below-equilibrium value of p2t triggers a rise in p2t ( α 2 positive). Here, adjustment
towards the equilibrium works through both markets (neither of the market prices is weakly
exogenous).

        The second question is: how long does it take until a shock to the long-run equilibrium is
absorbed? This can be gauged by looking at the size of the α ’s. The point estimates for α1 and
α 2 are -0.228 and 0.291, respectively. These numbers, of around 0.25 in absolute value,
translate into a half-life of a shock of about 0.5 years for these two markets.47 For comparison,
Persson (1999, 98-100) estimates comparable half-lives for a number of grain markets in Europe

46
   The exact critical value for this test might be somewhat different, both because it is an asymptotic value (here,
T=108), and because we include some additional deterministic components. In any case, given the large test statistic
of 52.51 (relative to the approximate critical value of 17.79), qualitatively, this will not matter.
47
   We use prices at semi-annual frequency (one period lasts six months). At the same time, note that we use monthly
data, the same frequency that is employed for the European estimates discussed in the following; Gonzalo (1993)
and Taylor (2001) discuss the consequences of temporal aggregation for the properties of some estimators.


                                                        48
and finds that the duration in the 16th to 18th centuries was 1 ½ to 3 years; and the half life of a
price deviation does not fall to 3 to 4 months until the mid-19th century.


Appendix B: Comparing historical weather patterns in China and Europe

        For China, the weather data available to us is an indicator of rainfall and wetness in a
given harvest year. Systematic rainfall recording began as early as the Tang Dynasty (618-907
A.D.), and from at least the 17th century the collection of rainfall and weather reports at the
county level had become standard government practice (Wilkinson 1969). Our source for
historical weather data are the weather maps in the State Meteorological Administration (1981).
The maps give weather data throughout China for each year for 120 ''stations'', where one station
corresponds to one or two of our prefectures. It is a discrete indicator of the degree of rainfall
relative to what is considered normal for that region. The indicator, Rnt, ranges from 1 (severe
droughts) to 5 (heavy rains and floods), and normal conditions are given by Rnt=3. The
information is hand-coded from the weather maps to compute the weather correlations between
any two prefectures.

        For Western and Central Europe before 1300 A.D., there are reports of natural disasters,
and by 1800 A.D. there are almost complete descriptions of monthly weather, although cross-
border (international network) weather observations before 1860 were still rare (Pfister 2002).
The exact relationship between climate and agricultural output is complicated, but it is clear that
both extreme temperatures as well as extreme humidity tend to lead to bad harvests. Moreover,
humidity and temperatures in different years or in different cities are correlated.7 This means that
we can employ the temperature data for 8 European cities available to us to compare the spatial
weather patterns in Europe with those in China.8 For each of the eight European cities, we have
re-classified the weather data from temperature in degrees Celsius into five discrete classes, 1 to
5, and computed for each city pair the correlation of weather.9

         The regressions presented in Table B1 compare weather correlations in China and Europe
as a function of distance. We see that throughout weather correlations in Europe were higher
than they were in China, indicated by the higher intercepts for the former sample (China: 0.39 to
0.62, versus 0.83 to 1.17 for Europe). This in itself suggests that our evidence on price
correlation might be affected by spatial patterns of weather (and not of arbitrage and trade) to a
relatively greater extent in Europe, or put differently, without controlling for weather we have
stacked the odds against finding China ahead in terms of market efficiency. However, it may be
that the spatial correlation of humidity (used for China) and of temperature (used for Europe) is
just different, and this may explain in part why we estimate a higher level of weather correlations
for Europe.



7
  See Baten (2000) for more discussion.
8
  The temperature data was provided by Rüdiger Glaser (see Glaser 2001); thanks to Jörg Baten for sharing the data
with us. The cities are Paris, Vienna, Munich, De Bilt (the Netherlands), Nottingham (as Central England), Berlin,
Basle (as Switzerland), and Stockholm (as Sweden).
9
  We replicate the frequencies that are present in the data for China (1770-1794): Rnt=1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 with
probabilities of 5.7%, 28.1%, 46.5%, 15.3%, and 4.5%, respectively.
         Another question thus is how weather correlations changed with distance in the two
continents. It turns out that there is no clear difference between China and Europe. In the
preferred specification for the European sample (in terms of R 2 ), we estimate a value of -0.243
on log distance for Europe, while for China it is smaller in absolute value (at -0.195). However,
the 95% confidence interval of the estimate for Europe is (-0.310, -0.177), which covers the
point estimate for China. Moreover, one may want to drop Stockholm from the sample because
its location is substantially to the North of our core price series sample. That alone brings the
distance coefficient rises to -0.186, less in absolute value than the estimate for China while at the
same time increasing the R 2 (see specifications 4 and 2a, respectively). In addition, the
preferred specification for the Chinese sample has both log distance and its square, and for this
specification distance has the expected effects for China (linear: negative, squared: positive),
while for Europe distance has no significant effect.

      On the bottom of the table, the predicted level of weather correlations in China and
Europe is reported based on the OLS regressions. It is clear from these figures that the predicted
weather correlation in Europe was higher than in China, while if one focuses on changes in
weather correlation (moving from 300 km to 600 km e.g.), the magnitudes are roughly
comparable.10

        Overall, this analysis shows that the influence of weather is unlikely to favor China over
Europe in our comparison. First, the changes in weather accompanied by changes in distance
were comparable in China and Europe. Second, we estimate that the level of weather correlations
was substantially stronger in Europe than in China, and to the extent that this is not entirely due
to differences in temperature versus humidity patterns, the analysis tends to favor Europe over
China.




10
 Finally, the remaining two specifications indicate that our results do not seem to be driven by the particulars of
China’s weather distribution during 1770-94 (specification 5) or the fact that the minimum bilateral distance in our
China is smaller than in our European sample (12 kilometers versus 265 kilometers; specification 6).
Figure A.1. Huizhou Prefecture


                                                               L2
                                                             LEVEL
          1.00


          0.75


          0.50


          0.25
                 1742   1746   1750   1754   1758   1762     1766    1770   1774   1778   1782   1786   1790   1794


                                                           DIFFERENCE
          0.3

          0.2

          0.1

          -0.0

          -0.1

          -0.2

          -0.3
                 1742   1746   1750   1754   1758   1762    1766     1770   1774   1778   1782   1786   1790   1794
Figure A.2 Taicang Prefecture




                                                                 L94
                                                                LEVEL
           1.1
           1.0
           0.9
           0.8
           0.7
           0.6
           0.5
           0.4
           0.3
                   1742    1746   1750   1754   1758   1762    1766    1770    1774   1778   1782   1786   1790   1794


                                                              DIFFERENCE
            0.5
            0.4
            0.3
            0.2
            0.1
           -0.0
           -0.1
           -0.2
           -0.3
                    1742   1746   1750   1754   1758   1762    1766     1770   1774   1778   1782   1786   1790   1794
Figure A.3 Diagnostic Analysis for Differenced Taicang Price Series



                                 Actual and Fitted for DL94                                               Histogram of Standardized Residuals
         0.5                                                                                 0.56
                                                                                                     Normal
                                                                                                     DL94
         0.4
                                                                                             0.48
         0.3
                                                                                             0.40
         0.2

                                                                                             0.32
         0.1

         -0.0                                                                                0.24

         -0.1
                                                                                             0.16
         -0.2
                                                                                             0.08
         -0.3
                1742   1747   1752   1757   1762   1767   1772   1777   1782   1787   1792
                                                                                             0.00


                                     Standardized Residuals                                                           Correlogram of residuals
         3.6                                                                                 1.00

         2.7                                                                                 0.75

                                                                                             0.50
         1.8
                                                                                             0.25
         0.9
                                                                                             0.00

         -0.0                                                                                -0.25

         -0.9                                                                                -0.50

                                                                                             -0.75
         -1.8
                                                                                             -1.00
         -2.7                                                                                        2        4   6      8   10   12     14   16   18   20   22   24   26
                1742   1747   1752   1757   1762   1767   1772   1777   1782   1787   1792                                        La g
Figure A.4 The Estimated Cointegrating Vector between the Huizhou and Taicang Price Series.



                                                        beta1` * Zk(t)
            4
            3
            2
            1
            0
           -1
           -2
           -3
           -4
                  1742   1746   1750   1754   1758   1762   1766   1770   1774   1778   1782   1786   1790   1794


                                                       beta1` * Rk(t)
            2

            1

            0

           -1

           -2

           -3

           -4
                  1742   1746   1750   1754   1758   1762   1766   1770   1774   1778   1782   1786   1790   1794
Table B.1: The spatial correlation of weather in Europe and China, 1770 to 1794

Dependent variable: Bilateral weather correlation



                                     (1a)       (1b)                   (2a)       (2b)                  (3a)      (3b)          (4)             (5)                (6)

                                                                                                                               Europe         Europe              China
                                    China     Europe                 China      Europe                 China     Europe    w/o Stockholm   Alt. Dist'n***   Distance > 265 km

Intercept                          0.392**    0.832**                0.539**    1.116**                0.628**   0.890*       1.024**         1.166**            0.591**
                                   (0.007)    (0.034)                (0.010)    (0.065)                (0.017)   (0.387)      (0.068)         (0.071)            (0.049)

Distance                           -0.029**   -0.025**
                                    (0.001)    (0.004)

Distance sq.


Log Distance                                                         -0.197**   -0.243**              -0.362**    -0.026      -0.186**       -0.260**           -0.354**
                                                                      (0.005)    (0.032)               (0.022)   (0.372)       (0.033)        (0.036)            (0.051)

Log Distance sq.                                                                                       0.057**    -0.050                                         0.061**
                                                                                                       (0.007)   (0.085)                                         (0.013)


R-bar squared                       0.158      0.601                  0.236      0.611                  0.254    0.601         0.629          0.572               0.065


# of obs.                           7260         28                   7260         28                   7260       28           21              28                6397

Implied weather
 correlation at
                300 km              0.305      0.757                  0.323      0.899                  0.299    0.890         0.820          0.880               0.276
                600 km              0.218      0.682                  0.186      0.731                  0.162    0.890         0.691          0.700               0.153
                900 km              0.131      0.607                  0.106      0.632                  0.108    0.890         0.615          0.595               0.108


OLS regressions with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors in parentheses
Europe is the cities Paris, Vienna, Munich, De Bilt, Nottingham, Berlin, Basle, and Stockholm
China is 121 prefectures
**(*) indicates that a coefficient is significantly different from 0 at a 1% (5%) level
*** The European data is re-coded to match the distribution of weather in China during 1496-1916 (not 1770-94)
