                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BULLS, BEARS, AND RETIREMENT BEHAVIOR

                                           Courtney C. Coile
                                           Phillip B. Levine

                                         Working Paper 10779
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10779


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




The authors thank Wellesley College for financial support and seminar participants at the National Bureau
of Economic Research’s Aging Workshop for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Courtney C. Coile and Phillip B. Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Bulls, Bears, and Retirement Behavior
Courtney C. Coile and Phillip B. Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 10779
September 2004
JEL No. J14, J26

                                           ABSTRACT

The historic boom and bust in the stock market over the past decade had the potential to significantly
alter the retirement behavior of older workers. Previous research examining the impact of wealth
shocks on labor supply supports the plausibility of this hypothesis. In this paper, we examine the
relationship between stock market performance and retirement behavior using the Health and
Retirement Study (HRS), Current Population Survey (CPS), and Survey of Consumer Finances
(SCF). We first present a descriptive analysis of the wealth holdings of older households and
simulate the labor supply response among stockholders necessary to generate observed patterns in
retirement. We show that few households have substantial stock holdings and that they would have
to be extremely responsive to market fluctuations to explain observed labor force patterns. We then
exploit the unique pattern of boom and bust along with variation in stock exposure to generate a
double quasi-experiment, comparing the retirement and labor force re-entry patterns over time of
those more and less exposed to the market. Any difference in behavior that emerged during the boom
should have reversed itself during the bust. We find no evidence that changes in the stock market
drive aggregate trends in labor supply.

Courtney C. Coile
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
ccoile@wellesley.edu

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

        After posting record gains in the late 1990s, the U.S. stock market dropped precipitously

starting in the year 2000, as illustrated in Figure 1. In the twelve months following the market

peak in March 2000, the benchmark S&P 500 Index lost over one-quarter of its value and the

NASDAQ Composite Index lost over 60 percent of its value; by October 2002, the S&P 500 had

fallen by 50 percent from its peak and the NASDAQ had fallen by nearly 80 percent.

        This remarkable decline in stock value occurred at a time when more Americans were

exposed to the stock market than ever before, often through participation in their pension plans.

Friedberg and Webb (2003) report that 79 percent of full-time workers with pensions had a

401(k) plan or other type of defined contribution plan in 1998, rising from 40 percent in 1983.

Poterba (2001) finds that 52 percent of households held some stock in 1998, either through direct

ownership of individual stocks or stock mutual funds or in their defined contribution plan or

individual retirement account (IRA), up from 36 percent in 1989. As a result, it was widely

predicted that the stock market drop would force many older workers to postpone retirement.1 In

fact, in an AARP (2002) study of 50 to 70 year old stock holders, 21 percent of those who had

lost money in stocks and not yet retired reported that they have postponed retirement.

        Aggregate labor force statistics appear to offer some support for this hypothesis.

Eschtruth and Gemus (2002) note that the two percentage point increase in labor force

participation rate for older workers (aged 55 to 64) that occurred between early 2000 and early

2002 is unprecedented in the U.S. since World War II and is particularly noteworthy for having

occurred during a recession, when labor force participation is typically flat or declining. They




1
 For instance, in response to plummeting stock prices the July 29, 2002 cover of Time Magazine asked, “Will You
Ever Be Able to Retire?”


                                                      1
suggest that “plunging stock portfolios may have caused some older workers to postpone

retirement and convinced some early retirees to rejoin the labor force.”

        However, there are reasons to be skeptical that the drop in the stock market had much of

an impact on aggregate labor force behavior. First, if the bear market led people to delay

retirement, one may have predicted that the bull market in the late 1990s would have led

individuals to retire earlier. Yet data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics indicate that the labor

force participation rate for individuals 55 to 64 actually rose by about 2 percentage points during

the 1995 to 1999 boom years.2 Moreover, while significantly more workers have stock market

holdings now than in the past, many workers may not yet have accumulated large balances in

these accounts and thus may be unlikely to respond to even a sizeable drop in the market. While

individual investors may have altered their retirement plans, the ability of stock fluctuations to

drive aggregate labor force patterns may be limited.

        In this paper, we examine the relationship between stock market performance and

retirement behavior over the past two decades, paying particular attention to the boom and bust

periods of 1995-1999 and 2000-2002, respectively. For our analysis, we use data from the first

six waves (1992-2002) of the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), from the March 1981 to 2003

Current Population Surveys (CPS), and from the 1992, 1995, and 1998 Surveys of Consumer

Finances (SCF). We first provide a descriptive analysis that begins by documenting trends in

retirement patterns using the CPS and HRS data. We also present descriptive statistics detailing

the stock market holdings of older households in the late 1990s and then provide a “back-of-the-

envelope” calculation to simulate the magnitude of the response to the recent stock market


2
  These data were accessed from the Bureau’s customized table-maker, available at data.bls.gov and accessed on
July 5, 2004. Although this pattern may be partly attributable to the robust economy during the period, our own
calculations (described subsequently) show that even cyclically-adjusted annual retirement rates were unaffected by
the boom.


                                                        2
decline that would be required to generate the observed drop in retirement rates. Second, we

undertake a reduced-form analysis to compare the effect of the stock market on the retirement

behavior of individuals who are likely to have been differentially affected by changes in the

market, such as persons with and without defined contribution pension plans.             Evidence

supporting an impact of the stock market on retirement behavior would require that those who

are more likely to own stock are also more likely to retire in booms and less like to retire in

busts. We also apply the same empirical strategy to an analysis of labor force re-entry decisions.

       This paper makes several contributions to the existing literature on the stock market and

retirement. First, along with Kezdi and Sevak (2004), we are the first to look at both the boom

period of the late 1990s and the bust period that followed. But our methodology more directly

imbeds these two periods into a quasi-experimental framework, taking advantage of what

amounts to a double experiment in which differences across groups that are predicted to emerge

during the boom are also predicted to reverse during the bust. Second, we focus on the aggregate

response to market movements rather than estimating individual wealth effects. Our goal is to

estimate the relationship between market fluctuations and aggregate changes in retirement rather

than the relationship between wealth and retirement.

       Our results suggest that the stock market has very little influence on aggregate labor

market behavior. This conclusion is based on the relatively small number of households with

sizeable stock holdings, the magnitude of their retirement response that would be required to

generate the types of retirement patterns observed recently, and the fact that we are unable to

find any evidence that population subgroups who should be more responsive to market

fluctuations are more responsive. This is not to say that changes in an individual’s wealth are




                                                3
unrelated to his/her decision to remain in the labor market, but that the number of individuals for

whom market fluctuations are meaningful is simply too small to drive any aggregate patterns.



II. LITERATURE REVIEW

         Economic theory suggests that the consumption of leisure, like the consumption of goods

and services, should increase when the household experiences a positive wealth shock and

likewise decrease when the household experiences a negative wealth shock. For households

nearing retirement age, a positive (negative) wealth shock may lead family members to retire

earlier (later), especially if workers lack the flexibility to change the number of hours they work

at their current job. Dramatic and arguably unexpected changes in stock market returns may

generate shocks of this nature. Therefore, the broader literature on the impact of wealth shocks

as well as those studies directly examining the role of stock market fluctuations can inform this

study.

         Recent research examining the role of wealth shocks more broadly has relied on sources

of variation in retirement wealth that are exogenous to an individual’s preferences for leisure.

For instance, several authors have focused on inheritances and lottery winnings. Joulfaian and

Wilhelm (1994) estimate relatively modest effects of inheritances on the retirement decisions of

older men, while Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen (1993) find that working-age individuals

receiving large inheritances are three to four times more likely to exit the labor force than

individuals receiving small inheritances. Imbens, Rubin, and Sacerdote (2001) estimate that

lottery winners consume about 11 percent of their winnings in the form of reduced labor earnings

and that the effect is about one-third larger for individuals aged 55 to 65. Other authors have

exploited natural experiments resulting from policy changes. Krueger and Pischke (1992) find




                                                4
little evidence of an increase in labor supply for workers born between 1917 and 1921, who

experienced a dramatic reduction in Social Security benefits due to a law change. Thus the

general evidence regarding wealth effects on labor supply is mixed.

         A second related strand of the literature explores the impact of unexpected changes in

wealth associated with stock market fluctuations, and largely the boom of the late 1990s, on

retirement decisions. Coronado and Perozek (2003) find that those who received unanticipated

equity gains during the market boom of the late 1990s retired earlier than they had anticipated.

Sevak (2001) finds a relationship between unexpected capital gains and retirement as well. Yet

she also recognizes that the relationship between unexpected wealth gains and earlier retirement

are relevant only for the reasonably small share of the population that has considerable holdings

in stocks. She reports that “the data finds quite large wealth effects, (but) because many

individuals have negligible wealth gains over the period, the aggregate effect is quite small.”

These studies are subject to the critique that differences in unexpected gains are strongly (if not

perfectly) correlated with previous differences in the amount of stock ownership.                             These

differences may be correlated with other unobservable characteristics, like individuals’

preferences for leisure or their ability to plan for retirement.3

         A third set of analyses has introduced quasi-experimental methods, examining whether

retirement behavior responds differently to market variation among those with more and less

exposure to the stock market.4 Sevak (2001) finds that men in defined contribution (DC) pension

plans were more likely to retire between 1996 and 1998 compared to men with defined benefit

3
  Coronado and Perozek (2003) acknowledge a related concern, stating that their results “might be biased if
unobservable characteristics are correlated with both stock ownership and a willingness to revise retirement plans.”
Although they find no evidence of this with regard to a measure of risk aversion, other such characteristics may still
present problems.
4
  Hurd and Reti (2001) use similar methods to examine the impact of market fluctuations on the subjective
probability of retirement after age 62. They find no evidence that changes between 1996 and 1998 in this measure
differ by stock ownership status or pension plan type.


                                                          5
(DB) pensions, using the difference in the retirement rates of these groups in an earlier period to

control for any underlying difference in their propensities to retire. One limitation of this

analysis is that it does not control for possible differences in underlying trends in retirement

behavior between groups. For example, if workers with DB pensions are initially more likely to

be eligible for retiree health insurance but employers start to drop this coverage during the 1990s,

workers in DB plans would begin to retire relatively later for reasons unrelated to the stock

market. One feature that may contribute to this problem is the restriction that baseline retirement

hazards are the same for the different groups, as any difference in underlying trends could bias

the results.5 Our double experiment addresses this problem.

        In a later paper also incorporating the bust period, Kezdi and Sevak (2004) find that CPS

respondents with dividend income are less likely to retire in 2001 and 2002 than respondents

without dividend income. Unfortunately, those with dividend income represent a small fraction

of those exposed to stock fluctuations. Moreover, their results also indicate that this group is less

likely to retire during the boom, suggesting that differences in underlying preferences for

retirement explain their findings, and not market fluctuations. The authors also find that the

labor force transition rates for HRS respondents with risky assets (stocks, mutual funds, DC

plans, or IRAs) are not significantly different in the 1998-2000 and 2000-2002 periods.                       This

analysis is the most similar to ours, except that we look over a longer time period, allow baseline

hazards to vary by group, and use additional measures of stock exposure. Taken as a whole, the


5
  Sevak (2001) acknowledges our concern, stating that her method provides an “unbiased estimate as long as there
were no other unobserved changes occurring over the time period that differentially affected the retirement patterns
of DC workers.” Beyond ambiguous types of unobservable heterogeneity, it also seems to us that mechanical
features of the different types of plans will create such problems. Individuals in defined contribution and defined
benefit pension plans have different underlying incentives to retire at particular ages, so as the HRS sample grows
older, the surges in retirement may occur at different times for different groups (as discussed in Friedberg and
Webb, 2003). Sevak talks about the different pension incentives, but does not relate them to the limitations of her
identification strategy.



                                                         6
evidence for greater labor supply responses to changes in the stock market for those with more

exposure to the market is far from conclusive.6

         This paper offers a number of contributions relative to past research. First, along with

Kezdi and Sevak (2004), we explore the relationship between the stock market and retirement in

both the boom and bust period. Beyond extending the time frame of the analysis, the second

contribution of our analysis is to use both the boom and the bust in our quasi-experimental

framework to provide a stronger causal test of the impact of market fluctuations. These two

periods provide a unique double experiment. Any differences that emerge in retirement behavior

across groups during the boom of the late 1990s should be reversed during the bust of the early

2000s if stock market fluctuations cause individuals to change their retirement behavior. This

approach enables us to dismiss the possibility that differences in the labor market trends in

groups with more and less stock market exposure may confound estimates of the effect of market

fluctuations. Third, our quasi-experimental approach builds upon those employed in past studies

by using more measures of potential stock market exposure and estimating regressions separately

for each of these groups using data from both the CPS and HRS. Finally, while many previous

papers have been primarily concerned with estimating the effect of stock market wealth on labor

supply for the relatively small number of people experiencing large changes in wealth, we are

primarily concerned with exploring whether wealth effects can explain observed aggregate

movements in labor supply.




6
  Other studies have also examined stock market fluctuations and retirement behavior using an approach where
relevant elasticities are either taken from other studies or estimated within the framework of a structural retirement
model and then used to predict responses to market fluctuations (Cheng and French, 2003; Gustman and Steinmeier,
2002). The labor supply responses to the stock market boom and bust estimated in these papers are quite large, on
the order of 2 to 3 percentage points. However, the methodological approaches employed in these papers are
sufficiently distinct from that which we apply in our analysis that we do not discuss them in further detail here.


                                                          7
III. DATA AND EMPIRICAL STRATEGY

         We utilize three different sources of data, each of which has distinct strengths and

weaknesses that make it better suited for certain parts of the analysis. Where possible, each

analysis is replicated using a second data source to confirm the results.

         The first data set is the Health and Retirement Study (HRS). The HRS began in 1992 as

a longitudinal study of persons born between 1931 and 1941 and their spouses, with re-

interviews of these 7,500 households every two years; in 1998, additional birth cohorts were

added to the survey so that it now includes persons born in all years through 1947. The HRS

contains richly detailed information on demographics, labor supply, finances, and health. The

principal advantage of the HRS is that it provides comprehensive data for a sample of near-

retirement age households and follows them over time.

         In this paper, we use two main components of the HRS: information on retirement

behavior and on wealth holdings. For our analysis of retirement behavior, we use longitudinal

data on wave 1 (1992) respondents for the first six waves of the survey (1992-2002). In one part

of that analysis, respondents contribute person-year observations for all years between 1992 and

2001 in which they were aged 55 to 70, were working at the beginning of the calendar year, and

had not previously retired; retirement is defined as reporting a labor force status of retired or

disabled by the end of the calendar year.7 In a second part of that analysis, we construct an

analogous sample of person-month observations, making use of the availability of data on month

of retirement. We also present a descriptive analysis of household wealth holdings; we use wave


7
  The sample is constructed using HRS respondents who are working at wave 1, so respondents who retire in 1992
prior to their interview are not in the sample. Persons who exit the labor force by other pathways (e.g., exit to
homemaker status, exit to other or no labor force status, or leave survey) do not provide a retirement date and thus
are used in the sample only for the years in which it is known they worked the full year and omitted thereafter.
Results are very similar if exits to disability are treated in the same manner. If persons report multiple labor force
status codes at a point in time, the following hierarchy is used: working, retired, disabled, all other.



                                                          8
4 (1998) data for that because it is the last interview available prior to the stock market crash.8 In

both the descriptive and retirement analyses, several variables are used to proxy for likely

exposure to the stock market: educational attainment, ownership of a DC plan or IRA within the

household, and ownership of individual stocks or stock-based mutual funds.9 A designation of

having “high value” DC and IRA or stock balances refers to having balances in excess of

$50,000 in 2003 dollars.

         The Current Population Survey (CPS) is a monthly survey of approximately 50,000

households and forms the basis for most published U.S. labor statistics; we use data from annual

March CPS surveys from 1981 to 2003, referencing behavior in 1980 through 2002. Compared

to the HRS, the CPS includes a roughly similar number of older households but it collects less

information on them and does not follow the same households over time. CPS data, however,

are available for a longer period of time so that we can observe greater cyclical variability in the

stock market to compare to retirement behavior. The March surveys not only provide current

labor market activity, but they also provide retrospective reports from the past calendar year.

From these data, we define a transition into retirement as one in which an individual reports

working at least 13 weeks in the preceding calendar year, but s/he is currently out of the labor

force on the survey date.10 Although data on the wealth holdings of CPS respondents are limited,

we are able to use some information on whether or not the individual was included in a pension
8
 We acknowledge that the values of these holdings immediately prior to the bust would likely be somewhat higher
due to continued growth in the market through March 2000.
9
 IRA and stock ownership status and asset values come from the RAND HRS data file, which imputes missing
values using bracketed data (e.g., does your account amount to more or less than $10,000) and other information.
Because asset allocation of DC balances is observed for only a small fraction of DC plans, DC plan participation is
used as a proxy for stock market wealth in the analysis, though of course not all participants will invest their DC
balances in stock. In the regression analysis, asset ownership is determined based on ownership at wave 1, so as to
be exogenous to the subsequent boom and bust in the stock market. In the descriptive analysis, asset ownership is
based on ownership at wave 4, as the point of the exercise is to describe assets in the pre-crash period.
10
  Assuming those 13 weeks worked last year all took place in the first quarter, then this definition is comparable to
an annual window where retirements are observed between March of one year and the next.


                                                         9
plan (defined benefit or defined contribution) and on their educational attainment to provide a

rough proxy for stock holdings.

       The Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) is a survey of about 4,500 households

conducted every three years to collect detailed data on the finances of U.S. households.

Compared to the HRS, the SCF has more in-depth information on stock holdings. It provides no

information that would enable us to detect retirement transitions, however, so these data can only

contribute to our descriptive analysis of wealth holdings. In the analysis, data from the 1992,

1995, and 1998 SCF is pooled to generate a sample sufficiently large to estimate descriptive

statistics of the wealth holdings of older households and of subgroups of this population.

       Our empirical analysis of the link between the stock market and retirement is divided into

two parts, a descriptive analysis and a reduced-form analysis. The goal of the descriptive

analysis is to explore the plausibility of a large labor supply response to the recent drop in the

stock market. First, we present detailed statistics on the wealth holdings of older households in

the late 1990s to examine the level of stock market exposure in this population. Second, we

conduct a “back-of-the-envelope” calculation to estimate the magnitude of the response to the

stock market shock that would be necessary to explain the drop in the average retirement rate;

this exercise is described in more detail below.

       In the reduced-form analysis, the empirical strategy is to compare the response to changes

in the stock market among individuals likely to have been differentially affected by such

changes. The identification of stock market effects relies on quasi-experimental variation in

exposure to the stock market, which comes from factors such as education level, participation in

a defined contribution pension plan or IRA, and ownership of stocks or stock mutual funds. We

hypothesize that if the stock market affects people’s retirement behavior, then the response to




                                                   10
changes in the stock market should be larger among groups with greater exposure to the stock

market. Importantly, any differential in retirement behavior across groups generated during the

boom should be reversed during the bust. Findings to that effect in response to this double

experiment would provide strong evidence of a causal effect of stock market fluctuations.

        Specifically, we estimate regressions of the following form:

                           retireist = β 0 + β1bustt + β 2boomt + β3 X ist + γ s + ε ist                        (1)

where: retire is a dummy variable for whether the individual i residing in state/region s who

worked in year t-1 retires in year t, bust and boom are dummy variables for whether the person-

year observation occurs in a bust year (2000-2001 in the HRS or 2000-2002 in the CPS) or a

boom year (1995-1999), X is a set of demographic characteristics including exact age dummy

variables, race and ethnicity, gender, marital status, the unemployment rate (state-level in the

CPS or region-level in the HRS), and state or regional fixed effects. The sample is restricted to

individuals working in year t-1 and, in the HRS, to those workers who have not retired

previously. Therefore, this model is very similar to a discrete time proportional hazard model.11

This model is estimated first for all workers aged 55-70. But the true test of the impact of market

fluctuations comes by estimating this model separately for groups who may be differentially

affected by changes in the stock market and comparing coefficients for the boom and bust

periods across groups.12

        Estimation of equation (1) provides a way to identify whether there is a relationship

between the stock market and retirement, but does not determine the magnitude of the impact of

11
   Estimating models like equation (1) using a logit specification is equivalent to estimating a discrete time
proportional hazard model (Allison, 1984). We opt to estimate equation (1) as a linear probability model for ease of
interpretation of the coefficients; the results using a logit specification are qualitatively similar.
12
  We choose to estimate the model separately by group rather than interacting the group dummy variable with the
boom and bust dummies in order to allow the other covariates, notably the age dummies, to differ by group.



                                                         11
market fluctuations on retirement behavior.                 To do so, a second set of regressions of the

following form are estimated:

                            retireist = β 0 + β1∆S & P500t + β 2 X ist + γ s + ε ist                                  (2)

where ∆S&P500 is the percent change in the S&P 500 Index over the previous twelve months.

As before, the model is estimated for all workers and separately for groups of workers likely to

have been differentially affected by changes in the stock market. Note that the identification

strategy is similar to that underlying equation (1), but this analysis allows for the effect to be

parameterized. On the other hand, it loses the value of the double experiment in providing a

stronger causal interpretation of the results.

         Finally, we explore the effect of stock market fluctuations on the decision to re-enter the

labor force following retirement, as this may also constitute an important labor supply response

to changes in the market. Specifically, we re-estimate equations (1) and (2) using labor force re-

entry as the dependent variable. In the CPS, labor force re-entry is defined as working on the

survey date conditional on having worked fewer than 13 weeks in the previous year. In the HRS,

labor force re-entry is defined as working at the current wave of the survey conditional on having

been out of the labor force at the last wave.13 We hypothesize that if the market affects re-entry

decisions, then those with greater exposure to the market will be relatively less likely to re-enter

the labor force during the boom period and relatively more likely to do so during the bust period.




13
  The HRS labor force re-entry analysis is based on a sample of person-wave observations. Creating a person-year
sample for this analysis is not feasible because the date of labor force re-entry is either missing or inconsistent (e.g.,
respondent reports starting current job in 1995 but previously reported self out of labor force in 1996) for about half
of all re-entrants. In this analysis, the boom period includes labor force transitions between waves 3 and 4 and
waves 4 and 5 (1996-1998, 1998-2000) and the bust period includes transitions between waves 5 and 6 (2000-2002).


                                                           12
IV. RESULTS

A. Descriptive Analysis

         We begin our analysis by offering data from the CPS and HRS in Figures 2A and 2B,

respectively, which track changes in retirement patterns over time for workers ages 60 to 65.

Since the size of exact age cohorts change over time and since the economy moved from a

significant expansion in the late 1990s to a period of recession and weak growth in the beginning

of the current decade, we use the available data to generate retirement rates adjusted for age

composition and business cycle conditions over time.14 Results from both surveys are consistent

with the statistics reported in Eschtruth and Gemus (2002) in that retirement rates took a

noticeable and significant drop exactly in 2000, which corresponds with the plunge in the stock

market. In both datasets, despite the differences in the definition of retirement transitions, older

workers appear to have reduced their likelihood of retiring by about two percentage points during

the market bust, or about 15 percent from an approximate baseline retirement rate of about 13

percent.

         As previewed earlier, however, there are reasons to be skeptical of a causal relationship

between recent market performance and retirement even based on this preliminary analysis.

First, the change in the retirement rate in 2000 is quite large, especially considering the timing of

the market decline. Although the S&P 500 peaked for the year on March 24th at 1,527 and

declined to 1,320 by the end of the year (a 14 percent decline), on September 1, the value stood

at 1,521. This means that the most of the retirement response to this drop should have occurred


14
   These estimates are obtained from regression models of the retirement rate on state-level (in the CPS) and region-
level (in the HRS) unemployment rates, exact age dummies, and year fixed effects (and no constant); reported
results reflect the year fixed effects assuming a 5 percent unemployment rate and an equal share of workers ages 60
through 65. In the CPS, year labels are associated with the survey conducted in March of the following year since
most of the retirement that is captured in that survey is likely to reflect behavior that occurred last year, as described
above. All HRS figures begin in 1993, as the sample is constructed using wave 1 workers (see above) and does not
capture all retirements in 1992.


                                                           13
in the last quarter of the year. Although the argument is not quite as strong with the NASDAQ,

which hit its annual peak of 5,049 on March 10th and fell to 2,471 by the end of the year (a 51

percent decline), the market’s index stood at 4,234 as late as September 1. This also suggests

that much of the response had to take place late in the year and must have represented a very

large change in behavior over a very short period of time.

         Second, the CPS data provide little evidence of a symmetric response to the booming

stock market of the late 1990s. Cyclically adjusted retirement rates between 1995 and 1999 were

actually lower over that period than they had been previously despite the greater wealth

generated by exceptional stock market returns.                  However, other time-varying factors may

confound this simple analysis of the effect of the stock market on retirement, so this evidence is

informative, but far from conclusive.

         The limited stock holdings of most older households also suggest that market fluctuations

may not have a sizeable effect on aggregate labor market behavior.15 The nature of these

holdings is reported in Tables 1A and 1B, using data from the HRS and SCF, respectively.

Statistics reflect the holdings of workers nearing retirement age (55 to 60). Data from the 1998

HRS and from the 1992, 1995, and 1998 SCF are employed to assess holdings prior to the stock

market plunge in early 2000.16

         In the HRS (Table 1A), over two-thirds of older households now have retirement

accounts – 46 percent of households have one or more members with a defined contribution

(DC) pension plan, 47 percent of households have an IRA, and 68 percent of households have


15
   Engen, et al. (2004) make a similar point regarding the impact of stock market fluctuations on the adequacy of
retirement savings, stating “because most stocks are held by households with substantial wealth, and most
households hold very little equity, fluctuations in stock market values … have little effect on households’ ability to
save adequately for retirement.”
16
   We have also relaxed the sample restrictions placed on the analysis performed here and verified that we can
replicate official SCF results on wealth holdings, published in Kennickel, et al. (2000).


                                                         14
one or both types of retirement account. Yet it is important to keep in mind that these accounts

are not necessarily invested entirely, or even mainly, in stocks; older households making more

conservative investments based on their age may reduce their holdings in stock-based

investments because of their riskier nature. Ownership of individual stocks or stock mutual

funds outside of retirement accounts is less prevalent but still significant, with 38 percent of

households owning these assets. Overall, 75 percent of families have some type of account (DC

pension, IRA, or stocks) that may include stock holdings, although this statistic is also likely to

overstate exposure to the stock market.

       Median assets values in these accounts are high by historical standards, but still low

relative to family income. Among households holding each type of asset, median holdings in

DC accounts and IRAs are about $40,000 each, while median stock holdings are $33,900.

Among households with any of these three accounts, median combined holdings are $68,900.

This represents less than one and a half times median income, which was $48,728 (in 2003$) for

households aged 55 to 64 in 1998 (U.S. Census Bureau, 1999).

       Moving across Table 1A, it is evident that the distribution of these assets is highly

skewed. While 68 percent of families own a DC plan or IRA, only 28 percent of families have

combined balances of over $50,000 in these assets, and median combined holdings for this

subset of families are $208,800. Similarly, only 17 percent of families have holdings of stocks in

excess of $50,000; median combined holdings for these families are $311,600. Asset holdings

also vary significantly by education level – 89 percent of college-educated households have

some type of account that may include stocks, but only 52 percent of high school dropouts do so.

The median combined holdings are $146,700 for college-educated households compared to




                                                15
$20,300 for high school dropout households.          These differences in stock holdings are an

important component of our quasi-experimental methodology.

       Table 1B replicates these statistics using the SCF. The SCF statistics are broadly similar

to those in Table 1A, though ownership of DC pensions and stocks is less prevalent and asset

values are somewhat lower, as one would expect given the pooling of data with earlier years.

Yet the SCF data provide the advantage that they include better information on whether DC

pension and IRA assets are invested in stock. Figure 3 illustrates that the fraction of households

reporting that their DC plan or IRA is invested mostly in stocks is consistently less than 50

percent. This is also true for IRA plans as reported in the HRS. When DC pension and IRA

assets are counted only if invested mostly in stock, both the fraction of households holding each

type of asset and the median value of assets decrease significantly.        While 41 percent of

households have DC pensions, only 15 percent have pensions invested mostly in stocks; for

IRAs, the equivalent figures are 48 percent and 21 percent, respectively. Overall, only 48

percent of households have any assets invested mostly in stock, and the median value of such

assets among these households is $42,900, which is less than the 1998 median household income

for this age group (in 2003$).

       The key point from these descriptive statistics is that the labor supply response to the

drop in the stock market in 2000 is unlikely to come from the median person. Fewer than half of

older households have any assets invested mostly or all in stock, and median asset holdings for

households that do are on the order of one year of household income. It seems unlikely that even

a sizeable decrease in the value of these assets would generate a large labor supply response.

       To explore this point further, we conduct a “back-of-the-envelope” calculation to

estimate the magnitude of the response to the 2000 stock market shock that would be necessary




                                                16
to explain the observed drop in the average retirement rate; the results of this analysis are shown

in Table 2. We first divide the sample of HRS respondents who were aged 55 to 70 and working

at the beginning of 2000 according to the value of their stock assets at that time (greater or less

than $0, $25,000, $50,000, $100,000, and $250,000), making assumptions that are likely to

overstate the value of stocks.17 We then calculate the monthly annuitized value of the loss

incurred in a portfolio of each of these amounts as a result of the stock market drop during 2000.

For example, a portfolio invested 70 percent in the S&P 500 Index and 30 percent in the Nasdaq

(the approximate relative market capitalization of the two indices at the end of 1999) would have

dropped 25 percent between the market peak in March 2000 and the end of the year, resulting in

a $6,250 loss on a $25,000 portfolio; annuitized at a 5 percent real interest rate over 20 years,

this is equivalent to a $41 decrease in monthly income.

        We use these values to help determine which individuals would likely respond to the

stock market crash. Clearly, workers with no stock assets should not respond since they lose

nothing. Workers under the $25,000 cutoff are also unlikely to respond, as they face a maximum

annuitized loss of just $41 per month. Using this logic, it seems reasonable that workers with

stock assets up to perhaps $100,000 (and even beyond) may not respond, as they face an

annuitized loss of no more than $164 per month.




17
  The HRS has information on how IRAs are invested (“mostly in stock, mostly in interest-earning assets, or about
evenly split”) but collects such information for only a minority of DC plans, so this information was not used in
Table 1A. Here, we assume that invested mostly in stock means 100 percent in stock, mostly in interest-earning
means 1/3 in stock, and evenly split means 2/3 in stock. For people with missing DC or IRA asset allocation, we
assign the mean stock percentage in this asset class for their education group. For a small number of people with
missing DC asset values, we assign the median value for their education group. Asset values are those reported in
the 1998 HRS, increased to the year 2000 level using the asset returns between the wave 4 interview date and March
2000 for a portfolio invested 70 percent in the S&P500 and 30 percent in the Nasdaq; values are then adjusted to
2003$ using the CPI.



                                                       17
        Next, we estimate a retirement regression model using 1992-1999 HRS data and use it to

predict retirement probabilities in the year 2000 if the stock market was unchanged.18 Finally,

using these predicted probabilities for the households below each asset cutoff point, we calculate

what the average retirement rate would have to be among those above the cutoff in order to

generate a weighted average retirement rate matching that actually observed in the sample in the

year 2000, 8.9 percent.19 For the most conservative assumption that only those without stocks

fail to respond to the market crash, we estimate that the average retirement rate in the rest of the

sample would need to have dropped from the predicted level of 12.8 percent to 7.0 percent.

Under the alternative assumption that individuals in households with up to $25,000, $50,000, or

even $100,000 would not respond, the required retirement rate among those above the cutoff

falls to 5.3 percent, 3.6 percent, and 1.1 percent, respectively. Using the $100,000 cutoff, it

would need to be the case that virtually no one with more than $100,000 in stock assets retired

during the year 2000 for the observed drop in the retirement rate to be due to the stock market

crash, which seems highly implausible. This problem is intensified when one recognizes that the

change in retirement behavior was unlikely to begin until later in 2000 based on the monthly

movements in market indices, as described earlier. If the asset cut-off is defined to be $250,000,

it is actually impossible to simulate the observed behavior. Overall, this simulation points out

that the response to the 2000 stock market decline had to have been extremely strong (and

possibly implausible or even impossible) to explain the observed drop-off in retirement rates.




18
   The regression includes the unemployment rate and various demographic characteristics (age dummies,
race/ethnicity, gender, region, and marital status).
19
 Note that this statistic is smaller than that displayed in Figure 2B, largely because the sample used here includes
workers 55 to 70 compared to a sample of those 60 to 65 in that figure.


                                                        18
B. Reduced-Form Analysis

       The hypothesis that some workers should have responded more to the stock market crash

than other workers is explored further in a series of figures that preview the regression analysis.

Figures 4A and 4B plot the cyclically-adjusted retirement rates over time for workers aged 60 to

65 by educational attainment in the CPS and HRS, respectively. As Tables 1A and 1B show that

ownership of stock assets and median stock values rise with education, we expect highly

educated workers to increase their probability of retirement during the boom period relative to

less educated workers and the reverse during the bust period. The figures show no such pattern.

In the CPS figure, there is no noticeable increase in retirement rates for college graduates during

the boom period; the biggest drop in retirement rates in 2000 occurs for high school graduates.

In the HRS figure, high school dropouts and graduates experience a large drop in retirement rates

in 2000, while college graduates do not.

       Figures 5A and 5B conduct the same analysis by pension status. In the CPS figure, the

drop in retirement rates in 2000 is virtually identical for those with and without a pension and

there is no evidence of a jump in retirement rates during the boom for those with pensions.

However, the CPS does not distinguish between defined contribution and defined benefit pension

plans; only the former would be expected to affect retirement. This shortcoming is addressed in

Figure 5B, which uses HRS data, and the result is the same: individuals with no DC plan or IRA,

those with a DC plan or IRA, and those with DC and IRA combined balances in excess of

$50,000 all experience identical drops in retirement between 1999 and 2000. Individuals with

high value DC and IRA balances do have much higher retirement rates in 1996-1998, but that

differential disappears in 1999. Moreover, it is not clear whether this is a response to the boom




                                                19
or simply a difference in the underlying propensity to retire, as the retirement rate is higher for

those with a pension or IRA in the pre-boom period as well.

        Figure 6 compares retirement rates by an even more direct measure of stock market

exposure, whether the household owns individual stocks or stock mutual funds – information that

is only available in the HRS. The expected larger response to the stock market drop by those

exposed to the market again fails to materialize – in fact, the drop in the retirement rate between

1999 and 2000 is larger for individuals with no stock than for individuals with any stock or with

stock holdings in excess of $50,000. The high value stock group has a higher retirement rate in

1997 during the boom, but not during the rest of that period, and also has a higher rate in 1994

before the boom. Overall, the figures provide no support for the hypothesis that workers who

were more likely to be affected by the drop in the stock market in 2000 reduced their retirement

relative to other workers and inconsistent support at best for the hypothesis that these workers

increased their retirement rate in the boom period of the late 1990s.

        The regression analysis incorporates the intuition of these figures in a framework that

also controls for demographic characteristics, the unemployment rate, and state- or region-

specific fixed effects.      The first column of Table 3A reports the linear probability model

estimates of equation (1) for the full sample of workers in the CPS.20 This column largely

presents a parameterized version of Figure 2A, except that years have been aggregated into

periods, demographic controls are included, and we use a sample of workers who are 55 to 70

rather than 60 to 65 to improve our precision. Consistent with that figure, we see that retirement

rates fell during the bust period (2000-2002) relative to the baseline (1980-1984), but also fell

during the boom period (1995-1999), albeit not to the same extent.


20
  In the CPS regressions, standard errors are clustered at the year level to correct for arbitrary forms of serial
correlation in the error term across individuals within the same survey year.


                                                       20
         More interesting for our purposes is the comparison of the boom and bust coefficients

across columns in the rest of the table. As in the figures, we examine whether the retirement rate

fell by more in the bust period and whether it rose by more (or fell by less) relative to the omitted

period for groups with greater exposure to the stock market.                        A comparison of the bust

coefficients by pension status contradicts this hypothesis. The retirement rate in the bust period

is 2.9 percentage points lower for those without a pension plan and only 1.1 percentage points

lower for those with a pension plan. The education specifications generate similar results – the

retirement rates is 2.8 percentage points lower for high school dropouts and only 0.8 percentage

points lower for college graduates, despite college graduates’ much higher exposure to the stock

market.      We do find that those with pensions retired more frequently than those without

pensions during the boom period, but there is no consistent pattern across workers with different

levels of educational attainment.

         Table 3B repeats this analysis using the HRS, which has better information on which

individuals are likely to hold stocks but is only available starting in 1992. Relative to the

previous table, the standard errors are larger due to the smaller sample sizes, but the principal

findings are similar.21 Retirement rates are not significantly lower in the bust period for groups

with greater exposure to the stock market. For example, the retirement rate in the bust period is

5.0 percentage points lower than in the early 1990s for those who do not own stocks, compared

to 3.5 percentage points lower for those who do own stocks and 4.6 percentage points lower for

the subset of those with greater than $50,000 in stock assets. In the case of a DC plan or IRA,

the retirement rate is 3.7 percentage points lower for individuals without such assets compared to


21
  In all HRS regressions, standard errors are clustered at the household level to correct for arbitrary forms of serial
correlation in the error term across individuals within the same household over time. The magnitudes of the
coefficients in the HRS and CPS regressions are not expected to be identical, as the omitted time period differs in
the two samples.


                                                         21
5.2 percentage points lower for individuals with $50,000 or more in such assets, but the

difference is not statistically significant. The education results mirror those in Table 3A. For the

boom coefficients, as in Table 3A, there are cases where those with greater exposure to the stock

market are more likely to retire in the boom period. But this pattern in point estimates is spotty

and the differences across groups are not statistically significant. Overall, we find no evidence in

either the CPS or HRS regressions that workers with greater exposure to the stock market reduce

their retirement rate during the bust period relative to other workers. Although the evidence is

not quite as strong regarding the boom periods, we do not find much support for the notion that

those with greater exposure are more likely to retire when the market is doing well.

         Tables 4A and 4B present the linear probability model estimates of equation (2), which

quantifies the relationship between the stock market and retirement.                      The key explanatory

variable in this specification is the percentage change in the S&P 500 Index over the previous

twelve months.22 The coefficient on this variable is expected to be positive, as workers should

be more likely to retire when the stock market rises due to wealth effects. In the full CPS

sample, a 10 percent rise in the S&P 500 is associated with a 0.10 percentage point increase in

the annual retirement rate, although the effect is not statistically significant.

         As in the earlier tables, our primary interest is in testing whether this effect is larger for

workers who are more likely to be exposed to the stock market, and once again, the results do not

support this hypothesis. The effect of a 10 percent rise in the S&P 500 is smaller for workers

with a pension plan than for workers without a pension plan, 0.08 vs. 0.12. The education trend

is also the opposite of what is expected – the effect of a 10 percent rise in the S&P is a 0.14


22
  In the HRS, results are qualitatively similar when the key variable is defined as the percentage change in the S&P
Index over the previous two or three years, though insignificant when defined as the percentage change over the
previous five years.



                                                         22
percentage point increase in the annual retirement rate for high school dropouts compared to 0.06

for college graduates.

        Table 4B repeats this analysis using the HRS. The availability of month of retirement in

the data allows the analysis to be conducted using person-month observations. Results are

similar to those in Table 4A, though the magnitude of the coefficients is smaller, as would be

expected when comparing the effect of a given change in the S&P 500 Index on monthly vs.

annual retirement rates.23 For all workers, a 10 percent rise in the S&P is associated with a 0.066

increase in the monthly retirement rate; the effect is statistically significant.

        Comparing this coefficient across groups, there is no evidence that groups with greater

stock market exposure are more responsive to change in the S&P. For example, a 10 percent rise

in the S&P is associated with a 0.059 percentage point increase in the monthly retirement rate for

workers with no DC plan or IRA, vs. 0.072 for all workers with such assets and 0.088 for

workers with balances of $50,000 or more in such assets, but these differences are small and not

statistically significant. The results are even more striking in the case of stock ownership – the

S&P coefficients for workers with and without stock are identical and the coefficient for those

with stock assets of $50,000 or more is half as large as that for workers with no stock. The

education pattern is the reverse of what is expected, with college graduates responding less to an

increase in the S&P than high school dropouts. In sum, neither the figures nor the regression

results provide support for the hypothesis that those with greater exposure to the stock market

alter their retirement behavior in response to changes in market conditions relative to others with

less exposure.




23
  When the HRS analysis is conducted using a person-year sample, the magnitude of the coefficients is similar to
those in Table 4A and the results are otherwise qualitatively similar to those in Table 4B.


                                                      23
        Finally, we examine the effect of market fluctuations on labor force re-entry. The effect

is expected to be the opposite of that predicted for retirement: workers should be less likely to re-

enter during a stock market boom and more likely during a bust, and the effect should again be

larger for those with greater stock market exposure.                 Tables 5A and 5B present the linear

probability model estimates of equation 1 with labor force re-entry as the dependent variable. For

reference, the average rate of re-entry is 2.5 percent per year in the CPS and 8.0 percent per wave

in the HRS.24 The coefficients in the first column of Table 5A indicate that CPS workers were

less likely to re-enter in the bust period than in the boom, though the difference is insignificant.

As before, we are primarily interested in comparing coefficients across columns.25 In the CPS,

there is no consistent pattern by education group in the bust coefficients, and the pattern in the

boom coefficients is the opposite of what is expected, though not significant. In the HRS,

workers are more likely to re-enter in the bust period than the boom, but the difference is again

insignificant. Looking across columns, HRS workers with greater market exposure are less

likely to re-enter in the bust, contrary to expectations; there is no consistent pattern in the boom

coefficients. Overall, there is no evidence that workers with greater market exposure were less

likely to re-enter during the boom and more likely to re-enter in the bust.

        Tables 6A and 6B present the parameterized results for labor force re-entry.26 We expect

workers with greater exposure to be relatively less likely to re-enter in response to an increase in

the S&P 500 Index. In fact, the opposite pattern is evident in both the HRS and CPS. Thus, we

24
  Part of the discrepancy is that the period between HRS waves is two years, compared to the annual CPS data.
Others have noted the relatively high rate of labor force re-entry in the HRS. For example, Bruce, Holtz-Eakin, and
Quinn (2000) find that 15% of those who were out of the labor force in 1992 are employed or self-employed in
1996.
25
  Tables 5A and 6A do not include columns for those with and without a pension due to the small number of CPS
respondents in the labor force re-entry sample reporting this information.
26
  In HRS analysis, the percentage change in the S&P 500 is the contemporaneous change across waves (e.g., the
change from January 2000 to January 2002 is used for labor force transitions between waves 5 and 6, etc.).


                                                        24
are unable to find any evidence that retirees re-entered the labor force as a result of the drop in

the stock market in 2000.

C. Extensions

       We conduct a number of specification checks to assess the robustness of these results,

focusing our discussion on models of retirement for simplicity. First, we consider the argument

that there is heterogeneity in workers’ responsiveness to stock market fluctuations conditional on

the level of stock holdings and that those workers who are most responsive retired during the

boom and thus were not in the sample to delay retirement during the bust. This strikes us as a

plausible hypothesis, but if true we would expect to see a bigger increase in retirement in the

boom period for groups with greater market exposure (as some of the workers in these groups

would be the responsive ones who would choose to retire) than for groups with less market

exposure. We do not observe this pattern.

       Second, we explore the hypothesis that younger workers might have been more

responsive to stock market fluctuations, as might be the case if their decisions are based more on

finances while older workers’ decisions are based more on health status or social norms. To do

so, we re-estimate the models separately for workers aged 55-59 and 60-65. In both sub-samples

the pattern of boom and bust coefficients are inconsistent with that predicted if the stock market

had an impact on retirement behavior.

       Third, we explore the effect of the market on a worker’s decision to work full-time or

part-time. To do so, we re-estimate the model limiting the sample to those working full-time (35

or more hours per week) and define the dependent variable in one specification as moving to

part-time work and in a second specification as either moving to part-time work or exiting the




                                                25
labor force completely. We find no evidence of a greater response to market fluctuations among

those with greater market exposure in either of these alternative specifications.

       Finally, we perform two other checks. As labor supply is more difficult to measure for

the self-employed, we drop them from our analysis and find very similar results. To account for

the possibility that some households experienced large increases in their housing wealth at the

same time their stock portfolios fell, we include the change in real house value in the regression,

but find that its coefficient is insignificant and the coefficients on the boom and bust dummies

are unaffected by its inclusion. Overall, none of these extensions change the nature of our earlier

findings.



V. CONCLUSIONS

       This paper has explored the impact of stock market fluctuations, and particularly the

recent boom and bust, on retirement behavior.           We take advantage of a unique double

experiment which compares labor force exits for groups that were more and less exposed to

those fluctuations to determine whether differences emerged during the boom and then reversed

in the bust. Our focus is exclusively on the ability of the market to generate changes in

aggregate retirement behavior, and not on the estimation of wealth effects for individuals. These

two features distinguish our work from that which precedes it. The results of our analysis

provide little support for an impact of the boom and bust on retirement or labor force re-entry.

       Our results do not necessarily contradict previous studies that have found wealth effects

associated with changes in the stock market or other unanticipated wealth shocks. On the

contrary, it is almost certainly true that some individuals experienced large drops in wealth

because of the market bust and retired later as a result. But we suspect that this is a fairly narrow




                                                 26
segment of the population. As we illustrate in our descriptive analysis, most workers have few if

any stock assets; at the other end of the distribution, some workers may have sufficient wealth

holdings that even a sizeable financial loss would not alter their retirement behavior. There is a

group of workers in the middle whose retirement decisions are affected by stock market

fluctuations, but it is a sufficiently small group that we are unable to identify them in

conventional data sets. Thus it seems unlikely that even a substantial labor supply response by

this group could be driving large changes in aggregate labor market trends.

       Our results leave unexplained the drop in labor market activity among older workers in

the year 2000. Although we do not know the specific cause of this decline, one possibility is that

it is merely a realization of a longer-term decline in retirement among older workers. Burtless

and Quinn (2002) state that since the mid 1980s “male participation rates at older ages have

stabilized or even increased slightly.” A casual examination of the figures we presented earlier is

not inconsistent with this hypothesis. Nevertheless, we are able to definitively rebut the idea that

the drop in retirement in 2000 was linked to the stock market.

       Despite our findings, stock market fluctuations are likely to have broader implications for

individuals’ behavior and well-being.     Recent retirees, workers of near-retirement age, and

workers further from retirement all may respond in any number of ways, such as changing their

level of consumption, altering savings and investment activities, updating expectations about

leaving a bequest, or adjusting longer-term retirement plans or spousal labor supply (for younger

workers). Indeed, there is some evidence to suggest that consumption may be sensitive to

market fluctuations. Maki and Palumbo (2001) find that households increased consumption by

3.5 to 5 cents per year for each dollar of stock market wealth generated during the market boom

of the 1990s, while Kezdi and Sevak (2004) obtain similar results for the bust period, with a




                                                27
somewhat larger response by retirees. We conclude that the drop in wealth resulting from the

market bust in 2000 was likely reflected to a much greater extent in changes in consumption and

possibly other behaviors than in changes in labor supply of near-retirement-age workers or recent

retirees.




                                               28
                                        References


AARP (2002). “Impact of Stock Market Decline on 50-70 Year Old Investors,” unpublished
manuscript.

Allison, Paul D. (1984). Event History Analysis: Regression for Longitudinal Event Data.
London: Sage Publications.

Bruce, Donald, Douglas Holtz-Eakin, and Joseph Quinn (2000). “Self-Employment and Labor
Market Transitions at Older Ages,” Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, Working
Paper 2000-13.

Burtless, Gary and Joseph F. Quinn (2002). Is Working Longer the Answer for an Aging
Workforce? Center for Retirement Research at Boston College. Issue Brief #11.

Cheng, Ing-Haw and Eric French (2000). “The Effect of the Run-Up in the Stock Market on
Labor Supply,” Economic Perspectives (fourth quarter).

Coronado, Julia and Maria Perozek (2003). “Wealth Effects and the Consumption of Leisure:
Retirement Decisions During the Stock Market Boom of the 1990s,” Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series #2003-20.

Engen, Eric, William G. Gale, and Cori E. Uccello (2004). "Effects of Stock Market
Fluctuations on the Adequacy of Retirement Wealth Accumulation." Center for Retirement
Research at Boston College, Working Paper 2004-16.

Eschtruth, Andrew D. and Jonathan Gemus (2002). Are Older Workers Responding to the Bear
Market, Center for Retirement Research at Boston College, Just the Facts on Retirement Issues
#5.

Friedberg, Leora and Anthony Webb (2003). “Retirement and the Evolution of Pension
Structure.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 9999.

Gustman, Alan L. and Thoman L. Steinmeier (2002). “Retirement and the Stock Market
Bubble,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 9404.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen (1993). “The Carnegie Conjecture:
Some Empirical Evidence,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 102(2): 413-435.

Hurd, Michael and Monika Reti (2001). “The Effects of Large Capital Gains on Work and
Consumption: Evidence from Four Waves of the HRS,” RAND Labor and Population Program,
Working Paper Series 03-14.

Joulfaian, David and Mark Wilhelm (1994). “Inheritance and Labor Supply,” The Journal of
Human Resources 29(4):1205-1234.



                                             29
Imbens, Guido W., Donald B. Rubin, and Bruce I. Sacerdote (2001). “Estimating the Effect of
Unearned Income on Labor Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of
Lottery Players,” American Economic Review 91(4):778-794.

Kennickell, Arther B. Martha Starr-McCluer, and Brian J. Surette (2000). "Recent Changes in
U.S. Family Finances: Results from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances." Federal Reserve
Bulletin.

Kezdi, Gabor and Purvi Sevak (2004). “Economic Adjustment of Recent Retirees to Adverse
Wealth Shocks,” Michigan Retirement Research Center, Working Paper #2004-75.

Krueger, Alan B. and Jorn-Steffen Pischke (1992). “The Effect of Social Security on Labor
Supply: A Cohort Analysis of the Notch Generation,” Journal of Labor Economics 10(4): 412-
437.

Maki, Dean M., and Michael G. Palumbo (2001). “Disentangling the Wealth Effect: A Cohort
Analysis of Household Saving in the 1990s,” Federal Reserve Finance and Economics
Discussion Series, Working Paper #2001-21.

Poterba, James M. (2001). “The Rise of the “Equity Culture:” U.S. Stockownership Patterns,
1989-1998,” MIT unpublished manuscript.

Sevak, Purvi (2001). “Wealth Shocks and Retirement Timing: Evidence from the Nineties,”
Michigan Retirement Research Center, Working Paper #WP00D1.

U.S. Census Bureau (1999). Current Population Reports, P60-206, Money Income in the United
States, 1998. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.




                                            30
                     Table 1A: Financial Holdings of Workers Age 55 to 60 in the 1998 Health and Retirement Study
                                                           “High                                     “High
                                                           Value”       No Stocks      Has Stocks    Value”
                               No DC        Has DC           DC          or Stock       or Stock-   Stocks or    High       High
                     All      Pension or   Pension or     Pension/       Mutual          Based        Stock     School     School     Some     College
                    Workers      IRA          IRA           IRA           Fund           Funds       Funds      Dropout   Graduate   College   Graduate

                                                                         % in Category

                     100        31.6         68.4            28.1          61.6           38.4         17.1      17.0       32.9      21.6       28.5

                                                                           % Holding

Stocks/StockFunds    38.4       20.9          46.5           58.3           0            100.0        100.0      14.2       32.4      43.2       55.9
DC Pension           46.2        0            67.5           67.6          41.3           54.0        58.9       36.6       41.0      49.5       55.2
IRA                  47.1        0           68.9            81.9          35.5          65.7         71.4       22.7       43.5      49.2       64.3
Any Type             75.0       20.9         100.0          100.0          59.4          100.0        100.0      51.8       72.4      78.3       89.2

                                                     Median Value of Holdings, if Any (in $1,000s of 2003 $)

Stocks/StockFunds    33.9       18.1         41.9            67.7           0.0           33.9        169.3      16.9       22.6      28.7       73.4
DC Pension           39.5        0.0         39.5            88.0          22.6           67.7        84.7       13.5       29.2      30.5       79.0
IRA                  40.6       0.0          40.6           101.6          28.2           56.4        84.7       20.3       29.9      39.5       56.4
All Types            68.9       18.1         80.1           208.8          35.0          125.3        311.6      20.3       45.2      62.1      146.7
Notes: The sample is restricted to households in which the respondent and/or spouse is between age 55 and 60 and is employed on the
survey date. “High value” is defined as having at least a $50,000 combined balance in a defined contribution pension plan and IRA
account or in stocks and stock-based mutual funds. Statistics reflect the holdings of all individuals in the worker’s family.




                                                                              31
                         Table 1B: Financial Holdings of Workers Age 55 to 60 in the 1992, 1995, and 1998 Surveys of Consumer Finances

                                                                                                              “High
                                                                        “High           No          Has       Value”
                                                                        Value”       Stocks or   Stocks or   Stocks or
                                              No DC        Has DC         DC          Stock-      Stock-      Stock-      High       High
                                    All       Pension      Pension     Pension/       Based       Based       Based      School     School     Some     College
                                   Workers    or IRA       or IRA        IRA          Funds       Funds       Funds      Dropout   Graduate   College   Graduate

                                                                            % in Category

                                     100       33.5          66.5        28.0            66.7      33.3           12.3    19.4       31.2      19.9       29.0

                                                                                % Holding:

 Stocks/Stock Funds                 33.3       16.2          41.9        60.1             0        100            100      9.5       24.8      37.7       55.5
 DC Pension                         40.6        0            61.0        68.8            37.2      47.3           49.3    33.9       34.2      48.9       46.3
   DC Pension (mostly in stocks)    15.0        0            22.5        29.2            10.8      23.3           23.5    8.9        12.4      17.5       20.1
 IRA                                47.5        0            71.4        82.5            37.3      67.9           76.3    24.2       43.8      47.4       67.3
   IRA (mostly in stocks)           20.8        0            31.2        38.5            13.5      35.3           45.3    7.7        16.9      20.6       33.8
 Any Types                          71.9       16.2          100         100             57.9      100            100     49.7       68.7      79.3       85.3
   Any Stock-Based Types            47.5       16.2          63.2        77.9            21.3      100            100     23.1       40.2      53.7       67.4

                                                        Median Value of Holdings, if Any (in $1,000s of 2003 $)

 Stocks/Stock Funds                 26.6       21.0          27.5         39.3            0        26.6       120.7       9.2        13.0      22.3      39.3
 DC Pension                         30.2        0            30.2         90.5           18.1      50.8        90.5       14.5       24.8      18.3      64.0
   DC Pension (mostly in stocks)    22.6        0            22.6         72.4           13.3      33.9        72.4       6.2        15.7      22.6      43.9
 IRA                                30.2        0            30.2         75.6           16.9     47.4         72.1       7.1        21.4      25.3      42.6
   IRA (mostly in stocks)           34.4        0            34.4         88.0           20.5     52.4         79.0       8.5        15.2      36.7      52.4
 All Types                          46.1       21.0          47.4        170.4           26.6     112.8       253.9       17.4       32.8      35.0      106.7
   All Stock-Based Types            42.9       21.0          46.1        112.8           21.4     63.3        197.5       8.5        22.6      28.6      78.7
Notes: The sample is restricted to households in which the respondent and/or spouse is between age 55 and 60 and is employed on the
survey date. Sampling weights are used to provide nationally representative statistics for this group. “High value” is defined as having
at least a $50,000 combined balance in a defined contribution pension plan and IRA account. Statistics reflect the holdings of all
individuals in the worker’s family.




                                                                                    32
    Table 2: Simulated Retirement Rates for those Aged 55 to 70 Holding Stocks Required to Match Observed Retirement Rates

                                                                                      Stock Assets at Beginning of 2000 (in 2003$)A
                                                                   ≥0                 ≥ 25K               ≥ 50K              ≥ 100K                 ≥ 250K
1) Monthly annuitized value of loss associated with
stock market decline in 2000 at lower bound of rangeB               $0                  $41                  $82                 $164                 $409

2) Percent of HRS sample with stock assets
at lower bound or greater                                          67.8                48.8                 39.5                 31.0                 18.2

3) Percent of HRS sample with stock assets
below the lower bound                                              32.3                51.2                 60.5                 69.0                 81.8

4) Predicted 2000 retirement rate for those with
stock assets less than lower boundC                                12.1                12.3                 12.3                 12.1                 12.2

5) Predicted 2000 retirement rate for those with
stock assets at lower bound or greater
and no response to stock market declineC                           12.8                12.4                 12.4                 12.4                 12.4

6) Simulated retirement rate for those with
stock assets at lower bound or greater.D                              7.0              5.3                   3.6                 1.1                -6.5
Notes:
A
  Each column of this table represents the characteristics of the sample whose stock market values at the beginning of 2000 are above or below the defined level.
See footnotes in text for greater detail regarding the construction of these values.
B
  The 2000 market decline is calculated as a weighted average of the decline in the S&P 500 (70% weight) and the NASDAQ (30% weight), where the weights
are determined according to the relative market values of the two indices at the end of 1999.
C
  Predicted retirement rates represent the rates that would have been expected based on labor market conditions and the demographic characteristics (age,
race/ethnicity, gender, region, and marital status) of the sample of respondents still working at the beginning of 2000. These predictions are obtained from
regression models of retirement behavior using 1992-1999 HRS data.
D
  Those with stock market assets below the lower bound are assumed to be unaffected by the market decline. The simulated retirement rate for those with stock
assets at or above the cut-off is calculated to be the value necessary for the weighted average of the predicted rate for those below the cut-off and the simulated
rate for those above the cut-off to match the aggregate rate observed in the 2000 HRS of 8.9 percent.




                                                                               33
                    Table 3A: CPS Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Retirement Behavior, by Group

                           (1)               (2)              (3)           (4)             (5)               (6)             (7)
                                      Not Included in    Included in                                    Attended Some      College
                      All Workers      Pension Plan     Pension Plan     HS Dropout     HS Graduate         College        Graduate
 Bust (2000-2002)        -2.090            -2.928           -1.084         -2.792         -1.102            -1.759          -0.772
                        (0.314)           (0.298)          (0.446)        (0.673)         (0.433)           (0.466)         (0.559)

 Boom (1995-1999)         -1.228           -2.028          -0.291          -1.496          -0.332          -0.529          -0.531
                         (0.190)          (0.243)         (0.319)         (0.608)         (0.382)          (0.569)         (0.417)

 Years 1990-1994          -0.527           -1.181          0.178           -0.705         -0.281           -0.196           0.905
                         (0.193)          (0.308)         (0.247)         (0.362)         (0.252)          (0.786)         (0.365)

 Years 1985-1989          0.284            -0.058          0.608           0.271           0.695            -0.330          0.985
                         (0.200)          (0.293)         (0.297)         (0.389)         (0.283)          (0.391)         (0.555)

 # of Obs.              224,472          118,053          106,419          50,974          83,353          40,561           49,584
Notes: The sample includes all respondents between the ages of 55 and 70 who worked at least 13 weeks in the preceding calendar
year. Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender, the state unemployment
rate, and state-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey.




                                                                    34
                        Table 3B: HRS Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Retirement Behavior, by Group

                  (1)           (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)
                               Not                               Does Not                  High
                             Included    Included      High        Own         Owns       Value
                              in DC       in DC      Value DC    Stocks or   Stocks or   Stocks or                        Attended
                 All         Pension /   Pension /   Pension /     Stock       Stock       Stock       HS        HS        Some      College
                Workers        IRA         IRA         IRA        Funds       Funds       Funds      Dropout   Graduate   College    Graduate

 Bust             -4.54        -3.71       -5.04       -5.16       -5.00       -3.48       -4.64      -6.78      -4.82      -2.19      -3.52
 (2000-2001)     (0.87)       (1.31)      (1.15)      (2.01)      (1.04)      (1.56)      (2.89)     (2.00)     (1.48)     (1.74)     (1.70)

 Boom            -0.85        -0.65        -0.94       -0.02       -1.02       -0.45       -1.96      -2.47      -1.02      1.23       -0.89
 (1995-1999)     (0.56)       (0.86)      (0.73)      (1.24)      (0.68)      (1.01)      (1.85)     (1.27)     (0.92)     (1.15)     (1.15)

 # of person-
 year obs.      32,005        12,966      19,039      7,254       22,070      9,935       3,162       7,012    11,164      6,633      7,196
Notes: The sample of person-year observations includes all HRS Wave 1 respondents in all years (from 1992 to 2001) in which they
were between the ages of 55 and 70, were working at the beginning of the calendar year and had not previously retired. Participation
in DC pension plan, IRA, or stocks is based on ownership of these assets at Wave 1; “high value” indicates Wave 1 assets of $50,000
or more (in 2003 dollars). Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender,
regional unemployment rates, and region-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100;
standard errors are clustered at the household level to correct for arbitrary forms of serial correlation in the error term across
individuals within the same household over time.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Health and Retirement Study




                                                                        35
               Table 4A: Parameterized Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Retirement Behavior from the CPS,
                                                             by Group

                             (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)
                                       Not Included in    Included in                                Attended Some     College
                         All Workers    Pension Plan     Pension Plan     HS Dropout   HS Graduate       College       Graduate
 12 Month Percentage        0.010           0.012            0.008          0.014         0.002           0.025          0.006
 Change in the S&P 500     (0.010)         (0.013)          (0.008)        (0.013)       (0.007)         (0.013)        (0.012)

 # of Observations        224,472         118,053          106,419          50,974       83,353         40,561          49,584
Notes: The sample includes all respondents between the ages of 55 and 70 who worked at least 13 weeks in the preceding calendar
year. Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender, state unemployment
rates, and state-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey.




                                                                     36
         Table 4B: Parameterized Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Retirement Behavior from the HRS, by Group

                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)
                                       Not                     High      Does Not                 High
                                     Included    Included     Value        Own         Owns       Value
                                      in DC       in DC         DC       Stocks or   Stocks or   Stock or                         Attended
                           All       Pension /   Pension /   Pension /     Stock       Stock      Stock       HS         HS        Some      College
                          Workers      IRA         IRA         IRA        Funds       Funds       Funds     Dropout    Graduate   College    Graduate

 12 Month Percentage       0.0066     0.0059      0.0072      0.0088      0.0067      0.0066      0.0034     0.0077     0.0076     0.0054     0.0046
 Change in the S&P 500    (0.0012)   (0.0017)    (0.0016)    (0.0026)    (0.0014)    (0.0021)    (0.0042)   (0.0027)   (0.0020)   (0.0026)   (0.0021)

 # of person-month obs.   354,482    144,121     210,361      79,978     244,515     109,967     35,070     77,316     123,438     73,760     79,968
Notes: The sample of person-month observations includes all HRS Wave 1 respondents in all months (from 1992 to 2001) in which
they were between the ages of 55 and 70, were working at the beginning of the calendar year and had not previously retired.
Participation in DC pension plan, IRA, or stocks is based on ownership of these assets at Wave 1; “high value” indicates Wave 1
assets of $50,000 or more (in 2003 dollars). Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital
status, gender, regional unemployment rates, and region-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses)
multiplied by 100; standard errors are clustered at the household level to correct for arbitrary forms of serial correlation in the error
term across individuals within the same household over time.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Health and Retirement Study.




                                                                         37
                    Table 5A: CPS Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Labor Force Re-Entry, by Group

                                (1)                  (4)                   (5)                   (6)                   (7)

                            All Workers          HS Dropout            HS Graduate      Attended Some College    College Graduate
 Bust (2000-2002)              0.160               -0.488                -0.003                 0.067                 -0.142
                              (0.174)             (0.126)                (0.273)               (0.406)                (0.555)

 Boom (1995-1999)              0.414               -0.131                 0.189                 0.610                 0.350
                              (0.150)              (0.174)               (0.254)               (0.372)               (0.555)

 Years 1990-1994               -0.051               -0.259               -0.261                 0.349                -0.572
                              (0.166)              (0.174)               (0.311)               (0.407)               (0.354)

 Years 1985-1989               0.079                -0.274                0.149                 0.126                 0.625
                              (0.104)              (0.103)               (0.227)               (0.280)               (0.354)

 # of Obs.                   242,385               92,065                90,757                33,045                26,518
Notes: The sample includes all respondents between the ages of 55 and 70 who worked fewer than 13 weeks in the preceding
calendar year. Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender, the state
unemployment rate, and state-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey.




                                                               38
                Table 5B: HRS Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Labor Force Re-Entry Between Waves, by Group

                     (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)       (9)        (10)       (11)
                               Not                               Does Not                  High
                             Included    Included      High        Own         Owns       Value
                              in DC       in DC      Value DC    Stocks or   Stocks or   Stocks or                        Attended
                    All      Pension /   Pension /   Pension /     Stock       Stock       Stock       HS        HS        Some      College
                   Workers     IRA         IRA         IRA        Funds       Funds       Funds      Dropout   Graduate   College    Graduate

 Bust               -1.08      0.87       -3.27        -1.78      -0.004       -3.44       -5.56      0.88       -2.62      0.97       -5.10
 (wave 6)           (0.92)    (1.22)      (1.39)      (2.06)      (1.08)      (1.72)      (2.32)     (1.45)     (1.51)     (2.67)     (2.61)

 Boom               -1.39     -0.74       -2.23        0.82       -1.58       -0.43       -1.70       -0.93      -1.48      -1.08      -3.06
 (waves 4-5)        (0.88)    (1.16)      (1.33)      (1.97)      (1.01)      (1.74)      (2.43)     (1.33)     (1.44)     (2.54)     (2.68)

 # of person-
 wave obs.          15,455    8,183       7,272       3,169       11,093      4,362       1,853       5,235     5,676      2,389      2,155
Notes: The sample of person-wave observations includes HRS Wave 1 respondents in all waves (from wave 2 to wave 6) in which
they were between the ages of 55 and 70 (during the intra-wave year) and were not working at the previous wave. Participation in DC
pension plan, IRA, or stocks is based on ownership of these assets at Wave 1; “high value” indicates Wave 1 assets of $50,000 or
more (in 2003 dollars). Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender,
regional unemployment rates, and region-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100;
standard errors are clustered at the household level to correct for arbitrary forms of serial correlation in the error term across
individuals within the same household over time.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Health and Retirement Study




                                                                        39
              Table 6A: Parameterized Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Labor Force Re-Entry from the CPS,
                                                            by Group

                                (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)                    (5)

                            All Workers          HS Dropout           HS Graduate      Attended Some College   College Graduate
 12 Month Percentage           0.004               -0.001                0.002                 0.011                 0.020
 Change in the S&P 500        (0.002)             (0.003)               (0.004)               (0.008)               (0.008)

 # of Observations            242,385              92,065               90,757                33,045               26,518
Notes: The sample includes all respondents between the ages of 55 and 70 who worked fewer than 13 weeks in the preceding
calendar year. Regressions also include controls for race, ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender, state
unemployment rates, and state-specific fixed effects. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Current Population Survey.




                                                               40
     Table 6B: Parameterized Estimates of the Impact of Market Cycles on Labor Force Re-Entry Between Waves from the HRS,
                                                            by Group

                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)        (10)       (11)
                             Not                               Does Not                  High
                           Included    Included      High        Own         Owns       Value
                            in DC       in DC      Value DC    Stocks or   Stocks or   Stocks or                         Attended
                 All       Pension /   Pension /   Pension /     Stock       Stock       Stock       HS         HS        Some      College
                Workers      IRA         IRA         IRA        Funds       Funds       Funds      Dropout    Graduate   College    Graduate

 2 Year %        0.0001     -0.0152     0.0169      0.0338     -0.0166      0.0440      0.0473     -0.0198     0.0212    -0.0226     0.0293
 Chg in S&P     (0.0077)   (0.0107)    (0.0112)    (0.0161)    (0.0092)    (0.0139)    (0.0195)    (0.0121)   (0.0126)   (0.0217)   (0.0217)

 # of person-
 wave obs.      15,455      8,183       7,272       3,169       11,093      4,362       1,853       5,235      5,676      2,389      2,155
Notes: The sample of person-wave observations includes HRS Wave 1 respondents in all waves (from wave 2 to wave 6) in which
they were between the ages of 55 and 70 (during the intra-wave year) and were not working at the previous wave. The percentage
change in S&P 500 is the contemporaneous change across wages (e.g. the change from January 2000 to January 2002 is used for labor
force transitions between waves 5 and 6). Participation in DC pension plan, IRA, or stocks is based on ownership of these assets at
Wave 1; “high value” indicates Wave 1 assets of $50,000 or more (in 2003 dollars). Regressions also include controls for race,
ethnicity, exact age dummy variables, marital status, gender, regional unemployment rates, and region-specific fixed effects.
Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) multiplied by 100; standard errors are clustered at the household level to correct for
arbitrary forms of serial correlation in the error term across individuals within the same household over time.

Source: Authors’ calculations from the Health and Retirement Study




                                                                      41
                                                Figure 1: Stock Market Performance, 1980-2003
                  100



                  80



                  60



                  40
Annual % Change




                  20



                   0
                        1980   1982   1984   1986     1988      1990       1992      1994       1996   1998   2000   2002

                  -20



                  -40



                  -60
                                                                        Year

                                                              S&P 500          NASDAQ
                                 Figure 2A: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Current Population Survey
       0.16


       0.15


       0.14


       0.13
Rate




       0.12


       0.11


        0.1


       0.09


       0.08
              1980        1982         1984         1986         1988         1990          1992         1994         1996         1998         2000         2002
                                                                                     Year

          Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
          estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard betw een age 60 and 65. Year t reflects
          retirements that take place roughly betw een March of year t and March of year t+1.
                               Figure 2B: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Health and Retirement Survey
       0.17


       0.16


       0.15


       0.14


       0.13
Rate




       0.12


       0.11


        0.1


       0.09


       0.08
                    1993            1994             1995             1996            1997             1998            1999             2000             2001
                                                                                      Year

              Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
              estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard betw een age 60 and 65.
                             Figure 3: Investment Allocation in IRAs and Defined Contribution Pensions
                        60




                        50




                        40
Percent of Households




                        30




                        20




                        10




                         0
                                DC Plan (SCF)                       IRA (SCF)                     IRA (HRS)

                                   Mostly Interest-Bearing   Mostly Stocks      Combination   Other
                             Figure 4A: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Current Population Survey,
                                                            by Educational Attainment
       0.18

                                                                                                                            Boom                   Bust
       0.16



       0.14
Rate




       0.12



        0.1



       0.08



       0.06
          1980           1982          1984         1986          1988         1990          1992         1994         1996          1998         2000           2002
                                                                                      Year

                                                       HS Dropouts                HS Graduates               College Graduates

              Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
              estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard between age 60 and 65. Year t reflects
              retirements that take place roughly between March of year t and March of year t+1.
                           Figure 4B: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Health and Retirement Survey,
                                                            by Educational Attainment
       0.22

                                                                                          Boom                                                Bust
        0.2


       0.18


       0.16
Rate




       0.14


       0.12


        0.1


       0.08


       0.06
          1993                1994              1995               1996              1997               1998              1999               2000                2001
                                                                                     Year

                                                     HS Dropout               HS Graduate              College Graduate

              Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
              estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard between age 60 and 65.
                            Figure 5A: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Current Population Survey,
                                                               by Pension Status
       0.18

                                                                                                                              Boom                     Bust
       0.16



       0.14
Rate




       0.12



        0.1



       0.08



       0.06
          1980           1982         1984          1986         1988          1990          1992        1994          1996         1998          2000           2002
                                                                                      Year

                                                                No Pension                                 Has Pension

              Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
              estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard between age 60 and 65. Year t reflects
              retirements that take place roughly between March of year t and March of year t+1.
                        Figure 5B: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Health and Retirement Survey,
                                                 by Defined Contribution Pension/IRA Status
       0.22


        0.2                                                                           Boom                                                   Bust


       0.18


       0.16
Rate




       0.14


       0.12


        0.1


       0.08


       0.06
          1993              1994              1995               1996              1997               1998              1999               2000              2001
                                                                                   Year

                                   No DC Pension/IRA                    Has DC Pension/IRA                   High Value DC Pension/IRA

          Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
          estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard between age 60 and 65.
                            Figure 6: Adjusted Retirement Rates for Workers 60 to 65 in the Health and Retirement Survey,
                                                             by Stock Holdings Status
       0.24


       0.22                                                                            Boom                                                    Bust

        0.2


       0.18


       0.16
Rate




       0.14


       0.12


        0.1


       0.08


       0.06
          1993                1994               1995              1996               1997              1998               1999              2000                2001
                                                                                      Year

                                          No Stock                              Has Stock                             High Value Stock

              Note: Rates reflect retirement behavior adjusted for variation in the unemployment rate and the exact age composition of 60 to 65 year olds. The
              estimates assume an unemployment rate of 5 percent and are measured at the average retirement hazard between age 60 and 65.
