                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            DO ACQUIRERS WITH MORE UNCERTAIN GROWTH PROSPECTS
                       GAIN LESS FROM ACQUISITIONS?

                                           Sara B. Moeller
                                       Frederik P. Schlingemann
                                            René M. Stulz

                                         Working Paper 10773
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10773


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of I/B/E/S International Inc. and First Call for providing
forecast data. We thank Kose John, Carrie Pan, and Greg Sommers for helpful comments and suggestions.
The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Sara B. Moeller, Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Acquirers With More Uncertain Growth Prospects Gain Less From Acquisitions?
Sara B. Moeller, Frederik P. Schlingemann, and René M. Stulz
NBER Working Paper No. 10773
September 2004
JEL No. G31, G32, G34

                                           ABSTRACT

Behavioral finance models imply that an increase in shares outstanding leads to a lower stock price
for firms with greater diversity in opinion among investors. Information asymmetry models imply
that share issues by firms with greater information asymmetries are accompanied by larger share
price decreases. Valuation models predict a negative relation between uncertainty resolution and
share prices. Acquisition announcements are used to investigate these predictions. We find acquirer
abnormal returns for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity (but not for acquisitions of
private firms paid for with equity) are lower for firms with higher dispersion of analyst forecasts,
larger change in dispersion of analyst forecasts, and higher idiosyncratic volatility. The opposite
result holds for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash for idiosyncratic volatility. We show
that this evidence can best be explained by models that emphasize information asymmetries, but the
behavioral models and valuation models explain part of the evidence.

Sara B. Moeller
Cox School of Business
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, TX 75275
smoeller@mail.cox.smu.edu

Frederik P. Schlingemann
Katz Graduate School of Business
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
schlinge@katz.pitt.edu

René M. Stulz
Department of Finance
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
and NBER
stulz@cob.osu.edu
1. Introduction

    Firms with more expected growth uncertainty are likely to have lower announcement returns

for some types of acquisitions for at least three important reasons. First, in behavioral finance,

growth uncertainty leads to diversity of opinion and a downward-sloping demand curve for

common stock, causing poor returns on equity-financed acquisitions of public firms because they

increase their supply of shares. Second, in rational expectations models, growth uncertainty can

be due to information asymmetry between corporate insiders and outside shareholders which

leads to adverse announcement returns for acquisitions paid for with equity because management

is more likely to use equity if it is overvalued. Conversely, announcement returns are more

favorable for acquisitions paid for with cash because the use of cash signals that equity is not

overvalued. Third, an acquisition can reduce uncertainty about a firm’s future growth prospects.

Such uncertainty resolution is associated with a decrease in firm value in some valuation models.

    In this paper, we investigate the relation between growth uncertainty and acquirer returns. A

forward-looking measure of growth uncertainty is the dispersion of analyst forecasts of long-term

earnings growth. We find that acquisition returns for acquisitions of public firms paid for with

equity are negatively related to the dispersion of analyst forecasts. This result is especially strong

for high valuation firms. Among firms in the top tercile of market-to-book, the difference in

abnormal returns between firms in the bottom tercile of forecast dispersion and the top tercile of

forecast dispersion is 6%. This relation does not exist for other types of acquisitions. More

generally, we find that acquirer returns in acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity are

strongly negatively correlated with a proxy for growth uncertainty. In contrast, the abnormal

returns for other types of acquisitions, especially acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash,

are positively related to some of these variables.

    With greater growth uncertainty, it is easier for investors to disagree because the data speak

less clearly. Miller (1977) and Chen, Hong, and Stein (2002), among others, show that diversity

of opinion about a firm’s growth prospects leads to a downward demand curve for its stock. With


                                                     1
these models, the slope of the demand curve increases with diversity of opinion among investors.

As the supply of shares increases, it has to be absorbed by investors who have a lower opinion of

the stock. With greater diversity of opinion, there are fewer investors with valuations close to the

market price before the increase in the supply of shares so the price has to fall sufficiently so

investors with lower valuations will buy the new shares.1

    Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2004) provide additional testable predictions. In their model,

investors are overconfident and have heterogeneous beliefs. Because they have a valuable option

to sell the shares later to more optimistic investors, investors pay more than they believe the

shares are worth. When the supply of shares increases, however, the most optimistic investors

may not be able to absorb the supply increase, which wipes out the speculative froth in the stock

price. The extent to which the bubble component of the stock price decreases in magnitude

depends on the standard deviation of the investors’ beliefs. Their model therefore predicts a

negative relation between the announcement return and investor heterogeneity. It also predicts the

drop in value of the stock to be higher when the bubble component in the stock price is higher, so

that highly valued bidders with high diversity of opinion are expected to experience worse

returns. Further, given a firm’s valuation and diversity of opinion, the drop in value should be

proportionately greater for firms that issue more equity. Finally, to the extent that acquisitions of

private firms paid for with equity do not increase the bidder’s float, diversity of opinion models

predict that there should be no relation between abnormal returns and diversity of opinion for

such acquisitions.


1
  In a paper completed at the same time as this paper, Baker, Coval, and Stein (2004) investigate the
relation between merger returns and diversity of opinion using a sample of stock swaps. They posit that, in
a stock merger, some target shareholders are “sleepy” in that they will hold on to the equity received as
consideration even though they would not have bought that equity on their own. They show theoretically
and empirically that mergers returns should be lower for mergers where target investors are less likely to be
“sleepy.” This is because target shareholders who are not “sleepy” will sell the equity they receive as
consideration since they did not value the equity of the acquirer highly in the first place. Consequently,
when investors hold strong opinions about the value of the acquirer, the equity received by shareholders
who are not “sleepy” will have to be acquired by investors who value it less than the pre-merger acquiring-
firm shareholders. They show that institutional shareholders are less likely to be “sleepy” and that merger




                                                     2
    Recent literature uses the dispersion of analyst forecasts as a measure of diversity of opinion.2

Consistent with behavioral finance models, we find that the relation between diversity of opinion

and acquisition returns is limited to acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity and is

strongest for highly valued firms. For the firms with the greatest diversity of opinion, the effect is

dramatic: The high market-to-book bidders in the top decile of diversity of opinion have average

abnormal returns of –8.3%. We show that diversity of opinion is irrelevant for private firm

acquisitions as well as for public acquisitions paid for with cash.

    Greater uncertainty can simply reflect the existence of information asymmetries. A more

traditional explanation for the negative announcement returns of acquisitions of public firms paid

for with equity, put forward by Travlos (1987) and inspired by Myers and Majluf (1984), is that

the announcement signals to the market that bidder management does not believe equity is

undervalued. To the extent that firms with high diversity of opinion are firms where information

asymmetries are significant, the information asymmetry explanation does not seem

distinguishable from the diversity of opinion explanation using acquisitions of public firms paid

for with equity only. Dierkens (1991) explores the relation between abnormal returns for equity

issues and proxies for information asymmetries. Some of her proxies, especially the idiosyncratic

volatility of the stock before the announcement, are more robustly related to announcement

returns than dispersion of analyst forecasts. We find that the abnormal return for equity offers

falls as idiosyncratic volatility increases, but the opposite takes place for cash offers. The

evidence on cash offers cannot be explained by diversity of opinion models, but is consistent with

information asymmetry models. With high volatility, there is much uncertainty about the true

value of the firm. When management uses cash to finance an offer, the market infers that equity is

worth more than its market value, which is good news and leads to higher abnormal returns. With

acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity, we expect the willingness of the seller to


returns fall as the interaction of a diversity of opinion proxy and institutional ownership increases. Their
diversity of opinion proxies are one-year earnings forecast analyst dispersion and idiosyncratic risk.
2
  See, for instance, Diether et al. (2002), Diether (2004), and Scherbina (2003).


                                                     3
receive equity to be better news for firms with greater information asymmetries since the seller

can receive information directly from the acquirer hence providing a certification benefit. We find

that the abnormal returns for acquisitions of private firms are positively related to idiosyncratic

volatility, but the coefficient is not significant.

    Krasker (1986) extends the Myers and Majluf (1984) model to show that there is a negative

relation between the post-issue price and the size of the equity issue when management can

choose the size of the issue. Krasker’s model therefore implies empirically a negative relation

between abnormal returns and the size of an acquisition. The same prediction follows from the

diversity of opinion models. We find support for that prediction. The information asymmetry

models could also help us understand why diversity of opinion is more important for high market-

to-book firms. Firms with a high Tobin's q, proxied by the market-to-book ratio, are more likely

to have a larger fraction of their value derived from growth opportunities and other assets

associated with greater information asymmetries. If so, then firms with high dispersion of analyst

forecasts and high Tobin’s q are likely to exhibit the greatest degree of information asymmetry.

     Pástor and Veronesi (2004) show that uncertainty about a firm’s long-term growth prospects

increases firm value in an efficient market. Their model offers an alternative explanation for the

negative relation between bidder abnormal returns and the dispersion of analyst forecasts that we

investigate extensively. Their reasoning is straightforward when a firm’s value is estimated using

Gordon’s growth model. In that model, firm value is a convex function of the firm’s expected

growth rate. Consequently, an increase in uncertainty about the firm’s expected growth rate leads

to a higher firm value because of Jensen’s inequality. Johnson (2004) reaches the same

conclusion. With the Pástor and Veronesi (2004) and Johnson (2004) models, a merger would be

associated with a drop in firm value if it lowers uncertainty about a firm’s future expected

growth. To the extent that highly valued firms are firms with high growth uncertainty that are

more sensitive to resolution of uncertainty, we expect an acquisition announcement that reduces

growth uncertainty should be accompanied by a drop in firm value unless there is an



                                                      4
accompanying synergy gain large enough to offset the resolution of uncertainty effect. We find a

strong negative relation between the resolution of uncertainty and merger returns for acquisitions

of public firms paid for with equity. This relation is so strong that it tends to overwhelm the

relation between abnormal returns and the level of dispersion of analyst forecasts. One might be

tempted to conclude therefore that the relation between bidder returns and the dispersion of

analyst forecasts can be explained by the role of growth uncertainty in valuation. However,

contrary to the models, we do not observe the same relation for private firm acquisitions and for

acquisitions paid for with cash. Alternatively, the relation we document might be due to reverse-

causation: analysts observe poor announcement returns and draw similar conclusions from them,

so that the dispersion of analyst forecasts is reduced.

    The three main reasons why expected growth uncertainty is related to acquisition abnormal

returns have different implications for agency costs and market efficiency. With the behavioral

finance hypothesis as well as with the information asymmetry hypothesis, the market overvalues

the acquirer’s equity immediately before the announcement. However, in the former case it is

because investors are overoptimistic while in the latter case it is because investors do not have

information that management has. With the valuation model of Pástor and Veronesi (2004), it

could also be that the market overvalues the firm immediately before the acquisition if, at that

time, managers already know they will make the acquisition and know its implications for the

firm’s expected growth. Irrespective of the reason why expected growth uncertainty matters, the

value of the acquirer changes when the announcement is made for reasons that have nothing to do

with whether the acquisition has synergy effects. Importantly, divergence between a firm’s

market value and its value as known to the managers can lead these managers to make poor

acquisitions to try to prop up firm value as emphasized by Jensen (2004). Consequently, the

negative relation between our measures of growth uncertainty and abnormal returns is partly due

to firms making poorer acquisitions. It is important to note, however, that our results hold when




                                                  5
we control for firm valuation measures such as market-to-book, which presumably would account

for at least part of that effect.

    All the models we investigate predict that the relation between bidder returns and dispersion

of analyst forecasts should be permanent. While Mitchell et al. (2004) show that there is a

temporary price pressure effect associated with equity offers for public companies, Diether

(2004) demonstrates that higher dispersion of opinion is associated with lower long-term returns

following corporate actions such as equity issues and mergers paid for with equity. We show that

the worse returns of mergers undertaken by firms with greater diversity of opinion are not

reversed over the next twenty days. It turns out, instead, that the abnormal return differential we

document is amplified over the twenty days that follow the merger announcement. In particular,

we find that the acquirers with the highest valuations and highest dispersion of opinion have an

abnormal return that is 5.9% lower than the abnormal return of acquirers with the highest

valuations and lowest dispersion of opinion.

    A concern with a result like ours is that dispersion of analyst forecasts could proxy for other

variables that affect abnormal returns. In our regressions, we control for known variables related

to bidder returns. We also investigate how variables related to analyst dispersion affect our

results. In a recent paper, Scherbina (2003) finds evidence that firms that have experienced a

worsening of their prospects over the past year are more likely to have high analyst forecasts

dispersion. We estimate regressions where we control for changes in forecasts as well, including

the change in forecasts over the previous year. None of our results are affected by taking into

account forecast changes in our regressions.

    The paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2, we describe our sample of acquisitions. In

Section 3, we introduce our measures of analyst dispersion. In Section 4, we show how abnormal

returns are related to analyst dispersion for different types of acquisitions. In Section 5, we

examine more directly predictions from the behavioral literature. In Section 6, we use proxies for

information asymmetries used by Dierkens (1991) to more directly investigate the implications of



                                                6
information asymmetry models. We examine the resolution of uncertainty hypothesis in Section

7. In Section 8, we show that the poor returns for bidders with high dispersion of analyst forecasts

are permanent and not explained by past changes in analyst forecasts. We conclude in Section 9.



2. The acquisition sample

    To analyze the relation between the dispersion of analyst forecasts and the acquirer’s

acquisition announcement abnormal return, we start from a sample of successful and unsuccessful

acquisition announcements constructed from the Securities Data Company's (SDC) U.S. Mergers

and Acquisitions Database. We require that the deal value corresponds to at least 1% of the

market value of the assets of the acquirer (defined as the book value of assets minus the book

value of equity plus the market value of equity). In addition, the sample of acquisitions meets the

following criteria:

        1. The acquisition is announced in the period from 1980 to 2002 and neither the

            acquirer nor target has another merger announcement in the 3 day window;

        2. The acquirer controls less than 50% of the shares of the target at the announcement

            date and obtains 100% of the target shares if the target is a public or private firm;

        3. The deal value is equal to or greater than $1 million;

        4. The target is a U.S. public firm or a U.S. private firm;

        5. Data on the acquirer is available from CRSP and COMPUSTAT;

        6. The deal is classified by SDC as either successful, unconditional, or withdrawn;

        7. If successful the deal is completed in less than one thousand days.



    We find 11,393 acquisition announcements that meet these criteria. Next, we require the

acquiring firm to have a forecast for long-term growth of earnings per share and to be followed

by at least three analysts, measured in the month preceding the acquisition. The requirement that

three analysts follow the firm is due to the fact that we compute the standard deviation of analyst



                                                 7
forecasts. To compute a standard deviation, we need at least two observations, but we focus on

cases where we have at least three forecasts to avoid putting too much weight on outliers. Though

we believe that this measure is more reliable, our results also hold if we require only two analyst

forecasts to compute our measure of dispersion. Our information on analyst forecasts is obtained

from the Summary History File of the Institutional Brokers Estimate System (I/B/E/S) database.

This requirement dramatically reduces the size of our sample since it forces us to discard 7,974

announcements to end with a sample of 3,419 announcements.

    Table 1 provides and compares information on acquirer and deal characteristics for the full

sample of acquisitions and the subset with analyst data. Panel A of Table 1 shows that imposing

the requirement of analyst forecasts availability increases sharply the mean and median

transaction value for the acquisitions considered. Further, the acquisitions become less important

relative to the market value of equity of the acquirer or the market value of the assets (defined as

book value of assets plus market value of equity minus book value of equity). Acquisitions for

which we have analyst data are less likely to be financed with cash and more likely to be financed

with equity. They are also more likely to be acquisitions of public firms than of private firms and

less likely to be conglomerate acquisitions. It follows from this that the sample of acquisitions

with analyst forecasts is not a representative sample of all acquisitions. Hong, Lim, and Stein

(2000), LaPorta (1996), and Diether, Malloy, and Scherbina (2002), among others, already noted

that the intersection of CRSP, COMPUSTAT, and I/B/E/S is severely skewed towards larger

companies. This explains that acquirers with analyst forecasts are larger acquirers. This is

confirmed in Panel B. We see that, whether using book value of assets, market value of assets or

market value of equity, acquirers with analyst forecasts are much larger than acquirers without

such forecasts. There is also evidence that the acquirers with forecasts are valued more than those

without as can be seen from the higher Tobin’s q and lower book-to-market ratio for acquirers

with forecasts. We use market-to-book, computed as total assets minus the book value of

common equity plus the market value of common equity divided by total assets, as a proxy for



                                                 8
Tobin’s q. The acquirers with forecasts have also more cash and less leverage. They do not,

however, have significantly higher operating income.

    We use the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) database to collect daily return

data for our sample of acquirers and data for the equally-weighted index. We estimate the

acquirer abnormal returns, CAR(–1,+1), associated with the three-day window surrounding the

acquisition announcements in our sample for each year using standard event study methods (see

e.g., Brown and Warner (1985)). We compute market model abnormal returns using the CRSP

equally weighted index and the parameters for the market model are estimated over the (−205,

−6) day interval. The p-values are obtained using the time-series and cross-sectional variation of

abnormal returns.3

    In Panel C of Table 1, we report the mean and median announcement abnormal returns. We

show that the mean announcement abnormal return of firms with analyst data is roughly 100 basis

points less than the mean announcement abnormal return of firms in the unrestricted sample. The

differences in acquirer size between the two samples as well as the greater prevalence of equity

offers in the restricted sample help explain this difference in abnormal returns. The difference in

abnormal returns is significant for the medians for public firm acquisitions, but there is no

difference between the medians for private firm acquisitions.

    Another selection bias induced by restricting the sample to only acquirers with at least three

analyst forecasts is that the fraction of acquirers with analyst forecasts increases over time.

Consequently, the percentage of acquisitions made by firms followed by at least three analysts is

higher in recent years, so the proportion of acquisitions included in our sample is higher on

average during the last five years of the sample period. The restricted sample has 21.51% of the




3
 We also calculate abnormal returns using the value-weighted CRSP market return in the estimation of the
market model and using net-of-market returns. Our results are not sensitive to these alternate definitions of
abnormal returns.




                                                      9
unrestricted acquisitions from 1980 through 1990, 31.65% from 1991 through 2002, and 38.24%

from 1998 through 2002. The latest merger wave is therefore overrepresented in the sample.



3. Measures of dispersion of analyst forecasts

    The earnings and long-term earnings growth forecasts are collected from I/B/E/S. The month

of the acquisition is defined as the I/B/E/S statistical period in which the announcement occurs

unless that announcement is within 6 business days of the end of the period. In that case, the next

month is considered the month of the acquisition so the I/B/E/S information has time to

incorporate the announcement (see Pound (1988)).

    Our empirical work focuses on the long-term earnings growth forecast which I/B/E/S defines

as a three to five year forecast of the expected annual increase in operating earnings over the

company’s next full business cycle. The primary reason we choose the long-term growth forecast

over other time horizons, i.e., quarterly and yearly, is that it features prominently in valuation

models. This long-term forecast also has several other advantages. First, quarterly or yearly

earnings forecasts are affected by how close a firm is to the end of a fiscal quarter or year and by

how important earnings guidance is for a firm. These considerations are less likely to influence

the long-term growth forecast. Second, quarterly or yearly forecasts typically have to be

normalized to be made comparable across firms. A firm could have a higher forecast than another

firm simply because it has fewer shares. Many papers normalize the forecasts by the firm’s share

price (e.g., Pound, 1988; Thomas, 2002). Since the long-term forecast is an expected growth rate,

it is directly comparable across firms.

    The main variable of interest in our analysis is the dispersion of analyst forecasts before the

acquisition announcement. The difficulty with this variable is that the dispersion of analyst

forecasts is somewhat higher when a firm has few – but more than one – analysts. Therefore, we

also use a different measure of dispersion of analyst forecasts. For each number of analyst

forecasts, we rank the standard deviation of forecasts and we call high analyst dispersion firms



                                                10
those who rank in the top decile of dispersion of analyst forecasts among firms with the same

number of analyst forecasts.

    Table 2 provides information on our analyst measures. All of our data come from the

Summary File. Diether et al. (2002) report a rounding bias due to stock splits, but when they

correct for it, they find that it does not affect their results. Moreover, the rounding bias does not

affect the long-term growth forecast. We show in Panel A of Table 2 the average and median of

respectively the standard deviation and the median of the long-term growth forecast, the one-year

earnings forecast, and the quarterly earnings forecast for various samples. The first column is the

whole I/B/E/S sample for which a long-term growth forecast is available and there are at least

three analysts. The second column in the table is the sample of acquisitions.

    Comparing the acquirers to all I/B/E/S firms using a Wilcoxon median test, we first see that

the acquirers have higher long-term growth prospects and more dispersion in long-term growth

forecasts. The greater long-term growth prospects is consistent with the evidence presented in the

literature that firms make acquisitions after having outperformed the market.4 It is better to focus

on medians for earnings since averages can be influenced by large outliers. Using a sign-rank test

for differences, we find that acquirers’ earnings forecasts are less disperse and slightly lower for

the yearly variable, but the opposite holds for the quarterly variable.

    The third column in Table 2 is the full time-series median of the sample of acquiring firms

excluding the forecasts from one month prior to and one month after the merger announcement.

We find that the overall median of dispersion and levels of long-term growth across all acquirers

measured during the month prior to the acquisition are, respectively, lower and the same than

they are for all other months. However, when compared for each firm on a pairwise-basis, we

find that the median value of the long-term growth dispersion is higher during the month prior to

the acquisition than during the median of the other months. There are no economically

meaningful differences in terms of the other forecasts.




                                                 11
       Panel B shows changes in all these measures from one month before the acquisition to the

month after the announcement. The mean changes are generally not significant and all the median

changes are zero when rounded to three digits. For comparison, we compute changes over the

same length of time for the whole I/B/E/S sample. The dispersion of forecasts has a significant

positive mean and the level of forecasts has a significant negative mean. Similar results hold for

yearly earnings, but not for quarterly earnings. Again, all the medians are zero when rounded to

three digits.



4. Dispersion of analyst forecasts and abnormal returns

       To investigate whether acquisition abnormal returns are related to the dispersion of analyst

forecasts, we divide all acquirers into terciles of dispersion of analyst forecasts. Table 3 reports

the abnormal returns for all acquirers and for each type of acquisition. To ensure that our results

are not due to outliers, abnormal returns are winsorized at 1% and 99% in constructing Table 3.

We find similar results when we include all observations. The first row in the table shows the

abnormal returns for all transactions. The abnormal returns are generally close to zero, but

surprisingly, given the discussion in the introduction, high dispersion firms have significantly

higher abnormal returns than low dispersion firms. The explanation for this can be inferred from

the subsequent rows: Relatively more acquisitions made by high dispersion firms are private-firm

acquisitions. We already know that private-firm acquisitions have positive abnormal returns (see

e.g., Chang, 1998; Fuller, Netter, and Stegemoller, 2002). The second row shows the results for

acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity. Not surprisingly, the abnormal returns are

negative. We see there, however, a highly significant difference between high dispersion firms

and low dispersion firms. The difference of -2.154% is not only statistically significant, but

economically as well. For instance, while the literature has made much of the difference between

equity acquisitions and cash acquisitions of public targets, that difference is of a similar


4
    See Asquith, et al. (1983).


                                                 12
magnitude in our sample (-2.371%). If we use our decile measure of dispersion (not reported), the

difference between the high dispersion firms and the others becomes -3.589%. The third row

shows the result for acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity and the fourth row for

acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash. In these rows, dispersion of analyst forecasts is not

associated with significant variation in abnormal returns.

    There is a strong relation between analyst forecasts dispersion and abnormal returns for

acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity. This relation raises the question of whether

analyst forecasts dispersion proxies for variables that are known to predict bidder returns. To

examine this issue, we estimate regressions of bidder returns on variables that the literature has

typically used to predict returns and add our analyst forecasts dispersion measures.

    In Regression (1) of Table 4, the bidder abnormal return for acquisitions of public firms paid

for with equity is regressed on the measure of analyst forecasts dispersion and a constant. We find

that the measure of analyst forecasts dispersion has a negative significant coefficient. The

coefficient is -0.0028. The standard deviation of the measure of dispersion of analyst forecasts is

5.64. Consequently, a change of two standard deviations of the measure of dispersion of analyst

forecasts corresponds to a change in abnormal return of 3.2%. The regression confirms the results

reported in Table 3 showing that dispersion of analyst forecasts has an economically and

statistically significant relation with abnormal returns for public acquisitions financed with

equity.

    In Regression (2), we add the variables that other papers often use to explain acquirer

abnormal returns. Note first that the measure of dispersion of analyst forecasts is still significant.

The coefficient is now slightly smaller in absolute value. It follows that dispersion of analyst

forecasts does not proxy for other variables used to explain acquirer abnormal returns. Maloney,

McCormick, and Mitchell (1993) show that firms with higher leverage make better acquisitions.

We therefore use the market value of leverage as a control variable. This variable is significantly

positive. Second, we use a proxy for Tobin’s q. Earlier research (Lang, Stulz, and Walkling,



                                                 13
1989; Servaes, 1991) finds higher abnormal returns for firms with a higher Tobin’s q. Research

with samples constructed from SDC that include the latest merger wave do not find this result

(Moeller, Schlingemann, and Stulz, forthcoming; Dong, Hirshleifer, Richardson, and Teoh,

2002). The coefficient on Tobin’s q is negative but not significant. It is also economically trivial.

There is evidence that conglomerate acquisitions have worse returns (see Morck, Shleifer, and

Vishny, 1990). A dummy variable that takes a value of one if the acquirer and the acquired firm

are in the same industry is not significant. We find no evidence that the abnormal return is

significantly different for competed offers or for offers to which the target reacts with hostility.

Following Asquith, Bruner, and Mullins (1983), bidder return regressions generally control for

the size of the target relative to the size of the acquirer for acquisitions of public firms, to adjust

for the impact of an acquisition on the equity market capitalization of the acquiring firm. We find

a strong negative effect of relative size on acquisition returns. The operating cash flow

normalized by the book value of assets has a positive yet insignificant coefficient. Moeller,

Schlingemann, and Stulz (2004) show that acquisitions by small firms have higher abnormal

returns. They use a dummy variable for small firms that take a value of one for firms with a

capitalization below the 25th percentile of the NYSE in the year of the acquisition. This variable

has a highly significant positive coefficient. Finally, we control for the liquidity of the market for

corporate assets in the industry of the target using the liquidity index constructed in

Schlingemann, Walkling, and Stulz (2002). We find that the coefficient on the liquidity index is

positive and significant.

    In regression (3) and (4), we replicate, respectively, regressions (1) and (2) for acquisitions of

private firms paid for with equity. For this subsample there are no hostile deals or tender offers,

so these dummy variables are excluded from the model. As predicted by diversity of opinion

models, the coefficient on the dispersion of analyst forecasts variable is not significantly different

from zero. It is not just an issue of statistical significance, however. The coefficient in regressions

(3) is only one-quarter of the value of the coefficient in regression (1). It is interesting to note that



                                                   14
the relative size variable has a positive insignificant slope for private-firm acquisitions in contrast

to a negative significant slope for public-firm acquisitions.

    Analysts produce forecasts for the next quarter as well as for the next year. We investigate

whether the results we have shown so far hold for these alternate measures of dispersion of

analyst forecasts. These measures in many ways are less compelling because firm value is much

more sensitive to the forecast of long-run growth than it is to forecasts of next quarter’s or next

year’s earnings. We follow Pound (1988) and Thomas (2002) and normalize the earnings forecast

by the stock price. Regressions (5) and (6) show the results when we add the same set of control

variables as in model (2). We find a strong negative coefficient for these measures of dispersion.

In regression (7), we put all three measures of dispersion in the regression. Multicollinearity

renders all coefficients insignificant. The results using the quarterly and yearly forecasts seem

sensitive to how the forecasts are normalized. If we normalize instead by the mean forecast, the

coefficients on the dispersion measures are negative but not significant. Though we do not

reproduce the regressions, the quarterly and yearly earnings forecast dispersions have positive

insignificant coefficients for private-firm acquisitions.

    The last two regressions in the table use our alternate measure of diversity of opinion, which

is a dummy variable for firms in the top decile of analyst forecasts dispersion given their number

of analyst forecasts. We find that this variable has a negative significant coefficient for

acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity and a positive insignificant coefficient for

acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity.

    To check that the role of dispersion of analyst forecasts is significantly different between

acquisitions of public firms and acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity, we also

estimate (not reported) regressions using all acquisitions paid for with equity but allowing the

slope on the dispersion of analyst forecasts to differ for acquisitions of private firms. In these

regressions, we find that the coefficient on dispersion of analyst forecasts for private firm

acquisitions is significantly higher than the coefficient for public firm acquisitions.



                                                  15
5. Abnormal returns, valuation, and diversity of opinion

    One reason that growth uncertainty matters is that it fosters diversity of opinion. The result

that abnormal returns for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity are negatively related to

dispersion of analyst forecasts is consistent with the predictions of models that emphasize the

importance of diversity of opinion. The diversity of opinion models also predict that abnormal

returns for acquisitions that do not increase the float should be unrelated to diversity of opinion.

Acquisitions paid for with cash do not increase the float, so the lack of significance of the proxies

for diversity of opinion measures is supportive of diversity of opinion models. Acquisitions of

private firms paid for with equity increase the float only if the shares paid to the seller are not

held by the seller as long-term investments.

    To check whether the result that there is no relation between abnormal returns for acquisition

of private firms paid for with equity and dispersion of analyst forecasts is supportive of diversity

of opinion models, we explore whether the shares available for trading increase with such

acquisitions. We cannot measure the number of share available for trading directly, but we can

conduct an indirect test. If public firm acquisitions paid for with equity increase the float more

than private firm acquisitions paid for with equity, it should be that the percentage change in the

number of shares traded from before the announcement of the acquisition to after its completion

is significantly higher for public than for private deals.

    To investigate this, we collect data on bidder volume from CRSP for two windows of 50

days. The first window ends 25 days before the announcement and the second window starts 25

days after completion. The median percentage change in volume for public acquisitions paid for

with equity is 58.33%; in contrast, it is 29.36% for acquisitions of private firms paid for with

equity and 13.07% for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash. The above median changes

are significantly different from zero and from each other. With our assumption that the float

increases only with acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity, the size of the acquisition for

an acquisition of a private firm with equity or of a public firm with cash should have no relation



                                                  16
with the volume percentage change. To investigate this, we regress the volume percentage change

on a constant, a dummy for private equity acquisitions (PrivEq), a dummy for public firm

acquisitions paid for with cash (PubCash), a dummy for private firm acquisitions paid for with

cash (PrivCash), the ratio of deal value to bidder market capitalization (TVMVE), interactions of

the dummy variables with the ratio of deal value bidder market capitalization, and year dummies.

The estimated regression is:



Volume percentage change = 0.5690 + 0.0341 × PrivEq − 0.2901 × PubCash – 0.1729 × PrivCash

+ 0.9102 × TVMVE – 0.8107 × [PrivEq × TVMVE] – 0.9216 × [PubCash × TVMVE] – 0.6917

× [PrivCash × TVMVE]



    All coefficients are significant at the 1% level. The regression is estimated on 1,763

observations and has an adjusted R-squared of 0.066. The impact of TVMVE on the volume

percentage change is not significantly different from zero for acquisitions of private firms paid for

with equity or acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash. It is therefore reasonable to believe

that acquisitions of private firms paid for equity have a negligible effect on the bidder’s float, so

our result that there is no relation between abnormal returns for such acquisitions and dispersion

of analyst forecasts is consistent with the diversity of opinion models. Further, the result of Table

4 that the abnormal return for public-firm acquisitions paid for with equity falls as the ratio of

deal value to market value of the acquirer increases, but the abnormal return for private-firm

acquisitions does not, is also consistent with diversity of opinion models.

    Growth uncertainty should matter more for firms with higher valuations because the value of

such firms is more sensitive to the expected growth rate. In Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong

(2004), diversity of opinion matters for firms that are overvalued because of the resale option

embedded in the stock, i.e., the option that the stock may be sold to more optimistic investors

later. Hence, if Tobin’s q is correlated with overvaluation, their model predicts that diversity of



                                                 17
opinion is more important for firms with a high Tobin’s q. We therefore investigate whether the

relation between dispersion of analyst forecasts and abnormal return depends on a firm’s

valuation.

    In Table 5, we divide all firms in the sample according to the acquirer’s market-to-book ratio,

our proxy for Tobin’s q, and to its dispersion of analyst forecasts. This also allows us to test the

hypothesis that the relation between diversity of opinion and bidder return for acquisitions of

public firms financed with equity should be stronger for bidders with higher valuations. Similar to

the procedure in Table 3, we winsorize abnormal returns at 1% and 99% in constructing Table 5

to ensure that our results are not due to outliers. Winsorizing does not affect our conclusions.

The results in Panel A of Table 5 are consistent with the hypothesis that diversity of opinion and

bidder return for acquisitions of public firms financed with equity are more strongly related for

bidders with higher valuations. For firms with low and medium market-to-book ratios, there is no

significant difference in abnormal returns between acquirers with high and low dispersion of

analyst forecasts. In contrast, when we turn to firms with high valuations, the difference between

acquirers with high and low dispersion of analyst forecasts is –2.797% with a p-value of 0.049. It

is interesting to note that valuation seems to matter only for the firms with high dispersion of

analyst forecasts since the difference in abnormal returns between high Tobin’s q and low

Tobin’s q firms is not significant unless a firm has a high dispersion of analyst forecasts.

However, the 127 firms that are in the highest Tobin’s q tercile and in the highest analyst

forecasts dispersion tercile have an average abnormal return of –5.81%.

    The diversity of opinion models predict that diversity of opinion should not be relevant for

acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity or for acquisitions of public firms paid for with

cash, irrespective of the valuation of the bidder. Panel B of Table 5 reports results for acquisitions

of private firms paid for with equity when we use dispersion of analyst forecasts as a proxy for

diversity of opinion. We find that acquisitions by firms with higher dispersion of analyst forecasts

have insignificantly higher abnormal returns. The results in Panel C of Table 5 show that high



                                                 18
dispersion of analyst forecasts bidders with low valuations have higher abnormal returns than low

dispersion of analyst forecasts bidders with similar valuations for public-firm acquisitions paid

for with cash. The p-value is 0.081. This result, albeit weak, indicates that the evidence cannot be

explained by diversity of opinion models alone.

    As discussed earlier, we also use a different proxy for opinion diversity. We split the sample

depending on whether a firm, among all firms with the same number of analysts, is in the top

decile of analyst forecasts dispersion. While not reported, our results hold with this approach

when we consider the whole sample of acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity. High

dispersion acquirers with this measure have predominantly high valuations. Consequently, the

results for medium and low valuation firms are not meaningful since there are only 10 firms with

low valuation and high dispersion of analyst forecasts and 13 firms with medium valuation and

high dispersion of analyst forecasts. Strikingly, the 51 firms with high valuation and high

dispersion of analyst forecasts have a mean abnormal return of –8.30% when using the decile

dummy.

    Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong (2004) predict that the abnormal returns for float increases

should be worse for high valuation firms with investors with highly heterogeneous beliefs. To

examine this prediction, we divide the high valuation/high dispersion of analyst forecasts firms

into three groups based on the ratio of deal value to bidder market capitalization. The results are

reported in Panel D of Table 5 and are striking. The group of 42 bidders where the ratio is the

highest has a mean abnormal return of -9.27%. In contrast, the group of 43 bidders where the

ratio is lowest has a mean abnormal return of -4.25%. The difference between these two groups is

significant with a p-value of less than one percent. The 42 bidders in the middle group have an

average abnormal return of -3.95%. We also estimated regressions of abnormal returns on the

ratio of deal value to bidder market capitalization for the firms with high valuation and high

dispersion of analyst forecasts. For public-firm acquisitions, the coefficient on the ratio is -0.019

with a p-value of 0.036. In contrast, for private-firm acquisitions, the coefficient is 0.018 with a



                                                  19
p-value of 0.221 (not reported). This evidence is supportive of the Hong, Scheinkman, and Xiong

(2004) model.



6. Information asymmetry or diversity of opinion?

    We find that abnormal returns for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity but not for

other types of acquisitions are worse for firms with greater dispersion of analyst forecasts, that the

relation between abnormal returns and dispersion of analyst forecast is magnified for firms with

high valuations, and that, among firms with high valuations and high dispersion of analyst

forecasts, the worst returns are by firms that make the largest acquisitions. Since the acquisitions

of public firms paid for with equity are, among all acquisition types, those that increase the float

the most, these results are supportive of models that emphasize the role of diversity of opinion if

dispersion of analyst forecasts proxies well for diversity of opinion. We would expect dispersion

of analyst forecasts to be high when information asymmetries between managers and outside

shareholders are also high. Models of information asymmetries can explain all of our results since

it would not be unreasonable to presume that dispersion of analyst forecasts proxies well for the

extent of information asymmetries. To see this, note that we know from Myers and Majluf (1984)

that equity issues are associated with a drop in stock prices and from Krasker (1986) that the

magnitude of the drop increases with the size of the issue. Further, it is often argued that high

Tobin’s q firms have higher information asymmetries because more of their value comes from

intangible assets. The information asymmetry hypothesis would predict that greater information

asymmetry does not make abnormal returns worse for cash acquisitions or for acquisitions of




                                                 20
private firms paid for with equity (since in that case the buying firm can provide information to

the seller it could not provide to investors in general).5

    To understand better the extent to which our results can be explained by asymmetric

information models, we investigate the relation between abnormal returns and proxies for

information asymmetries used in the literature. Dierkens (1991) uses four variables to describe

the information environment of a firm in a study of the announcement effect of seasoned primary

equity issues. These variables are the standard deviation of the earnings announcement abnormal

return, the firm’s idiosyncratic volatility, the firm’s turnover, and the number public

announcements of the firm. She has no prediction on the coefficient of turnover, but she predicts

a negative coefficient on idiosyncratic volatility. Regression (1) of Table 6 adds idiosyncratic

volatility to regression (2) of Table 4. We measure idiosyncratic volatility in a similar way as in

Dierkens (1991), namely the standard deviation of the market-adjusted residuals of the daily stock

returns measured during the period starting from 205 days to 6 days prior to the acquisition

announcement. We find that idiosyncratic volatility is highly significant with a negative

coefficient. When idiosyncratic volatility is added to the regression, dispersion of analyst

forecasts is no longer significant. The coefficient of correlation between idiosyncratic volatility

and dispersion of analyst forecasts is 0.42. We estimate the idiosyncratic volatility that is

orthogonal to the dispersion of analyst forecasts. When we use this decomposition in regression

(2), we find that the coefficient on dispersion of analyst forecasts is still insignificant, but its

value is similar to its value without idiosyncratic volatility and the p-value is 0.13. We then use

our alternative measure of high dispersion of analyst forecasts, the top decile dummy of analyst


5
  Note that there is a literature that draws attention to information asymmetries about the target as well and
makes the choice of means of payment dependent on these asymmetries. An example and empirical test of
such a model is Eckbo, Giammarino, and Heinkel (1990). Their empirical work is not supportive of the
model. Other models with information asymmetries emphasize that the acquisition signals that a firm has
run out of internal investment opportunities, see Braguinsky and Jovanovic (2004) and McCardle and
Viswanathan (1994). These models are not helpful here because we are focusing on the role of growth
uncertainty across acquisitions with significantly negative abnormal returns (public acquisitions paid for
with equity) as well as acquisitions with significantly positive abnormal returns (private acquisitions paid
for with equity).


                                                     21
forecasts, in regression (3). That measure has a significant coefficient. In regression (4), we add

the standard deviation of earnings announcements and turnover to regression (1). The earnings

announcement standard deviation is measured as the standard deviation of all 3-day cumulative

abnormal returns around earnings announcements from I/B/E/S using the market model over the

5-year period preceding the acquisition announcement. Turnover is defined as the median of daily

volume divided by shares outstanding from day (-205,-6) relative to the acquisition

announcement day. We still find that idiosyncratic volatility has a negative significant coefficient.

Neither the standard deviation of earnings announcements nor the turnover measure is significant.

If we remove the dispersion of analyst forecasts from regression (1) and replace it with turnover,

turnover has a significant negative coefficient.

    To save space, we do not reproduce the regressions for acquisitions of private firms paid for

with equity. In these regressions, neither the dispersion of analyst forecasts nor idiosyncratic

volatility has a significant coefficient. The coefficient on dispersion of analyst forecasts is

negative but close to zero; the coefficient on idiosyncratic volatility is positive. When we estimate

regression (5) for these acquisitions, the standard deviations of earnings announcements has a

positive significant coefficient.

    The models that focus on diversity of opinion predict that the announcement return of an

acquisition paid for with cash should not be related to a proxy for diversity of opinion since no

new equity is issued. In contrast, models based on information asymmetries imply that the

announcement return on acquisitions paid for with cash should increase with variables that

measure information asymmetry. Not issuing equity when financing an acquisition must be

interpreted as positive news about the value of equity and it must be more positive news when

there is greater uncertainty about the true value of the firm. Regressions (5) through (8) in Table 6

replicate regressions (1) through (4) for acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash.

Idiosyncratic volatility has a significant positive coefficient in regressions (5) through (7) and a p-

value of 0.105 in regression (8). In regression (6), the dispersion of analyst forecasts has a



                                                   22
positive significant coefficient as well, and in regression (7) our alternate measure of high

dispersion of analyst forecasts has a significant positive coefficient. When we have only one

proxy for growth uncertainty in a regression (not reported), the absolute earnings announcement

abnormal return has a positive significant coefficient for acquisitions of public firms paid for with

cash.

    The Myers and Majluf (1984) model implies that an equity issue conveys information about

the value of assets in place. Jain (1992) tests that implication of the model by regressing changes

in analyst forecasts around the time of an equity issuance on the issue abnormal return. We find

some supportive, albeit weak evidence in Table 2 where the median change in acquirer yearly and

quarterly earnings forecasts is lower around acquisitions than at other times. In contrast, the

difference of medians for long-term earnings growth is positive. This evidence is for all

acquisitions, but the Myers-Majluf (1984) prediction is about firms issuing equity, and thus

applies to equity-financed acquisitions only. Though we do not report the results in a table, we

compare changes in forecasts for the three types of acquisitions we focus on. Using median

changes, we find acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity have the highest change and

public acquisitions paid for with cash have the lowest change, with the acquisitions of public

firms paid for with equity in the middle. The only significant difference using the long-term

earnings growth forecasts is between acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity and

acquisitions of public firms paid for with cash. Using yearly earnings forecasts normalized by the

stock price, the change is significantly higher for private firm acquisitions paid for with equity

than for public firm acquisitions paid for with cash, but the p-value for the comparison between

public firm acquisitions paid for with equity and public firm acquisitions paid for with cash is not

significant. In sum, changes in analyst forecasts are not supportive of the Myers-Majluf (1984)

prediction since with that prediction the change should be lowest for acquisitions of public firms

paid for with equity.




                                                 23
    The significant coefficients on some of the variables used in Dierkens (1991) in the

regressions for cash acquisitions of public firms and equity acquisitions of private firms cannot be

explained by diversity of opinion models and are direct evidence of a distinct role for information

asymmetries, so that these variables are supportive of the Myers-Majluf (1984) model in contrast

to the analyst forecast changes. The results for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity

can be explained by diversity of opinion as well as information asymmetries unless one has

strong priors that idiosyncratic volatility is only a proxy for asymmetric information.



7. Changes in forecast dispersion and bidder abnormal returns

    The asymmetric information models imply that investors learn from corporate actions, so

information asymmetry should fall following a merger announcement. To the extent that

investors learn in models with heterogeneous beliefs, they should also learn from merger

announcements, so that heterogeneous beliefs models predict in that case that the abnormal return

is higher for firms where the dispersion of analyst forecasts falls more. Table 2 shows that the

mean, but not the median, change in dispersion of analyst forecasts from before the

announcement of an acquisition to after the announcement is significantly negative. The valuation

model of Pástor and Veronesi (2004) predicts a positive relation between a firm value and

uncertainty about its long-run expected growth. We proxy for long-run expected growth with the

dispersion of analyst long-term growth forecasts. Our measure of the change in dispersion of

analyst forecasts is the difference between the dispersion of analyst forecasts in month t+1 and

month t–1, where month t denotes the acquisition announcement month. The change in dispersion

has a correlation of -0.2 with the level of the dispersion of analyst forecasts. Consequently, firms

with high dispersion of analyst forecasts are expected to see a drop in their dispersion of analyst

forecasts.

    We first compare the abnormal returns for bidders where the change in dispersion is negative

with the abnormal return for bidders where the change is positive, ignoring the firms where the



                                                 24
change is zero. The bidders with a decrease in dispersion of analyst forecasts have a worse

abnormal return by 1.26% on average for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity. After

the beginning of 1998 the difference is 3% which is especially large. In contrast, the difference

for acquisitions of private firms has the opposite sign and is -1.22%.

    In Table 7, we first show regressions where the dependent variable is the bidder abnormal

return and the explanatory variables are, respectively, the dispersion of analyst forecasts, the

change in analyst forecasts dispersion, and the change in the median analyst forecasts for

acquisitions of public firms in regression (1) and acquisitions of private firms using equity

financing in regression (2). We find that the changes in the dispersion of analyst forecasts and

changes in the median analyst forecast are not significant in regressions (1) and (2). However, in

regressions (3) and (4) we add our control variables from Section 5 and find that the change in

dispersion has a positive significant coefficient for the sample of public-firm acquisitions. Hence,

bidders whose long-term growth dispersion falls have worse announcement returns, while the

level of the dispersion of analyst forecasts is no longer significant. The coefficient on the change

in the dispersion of analyst forecasts is consistent with the prediction from the model of Pástor

and Veronesi (2004). In models (5), (6), (7) and (8) we repeat the first four regressions using our

measure of dispersion based on the top decile of dispersion of analyst forecasts among all

acquirers with the same number of analysts. That measure remains significant, irrespective of the

addition of the control variables, for acquisitions of public firms when the change in dispersion is

added. The change in dispersion is not significant for acquisitions of private firms in any of the

specifications. Also, for private-firm acquisitions, neither the dispersion of analyst forecasts nor

the change in the median forecast is significant. We also estimate, but do not report, regressions

for cash acquisitions and find that the analyst forecast variables are not significant.

    The result that the change in dispersion is significant for acquisitions of public firms paid for

with equity, but not for other acquisitions, does not fit well with model of Pástor and Veronesi

(2004). That model predicts that if an acquisition reduces uncertainty about future expected



                                                  25
growth it should be associated with a drop in the stock price, everything else equal, regardless of

how it is financed. One possible explanation is that a firm that issues equity to pay for a public

firm acquisition conveys different information than if it pays for an acquisition with cash or if it

pays for a private-firm acquisition with equity. For instance, Myers and Majluf (1984) predict that

issuing equity to unrelated investors conveys bad news about firm value. Hence, analysts might

infer that the firm has worse growth prospects if it finances a public-firm acquisition with equity,

but not for other types of acquisitions. Another possible explanation is simply that poor

announcement returns dampen the optimism of the most optimistic analysts. In that case,

causality would run from the abnormal return to the dispersion of analyst forecasts.



8. Is the abnormal return differential associated with diversity of opinion permanent and

can it be explained by past changes in analyst forecasts?

    An additional prediction coming out of the models that argue growth uncertainty should be

related to abnormal returns of acquisition announcements is that the relation should be permanent.

If the effect we document is temporary, acquisitions of public firms by firms with high valuations

and high dispersion of analyst forecasts should have a higher abnormal return after the acquisition

announcement than similar acquisitions by firms with high valuations and low dispersion of

analyst forecasts. To examine this, we estimate the abnormal returns for the 20 trading days after

the announcement period for the subsamples used in Panels A and B of Table 5. These estimates

are provided in Table 8. In Panel A, we find that the post-announcement abnormal return for the

sample of acquirers of public firms that use equity and have high dispersion of analyst forecasts is

worse than for those with low dispersion of analyst forecasts. The difference in abnormal returns

is –3.75% with a p-value of 0.005. When sorting our sample by Tobin’s q terciles and dispersion

of analyst forecasts terciles, we find that the 20-day abnormal returns have large standard errors

so they are typically not significant for most sorts. Nonetheless, there is a significant difference in

abnormal returns between high and low dispersion acquirers for high valuation firms that is



                                                  26
economically large, –5.91%, and significant. This difference explains the post-announcement

abnormal return difference for the whole sample. In any case, there is no evidence of reversals for

firms with a high dispersion of analyst forecast.

    In Panel B of Table 8, we investigate the post-announcement abnormal returns for the

acquisitions of private firms. We do not find significant differences between high and low

dispersion acquirers. For high valuation firms, the difference in post-announcement abnormal

returns between high and low diversity acquirers is –0.21% with a p-value of 0.945. Therefore, as

for announcement returns, differences in dispersion of analyst forecasts do not appear to matter

for firms that make acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity.

    Another approach to evaluate whether the effect we document is transitory is to estimate a

regression of post-announcement returns on announcement returns, dispersion of analyst

forecasts, and dispersion of analyst forecasts interacted with announcement returns. Reversal of

the announcement return would imply a negative coefficient on the announcement return.

Reversal of the effect we document requires a negative coefficient on the interaction of dispersion

of analyst forecasts and the announcement return. When we estimate this regression (not

reported) for offers to acquire public firms financed with equity, the coefficient on the

announcement return is 0.022 with a p-value of 0.064, the coefficient on the interaction is –

0.0164 with a p-value of 0.399, and the coefficient on dispersion of analyst forecasts is –0.004

with a p-value of 0.168. The coefficient on the interaction is negative, but not significant.

Surprisingly, though, the coefficient on the interaction is negative and significant for private

offers.

    Scherbina (2003) provides evidence that analyst forecasts dispersion is related to the prior

performance of the firm. This raises the concern that our measure of forecast dispersion could

proxy for changes in the level of forecasts or for the level of forecasts. To examine this

possibility, we estimate but do not report regressions where we add changes in the long-term

forecast as well as the level of the forecast. We first add the past-year change in the long-term



                                                    27
growth forecast to regression (2) from Table 4, which includes the forecast dispersion and prior

control variables. The forecast dispersion remains significant with no change in the coefficient

while the past-year change is not significant. We then add to that regression the dispersion of

quarterly and yearly forecasts. We find that adding these forecasts does not change the coefficient

on the dispersion of long-term forecasts. Finally, we add to that regression the quarterly earnings

surprise since Scherbina concludes that analysts are too optimistic when dispersion is high. The

quarterly earnings surprise is calculated as the actual quarterly earnings minus the most recent

median (mean) analyst forecast if the announcement occurred during the period starting one

month before the announcement and ending one month after the announcement. If no

announcement occurred in that period, the earnings surprise is zero. Adding the quarterly

earnings surprise does not change our results. We repeat these regressions for private firm

acquisitions paid for with equity. The coefficient on the dispersion of long-term forecasts is

insignificant in each model for private acquisitions.



9. Conclusion

    Growth uncertainty can be related to acquisition abnormal returns for at least three reasons:

(1) greater investor heterogeneity is associated with a downward-sloping demand curve for stock,

so the stock price has to fall to absorb a greater supply of shares with acquisitions of public firms

financed with equity; (2) growth uncertainty is associated with information asymmetries so the

choice of means of payment in acquisitions is a signal of the true value of the firm’s equity; and

(3) firm value is increasing in growth uncertainty and falls with resolution of uncertainty, so

acquisitions that decrease growth uncertainty but do not have large synergy gains result in a

decrease in firm value. In this paper, we show that firms with greater growth uncertainty have

worse announcements return for acquisitions of public firms paid for with equity and, for at least

some measures of growth uncertainty, better announcement returns for acquisitions of public




                                                 28
firms paid for with cash. For acquisitions of private firms paid for with equity, there is no

significant relation between growth uncertainty and abnormal returns.

    The resolution of uncertainty hypothesis predicts that any acquisition that reduces uncertainty

should be associated with a drop in firm value for growth firms, regardless of whether the

acquired firm is public or private and irrespective of how the acquisition is financed. The

evidence does not support the hypothesis in this form. The diversity of opinion models imply that

diversity of opinion should not be related to the announcement return when no equity is issued.

The results for cash acquisitions of public firms do not seem consistent with this prediction. The

asymmetric information models predict that the announcement return for cash offers should

increase with measures of information asymmetry. The evidence is supportive of this prediction

when the measure of information asymmetry is the acquirer’s idiosyncratic volatility. Only

information asymmetry models seem readily capable of explaining this result. The evidence

therefore supports an important role for information asymmetries, but the diversity of opinion

models and the resolution of uncertainty model explain some of the results we find as well.




                                                29
References

Asquith, P., Bruner, R., Mullins, D., 1983. The gains to bidding firms from merger. Journal of
Financial Economics 11, 121-139.

Baker, M., J. Coval, and J.C. Stein, 2004, Corporate financing decisions when investors take the
path of least resistance, unpublished paper, Harvard Economics Department, Cambridge, MA.

Brown, Stephen J., Warner, J.B., 1985. Using daily stock returns, the case of event studies.
Journal of Financial Economics 14, 3-31.

Chang, S., 1998. Takeovers of privately held targets, method of payment, and bidder returns.
Journal of Finance 52, 773-784.

Chen, J.S.,, Hong, H.G., Stein, J., 2002. Breadth of Ownership and Stock Returns. Journal of
Financial Economics 66, 171-205.

Dierkens, N., 1991. Information asymmetry and equity issues. Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 26, 181-200.

Diether, K., 2004. Long-run event performance and opinion divergence. Working paper, The
Ohio State University.

Diether, K.B., Malloy, C.J., Scherbina A., 2002. Differences of opinion and the cross section of
stock returns. Journal of Finance 57, 2213-2141.

Dong, M., D. Hirshleifer, S. Richardson, Teoh, S.H., 2003. Does investor misvaluation drive the
takeover market? unpublished working paper, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.

Eckbo, B. E., Giammarino, R.M., Heinkel, R.L., 1990. Asymmetric information and the medium
of exchange in takeovers: Theory and tests. Review of Financial Studies 3, 651-676.

Fama, E.F., French, K.R., 1993. Common risk-factors in the returns on stocks and bonds. Journal
of Financial Economics 33, 3-56.

Fuller, K., J. Netter, Stegemoller, M., 2002. What do returns to acquiring firms tell us? Evidence
from firms that make many acquisitions. Journal of Finance 57, 1763-1794.

Hong, H.G., Scheinkman, J.A., Xiong, W., 2004. Asset float and speculative bubbles.
unpublished working paper, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.

Hong, H., T. Lim, Stein, J.C., 2000. Bad news travels slowly: Size, analyst coverage, and the
profitability of momentum strategies. Journal of Finance 55, 265-295.

Jain, P., 1992. Equity issues and changes in expectations of earnings by financial analysts.
Review of Financial Studies 5, 669-683.

Jensen, M.C., 2004. Agency costs of overvalued equity. Harvard NOM Working Paper No. 04-
26; ECGI - Finance Working Paper No. 39/2004, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.




                                               30
Johnson, T., 2004. Forecast dispersion and the cross-section of returns. Journal of Finance,
forthcoming.

Jovanovic, B., Braguinsky, S., 2004. Bidder discounts and target premia in takeovers. American
Economic Review 94, 46-56.

Krasker, W. S., 1986. Stock price movements in response to stock issues under asymmetric
information. Journal of Finance 41, 93-106.

Lang, L. H. P., Stulz, R. M., Walkling, R. A., 1989. Managerial performance, Tobin's Q, and the
gains from successful tender offers. Journal of Financial Economics 24, 137-154.

LaPorta, R., 1996. Expectations and the Cross-Section of Stock Returns. Journal of Finance
51(5).

McCardle, K.F., Viswanathan, S., 1994. The direct entry versus takeover decision and stock price
performance around takeovers. Journal of Business 67, 1-43.

Maloney, M.T., R.E. McCormick, Mitchell, M.L., 1993. Managerial decision making and capital
structure. Journal of Business 66, 189-217.

Miller, E. M., 1977. Risk, uncertainty, and divergence of opinion. Journal of Finance 32, 1151-
1168.

Mitchell, M., Pulvino T., Stafford, E., 2004. Price pressure around mergers. Journal of Finance,
59(1), 31-63.

Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., 2004. Firm size and the gains from acquisitions.
Journal of Financial Economics 73, 201-228.

Moeller, S.B., Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., forthcoming, Wealth destruction on a massive
scale: A study of acquiring firm returns in the merger wave of the late 1990's. Journal of Finance.

Morck, R., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1990. Do managerial objectives drive bad acquisitions?
Journal of Finance 45, 31-48.

Myers, S. C., Majluf, N.S., 1984. Corporate financing and investment decisions when firms have
information that investors do not have. Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.

Pástor, L., Veronesi, P., 2004. Was there a Nasdaq bubble in the late 1990s? CRSP Working
Paper No. 557, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL.

Pound, J., 1988. The information effects of takeover bids and resistance. Journal of Financial
Economics 22, 207-227.

Scherbina, A., 2003. Analyst disagreement, forecast bias and stock returns. unpublished working
paper, Harvard University, Cambridge MA.

Schlingemann, F.P., Stulz, R.M., Walkling, R.A., 2002. Divestitures and the liquidity of the
market for corporate assets. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 117-144.




                                                31
Servaes, H., 1991. Tobin’s q, agency costs, and corporate control: An empirical analysis of firm
specific parameters. Journal of Finance 46, 409-419.

Thomas, S., 2002. Firm diversification and asymmetric information: Evidence from analysts’
forecasts and earnings announcements. Journal of Financial Economics 64, 373-396.

Travlos, N.G., 1987. Corporate takeover bids, methods of payment, and bidding firms' stock
returns. Journal of Finance 42, 943-963.




                                              32
Table 1
Sample Summary Statistics
The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S. acquirers is from SDC Merger
and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving U.S. private or public targets. The
sample is presented unrestricted (all) and restricted to deals with coverage by three or more analysts and
available data on long-term earnings growth forecasts (with analyst data), where n lists the number of
observations. The transaction value is from SDC and represents the total value of consideration paid by the
acquirer, excluding fees and expenses. The market value of equity (MVE) is the shares outstanding times the
stock price at the fiscal year end prior to the announcement and the market value of assets (MVA) is the book
value of assets minus the book value of equity plus MVE. Days to completion measures the number of days
between the announcement and effective date (for successful deals). Competed, hostile, tender offer, and cash
and equity in consideration are from SDC. Same industry deals involve targets with the same 2-digit SIC code
as that of the bidder. The liquidity index for the target is calculated as the value of corporate control
transactions for each year and 2-digit SIC code divided by the total book value of assets of firms in the 2-digit
SIC code for that year. Cash includes cash and marketable securities and is normalized by the book value of
assets. Leverage is measured as the ratio of long-term and short-term debt, and the market (book) value of
assets. Tobin’s q is defined as the book value of assets minus the book value of equity plus the MVE, divided
by the book value of assets. Book-to-Market is defined as in Fama and French (1993). Operating cash flow is
defined as sales minus the cost of goods sold, sales and general administration and working capital change,
normalized by MVA. Small dummy is equal to one if the acquirer has a MVE equal or less than the MVE of
the smallest quartile of NYSE firms in each year. The CAR(-1,+1) denotes the 3-day cumulative abnormal
return (in percent) measured using market model residuals. Respectively, a, b, and c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level based on t-tests (means) and Wilcoxon-tests (medians) of the
difference between the two samples.
Panel A: Deal Characteristics                          All (n=11,393)             With analyst data (n=3,419)
                                                   mean           Median              mean            median
Transaction Value (TV)                            394.01           29.27            1021.98a          112.00a
TV / Market Value of Assets (MVA)                 0.2749          0.0779             0.1661a          0.0612a
                                                                                              b
TV / Market Value of Equity (MVE)                 0.5416          0.1535            0.2891            0.1063a
                                                                                            b
Competed × 100%                                     2.95                              3.77
Days to Completion                                   83             55                  88b             67a
                                                                                             a
Percent Cash in Consideration × 100%               44.90           33.07              38.51            0.00a
                                                                                             a
Percent Equity in Consideration × 100%             41.89           11.95              49.83            50.00a
                                                                                             a
Pure Cash in Consideration × 100%                  30.22                              24.31
Pure Equity in Consideration × 100%                31.87                              38.90a
Hostile × 100%                                     1.85                                2.16
Tender offer × 100%                                 5.88                               8.86a
Same Industry × 100%                               31.44                              35.70a
Public Target × 100%                               34.17                              47.09a
Private Target × 100%                              65.83                              52.91a
Liquidity Index × 100%                             18.41           9.06               19.25            10.49a
Panel B: Acquirer Characteristics
                                                   mean           median              mean            median
Cash / Book Value of Assets (BVA)                 0.1742          0.0806            0.1825b           0.0869b
Book Value Assets (BVA)                          2172.43          214.63            5373.07a          704.45a
                                                                                               a
Market Value Assets (MVA)                        3374.22          394.70            8682.03          1621.12a
                                                                                               a
Market Value Equity (MVE)                        1685.64          208.67            4456.55           986.21a
                                                                                              a
Leverage (MVA)                                    0.2966          0.2533             0.2472           0.1953a
                                                                                              a
Leverage (BVA)                                    0.4569          0.4349             0.4220           0.4092a
                                                                                              a
Tobin's Q                                         2.3947          1.5282             3.0438           1.8817a
                                                                                              a
Book-to-Market                                    0.5594          0.4535             0.4330           0.3520a
Operating Cash Flow (MVA)                         0.1785          0.0891             0.3198           0.0902
Small dummy                                       0.5171                             0.1565a




                                                     33
Table 1. (Continued)
Panel C: Abnormal returns
                               mean         median      mean          median
CAR(-1,+1) × 100% - All       1.1601        0.1730    -0.1592a       -0.2679a
                                   (n=11,393)                (n=3,419)


CAR(-1,+1) x 100% - Public    -1.0689       -0.9834   -1.9161a       -1.4681a
                                    (n=3,893)                (n=1,610)


CAR(-1,+1) x 100% - Private   2.3171         0.7456   1.4045a        0.8058
                                    (n=7,500)               (n=1,809)




                                   34
Table 2
I/B/E/S Earnings Forecast Summary Statistics
The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S. acquirers is from SDC
Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving U.S. private or public
targets. Column (1) contains all I/B/E/S firms with three or more analysts and available data on long-term
earnings growth forecasts. The sample is presented in column (2) and consists of deals with coverage by
three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings growth forecasts. In column (3) the firm
median is based on all available months on I/B/E/S for the sample firms for which forecast data exists
excluding the months prior, during, and after the announcement of the deal. The number of observations in
each group with data on the standard deviation (std) of the long-term growth forecast is indicated with n.
For each variable the mean and median (in brackets) is reported. In Panel A the standard deviation (std) and
median (med) of the long-term earnings growth forecasts are reported in percent and the yearly (quarterly)
earnings forecasts are measured in dollars normalized by the stock price (stock price/4) from I/B/E/S in the
month prior to the deal. In Panel B the forecast revisions for the sample firms are the difference from the
month before the announcement to the month after the announcement. The yearly (quarterly) revisions are
normalized by the stock price (stock price/4). Forecast revisions for all I/B/E/S firms and firm median are
measured over a two-month period with overlapping windows. Respectively, a, b, and c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level based on t-tests (means) and Wilcoxon-tests (medians) of the
unpaired differences across the groups in columns (1) - (2) and (1) - (3) and a paired t-test (sign-rank test) is
used for the mean (median) paired difference between (2) - (3). Respectively – and + denote a negative and
positive test-statistic in case the mean or median paired difference is rounded to zero in the table, yet
significantly different from zero.
                                    I/B/E/S    Sample        Firm
                                     Firms      Firms      Median
                                  n=439,774 n=3,419 n=3,321                              Differences
Panel A: Forecasts
                                      (1)        (2)          (3)           (1) - (2)      (1) - (3)    (2) - (3)
Long-term Growth (std)               4.328      4.855        4.519           -0.528a       -0.191a      -0.359a
                                                                                       a             a
                                    [3.000]    [3.210]     [3.460]         [-0.210]       [-0.460]      [0.045]c
                                                                                     a             a
Long-term Growth (median)           15.875     21.525       20.566          -5.650         -4.691       -0.998a
                                                                                       a             a
                                   [14.000]   [20.000] [20.000]            [-6.000]       [-6.000]     [0.000]a–
                                                                                    a             a
Yearly Earnings (std)                0.834      0.005        0.006            0.828         0.828        0.000
                                    [0.007]    [0.003]     [0.003]          [0.005]a      [0.004]a     [0.000]a+
Yearly Earnings (median)             4.036      0.064        0.064            3.972a        3.972a       0.001
                                                                                      a
                                    [0.071]    [0.063]     [0.067]          [0.008]       [0.004]a      [0.004]a
Quarterly Earnings (std)             0.027      0.005        0.005            0.022a        0.022a       0.000
                                    [0.001]    [0.002]     [0.003]         [-0.002 ] [-0.002]a [0.000]a+
                                                                                     a

Quarterly Earnings (median)          0.222      0.051        0.049            0.170a        0.172a      -0.004b
                                                                                       a             a
                                    [0.007]    [0.051]     [0.055]         [-0.043]       [-0.047]      [0.002]a

Panel B: Forecast revisions
                                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (1) - (2)    (1) - (3)     (2) - (3)
Long-term Growth (std)              0.027a       -0.022       0.015            0.050       0.012          0.030
                                   [0.000]a     [0.000]      [0.000]c        [0.000]      [0.000]       [0.000]
Long-term Growth (median)          -0.172a       -0.028      -0.011c         -0.143b      -0.161a         0.020
                                   [0.000]a     [0.000]b     [0.000]a        [0.000]a     [0.000]a     [0.000]c+
Yearly Earnings (std)               0.004a       0.001        0.000           0.004a       0.004a        -0.001
                                   [0.000]a     [0.000]b     [0.000]a        [0.000]b     [0.000]      [0.000]a–
Yearly Earnings (median)           -0.009a        0.000       0.000a          -0.009a     -0.009a         0.000
                                   [0.000]a     [0.000]a     [0.000]         [0.000]a     [0.000]a     [0.000]a–
Quarterly Earnings (std)            0.001a       0.000b       0.000a          0.001a       0.001a       0.000c–
                                   [0.000]a     [0.000]a     [0.000]a        [0.000]      [0.000]      [0.000]a–
Quarterly Earnings (median)         0.005a       0.001        0.000a          0.004a       0.004a        -0.001
                                   [0.000]a     [0.000]a     [0.000]a        [0.000]a     [0.000]a     [0.000]a–
Table 3
Abnormal Returns by Diversity of Opinion
The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S. acquirers is from SDC
Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving U.S. private or public
targets. The acquirer has coverage by three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings
growth forecasts. The standard deviation (std) of the long-term earnings growth forecast is from I/B/E/S.
Abnormal returns are defined as the 3-day cumulative abnormal return (in percent) measured using the
market model residuals, where the parameters are estimated over the (−205, −6) event window relative to
the announcement day. Abnormal returns are winsorized at the 1% and 99% level. Cells denote
respectively the mean, standard deviation (Std Dev), and number of observations (n) for each group. Target
status is public, private, or both (All). The form of payment is 100% equity, 100% cash, or all deals
regardless of form of payment, including mixed forms of payment (All). Respectively, a and b denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level based on t-tests of the differences of the means
between the high and low groups.
                                                         Long-term growth (std)
   Target        Form of                                                                      High – Low
   status        Payment                           Low       Mid      High      Total           p-value
     All            All            Mean           -0.659 -0.081      0.144     -0.170           0.803b
                                  Std Dev          5.848    7.158    9.042      7.559            0.016
                                     n              991     1,206    1,202      3,399
   Public         Equity           Mean           -2.149 -1.981 -4.303 -2.695                   -2.154a
                                  Std Dev          6.176    6.863    9.302      7.469            0.003
                                     n              263      259      204        726
  Private         Equity           Mean            0.393    2.166    1.661      1.596            1.269
                                  Std Dev          6.244    8.391    9.866      8.860            0.214
                                     n              107      191      302        600
   Public          Cash            Mean           -0.882 -0.094      0.285     -0.324            1.167
                                  Std Dev          4.339    5.026    5.691      4.934            0.170
                                     n              90        78       53        221




                                                   36
Table 4
Cross-sectional Regressions for Analyst Dispersion for All Equity, Public and Private Target Acquisitions
OLS regressions where the dependent variable is the 3-day cumulative abnormal return measured using
market model residuals. The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S.
acquirers is from SDC Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving
U.S. private or public targets using 100% equity payment. The sample is restricted to deals with coverage
by three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings growth forecasts. The standard
deviation (std) of the long-term earnings growth forecasts are reported in percent and the yearly (quarterly)
earnings forecasts are measured in dollars normalized by the stock price (stock price/4) from I/B/E/S in the
month prior to the deal. Top decile long-term growth (LTG) std is equal to one if the acquirer’s std is in the
top decile of std among all acquirers with the same number of analysts. Leverage is measured as the ratio of
long-term and short-term debt and the market value of assets (MVA). Tobin’s q is defined as the book
value of assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the book value of
assets. Same industry deals involve targets with the same 2-digit SIC code as that of the bidder. Competed,
hostile, tender offer and transaction value are from SDC. The relative transaction value (TV/MVE)
represents the total value of consideration paid by the acquirer, excluding fees and expenses divided by the
market value of equity. Operating cash flow is defined as sales minus the cost of goods sold, sales and
general administration and working capital change, normalized by market value of assets. Small dummy is
equal to one if the bidder has a market capitalization equal or less than that of the smallest quartile of
NYSE firms in each year. The liquidity index for the target is calculated as the value of corporate control
transactions for each year and 2-digit SIC code divided by the book value of assets of firms in the 2-digit
SIC code for that year. Industry dummies are included (not reported). Respectively, a, b, and c denote
statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, based on heteroscedasticity-adjusted standard errors.
                Model                        (1)               (2)                (3)               (4)
            Target Status                  Public            Public            Private           Private
      Long-term Growth (std)              -0.0028b         -0.0022c            -0.0007           -0.0007
                                           0.024             0.074              0.453             0.420
                                                                    b
         Leverage (MVA)                                     0.0445                               -0.0547
                                                             0.034                                0.166
              Tobin’s q                                     -0.0005                               0.0001
                                                             0.772                                0.949
           Same Industry                                    0.0059                              -0.0262a
                                                             0.340                                0.006
            Tender Offer                                    -0.0248
                                                             0.301
             Hostile Deal                                   0.0276
                                                             0.141
           Competed Deal                                     0.0160                             -0.0622a
                                                             0.189                                0.000
                                                                     a
              TV / MVE                                     -0.0246                               0.0163
                                                             0.006                                0.225
   Operating Cash Flow (MVA)                                 0.0056                               0.0007
                                                             0.130                                0.844
                                                                    a
           Small Dummy                                      0.0417                               0.0231
                                                             0.000                                0.191
           Liquidity Index                                  0.0207c                              0.0017
                                                             0.063                                0.939
                                                  c                                   b
               Intercept                  -0.0551           -0.0127            0.0386            0.0258
                                           0.088             0.559              0.024             0.253
                   n                        724               721                600               599
            Adjusted - R2                  0.026             0.072              0.014             0.026



                                                     37
Table 4. (Continued)
             Model              (5)         (6)         (7)       (8)        (9)
          Target status        Public      Public     Public     Public    Private
    Long-term Growth (std)                           -0.0020
                                                      0.121
     Yearly Earnings (std)     -0.5069a              -0.0598
                                0.004                 0.911
    Quarterly Earnings (std)              -0.6811b   -0.5340
                                           0.026      0.522
     Top Decile LTG (std)                                       -0.0303b    0.0046
                                                                  0.028      0.696
       Leverage (MVA)          0.0529b    0.0517b    0.0472b    0.0475b    -0.0529
                                 0.011      0.014      0.031      0.022      0.179
           Tobin’s q           -0.0017    -0.0017    -0.0007    -0.0005    -0.0002
                                 0.337      0.339      0.690      0.797      0.847
        Same Industry           0.0052     0.0053     0.0064     0.0048    -0.0257a
                                 0.406      0.416      0.322      0.433      0.007
         Tender Offer          -0.0259    -0.0232     -0.024    -0.0224
                                 0.263      0.322      0.321      0.357
         Hostile Deal          0.0314c    0.0319c     0.0274     0.0253
                                 0.087      0.080      0.141      0.176
        Competed Deal          0.0199c    0.0214c     0.0174     0.0150    -0.0600a
                                 0.088      0.087      0.176      0.221      0.000
          TV / MVE             -0.0309a   -0.0326a   -0.0256a   -0.0246a    0.0163
                                 0.001      0.001      0.007      0.005      0.225
 Operating Cash Flow (MVA)      0.0077c   0.0091c     0.0063     0.0056     0.0015
                                 0.074      0.079      0.159      0.143      0.667
        Small Dummy             0.0339a   0.0347a    0.0421a     0.0401a    0.0235
                                 0.005      0.007      0.001      0.001      0.182
        Liquidity Index         0.0212c   0.0216b     0.0200c   0.0229b     0.0016
                                 0.051      0.048      0.073      0.043      0.944
           Intercept            0.0390     0.0410     0.0457    -0.0254     0.0063
                                 0.242      0.229      0.170      0.189      0.768
              n                   739        704        691        721        599
         Adjusted - R2           0.081      0.081      0.072      0.073      0.025




                                          38
Table 5
Abnormal Returns by Diversity of Opinion and Firm Valuation
The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S. acquirers is from SDC
Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving U.S. private or public
targets. The acquirer has coverage by three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings
growth forecasts. The standard deviation (std) of the long-term earnings growth forecast is from I/B/E/S.
Tobin’s q is defined as the book value of assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of
equity, divided by the book value of assets. Abnormal returns are defined as the 3-day cumulative abnormal
return (in percent) measured using the market model residuals, where the parameters are estimated over the
(−205, −6) event window relative to the announcement day. Abnormal returns are winsorized at the 1% and
99% level. Cells denote respectively the mean, standard deviation (Std Dev), and number of observations
(n) for each group. The relative transaction value (TV/MVE) is from SDC and represents the total value of
consideration paid by the acquirer, excluding fees and expenses divided by the market value of equity.
Diagonal measures the difference between the high-high and low-low cells. Panel A is public targets with
100% equity payment, panel B is private targets with 100% equity payment, panel C is public targets with
100% cash payment and panel D is high valuation, high std acquisitions sorted by TV/MVE. Respectively,
a b
 , , and c denote statistical significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% level based on t-tests of the differences of
the means between the high and low groups.
Panel A: Public targets and equity consideration
                                                 Long-term growth (std)                      High – Low
Tobin’s q                               Low          Mid       High       Total                 p-value
   Low           Mean                  -2.010      -2.028     -2.268     -2.042                 -0.257
                Std Dev                 4.885       5.540      8.084      5.474                  0.822
                    n                    153          92         27        272
    Mid          Mean                  -1.536      -1.352     -1.569     -1.477                 -0.033
                Std Dev                 6.552       7.470      9.316      7.790                  0.984
                    n                    50          60         50         160
   High          Mean                  -3.016      -2.294     -5.812     -3.961                 -2.797b
                Std Dev                 8.434       7.544      9.275      8.636                  0.049
                    n                    60          107        127        294
                                                                                               Diagonal
                                                                                                p-value
              High – Low               -1.005      -0.266     -3.545c    -1.919a                -3.802a
                p-value                 0.280       0.781      0.068      0.002                  0.000
Panel B: Private targets and equity consideration
                                                 Long-term growth (std)                        High – Low
Tobin’s q                               Low          Mid       High       Total                   p-value
   Low           Mean                  -1.138       5.029     -0.144      1.651                    0.995
                Std Dev                 3.127      12.617      6.103      9.166                    0.559
                    n                     17          22         15         54
    Mid          Mean                  -0.595       3.784     -0.052      1.433                    0.543
                Std Dev                 5.154       8.900      8.353      8.227                    0.761
                    n                    27          53         47         127
   High          Mean                   1.229       0.883      2.110      1.638                    0.881
                Std Dev                 7.156       6.856     10.295      9.024                    0.523
                    n                    63          116        240        419
                                                                                                 Diagonal
                                                                                                  p-value
               High-Low                 2.367      -4.146b     2.254     -0.013                    3.248
               (p-value)                0.189       0.028      0.403      0.992                    0.197




                                                     39
Table 5. (Continued)
Panel C: Public targets and cash consideration
                                             Long-term growth (std)                  High – Low
Tobin’s q                            Low         Mid       High        Total           p-value
  Low           Mean                -0.103     -0.643      1.817       0.202           1.920c
               Std Dev               3.468      4.806      4.252       4.173            0.081
                   n                  34         24         19          77
  Mid           Mean                -1.596      0.649      0.329      -0.474           1.925
               Std Dev               3.398      4.728      7.676       4.876           0.209
                   n                  39         29         14          82
  High          Mean                -0.799     -0.429     -1.201      -0.780           -0.402
               Std Dev               7.066      5.634      5.150       5.827            0.843
                   n                  17         25         20          62
                                                                                      Diagonal
                                                                                      p-value
             High-Low             -0.696      0.213      -3.018c     -0.982            -1.098
              (p-value)            0.638       0.888      0.054       0.250             0.354
Panel D: High Dispersion and High Tobin’s q by Relative Transaction Value (TV/MVE)
                                                       Target Status
TV/MVE                                        Public                 Private
  Low              Mean                       -4.248                  2.014
                  Std Dev                     6.528                   9.341
                     n                          43                     80
  Mid              Mean                       -3.953                  1.610
                  Std Dev                    11.395                   9.773
                     n                          42                     80
  High             Mean                       -9.273                  2.706
                  Std Dev                     8.513                  11.715
                     n                          42                     80
                                                     a
                 High-Low                    -5.026                   0.692
                 (p-value)                     0.003                  0.680




                                                  40
Table 6
Cross-sectional Regression with Information Asymmetry Measures for Public Acquisitions
OLS regressions where the dependent variable is the 3-day cumulative abnormal return measured using
market model residuals. The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S.
acquirers is from SDC Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving
U.S. public targets using either 100% equity payment or 100% cash payment. The sample is restricted to
deals with coverage by three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings growth forecasts. The
standard deviation (std) of the long-term earnings growth forecasts are reported in percent. Top decile long-
term growth (LTG) is equal to one if the acquirer’s std is in the top decile of std among all acquirers with the
same number of analysts. Volatility is measured as the standard deviation of the market-adjusted residuals of
the daily stock returns measured during the period starting from 205 days to 6 days prior to the acquisition
announcement. In models (2), (3), (6) and (7) volatility is orthogonal to the standard deviation of long-term
growth. The earnings announcement standard deviation (std) is measured as the standard deviation of all 3-
day cumulative abnormal returns around earnings announcements from I/B/E/S using the market model over
the 5 year period preceding the acquisition announcement. Turnover is defined as the median of daily volume
divided by shares outstanding from day (-205,-6) relative to the acquisition announcement day. Leverage is
measured as the ratio of long-term and short-term debt and the market value of assets (MVA). Tobin’s q is
defined as the book value of assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided
by the book value of assets. Same industry deals involve targets with the same 2-digit SIC code as that of the
bidder. Competed, hostile, tender offer and transaction value are from SDC. The relative transaction value
(TV/MVE) represents the total value of consideration paid by the acquirer, excluding fees and expenses
divided by the market value of equity. Operating cash flow is defined as sales minus the cost of goods sold,
sales and general administration and working capital change, normalized by market value of assets. Small
dummy is equal to one if the bidder has a market capitalization equal or less than that of the smallest quartile
of NYSE firms in each year. The liquidity index for the target is calculated as the value of corporate control
transactions for each year and 2-digit SIC code divided by the book value of assets of firms in the 2-digit SIC
code for that year. Industry dummies are included (not reported). Respectively, a, b, and c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, based on heteroscedasticity-adjusted standard errors.
       Model              (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
     Payment            Equity     Equity     Equity      Equity       Cash        Cash       Cash       Cash
    Long-term
   Growth (std)        -0.0005 -0.0020                   -0.0002      0.0018      0.0030b               0.0013
                        0.741      0.130                  0.893       0.186        0.022                 0.463
 Top Decile LTG
        (std)                                -0.0332b                                       0.0363b
                                               0.025                                         0.026
                               a                                 c           b
     Volatility       -0.9778                           -0.8818      0.8078                             0.8264
                        0.009                             0.073       0.037                              0.105
     Volatility
  Orthogonalized                  -0.9778a -0.9750a                               0.8078b 0.7949b
                                   0.009       0.008                               0.037     0.044
     Earnings
  Announcement
   Residual (std)                                        -0.0908                            -0.1741
                                                          0.469                              0.332
     Turnover                                            -0.0001                                        0.0011
                                                          0.920                                          0.539
 Leverage (MVA)         0.0321     0.0321     0.0348      0.0288      0.0019      0.0019    -0.0029 -0.0039
                        0.167      0.167       0.127      0.216       0.934        0.934     0.905       0.881
     Tobin’s q         0.0002      0.0002     0.0005     0.0005      -0.0045 -0.0045 -0.0060 -0.0050
                        0.919      0.919       0.828      0.830       0.289        0.289     0.219       0.283



                                                     41
Table 6. (Continued)
      Model            (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
    Payment           Equity    Equity     Equity      Equity      Cash       Cash       Cash       Cash
  Same Industry      0.0076    0.0076     0.0066      0.0074     -0.0037    -0.0037    -0.0037    -0.0084
                      0.224     0.224      0.286       0.237      0.655      0.655      0.655      0.301
  Tender Offer       -0.0240   -0.0240    -0.0201     -0.0297     0.0092     0.0092     0.0100     0.0119
                      0.324     0.324      0.411       0.224      0.231      0.231      0.189      0.127
   Hostile Deal      0.0259    0.0259     0.0229      0.0287     -0.0098    -0.0098    -0.0109    -0.0183c
                      0.158     0.158      0.212       0.117      0.418      0.418      0.356      0.100
 Competed Deal       0.0169    0.0169     0.0154      0.0156     -0.0147    -0.0147    -0.0142    -0.0015
                      0.178     0.178      0.220       0.213      0.261      0.261      0.280      0.868
   TV / MVE         -0.0265a   -0.0265a   -0.0262a    -0.0252a   0.0099     0.0099     0.0100     0.0216a
                     0.002      0.002      0.002       0.006      0.384      0.384      0.401      0.001
 Operating Cash
  Flow (MVA)        0.0023     0.0023     0.0024       0.0013    -0.0268b   -0.0268b   -0.0274b   -0.0255c
                     0.488      0.488      0.503       0.778      0.032      0.032      0.029      0.060
 Small Dummy        0.0545a    0.0545a    0.0530a     0.0548a    -0.0280c   -0.0280c   -0.0294c   -0.0585a
                     0.000      0.000      0.000       0.001      0.081      0.081      0.080      0.000
 Liquidity Index    0.0137     0.0137     0.0157      -0.0004    -0.0370b   -0.0370b   -0.0366b   -0.0400b
                     0.184      0.184      0.129       0.431      0.027      0.027      0.034      0.020
    Intercept       0.0566     0.0352     0.0251       0.0124    -0.0490c   -0.0313c   -0.0131    -0.0435b
                     0.154      0.368      0.526       0.591      0.009      0.074      0.462      0.043
       n              683        683        683         675        211        211        211        194
  Adjusted - R2      0.079      0.079      0.083       0.071      0.057      0.057      0.056      0.079




                                                 42
Table 7
Cross-sectional Regression for Forecast Revisions for 100% Equity, Public and Private Target Acquisitions
OLS regressions where the dependent variable is the 3-day cumulative abnormal return measured using
market model residuals. The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S.
acquirers is from SDC Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving
U.S. private or public targets using 100% equity payment. The sample is restricted to deals with coverage by
three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings growth forecasts. The standard deviation
(std) of the long-term earnings growth forecasts are reported in percent. Top decile long-term growth (std) is
equal to one if the acquirer’s std is in the top decile of std among all acquirers with the same number of
analysts. Forecast revisions of the long-term growth forecasts for the std and median are the changes from
the month before the announcement to the month after the announcement. Leverage is measured as the ratio
of long-term and short-term debt and the market value of assets (MVA). Tobin’s q is defined as the book
value of assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of equity, divided by the book value of
assets. Same industry deals involve targets with the same 2-digit SIC code as that of the bidder. Competed,
hostile, tender offer and transaction value are from SDC. The relative transaction value (TV/MVE)
represents the total value of consideration paid by the acquirer, excluding fees and expenses divided by the
market value of equity. Operating cash flow is defined as sales minus the cost of goods sold, sales and
general administration and working capital change, normalized by market value of assets. Small dummy is
equal to one if the bidder has a market capitalization equal or less than that of the smallest quartile of NYSE
firms in each year. The liquidity index for the target is calculated as the value of corporate control
transactions for each year and 2-digit SIC code divided by the book value of assets of firms in the 2-digit SIC
code for that year. Industry dummies are included (not reported). Respectively, a, b, and c denote statistical
significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%, based on heteroscedasticity-adjusted standard errors.
       Model              (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)
    Target status       Public     Private     Public    Private      Public      Private     Public     Private
     Long-term
    Growth (std)       -0.0024b -0.0003 -0.0017 -0.0007
                        0.044       0.743      0.152      0.509
 Top Decile LTG
        (std)                                                        -0.0334b 0.0071 -0.0244c 0.0058
                                                                       0.016       0.570      0.073        0.641
 Forecast Revision
     LTG (std)          0.0046      0.0009    0.0061b    0.0009       0.0048      0.0015     0.0062b      0.0008
                        0.151       0.788      0.048      0.788        0.140       0.645      0.046        0.446
 Forecast Revision
   LTG (median)         0.0025     -0.0001     0.0021    0.0000       0.0026     -0.0002     0.0021      -0.0002
                        0.203       0.820      0.290      0.956        0.218       0.679      0.295        0.783
                                                     c                                              b
 Leverage (MVA)                               0.0410     -0.0498                             0.0435      -0.0471
                                               0.066      0.200                               0.047        0.226
     Tobin’s q                                -0.0008     0.0004                             -0.0007      0.0000
                                               0.666      0.758                               0.700        0.979
                                                                  a
   Same Industry                              0.0049 -0.0278                                 0.0040 -0.0272a
                                               0.427      0.006                               0.517        0.007
   Tender Offer                               -0.0223                                        -0.0202
                                               0.331                                          0.382
    Hostile Deal                              0.0274                                         0.0254
                                               0.160                                          0.194
                                                                  a
  Competed Deal                               0.0151 -0.0660                                 0.0142 -0.0631a
                                               0.222      0.000                               0.249        0.000
                                                      a          b                                   a
     TV / MVE                                -0.0252     0.0746                             -0.0252      0.0731b
                                               0.009      0.011                               0.008        0.011



                                                     43
Table 7. (Continued)
      Model           (1)       (2)      (3)            (4)      (5)       (6)      (7)        (8)
  Target status      Public   Private   Public        Private   Public   Private   Public    Private
 Operating Cash
  Flow (MVA)                             0.0066        0.0005                       0.0068   0.0013
                                         0.222         0.898                         0.222    0.704
 Small Dummy                            0.0490a       0.0194                       0.0474a   0.0204
                                         0.001         0.308                         0.001    0.290
 Liquidity Index                        0.0194c       -0.0044                      0.0212c   -0.0053
                                         0.077         0.834                         0.056    0.802
    Intercept       0.0579c   0.0368c   -0.0173        0.0127   0.0487   0.0267    -0.0288   -0.0071
                     0.076     0.068     0.471         0.609    0.143     0.131      0.165    0.765
       n              711       574       708           573      711       574        708      573
  Adjusted - R2      0.037    -0.001     0.082         0.026    0.038    -0.001      0.083    0.025




                                                 44
Table 8
Post-Announcement Abnormal returns by Diversity of Opinion and Firm Valuation
The sample of successful and unsuccessful acquisitions by publicly listed U.S. acquirers is from SDC
Merger and Acquisition Database for the period 1980-2002 for all deals involving U.S. private or public
targets. The acquirer has coverage by three or more analysts and available data on long-term earnings
growth forecasts. The standard deviation (std) of the long-term earnings growth forecast is from I/B/E/S.
Tobin’s q is defined as the book value of assets minus the book value of equity plus the market value of
equity, divided by the book value of assets. Post-Announcement Abnormal returns are defined as the
cumulative abnormal return (in percent) over the 20 trading days subsequent to the announcement period,
starting at day +2, measured using the market model residuals. Cells denote respectively the mean, standard
deviation (Std Dev), and number of observations (n) for each group. Diagonal measures the difference
between the high-high and low-low cells. Respectively, a, b, and c denote statistical significance at the 1%,
5%, and 10% level based on t-tests of the differences of the means between the high and low groups.
Panel A: Public targets and equity consideration
                                              Long-term growth (std)                         High – Low
Tobin’s q                             Low         Mid         High       Total                 p-value
   Low            Mean               -1.380     -2.504       -2.451     -1.866                  -1.071
                 Std Dev              7.179      9.157       18.887      9.461                   0.615
                    n                  147         90           24        261
   Mid            Mean               -1.444      1.734       -3.717     -0.866                  -2.273
                 Std Dev              9.688     10.912       17.858     13.143                   0.444
                    n                  48         60           45         153
   High           Mean                0.211      0.053       -5.694     -2.285                  -5.905b
                 Std Dev            12.913      13.610       18.329     15.815                   0.031
                    n                  57         104          113        274
   Total          Mean               -1.032     -0.456       -4.778     -1.810                  -3.746a
                 Std Dev              9.231     11.637       18.228     13.106                   0.005
                    n                  252        254          182        688
                                                                                               Diagonal
                                                                                               p-value
              High – Low              1.591      2.556       -3.243     -0.419                  -4.315a
                 p-value              0.266      0.133        0.435      0.712                   0.010
Panel B: Private targets and equity consideration
                                              Long-term growth (std)                           High – Low
Tobin’s q                             Low         Mid         High       Total                    p-value
   Low            Mean                1.165      6.112       -5.161      1.459                     -6.326
                 Std Dev              8.037     22.049       14.745     16.950                      0.140
                    n                   17         21           14         52
   Mid            Mean               -2.704     -3.505       -3.724     -3.423                     -1.020
                 Std Dev              9.668     12.729       17.638     14.241                      0.798
                    n                  23         44           43         110
   High           Mean               -3.225      0.278       -3.438     -2.405                     -0.213
                 Std Dev            17.709      15.914       21.700     19.736                      0.945
                    n                  59         105          226        390
   Total          Mean               -2.350      0.019       -3.566     -2.244                     -1.216
                 Std Dev            14.825      16.202       20.790     18.528                      0.592
                    n                   99        170          283        552
                                                                                                 Diagonal
                                                                                                  p-value
               High-Low              -4.390     -5.834        1.723     -3.865                     -4.602
                (p-value)             0.326      0.155        0.770      0.179                      0.386




                                                    45
