                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  MARRIAGE AND DIVORCE SINCE WORLD WAR II:
ANALYZING THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGICAL PROGRESS ON THE FORMATION OF HOUSEHOLDS

                                            Jeremy Greenwood
                                               Nezih Guner

                                           Working Paper 10772
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w10772


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       September 2004




    Daron Acemoglu, Alvaro Aguirre, Kei Muraki, Claudia Olivetti and Juan Sanchez are thanked for
    helpful comments. Financial support from the Ministerio de Educacion y Ciencia (Spain) and the NSF
    is gratefully acknowledged. An abridged version of this paper, under the same title, will appear in
    the NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2008, 23, edited by Daron Acemoglu, Kenneth Rogoff and Michael
    Woodford, University of Chicago Press. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
    do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

    © 2004 by Jeremy Greenwood and Nezih Guner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
    exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
    © notice, is given to the source.
Marriage and Divorce since World War II: Analyzing the Role of Technological Progress
on the Formation of Households
Jeremy Greenwood and Nezih Guner
NBER Working Paper No. 10772
September 2004, Revised May 2008
JEL No. E13,J12,J22,O11

                                             ABSTRACT

Since World War II there has been: (i) a rise in the fraction of time that married households allocate
to market work, (ii) an increase in the rate of divorce, and (iii) a decline in the rate of marriage. What
can explain this? It is argued here that technological progress in the household sector has saved on
the need for labor at home. This makes it more feasible for singles to maintain their own home, and
for married women to work. To address this question, a search model of marriage and divorce is developed.
Household production benefits from labor-saving technological progress.


Jeremy Greenwood
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
3718 Locust Walk
McNeil Building, Rm 160
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6297
and NBER
eag@jeremygreenwood.net

Nezih Guner
Department of Economics
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
Calle Madrid 126
Getafe 28903
Spain
nguner@eco.uc3m.es
1     Introduction
Consider the following two facts that have helped reshape U.S. households over the last 50
years:

    1. A smaller proportion of the adult population is now married compared with 50 years
      ago–Figure 1.1 Eighty-two percent of the female population in 1950 was married (out
      of non-widows between the ages of 18 and 64). By 2000 this had declined to 62 percent.
      Adults now spend a smaller fraction of their lives married. In 1950 females spent about
      88 percent of their life married as compared with 60 percent in 1995. Underlying these
      facts are two factors.

         (a) Between 1950 and 1990, the divorce rate doubled from 11 to 23 divorces per 1,000
             married women (between the ages of 18 to 64)–Figure 2.

         (b) At the same time, the marriage rate declined. Exactly how much is somewhat
             sensitive to the particular age group used in the denominator for the calculations.
             In 1950 there were 211 marriages per 1,000 unmarried women as compared with
             just 82 in 2000 (again, out of non-widows between the ages of 18 to 64).

    2. The amount of time allocated to market work by married households has increased
      markedly over the postwar period–see Figure 3. This is mainly due to a rise in labor-
      force participation by married females. In particular,

         (a) In 1950 a married household in the 24-to-54-year-old age group spent working in
             the market 25.5 hours per week per person. This compared with 31.3 hours per
             week in a single household. Thus, singles worked more in the market on average
             than did married couples. At the time, only 23.7 percent of married women
             worked, compared with 78 percent of single ones.

   1
     Data sources, and issues regarding the facts and matching them with the model to be developed, are
detailed in the Appendix.



                                                  1
                                       85

                                                                                                             85




                                                                   Fraction of Adult Life Spent Married, %
                                       80
                                                                                                             80
                    Married Women, %




                                       75                                                                    75



                                                                                                             70
                                       70


                                                                                                             65
                                       65

                                                                                                             60

                                       60
                                            1960     1980   2000                                                  1955   1970    1985
                                                   Year                                                                   Year




                                                   Figure 1: Marriage, 1950-2000.


         (b) By the year 1990 labor e¤ort expended per person by married households had
             risen to 33.5 hours per week. This exceeded the 30.6 hours spent by a single
             household. Almost as many married females were participating in the labor mar-
             ket (71 percent) as single ones (80 percent).

       What economic factors can explain these facts? The idea here is that technological
progress played a major role in inducing these changes.2                                                                  Two hundred years ago the U.S.
was largely a rural economy. The household was the basic production unit, with the family
producing a large fraction of what it consumed. At the time, most marriages were arranged
by the parents of young adults. Key considerations were whether or not the potential groom
would be a good provider, and the bride a good housekeeper.3                                                                        Over time more and more

   2
     The impact of technological progress on household formation was addressed some time ago in a classic
and prescient book by Ogburn and Nimko¤ (1955). The book analyzes the impact of technological progress
on family size, marriage and divorce, and female labor-force participation, among other things.
   3
    Ogburn and Nimko¤ (1955, pp. 40-41) quote Godey’s The Lady’s Book in 1831 as writing “No sensible
man ever thought a beautiful wife was worth as much as one that could make good pudding” or in 1832


                                                                   2
                                                                                     Marriage Rate, 18-64




                                                                                                                                                                                               Number of Divorces Per 1,000 Married Women
                                 Number of Marriages per 1,000 Single Women
                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                              200




                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                                                                              150            Marriage Rate, 15-64




                                                                                                                                                                                          15

                                                                              100




                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                              Divorce Rate

                                                                               50
                                                                                      1950             1960            1970                                1980        1990        2000
                                                                                                                             Year




                       Figure 2: Rates of Marriage and Divorce, 1950-2000.




                                                                                       Household Hours                                                     Female Labor-Force Participation


                                                                                                                                                      80
                                                   33                                                                                                        Single

                                                                                                                                                      70

                                                                                    Single
                                                                                                                              Participation Rate, %




                                                   31
                                                                                                                                                      60
               Hours per Adult




                                                                                                                                                                                 Married
                                                                                                                                                      50
                                                   29


                                                                                                                                                      40

                                                   27
                                                                                                                                                      30

                                                                                     Married

                                                   25                                                                                                 20


                                                                                    1955        1970           1985                                           1955       1970      1985
                                                                                                Year                                                                     Year




Figure 3: Household Hours Worked and Female Labor-Force Participation, 1950-1990.



                                                                                                                             3
household goods and services could be purchased outside the home, such as packaged foods
and ready-made clothes. Additionally capital goods, ranging from washing machines to
microwave ovens, were brought into the home greatly reducing the time needed to maintain
a household. This had two e¤ects. First, it allowed all adults, both married and single,
to devote more time to market activities and less to household production. Second, it
lowered the economic incentives to get married by reducing the bene…ts of the traditional
specialization of women at housework, and of men at market work. The reduction of the
economic bene…ts of marriage allowed the modern criteria of mutual attraction between
mates to come to the fore, a trend “from economics to romance” in the words of Ogburn
and Nimko¤ (1955).
   To model this idea formally, a Becker (1965)–cum–Reid (1934) model of household pro-
duction is embedded into a Mortensen (1988) style spousal-search model. Three key ingre-
dients are injected into this framework. First, there are economies of scale in household
consumption and production. Second, it is assumed that purchased household inputs and
labor are substitutes in household production. Third, it is presumed that nonmarket goods
exhibit stronger diminishing marginal utility than market goods. Some theoretical results
are established for this framework. The economies of scale in household consumption and
production provide an economic motive for marriage. It pays for a couple to pool their
resources together. Now, suppose that the price of purchased household inputs declines over
time. Labor will be displaced from the home, given that household inputs and labor are
substitutes in household production. Furthermore, if there is stronger diminishing marginal
utility in nonmarket goods vis à vis market goods then married households will allocate a
smaller fraction of their spending on the inputs for household production than will single
households. As a consequence, single households gain the most from a decline in the price of
purchased household inputs. Thus, a fall in the price of purchased household inputs causes
the relative bene…ts of single life to increase. Singles searching for a spouse will become
as stating “Among our industrious fore-fathers it was a …xed maxim that a young lady should never be
permitted to marry until she had spun for herself a set of body, bed and table linen. From this custom all
unmarried women are called spinsters in legal proceedings.”



                                                    4
pickier. For those currently married, the value of a divorce will rise, because the value of
becoming single is higher. Thus, the theoretical analysis suggests that the framework de-
veloped has promise for explaining the observed rise in the number of single households,
together with the increase in hours worked by married ones.
   To gauge the quantitative potential of the framework, the model is solved numerically.
The model’s predictions for the time paths of labor-force participation and vital statistics
are compared with the U.S. data. It is found that the developed framework can potentially
explain a substantial portion of the rise in divorce, the fall in marriage, and the increase in
married female labor-force participation that occurred during the later half of the twentieth
century.
   Interestingly, the fraction of the population that is married did not show monotonic
decline over the course of the entire 20th century. It actually increased during the baby
boom years. This resulted in a \-shaped time path for marriage during the last century. Is
this observation congruent with theory presented here? The answer is yes. It is demonstrated
that a simple extension of the basic framework has the potential to address this fact. It does
so by linking a young adult’s decision to leave home, and search for a mate, with technological
progress in the household sector. The extension can explain the drop in the number of young
adults living with their parents over the last one hundred years.
   A prediction of the framework is that household size should decline when the price of
purchased household inputs falls. The relationship between household size and the price
of household appliances is examined econometrically for a small cross section of Western
countries. A positive association is found, in accordance with the theory’s prediction. This
…nding complements recent work by Cavalcanti and Tavares (2008) who report that female
labor supply is negatively associated with the price of household appliances in a panel of
countries. Algan and Cahuc (2007) also …nd that it is related to the labor supply of younger
and older (non prime-age) workers, but in a way that interacts with cultural di¤erences across
countries. Likewise, Coen-Pirani, Leon, and Lugauer (2008) conclude, using U.S. Census
micro data, that a signi…cant portion of the rise in married female labor-force participation


                                              5
during the 1960s can be attributed to the di¤usion of household appliances.
   It needs to be stated upfront that the goal of the analysis is not to simulate an all-inclusive
model of household formation and labor-force participation. Rather, the idea here is to see
whether or not the simple mechanisms put forth have the potential quantitative power to
explain the postwar observations on household formation and labor-force participation. This
is done without regard to the many other possible explanations for the same set of facts–
some of which could be embedded into a more general version of the developed framework.
Theory, by its essence, is a process of abstraction. Therefore, some factors that may be
important for understanding the phenomena under study have been deliberately left out of
the analysis, both for purposes of clarity and tractability–see Stevenson and Wolfers (2007)
for a recent survey on marriage and divorce.
   For example, the tremendous amount of technological progress in contraception that
occurred over the last century greatly reduced the risk out-of-wedlock sexual relationships.
It seems very likely that this provided impetus for a fall in marriage and a rise in divorce
that occurred since World War II. It might be hard for a theory based on improvements
in contraception alone, however, to explain the hump-shaped time path for marriage that
occured over the entire century. The liberalization of divorce laws in the 1970s is often
thought of as being a prime candidate for causing the rise in divorce. The adoption of
no-fault unilateral divorce laws by many states in the 1970s coincides well with the rise of
divorce rate during the same period. The empirical evidence on the e¤ect of divorce laws
is controversial, however. A recent study by Wolfers (2006) …nds that, once transitional
dynamics are appropriately controlled for, unilateral divorce laws explain very little of the
long-run rise in divorce rates. Furthermore, except for a spike associated with World War II,
the rate of divorce rose more or less continuously over the last century from about 4 per 1,000
women in 1900, to about 10 in 1941 (a doubling), to about 23 today (another doubling). [In
fact, Ogburn and Nimko¤ (1955) write about the early trend.] So, there seems to be room in
the literature for the explanation proposed here that technological advance in the household
sector contributed to the rise in divorce and the decline in marriage.


                                                6
2     The Economic Environment
The economy is populated by a continuum of males and females, each sex with unit mass.
Individuals have …nite lives. Speci…cally, at the beginning of each period an individual
faces the constant probability of dying, . Thus,     people of each sex die each period. The
individuals who have passed on are replaced by a newly-borne generation of exactly the same
size. There are two types of individuals: those who are single and those who are married.
Each individual is endowed with one unit of time, which can be divided between market and
nonmarket work. A unit of market work pays the wage rate, w. At the beginning of each
period singles participate in a marriage market, assuming that they have survived. Each
single is randomly paired up with someone else. The prospective couple then draws a certain
level of suitability or quality, b, from a …xed distribution. The question facing a single is:
should s/he marry, or wait until a better match comes along. For a married couple match
quality evolves over time, according to some …xed distribution. For simplicity, assume that
married couples die together at the start of a period with probability . If they survive
then they must decide whether or not to remain married. After the marriage and divorce
decisions, individuals enter the labor market. A single agent must decide how much of his
or her one unit of time to devote to market work. A married couple must determine how
much of their two units of time to spend in the labor force. For simplicity, it is assumed that
there are no assets markets. Hence, there is no borrowing or lending, etc., in the economy.
Last, as will become clear, there are no matching externalities present in the model. The
aggregate state of the marriage market will not in‡uence household’s decision making.

2.1    Production

Start with production. Two types of goods are produced, market and nonmarket ones.




                                              7
2.1.1   Household Production

Suppose that nonmarket goods, n, are made in line with the following household production
function:
                          n = [ d + (1     )h ]1= ; for 0 <   < 1;                        (1)

where d denotes purchases of household inputs, and h is the amount of time spent on
housework. Let purchased household inputs sell at price p, measured in terms of time. The
idea here is that over time p will drop. Speci…cally, let p fall monotonically to some lower
bound p> 0. In response households will substitute out of using labor toward using more
purchased inputs. Note that it has been assumed that purchased inputs and time are more
substitutable in production than Cobb-Douglas; i.e.,   > 0. Hence, as p declines, household
production will become more goods intensive and less labor intensive. Examples of labor-
saving household inputs abound: disposable diapers, frozen foods, microwave ovens, washing
machines, and tupperware.

2.1.2   Market Production

The production of market goods is done in line with the constant-returns-to-scale production
technology
                                          y = wl;                                         (2)

where y is aggregate output and l is aggregate employment. Given the linear form for the
aggregate production function, w will represent the real wage rate in equilibrium. Real wages
will grow over time. In particular, suppose that w increases monotonically to some …nite
upper bound w. There is no physical or, as mentioned, …nancial capital in the economy.
Market output y is used for two purposes: viz, direct consumption and as an input into
household production. Speci…cally, one unit of output can be used to produce one unit
of …nal consumption or 1=(wp) units of household inputs. Thus, the economy’s resource
constraint reads
                                       c + wpd = y;



                                             8
where c and d represent aggregate consumption and purchases of household inputs, respec-
tively.

2.2       Tastes

Singles: Let the momentary utility function for a single read

                  U s (c; n) =   ln(c     c) + (1   )n = ; with 0 <        < 1; < 0       c:

Here c and n denote the person’s consumption of market and nonmarket goods, respectively.
The constant c represents a …xed cost associated with maintaining a household.4                    5
                                                                                                       This
represents the …rst of two sources of scale economies in household consumption. Note that
the utility function for nonmarket goods is more concave than the ln function; i.e.,               < 0. The
importance of this restriction will become clear as the theory is developed. This constraint
is not imposed in the quantitative analysis. Therefore, the data will speak to the sign and
magnitude of . If a single dies he realizes a utility level of zero in the afterlife, an innocuous
normalization. Leisure has been excluded from the tastes. This is in line with the Beckerian
(1965, p. 504) theory of household production since “although the social philosopher might
have to de…ne precisely the concept of leisure, the economist can reach all his traditional
results as well as many more without introducing it at all.” The idea here is that often all
one cares about is time spent in the market versus at home, and the above framework will
capture this through the production side of things. Additionally, observe that a separable
form for the utility function is chosen, as is conventional in macroeconomics. This minimizes
the role placed on home production.
       Married Individuals: Tastes for a married individual are given by

             U m (c; n) + b =     ln((c    c)=2 ) + (1     )(n=2 ) = + b; with 0 <          < 1,

   4
       See footnote 6 for more detail.
   5
     The …xed cost is presumed to be the same for both single and married households. This is for theoretical
convenience, only. Casual empiricism suggests that it should be smaller for single households. The Appendix
reports some results for the quantitative analysis where this assumption is relaxed. Also, one might expect
that there are some …xed costs for home goods too. Some results for this case are also discussed.

                                                     9
where c and n represent the household’s consumption of market and nonmarket goods. To
determine an individual’s consumption, c              c and n are divided by the household equivalence
scale, 2 , to get consumptions per member, (c c)=2 and n=2 . Since 0 <                     < 1, this implies
that it is less expensive to provide the second member of the household with consumption
than it is the …rst. This is the second source of economies of scale in consumption. Observe
that the bliss from a match, b, can be negative. Finally, if a married couple die they realize
a zero-utility level thereafter.

2.3     Match Quality

Recall that when singles meet they draw a match quality, b. Suppose that b is normally
distributed so that
                                                               2
                                              b       N ( s;   s );

                  2
where   s   and   s   are the mean and variance of the singles distribution. Let the cumulative
distribution function that singles draw from be represented by S(b). Likewise, each period
a married couple draws a new value for the match quality variable, b. Suppose that last
period the couple had a match quality of b 1 . Now, assume that b evolves according to the
following autoregressive process:
                                                          p
                       b = (1   )       + b       +        1      2   , with   N (0; 1).
                                    m         1       m


                  2
Here    m   and   m   denote the long-run mean and variance for the process b. The parameter
is the coe¢ cient of autocorrelation. Write the (conditional) cumulative distribution function
that married couples draw from as M (bjb 1 ).


3      Household Decision Making
How will a single agent divide his or her time between market and nonmarket work? When
will he or she choose to get married? Likewise, how will a married couple split their time
between market work and housework? When will they choose to divorce? To answer these
questions, let V (b) denote the expected lifetime utility for an individual who is currently in

                                                       10
a marriage with match quality b. Similarly, W will represent the expected lifetime utility
for an agent who is single today. Imagine that two singles meet and draw a match quality
of b. They will choose to marry if V (b)            W and to remain single if V (b) < W . Likewise,
consider a married couple with match quality b. They will pick to remain married when
V (b)   W and choose to divorce if V (b) < W . Thus, the marriage and divorce decisions are
summarized by Table 1. Note that given the absence of asset markets, b will be the only
state variable at the individual level that is relevant for determining expected lifetime utility.
At the aggregate level, prices and wages will also matter. Recall that wages are rising over
time, and that prices are falling. Thus, W and V are functions of time. Given this, W 0 and
V 0 will denote the value functions for single and married lives that obtain next period; i.e.,
the prime symbol connotes these functions dependence on time. So, how are the functions
V (b) and W determined? This question will be addressed next.



                        Table 1: Marriage and Divorce Decisions

                           Single                                    Married
             Marry              if      V (b)   W         Remain Married if      V (b)    W
             Remain Single if           V (b) < W         Divorce           if   V (b) < W


3.1     Singles

The dynamic programming problem for a single agent appears as
                                         Z
                              s
                  W = max fU (c; n) +       max[V 0 (b0 ); W 0 ]dS(b0 )g;                           (P1)
                              c;n;d;h

subject to
                                           c = w(1     h)    wpd;                                     (3)

and (1).6     The discount factor           re‡ects the probability of dying. That is, if e is the
person’s subjective discount factor then             = (1      )e. Observe that while the individual

   6
     It can now be seen that the constant c does represent a …xed cost associated with maintaining a
household. Write U s as U s (e
                             c; n), where e
                                          c denotes the consumption of market goods by a single household.

                                                     11
is single today, the agent picks married or single life next period to maximize welfare, as
the term max[V 0 (b0 ); W 0 ] in (P1) makes clear. Again, recall that the value functions are
dependant upon technology, and hence time. Therefore, for a given level of match quality, b,
the value function will return a di¤erent level of expected utility tomorrow versus today. This
dependence of the value functions upon time is implicitly indicated through the use of the
prime symbols attached to V and W , which di¤erentiates their functional forms tomorrow
from their forms today. Since S(b) is some …xed distribution, the aggregate state of the
marriage market does not impact on the individual’s decision making.

3.2     Couples

The dynamic programming problem for a married couple reads
                                          Z
                            m
              V (b) = max fU (c; n) + b +    max[V 0 (b0 ); W 0 ]dM (b0 jb)g;                       (P2)
                           c;n;d;h

subject to
                                         c = w(2     h)    wpd;                                       (4)

and (1). Problem (P2) is similar in structure to problem (P1) with three di¤erences: (i) the
utility function for married agents di¤ers from single agents due to scale e¤ects in household
consumption; (ii) a married couple realizes bliss from marriage and this is autocorrelated
over time; (iii) the couple has two units of time to allocate between market and nonmarket
work. Again, note that while an individual is married today, the agent chooses married or
single life next period to maximize welfare. Last, the aggregate state of the marriage market
does not impinge on the couple’s decision making, because M (b0 jb) is a …xed distribution.


4     Equilibrium
Formulating an equilibrium to the above economy is surprisingly simple. First, given the
linear market production function (2), there is no need to determine the equilibrium wage, w.
Let c denote the …xed cost of maintaining a household. The household’s budget constraint will now appear
as e
   c = w(1 h) wpd c: Rewrite the budget constraint as e      c + c = w(1 h) wpd. Next, de…ne c = e    c+c
so that e                                       c in U s and the above budget constraint. This setting has
        c = c c. Use this to substitute out for e
transformed into the one presented in the text.

                                                   12
Second, since there are no …nancial markets, there is no interaction between households other
than through the marriage market. As far as consumption and production are concerned,
each household is an island unto themselves. Also, there are no matching externalities in
the model. Each single is matched with a potential mate each period. This pair then draws
a quality for the match, b, from the …xed distribution S(b). Likewise, the b for a couple
evolves according to the …xed distribution M (b0 jb). Hence, household decision making is
not in‡uenced by the aggregate state of the marriage market. Therefore, characterizing an
equilibrium for the economy amounts to solving the programming problems (P1) and (P2).
Thus, it is easy to establish that an equilibrium for the above economy both exists and is
unique.7

4.1     Vital Statistics

Computing vital statistics for the economy is a relatively straightforward task. Suppose that
the economy exits the previous period with the (non-normalized) distribution M 1 (b 1 )
over match quality for married agents of a particular sex. The fractions of agents (of a
particular sex) who were married and single last period, m 1 and s 1 , are therefore given
           R                         R
by m 1 = dM 1 (b 1 ) and s 1 = 1        dM 1 (b 1 ). Now, at the beginning of the current
period the fraction       of populace dies. These people are replaced by newly-borne single
agents. All agents will then take a draw, b, for their match quality. After this, they will
make their marriage and divorce decisions in line with Table 1. De…ne the set of match
quality shocks for which it is in an individual’s best interest to live in a married household,
or M, by
                                         M = fb : V (b)        W g:

   7
     In a nutshell the argument is as follows: Recall that limt!1 pt =p and limt!1 wt = w. It is easy to
deduce that a pair of unique steady-state value functions, W and V , exist that will solve the dynamic
programming problems (P1) and (P2). To see this note that (P1) and (P2) de…ne an operator (W; V ) =
T(W 0 ; V 0 ). By standard arguments, it can be readily deduced that the operator T is a contraction mapping
on the space of continuous bounded functions with norm jjW; V jj = sup jW j + sup jV j. Working backwards
in time from the steady state it is also easy to see that the value functions W and V will exist and be unique
at each stage of the recursion.




                                                     13
The current-period distribution over match quality for married agents, or M(b), will then
read8
                         Z Z                                                      Z
        M(b) = (1    )                dM (ebjb 1 )dM 1 (b 1 ) + [s   1   + m 1]              dS(eb):   (5)
                           M\[ 1;b]                                               M\[ 1;b]

    Therefore, the fractions of agents who are married and single in current period, m and
                      R                    R
s, are given by m = dM(b) and s = 1          dM(b). The fraction of people getting married
                                     R
in the current period is [s 1 + m 1 ] M dS(eb), while the proportion going through a divorce
                   R R
is given by (1    ) Mc dM (ebjb 1 )dM 1 (b 1 ), where Mc is the complement of M.


5        Qualitative Analysis
It is now time to entertain the following two questions, at least at a theoretical level:

    1. How does technological progress a¤ect the amount of time spent on housework?

    2. How does technological progress a¤ect the economic return from married versus single
         life?

Before answering these two questions, it may pay to take stock of the key features of the
model and to discuss the role that they play in the subsequent analysis.

         Household Equivalence Scale, 0 <          < 1. This provides an economic incentive for
         marriage. If a two-person household can live more economically than a single-person
         household then there are gains from marriage.

         Purchased Household Inputs-Housework Substitutability in Home Production, 0 <                  <
         1. Suppose that over time the price of purchased household inputs declines. The higher
         the degree of substitutability between purchased inputs and housework the bigger will
         be the labor-saving impact of technological progress on home production.

    8
     Note that when a single agent dies he is replaced by another single agent. This explains why there is
no term re‡ecting the probability of dying multiplying s 1 in the formula for M(b).



                                                   14
         Strong Diminishing Marginal Utility for Nonmarket Goods,                         < 0. Married couples will
         consume more of all goods than singles do. If the utility function for nonmarket goods
         is more concave than the one for market goods then married couples will allocate a
         higher fraction of their spending (as compared with singles) to market goods, c, relative
         to the inputs into home production, d and h.

         Fixed Cost of Household Maintenance, c                     0. This gives another economic incentive
         for marriage. Moreover, at low levels of income households will have limited resources
         to allocate for market consumption, after meeting the …xed cost of household main-
         tenance. This will force poorer households, or singles, to devote a higher fraction of
         their time to market work relative to richer households, or married couples.

         Marital Bliss, b. This creates a noneconomic incentive for marriage.

         The Probability of Dying, 0 <            < 1. This proves useful in the quantitative analysis.
         It increases the fraction of people who are single, ceteris paribus.

The task is now to establish that the features outlined above do indeed play their assigned
roles.

5.1       The Time-Allocation Problem

The Problem: To this end, consider the time-allocation problem that faces a household of
size, z. It is static in nature and appears as

                                                        c       c                     n
                         I(z; p; w) = max f ln(                     ) + (1       )(     ) = g;                (P3)
                                        c;n;h;d             z                         z

subject to
                                    c     c = w(z           h)       wpd        c;                              (6)

and
                                        n = [ d + (1                 )h ]1= :



                                                        15
Observe that versions of problem (P3) are embedded into (P1) and (P2), a fact that can be
seen by setting z = 1 and z = 2.
   The Solution: By using the constraints for c                 c and n in the objective function (P3),
and then maximizing with respect to d and h, the following two …rst-order conditions are
obtained:
                                                                               =        1        1
                                    wp = (1        )z   [ d + (1       )h ]                 d        ;                              (7)
                       c        c
and
                                                                           =   1                         1
                               w = (1         )z    [ d + (1        )h ]           (1           )h           :                      (8)
                   c       c
These two …rst-order conditions have standard interpretations. For instance, the left-hand
side of (7) represents the marginal cost of an extra unit of purchased household inputs,
d. The marginal unit of purchased household inputs costs wp in terms of forgone market
consumption. Since an extra unit of market consumption has a utility value of =(c                                              c) this
leads to a sacri…ce of [ =(c           c)]wp in terms of forgone utility. Likewise, the right-hand side
of this equation gives the marginal bene…t of an extra unit of purchased household inputs.
These extra goods will increase household production by [ d + (1                                         )h ]1=    1
                                                                                                                       d   1
                                                                                                                               . The
                                                                       1
marginal utility of nonmarket goods is (1                 )z    (n)        . Thus, the marginal bene…t of an
                                                                               1
extra unit of purchased household inputs is (1                 )z     (n)               [ d + (1                 )h ]1=    1
                                                                                                                                d    1
                                                                                                                                         ,
which is the right-hand side of (7). The two …rst-order conditions (7) and (8), in conjunction
with the budget constraint (6), determine a solution for c, d and h.

5.2     Results

Everything is now set up to address the two questions poised at the start of this section.

5.2.1   Technological Progress and Time Allocations

So, how does technological progress a¤ect the amount of time allocated to homework? First,
a fall in the price of purchased household inputs, p, leads to a reduction in the amount of
housework, h, and a rise in the amount of market work, z                       h. When the price of purchased
household inputs drops households move away from using labor in household production

                                                         16
toward using goods (given the assumption that production exhibits more substitutability
than Cobb-Douglas or that      > 0). Second, a rise in wages, w, leads to an increase in the
amount of housework, h, done. At low levels of income, the marginal utility of market goods
is high due to the …xed cost of household maintenance, c. Thus, people devote a lot of time
to laboring in the market. As wages increase the …xed cost for household maintenance bites
less and people relax their work e¤ort in market. Proposition 1 formalizes all of this.

Proposition 1 Housework, h, is:
(i) increasing in the price of household commodities, p;
(ii) decreasing in the …xed cost of household maintenance, c;
(iii) increasing in real wages, w (when c > 0).

Proof. See the Appendix.

Remark Real wages, w, will have no e¤ect on time allocations in the absence of a …xed cost
for household maintenance, c; i.e., when c = 0. To see this, substitute (6) into (7) and (8)
and note that the …rst-order conditions depend on c=w. Thus, as the economy develops the
impact of wages on housework will vanish, since c=w ! 0 as w ! 1.

5.2.2   Household Size and Allocations

Can anything be said about the allocations, (c ; d; h), within a two-person household vis à vis
a one-person household? The lemma below provides the answer, where the superscripts m
and s are attached to the allocations for married and single households. Before proceeding,
it will be noted that the lemma is a key step along the road to proving that a fall in the price
for purchased household inputs reduces the utility di¤erential between married and single
life, when holding …xed the amount of marital bliss. It shows that a married household
spends less on purchased household inputs, relative to market consumption (over and above
the …xed cost of household maintenance), than does a single one. Likewise, the corollary to
the lemma is instrumental for establishing that a rise in wages reduces the economic bene…t
from marriage. It proves that a married household consumes more market goods than a
single household does.


                                              17
Lemma 1 The allocations in married and single households have the following relationships:
(i) (cm c) > [(2 c=w)=(1 c=w)](cs c);
(ii) dm < [(2 c=w)=(1 c=w)]ds ;
(iii) hm < [(2 c=w)=(1 c=w)]hs .
The above relationships hold even when c = 0. They adhere with equality when = 0.

Proof. Again, see the Appendix.

Corollary Married households consume more market goods than do single households:
(i) (cm    c)=2 > (cs    c);
(ii) cm > cs :
The above relationships hold even when c =      = 0.

Proof. See Appendix.
   Now, note that a married household has 2         c=w units of disposable time, after netting
out the …xed cost of household maintenance, to spend on various things. A single household
has 1     c=w units of disposable time. Lemma 1 states that a married household will spend a
larger fraction of their adjusted time endowment on the consumption of market goods than
will a single household. The lemma also implies that married households spend less than
single households do on household inputs, relative to market goods. That is, pdm =(cm
c) < pds =(cs      c) and whm =(cm     c) < whs =(cs     c) so that [pdm + whm ]=(cm      c) <
[pds + whs ]=(cs   c), at least when   < 0. When nonmarket goods exhibit strong diminishing
marginal utility, bigger households will favor (relative to the consumption patterns of smaller
ones) the use of market consumption for their larger adjusted endowment of time. Part (i)
of the corollary states that after paying the …xed cost of household maintenance, market
consumption per person is e¤ectively higher in a married household than a single one. Also,
married households spend more in total on market goods than do single households.

5.2.3     Technological Progress and the Economic Bene…ts of Married versus Sin-
          gle Life

Last, how does technological progress a¤ect the utility di¤erential between married and
single life (holding …xed the amount of marital bliss)? To address this, let um denote the

                                               18
level of momentary utility realized from married life, sans marital bliss, and us represent the
level of utility realized from single life. From problem (P3) it is apparent that um = I(2; p; w)
and us = I(1; p; w).
Proposition 2 The utility di¤erential between married and single life (sans marital bliss),
um us , is:
(i) increasing in the price of purchased household inputs, p;
(ii) decreasing in real wages, w (when c > 0).

Proof. The …rst part of the proposition can be established by applying the envelope theorem
to problem (P3). It can be calculated that
                              d(um us )                   dm            ds
                                        =          w[                            ] > 0;                         (9)
                                  dp                    cm     c   cs        c
where the sign of the above expression follows from Lemma 1(i, ii). To prove the second
part of the lemma, note that
               d(um us )             hm pdm 1 hs pds
                                        2
                         =          [                      ]
                  dw                 cm c           cs c
                                    cm       cs          1                              1
                              =  [ m       s
                                                  ]= [                                       ] < 0;            (10)
                                w c    c c      c   w 1 c=cm                          1 c=cs
where the sign of the above expression derives from the fact that cm > cs , or part (ii) of the
Corollary to Lemma 1.
       Thus, technological advance in the form of either a falling price for purchased household
inputs or rising real wages reduces the economic gain from marriage. A fall in the price of
purchased household inputs leads to a substitution away from the use of labor in household
production toward the use of purchased household inputs. Single households use labor-saving
products the most intensively, so they realize the greatest gain [i.e., dm =(cm                 c) < ds =(cs     c)
in (9)].9 The assumption of strong diminishing marginal utility for nonmarket goods ( < 0)

   9
     While the Proposition 2 is very suggestive, given the general nature of the adopted setup it is hard
to say much concrete about the impact of technological progress on marriage and divorce, per se. To do
so requires either restricting the theoretical setup or numerically simulating the model. The latter is done
in the next section. The former strategy is pursued in the Appendix. It can be shown that a one-period
decline in the price for purchased household inputs leads to a one-period drop in the rate of marriage and a
one-period increase in the divorce rate. By specializing the stochastic structure of the model further, it can
be established that a steady-state decline in the price for purchased household inputs leads to a fall in the
steady-state fraction of the population that is married.

                                                     19
is important for the result that a drop in the price of purchased household inputs will reduce
the economic return to marriage. Suppose that        = 0. Then, prices will have no impact on
the utility di¤erential between married and single life, because dm =(cm   c) = ds =(cs   c) by
Lemma 1. The presence of a …xed cost is not important for obtaining the desired result,
since the lemma still holds when c = 0. To take stock of the situation so far, a decline in the
price of household products will lead to a decrease in housework by Proposition 1. It also
causes a reduction in the economic return to marriage by Proposition 2. Therefore, a decline
in the price of purchased household inputs has the potential for explaining Observations 1
and 2 made in the Introduction.
   As wages increase, the …xed cost for household maintenance matters less. The …xed cost
for household maintenance bites the most for single households [i.e., c=cm < c=cs in (10)].
Therefore, single households bene…t the most from a rise in wages. From (10) it is immediate
that a change in wages will have no impact in the absence of a …xed cost (c = 0) on the utility
di¤erential between married and single life. Also, note this result does not depend upon the
assumption of strong diminishing marginal utility of nonmarket goods since the Corollary to
Lemma 1 holds even when       = 0. Now, recall from Proposition 1 that an increase in wages
will cause housework to rise. Therefore, a rise in real wages, alone, cannot account for both
Observations 1 and 2.

5.2.4   The Economic Value of Marriage

What is the economic value of married life? One way to measure this is to compute the
required income, or compensation, that is necessary to make a single person as well o¤
as a married one when there is no marital bliss (b = 0). The formula for the required
compensation, expressed as a fraction of the value of a single individual’s time endowment,
is surprisingly simple and natural.

Lemma 2 The compensating di¤erential between married and single life is given by

                        ln[E(p; w; um )=w] = ln[21   + (1   1=2 )c=w]:

Proof. See the Appendix, once again.

                                              20
      The result is very appealing and the underlying intuition straightforward. For exposi-
tional purposes, temporarily set c = 0. On the one hand, a married household has twice
the time endowment of a single one. On the other hand, a married household must provide
consumption to twice as many members. On net, due to economies of scale in household con-
sumption, a married household realizes 21          (=2=2 ) as much consumption as a single one.
Now, when c > 0 an adjustment must be made for the presence of the …xed cost of household
maintenance. This reduces a single’s consumption by c but a married’s one by only c=2 , so
that the di¤erence is (1      1=2 )c. Note that the income needed to make a single person as
well o¤ as a married one is not a function of the price of purchased household inputs; one
just needs to scale up a single’s income by the constant fraction 21      + (1   1=2 )c=w. It is
a function of the wage rate, though. At higher wage rates the …xed cost bites less. Finally,
Lemma 2 establishes that there is an economic incentive for marriage provided that there is
some form of economies of scale in consumption or production; i.e., whenever either c > 0
or     < 1.
      It may seem a bit puzzling that a fall in price reduces the utility di¤erential between
married and single life, um      us , but has no impact on the compensating di¤erential between
these two situations, ln[21     + (1    1=2 )c=w]. This is true even when c = 0; i.e., the impact
of price on the di¤erence in utility between married and single life is not due to the presence
of the …xed cost. Suppose that one makes the compensation outlined by Lemma 2. Then,
married and single households will use labor-saving products in the same intensity, in the
sense that dm =(cm      c) = ds =(cs    c).10 After making the required compensation a change
in price will have no impact on the utility di¤erential, um      us , as can readily be seen from
(9). This suggests that for tracking over time the impact of technological progress on the
utility di¤erential from marriage the compensating di¤erential is not a perfect measure.

 10
      See the proof of Lemma 2 contained in the Appendix.




                                                  21
6       Quantitative Analysis
The Household’s Dynamic Programming Problems–A Restatement: Given the static nature
of the household’s time allocation problem (P3), note that the dynamic programming prob-
lems for single and married households (P1) and (P2) can be rewritten as
                                          Z
                       W = I(1; p; w) +      max[V 0 (b0 ); W 0 ]dS(b0 );

and                                                 Z
                         V (b) = I(2; p; w) + b +        max[V 0 (b0 ); W 0 ]dM (b0 jb):

Here I(z; p; w) gives the maximal level of momentary utility that a z-person household
can obtain, given that the price of purchased household inputs is p and that the wage
rate is w. The fact that for a household of a particular size, z, it is possible to calculate
their current level of utility, I(z; p; w), without regard to their marriage/divorce decision
is very useful. Given a sequence of prices and wages, fpt ; wt g1
                                                                t , it possible to compute

from (P3) the associated sequence of momentary utilities for single and married households,
fI(1; pt ; wt ); I(2; pt ; wt )g1
                                t .


6.1      Matching the Model with the Data

In order to simulate the model, numbers must be selected for the various parameters. Except
for …ve of the parameters, almost nothing is known about appropriate values. Additionally,
time series for prices and wages need to be inputted into the simulation. Values for the
model’s parameters will be assigned either on the basis of a priori information or they will
be estimated.

6.1.1     A priori information

Take the model period to be one year. In line with convention, set the subjective discount
factor at 0.96. The discount factor used in decision making must re‡ect the individual’s
probability of survival, 1            . A person’s life expectancy is 1= . Thus, if (marriageable)
life expectancy for an adult is taken to be 47 years then 1= = 47. Therefore, set               =

                                                    22
0:96 (1 1=47). Next, let          = 0:77. This is in line with the O.E.C.D.’s household equivalence
scale that treats the second adult in a family as consuming an additional 0.7 times the amount
of the …rst adult. Hence, the parameter                solves 1=2 = 1=(1:0 + 0:7). A series for wages can
be constructed from the U.S. data. To do this, divide disposable income by hours worked to
obtain a measure of compensation per hour. The use of disposable income should (partially)
take into account the changes in taxes (and transfers payments) that occurred over this time
period. Between 1950 and 2000 compensation per hour worked rose 3.0 times. Thus, the
analysis simply presumes that wages rise at 100                   ln(3:0)=50 = 2:2 percent per year. Last,
the household production function is characterized by two parameters, viz                      and . These
have been estimated by McGrattan, Rogerson and Wright (1997). Their numbers are used
here.11

6.1.2      Estimation

The rest of the parameters will be calibrated/estimated. First, a set of data targets is
picked. These targets summarize the data along …ve dimensions: the time allocations for
both married and single households, the fraction of the population married, the divorce
rate, and the marriage rate. Second, the parameter values in question are then chosen to
maximize the model’s …t with respect to these data targets. Speci…cally, for this section,
de…ne dejt to be the j-th data target for period t. Let                   be the vector of parameters to be
estimated. The model will yield a prediction for the j-th data target as a function of these
parameters and time, denoted by djt = Dj ( ; t). The estimation procedure solves
                                 X
                                 5   X j j j                                   X
                             min   f  It ! t [det             Dj ( ; t)]2 =[         Itj ]g;          (P5)
                                   j=1      t2T                                t2T


where         (c; p1950 ; ; ; ;   s;   s;   m;    m;   ), Itj 2 f0; 1g is an indicator function returning a
value of 1 if there is an observation at date t, ! jt gives the weight assigned to the target, and
T        f1950; 1960;    ; 2000g. Unlike the theory, the estimation does not restrict c                0 or

    11
     The important parameter is the elasticity of substitution between goods and time in production, 1=(1
 ). Chang and Schorfheide (2003) also …nd that goods and time are substitutes in the household production
function. Their estimate is not far o¤ from McGrattan et al.’s (1997).

                                                         23
    < 0; the data will decide the magnitudes and signs of these parameter. Some robustness
checks on the estimation are discussed in the Appendix.
       It’s interesting to compare this strategy for picking parameter values with the conven-
tional one employed in business cycle analysis, discussed in Cooley and Prescott (1995).
Business cycle analysis models short-run ‡uctuations around a stationary mean. Hence, pa-
rameter values are typically picked so that the model matches up with some relevant long-run
averages from the data. In contrast, the current analysis focuses on long-run changes in a
nonstationary world. The strong trends observed in the data speak to the degree of curva-
ture in tastes and technologies. Thus, the information contained in these trends should be
used to estimate parameter values. This is allowed by letting data targets at di¤erent points
in time enter into (P5). A discussion of the 10 parameters to be estimated and the 16 data
targets used to identify them will now follow.


Household Technology Parameters–Time Allocations Obtaining a price series for
purchased household inputs is somewhat problematic. So, a time path of the form pt = p1950
       (t 1950)
e                 will be estimated here, where    is the rate of decline in the time-price for purchased
household inputs and p1950 is the initial price. The …xed cost for household maintenance, c,
plays an important role in controlling the initial level of market work expended by singles
relative to married households. Nothing is known about its value, so it will also have to be
estimated. Thus, three household technology parameters will be estimated: c, p1950 , and .
       To match the model up with the data on time allocations, note that the fraction of time
spent by a married household on market work, lm , is given by lm = (2                       hm )=2. Likewise,
the fraction of time spent by a single household working in the market is ls = 1                     hs . Now,
note that lm and ls can be written as functions of the parameters to be estimated, namely
c, p1950 ; and . They are also functions of time, t, and the taste parameters                   and . Thus,
write ltm = Lm (c; p1950 ; ; ; ; t; ) and lts = Ls (c; p1950 ; ; ; ; t).
       Now, to operationalize the above in (P5) let de1t          e
                                                                  lm , D1 ( ; t)      Lm (c; p1950 ; ; ; ; t; ),
de2t     e
         ls , and D2 ( ; t)    Ls (c; p1950 ; ; ; ; t; ) for t = 1950; 1960;       ; 1990. Also, set ! 1t =2 and



                                                       24
! 2t =2 to be the fractions of married and single females in the time-t population of women.
(Note that ! 1t + ! 2t = 2 , the number of data targets for the time allocations.) The theory
developed suggests that the parameters c, p1950 , and                            will be important for determining
the time paths for hours worked. As a practical matter, it turns out that the time paths for
hours worked largely identify the magnitudes of c, p1950 , and –note that, as was mentioned
earlier, the matching parameters,             s;    s;       m;    m;   and , don’t even enter into the Lm ( ) and
Ls ( ) functions.


Taste and Matching Parameters–Vital Statistics There are seven taste and matching
parameters that need to be estimated; namely,                            , ,   s,   s,   m,        m,    and . Parameter
determines the weight of market goods in the utility function, while the parameter                                     controls
the degree of concavity in the utility function for nonmarket goods. The more concave this
utility function is the faster households will move away from nonmarket goods toward market
goods as income rises. Hence, this parameter plays an important role in determining how
the relative bene…ts of married versus single life respond to technological progress. The
idea here is that information on the trend in vital statistics is important for determining
the value of . The remaining six matching parameters govern the noneconomic aspects of
marriage–again recall that Lm ( ) and Ls ( ) are not functions of the matching parameters.
    These seven parameters impinge heavily on the model’s predictions concerning vital
statistics.   Here, the data is targeted along three dimensions for two years, 1950 and
2000: the fraction of the population married, the divorce rate, and the marriage rate. So,
    e j1950 and m
let m           e j2000 denote the data targets along the j-th dimension for the years 1950
and 2000. Correspondingly, permit mj1950 = M j (c; p1950 ; ; ; ;                              s;    s;    m;   m;   ; 1950) and
mj2000 = M j (c; p1950 , ; ;   s;   s;   m;        m;    ; 2000) to represent the model’s steady-state out-
put along the j-th dimension for the years 1950 and 2000. Hence, in (P5) set dej+2
                                                                               t                                           e jt ,
                                                                                                                           m
Dj+2 ( ; t)    M j (c; p1950 ; ; ; ;     s;    s;       m;    m;       ; t) and ! j+2
                                                                                  t   = 1, for j = 1; 2; 3 and t = 1950
and 2000. (Again, note that ! 3t + ! 4t + ! 5t = 3, the number of data targets for the vital sta-
tistics.)



                                                                  25
       To summarize, the parameter vector             (c; p1950 ; ; ; ;   s;   s;    m;   m;    ) is estimated so
that model matches the data on …ve dimensions: the time allocations for married households,
the time allocations for single households, the fraction of the population married, the divorce
rate, and the marriage rate. This involves 16 observations from the U.S. data. The estimation
procedure employed is similar to one used by Andolfatto and MacDonald (1998). Given the
paucity of observations there is little point in adding an error structure to the estimation.
Due to the heavy time costs of simulating the full model, the parameter                          was arbitrarily
restricted to lie in a 21-point discrete set A = f0:2;              ; 0:278;        ; 0:4g.12    The parameter
values obtained from the above procedure for matching the model with the data are presented
in Table 2. Before proceeding, note from Table 2 that the estimation procedure chooses c > 0,
  < 0, and      > 0. Therefore, when the simple structure outlined is estimated the data calls
for the presence of a …xed cost in household production, a utility function for nonmarket
goods that is more concave than the one for market goods, and a declining time price for
purchased household inputs–and, unlike the theory, none of these features are imposed on
the estimation procedure.
       There is some indirect evidence, both cross sectional and time series, that there might
indeed be stronger diminishing marginal utility in nonmarket goods vis à vis market goods.
Households with higher incomes tend to allocate a larger share of their total food consump-
tion for food away from home. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2007,
Table 1, p. 7), in 2005 food away from home was about 35 percent of total food consump-
tion for households in the bottom income quintile, while the same share for those at the top
income quintile was 50 percent. During the last century as incomes rose the share of food,
housing and household operation in personal consumption expenditure fell. Such spending
constituted about 56 percent of total expenditure in 1929, while they were about 40 percent

  12
     This set contains the value of calibrated by Greenwood and Hercowitz (1991) for a business cycle
model that includes household production and does not put leisure into the utility function. It also contains
the value suggested by Cooley and Prescott (1995) for the standard real business cycle model. The results
obtained are not that sensitive to the choice of . Hence, this restriction is not that severe. Also, the spacing
between the points in A is not linear. The set is re…ned over 3 successive iterations so that the points are
clustered the closest around the optimal solution = 0:278.



                                                      26
of total expenditure in 2000–U.S. National Income and Product Accounts.

                                    Table 2: Parameter Values

 Category      Parameter Values                                               Criteria
 Tastes          = 0:960        (1         ),    = 0:766;                     a priori information
                 = 0:278,         =      1:901                                estimated–vital statistics
 Technology c = 0:131,                                                        estimated–hours data
                 = 0:206,       = 0:189                                       a priori information
 Life span     1= = 47                                                        a priori information
                                     2
 Shocks          s   =   4:252;      s   = 8:063;                             estimated–vital statistics
                                    2
                 m   = 0:521,       m    = 0:680; = 0:896
 Prices        p1950 = 9:959;            = 0:059;                             estimated–hours data
                                         (t 1950)
               pt = p1950       e                   for t = 1951; :::; 2000
 Wages         w1950 = 1:00;                                                  normalization
               wt = w1950         e0:022    (t 1950)
                                                       for t = 1951; :::; 2000 a priori information


6.2     Results

Visualize the economy in 1950. Wages are low and the price for purchased household inputs
is high, at least relative to 2000. Over time wages grow and the price for purchased household
inputs falls. The time paths for wages and prices inputted into the analysis are shown in
Figure 4. As can be seen, in the U.S. data wages increase 3.0 times over the time period
in question. Prices are estimated to decline by a factor of 20. This seems large, but it is
merely the result of compounding a 6.0 percent annual decline over a 50-year period. Can
these two facts help to explain the decline in marriage and the rise in divorce over the last
50 years? This is the question asked here.

6.2.1     Household Hours

The time path for household hours that arises from the model is shown in Figure 5. It
mimics the U.S. data reasonably well. In particular, the model matches very well the sharp

                                                         27
                                10                                                                       3.0
                                                                                  Wages -- 2.2%
                                            Prices -- 6.0%

                                8
                                                                                                         2.5
                  Time Prices




                                6




                                                                                                               Wages
                                                                                                         2.0

                                4


                                                                                                         1.5
                                2

                                                                                                   0.5

                                0                                                                        1.0


                                     1950        1960        1970          1980       1990        2000
                                                                    Year




                        Figure 4: Wages and Prices, 1950-2000–Model Inputs.


increase in the fraction of time devoted to market work by married households. This is
due to the declining price for purchased household inputs. Purchased household inputs and
housework are substitutes in household production. As the price of purchased household
inputs declines, households substitute away from using labor at home toward using goods.
The tight …t should not be seen as precluding the in‡uence other factors. For example,
Albanesi and Olivetti (2006) argue that advances in obstetric and pediatric medicine, and the
introduction of new products such as infant formula, also promoted labor-force participation
by married women.
   The model has trouble mimicking the enigmatic U -shaped pattern for single households–
still, note the presence of an attenuated U . It does a reasonable job at predicting the rise
in participation from 1970 on. Observe that in 1950 married households devoted a smaller
fraction of their time to market work than did single ones, both in the data and model. In
the model this derives from the …xed cost of household maintenance. This forces low-income
households to work more than high-income ones. In the model the low-income households


                                                                    28
                                                                Married                                                             Single

                                                    30           U.S. Data                                              30


                                                                             Model
                                                                                                                                                Model




                                                                                      Fraction of Household's Time, %
                  Fraction of Household's Time, %


                                                    28                                                                  28



                                                                                                                                              U.S. Data
                                                    26                                                                  26




                                                    24                                                                  24




                                                    22                                                                  22
                                                         1960       1980      2000                                           1960      1980       2000
                                                                 Year                                                                Year



               Figure 5: Household Hours, 1950-1990–U.S. Data and Model.


are singles. As wages rise this e¤ect disappears. By 1990 in the U.S. married households
worked more than singles ones did. This is surprising since married households are much
more likely to have children. In the model, they work about the same. Perhaps, in the real
world, more productive individuals are also more desirable on the marriage market. Indeed,
Cornwell and Rupert (1997) provide evidence that this is the case. Such a marriage-selection
e¤ect is missing in the model.
   The estimation procedure picks a 6.0 percent annual rate of price decline, as was men-
tioned. This looks reasonable. For instance, the Gordon quality-adjusted time price index
for air conditioners, clothes dryers, dishwashers, microwaves, refrigerators, TVs, VCRs, and
washing machines fell at 10 percent a year over the postwar period. Alternatively, one could
take the price of kitchen and other household appliances from the National Income and Prod-
uct Accounts. This price series declined, relative to wage growth, at about 1.5 percent a
year since 1950. The 6 percent estimate obtained here is the midpoint of these two numbers.




                                                                                     29
6.2.2      Vital Statistics

Now, the model starts o¤ from an initial steady state that resembles the U.S. in 1950 and
converges to a …nal one looking like the U.S. in 2000. In 1950 about 81.6 percent of the
female population was married (out of non-widows who were between the ages of 18 to 64).
There were 10.6 divorces per 1,000 married females, and 211 marriages. According to Schoen
(1983) marriages lasted about 30 years in 1950. In 2000 the picture was quite di¤erent. Only
62.5 percent of females were married. The divorce rate had risen to 23 divorces by 1995,
and the marriage rate had declined to about 80 marriages. Finally, the average duration
of marriages was about 20 to 24 years.13              Table 3 shows the model’s performance along
these dimensions. Note that singles face a distribution with a low mean and a high variance,
while married people face a distribution that has relatively a high mean, low variance, and
high autocorrelation–see Table 2. This has two e¤ects. First, it encourages singles to wait a
while until a good match comes along. Second, it generates the long durations of marriages
observed in the data.


                     Table 3: the initial and final steady states

                                                        1950                2000
                                                   Model Data         Model Data
                     Fraction married              0.816     0.816 0.694        0.625
                     Probability of divorce        0.011     0.011 0.024        0.023
                     Probability of marriage 0.129           0.211 0.096        0.082
                     Duration of marriages         31.36     29.63 22.47        20 to 24

       The fraction of the population that is married declines with the passage of time in the

  13
     There are not any recent estimates for the duration of marriages. Schoen and Standish (2001) estimate
the duration of marriages to be about 24 years in 1995, while Espenshade (1985) estimates it to be 22.5
years for white females and 14.6 for black females over the period 1975-1980. The steady-state duration of
marriages in the model is given by
                                                        1
                                           dm =                  ;
                                                 1    mm (1    )
where     mm   is the probability of a married agent remaining married next period.


                                                      30
model. Figure 6 compares results obtained from the model with the U.S. data. The model
can explain 12 percentage points of the observed 19 percentage point decline in the number
of married females. This seems reasonable since other things went on in the world, such as
a rise in the number of people going to college, a decline in fertility, etc. Observe that the
utility di¤erential between married and single life declines over time.14              15
                                                                                            This occurs for
two reasons. First, recall that the utility function for nonmarket goods is more concave than
the one for market goods. Thus, high-income households (married couples) spend less on
household inputs relative to market consumption than do low-income household (singles).
As a consequence, a fall in the price of purchased household inputs has a bigger impact on
singles vis à vis married couples. Second, as wages rise the importance of the …xed cost
for household maintenance disappears. This is more important for single households than
married ones. Finally, many couples choose to live together but not marry. The framework
can be thought of as modelling couples living together. The fraction of females living with
a male fell by 16 percentage points between 1960 and 2000. From this angle, the model
captures about 75 percent of the decline between 1950 and 2000. Interestingly, the model
seems to do well predicting the number of marriages for the …rst half of the sample, and the
number of cohabitations for the later.
       Underlying the decline in the fraction of the U.S. population that is married is a rise in
the divorce rate and a decline in the rate of marriage. This is true for the model too, as can
be seen in Figure 7. In the model divorces rise from 11 to 24, per 1,000 married women.
This compares with 11 to 23 in the data. Marriages, in the model, fall from about 129 to
94 per 1,000 unmarried women. In the data they dropped from 141 to 69 or from 211 to 82,
depending on the measure preferred. Thus, by either measure, the drop in marriages in the
model is a little anemic. Again, it is not surprising that the model does not do well in this

  14
     In line with the discussion surrounding Lemma 2 the compensating di¤erential needed to make a single
as well o¤ as a married person only falls from 20.7 percent to 17.7. This small decline is due to the fact that
the …xed cost, c, is only a small fraction of the value of a single’s time endowment, w.
  15
     Choo and Siow (2006) estimate a non-transferable utility model of the U.S. marriage market. Their
estimates show that the gains to marriage for young adults fell sharply between 1971 and 1981.



                                                      31
                                             Married Population                                 Utility Difference

                                       85               Data, mar. + cohabit.

                                                                                          0.9

                                       80
                 Percentage of Women




                                            Model

                                       75                                                 0.7




                                                                                  um-us
                                       70

                                                                                          0.5

                                       65


                                                                  Data, married
                                       60                                                 0.3
                                             1960       1980           2000                     1960     1980        2000
                                                     Year                                              Year



           Figure 6: The Decline in Marriage, 1950-2000–U.S. Data and Model.


regard. Some important factors have been left out, such as the rise in education that surely
must be associated with the delay in …rst marriages, or a narrowing in the gender gap that
may have promoted female labor-force participation and made single life a more desirable
option for females. Last, in the data the duration of a marriage was 30 years in 1950. By
2000 this had declined to roughly 22 years. The model does well in this regard. It predicts
that the duration of a marriage was 31 years in 1950 and 22 years in 2000.


7    1920-2000: A Proposed Extension
The e¤ects of technological progress on the formation of households were beginning to per-
colate before World War II. How are these e¤ects manifested in data? Can the model be
modi…ed to address them?




                                                                              32
                                                                            Marriages                                                                            Divorces




                                                                                                        Number of Divorces per 1,000 Married Women
                  Number of Marriages per 1,000 Single Women
                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                               200              Data, 18-64




                                                                                                                                                                            Model
                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                               150




                                                                                                                                                     15

                                                               100                              Model                                                             Data




                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                 Data, 15-64

                                                                50
                                                                     1960        1980          2000                                                       1960       1980           2000




       Figure 7: Rates of Marriage and Divorce, 1950-1996–U.S. Data and Model.


7.1    The Marriage Data

Figure 8 plots the proportion of the female population that was married from 1880 to 2000.
About 72 percent of the population was married in 1900, as opposed to 62 percent in 2000.
So, 10 percentage points less women were married at the end of the 20th century relative
to the beginning. Observe that the number of marriages shows a \-shaped pattern roughly
coinciding with the baby boom years. This pattern is not as dramatic as it seems at …rst
glance, though. The population was much younger at the turn of the last century than it
is today. Women aged 18 to 30 made up 44 percent of the population in 1900. Now, they
account for 26 percent. Young women are much less likely to be married than older ones.
Figure 8 also shows the fraction of the female population that are married after making a
correction for the shift in the age distribution. First, note that much more females were
married at the beginning of the century as opposed to the end, about 17 percentage points
more. Second, the hump is still there, but it is much less pronounced. What can account
for this hump-shaped pattern in marriage? Speci…cally, why did the number of marriages


                                                                                                      33
                                                                  Married, Age-Adjusted
                                                                                                               31


                                            80
                  Married Women, 18-64, %



                                                                                                               26




                                                                                                                    Women, 18-24, %
                                            75




                                            70    Married, Raw
                                                                                                               21


                                            65


                                                                                   Women,18-24                 16
                                            60


                                                 1870    1890    1910     1930     1950   1970   1990   2010
                                                                            Year




                                                        Figure 8: Marriage, 1880-2000.


rise between 1940 and 1960, and subsequently decline?

7.2    Living Arrangements of Young Adults

At the beginning of the 20th century the vast majority of never-married young females
(close to 80 percent) lived as dependents with their parents. A substantial fraction lived
in households as non-relatives; viz, boarders, servants, etc. Almost none lived in their own
household, however. The fraction of young stand-alone households made up by singles has
become much more prevalent over time. It has risen from close to zero at the turn of the last
century to about 50 percent today, as Figure 9 illustrates. Additionally, Figure 9 plots the
proportion of young households made up by married couples. As can be seen, it fell from
nearly 100 percent at the turn of the last century to less than 50 percent today. Interestingly,
this plot shows a monotonic decline from roughly 1910 on; the hump has disappeared.




                                                                            34
                                                                                                                       Single, incl college
                                                                       100
                  Married females, 18-30, % (of independent females)
                                                                                                                                                     50
                                                                                Married




                                                                                                                                                          Independent single females, 18-30, %
                                                                        90
                                                                                                                                                     40


                                                                        80
                                                                                                                                                     30


                                                                        70
                                                                                                                                                     20



                                                                        60                                                                           10

                                                                                                            Single, on own
                                                                        50                                                                           0


                                                                             1870    1890   1910   1930     1950    1970      1990            2010
                                                                                                     Year




              Figure 9: Living Arrangements for Young Women, 1880-2000.


7.3     Returning to the Hypothesis

The idea here is that technological progress in the household sector made it feasible to es-
tablish smaller and smaller households. In the initial stages of development, technological
advance made it easier for a young adult to leave his or her parent’s home and marry. As
household technology progressed further it became viable for young adults to leave home
and remain single. Therefore, the move by young adults from large to two-person house-
holds coincided with an increase in marriages while the subsequent shift toward one-person
households was associated with a decline. This hypothesis is consistent with the decline in
the fraction of total young households made up by married ones that was shown in Figure
9.

7.3.1   Altering the Setup

To gauge whether or not this hypothesis has promise consider the following simple extension
of the model. Let there now be three types of individuals: singles living at home with


                                                                                                    35
their families (dubbed young adults), singles living in their own homes, and married couples
living in their own households. Suppose that a young adult living with his family receives
a momentary utility of H      x. Here H gives the economic bene…t from living at home,
as a function of the underlying state of the economy (w; p). The variable x represents
the psychic disutility from living at home (versus alone) so to speak. Each single starts
adulthood living at home with their parents and sibling. Assume that a young adult …rst
leaves home single and then looks for a mate. In particular, s/he exits the family nest with
probability ". This probability is choice variable, which is dependent upon the amount of
e¤ort that the youngster invests in leaving home. Let the convex cost function for leaving
home, C : [0; 1] ! R+ , be speci…ed by
                                                   "1+
                                   C(") =              ; for    > 0.
                                                   1+
Once departed, the youngster can never return. Also, presume that a family realizes no
bene…t (or incurs a cost) from a child staying at home. The rest of the setup remains the
same as before. The analysis will focus on steady states.
   Let Y be the expected lifetime utility for a young adult who is currently living at home.
His dynamic programming problem is given by
                               Z
           Y = H x + max f" max[V (b); W ]dS(b) + (1                       ")Y   C(")g:
                             0 " 1

The solution for " is given by
            R                                               Z
              max[V (b); W ]dS(b)     Y       1=
       "=[                                ]        (for 0       max[V (b); W ]dS(b)   Y   ):

As can be seen, a youngster will be more diligent about leaving home when the gains from en-
                          R
tering the singles market, max[V (b); W ]dS(b), are high relative to the bene…ts of staying at
home, Y . Now, consider an increase in wages or a fall in prices. These will lead to reductions
in the number of young adults living at home, so long as the bene…ts of independent single life
                                                                 R
rise more than the bene…ts of a dependent one; i.e., so long as @ max[V (b); W ]dS(b)=@w >
             R
@Y =@w or @ max[V (b); W ]dS(b)=@p < @Y =@p. The considerations ensuring this parallel
those outlined in the Section 5.

                                                     36
   Note that problems (P1) and (P2) remain the same as before, since the decision to leave
home is irreversible and because a married couple realizes no utility from a child living at
home. In a steady state the equation specifying the type distribution for marriages will
appear as
                   Z Z                                                                        Z
M(b) = (1      )                dM (ebjb 1 )dM(b 1 ) + [(1    )s + (1              )"y + "]              dS(eb);
                     M\[ 1;b]                                                                 M\[ 1;b]

where the number of young adults living at home with their parents, y, is given by

                                                 (1 ")
                                      y=                          ;
                                           1   (1   )(1      ")

and                       Z
                                dM(b) + s + y = 1;                    [cf. (5)]:

Therefore, a huge virtue of this setup is that it involves little modi…cation to the original
formulation.

7.3.2   An Example

Does the above setup have promise for extending the earlier analysis to the pre-World War II
period? To address this question, the model’s potential will be demonstrated using a simple
example. The example will focus on three years, to wit 1920, 1950 and 2000. For each
year the model’s steady state will be computed. The output from the model will then be
compared with the stylized facts discussed in Sections 7.1 and 7.2. It should be emphasized
that given the simplicity of the setup, the example is intended only as an illustration; it
should not be viewed as a serious data-…tting exercise.
   For the taste and technological parameters, take the values presented in Table 2 with
two changes. Presumably the price for purchased household inputs fell faster earlier in the
last century than later on. So, allow the price to fall at the constant rate             1920     prior to 1950.
Additionally, the …xed cost for household formation will be allowed to di¤er for this subperiod
as well. Denote this by c1920 . The above setup changes the pool of singles that are available on
the marriage market. So, new matching parameters will be selected. These values will apply


                                                 37
for the whole 1920 to 2000 period. Something must be speci…ed for the economic bene…t
that a young adult derives from staying at home with his parents, H(w; p). Simply suppose
that each family has two kids and set H(w; p) = I(4; p; w). That is, each period a young
adult who stays at home realizes the maximal level of momentary utility that would arise in
a household with four wage earners. [One could just as easily set H(w; p) = #I(4; p; w) for
some # 2 (0; 1). The essential requirement is that the economic bene…t of living in a large
household should decline over time relative to a small one.] Given the primitive nature of
the example, the parameters values are selected so that the model’s steady states display
some features of interest, discussed below. The parameter values selected are presented in
Table 5.

                       Table 5: New Parameter Values–example

              Household Production             c1920 = 0:161,       1920   = 0:165
                                                                2
              Shocks                            s   =   3:75,   s   =8
                                                                2
                                                m    = 0:145,   m    = 0:28,     = 0:59
              Utility of Living at Home        H(w; p) = I(4; p; w)
                                               x = 2:051
              Utility Cost of Leaving Home         = 115:27,    = 1:083

   In the model 63.8 percent of single women work in 1920, the same number as in the data
for women between the ages of 18 and 64–see Table 6. Likewise, only 7.8 percent of married
women work in 1920, again the same as is observed in the data. By construction, the model
still generates the hours-worked predictions shown in Figure 5 for the period 1950-1990. This
transpires because the hours-worked decisions are functions solely of the taste and technology
parameters, and these haven’t been changed for the 1950 to 2000 period. Table 7 presents
the results for some vital statistics. The statistics for the U.S. data apply to women in the
18-to-64 age group (as in Table 3). The numbers have also been adjusted for the shift in
U.S. age distribution, which was discussed earlier. First, as can be seen, the model replicates
quite nicely the stylized facts for the fraction of females who are married. In particular, the
model duplicates the \-shaped pattern displayed in the data. An improvement in …tting the

                                              38
numbers for 2000 can be obtained at the sacri…ce of a diminution in the left-hand side of
the hump. Second, it also does a reasonable job predicting the decline in the proportion of
single females that live at home with their parents. Third, analogously, it mimics well the
rise in fraction of single females that live alone. Fourth, the number of adults living in a
household declined monotonically over the course of the last century, as the Table 7 shows.
This is true for the model as well. The model can’t match the steepness of this decline. One
reason might be that fertility declined in the U.S. over this time period, and the population
aged signi…cantly. The elderly are much more likely to live alone now, relative to the past.
The model, of course, assumes that each woman always gives birth to two children. All in
all, it looks like an extension of the framework that models the decision of a young adult to
leave home has promise for explaining the trends in vital statistics that are observed in the
U.S. data.




                         Table 6: Participation Rates–1920

                                    Model Data
                         Married 0.078        0.078
                         Single     0.638     0.638



                    Table 7: Household Living Arrangements

                                            1920             1950             2000
                                      Model Data      Model Data       Model Data
       Married–m                      0.796    0.791 0.819      0.819 0.680      0.616
       Single, Living at Home–y       0.185    0.185 0.125      0.125 0.109      0.109
       Single, Living Alone–s         0.019    0.024 0.056      0.056 0.212      0.275
       Household Size–# of adults 2.40         2.55   2.15      2.14   1.81      1.65




                                              39
7.3.3    Discussion

The proposed extension of the benchmark model is minimalist, to say the least. It is easy to
identify areas of the analysis that warrant further work. At the heart of the above extension
is a young adult’s decision to leave home. Perhaps one could allow for a young adult to
search for a mate while at home. Three options would then arise: stay at home, leave home
married, and leave home single. Doing this will be important for matching the rates of
marriage that are observed in the data. In the earlier part of the last century most females
got engaged before they left home. Therefore, the model cannot hope to match the observed
rates of marriage at early dates if marriagability is restricted to the small pool of single
females living alone. Additionally, should searching for a mate while living in your parent’s
home be as e¢ cient as searching for one when you live alone? Modelling the utility that a
young adult receives while at home is another area where the framework could be improved.
Do transfers ‡ow from young adults to parents, or vice versa? The answer to this will
depend upon how parents care about their kids, how children feel about their parents, and
their mode of interaction.
    The economic forces that reduce the relative bene…t of single versus married life may also
have a¤ected other living arrangements, such as the incentives of the elderly to live with
their kids. Between 1970 and 1990 the fraction of widows living alone rose from 52.1 to
64.2 percent. Bethencourt and Rios-Rull (2004) argue that the rise in the relative income of
elderly widows can account for a signi…cant part of the rise in the number of elderly widows
living alone between 1970 and 1990. In a similar vein, Schoellman and Tertilt (2007) suggest
that a substantial proportion of the decline in household size is due to an increased demand
for privacy, made possible by rising living standards.


8       Some Cross-Country Evidence on Household Size
The above theory suggests that as the relative price of purchased household inputs declines
so should the number of adults living in a household. The relationship between household



                                              40
size and price is displayed in the upper panel of Figure 10 for a small sample of Western
countries for the year 2001. As can be seen, there is a positive association between these
two variables. Of course, other things may a¤ect household size in a country. To take into
account such factors, a linear regression of the following form is estimated:


         Size = Constant +          Price +        Controls + ", with "      N (0; ),

where Controls represents a vector of control variables. A list of potential control variables
might include GDP per capita, the gender gap, the extent of urbanization, the amount of
product market regulation, and the religiosity of a population. The empirical analysis is
in the spirit of Cavalcanti and Tavares (2008) and Algan and Cahuc (2007) who examined,
using a panel of countries, the impact of appliance prices on female labor supply, and younger
and older (non prime-age) workers, respectively. Theory suggests that      should be positive.
The size of this coe¢ cient is also of interest, because it indicates the power of the relative
price e¤ect.


   The results of the analysis are presented in Table 8. They should be interpreted with
the upmost caution because the sample size is so small. Focus attention on regression 5.
All of the variables are statistically signi…cant and enter in with the expected sign. The
price e¤ect in the regression is highly signi…cant. One would expect, as per-capita GDP
rises, household size–the number of adults between ages 18 and 64–declines. Females will
be less inclined to marry, and more inclined to divorce, the higher is their wage rate relative
to males, as this makes it more likely that they can live an independent life. Indeed, in
the regression household size is negatively related to the gender gap, de…ned as the ratio of
female to male wages. Religious societies may frown on young adults living by themselves or
couples getting divorced. Household size is positively associated with religiosity, as measured
as the fraction of the population that view themselves are religious. Other variables such
as the fraction of the population that lives in urban areas (not shown), perhaps a measure
of less traditional attitudes, or the degree of product market regulation, which increases the

                                              41
                                         1.9                                                  Sp               Ire
                                                                                                    Gr
                                         1.8                                  Port
                Household Size




                                         1.7
                                                                      Ita                    US
                                         1.6
                                                                      Aus
                                         1.5               Bel                       Neth           Fr
                                                                                              UK
                                         1.4             Fin Den            Nor Ger

                                                  104               108              112     116         120         124
           Household Size, unexplained




                                         0.2
                                                                                                   Sp          Ire
                                                                                            US
                                         0.1
                                                                            Port             UK Gr
                                         0.0          Fin
                                                              Den
                                                                                Neth
                                         -0.1                       Ita        Ger
                                                                     Aus
                                         -0.2           Bel

                                                104             108                112      116          120         124
                                                              Relative Price of Household Appliances


Figure 10: The Cross-Country Relationship between Household Size and the Relative Price
of Appliances, 2001.




                                                                                      42
cost of living, have the expected signs but are less signi…cant (when GPD per capita and
the gender gap are included in the regression). Adding them changes only marginally the
coe¢ cient on the price e¤ect, or its signi…cance. A robustness check found that controlling
for the age structure of the population doesn’t seem to matter much either. Additionally,
the basic results continue to hold in a larger sample that includes ex-communist countries,
such as Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, etc–see the Appendix. The lower panel in
Figure 10 shows the relationship between price and household size after controlling for the
factors included in regression 5.
   What about the economic signi…cance of the size of the coe¢ cient on price in the regres-
sion? To gauge this, compare Finland, which had the lowest relative price level of 104.8, with
Ireland, which had the highest relative price level of 122.01. The relative price di¤erence is
associated with about 0.44 members per household (about 100% of the observed di¤erence,
from 1.424 for Finland to 1.879 for Ireland). This price e¤ect is quantitatively powerful. An
increase in per-capita GDP from $17,440 (Greece with a household size of 1.86) to $34,320
(U.S with a household size of 1.65) leads to drop in household size of 0.22 members (again
almost all of di¤erence between the two countries). By comparison, the gender gap has
a much weaker impact. Suppose the gender gap shrinks from 0.4 (Ireland, the widest) to
0.7 (Denmark, the narrowest). Household size falls by 0.12 members, which represents 25
percent of di¤erence. Thus, the forces stressed in paper appear to have a strong impact
on household size. Last, the Appendix contains a tentative discussion on the relationship
between the fraction of the population married and the relative price of appliances.




                                             43
                       table 8: Cross-Country Regression Analysis

                                                     Regression

       Ind. Variable          1            2              3           4            5
       Constant           -1.907***   -1.699         -0.878       -2.110***     -1.092***
                          (0.545)     (0.466)        (0.513)      (0.434)        (0.331)
       Relative Price     0.0263***    0.0275***     0.0212*** 0.0267***       0.0244***
                          (0.0047)    (0.0043)       (0.0040)     (0.0037)      (0.0033)
       GDP per cap.                   -0.000015***                             -0.000013**
                                       (4.58e-06)                              (4.13e-0.6)
       Gender Gap                                     -0.637**                  -0.404**
                                                       (0.233)                   (0.135)
       Prod. Mar Reg                                              0.102*
                                                                   (0.049)
       Religion           0.825***      0.867***      0.657***    0.759***      0.722***
                           (0.165)      (0.109)        (0.189)     (0.196)       (0.119)
       Observations          14            14            14          14            13
       Adjusted R2          0.700        0.856          0.781       0.772         0.897
      *** Signi…cant at 1%, **Signi…cant at 5%, *Signi…cant at 10%

      Standard errors re‡ect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.


9    Conclusions
The fraction of adult females who are married has dropped by roughly 20 percentage points
since World War II. Females now spend a much smaller part of their adult life married than
50 years ago. Associated with this has been a rise in the divorce rate and a decline in the
rate of marriage. At the same time, hours worked by married households rose considerably.
This was driven by a large increase in labor-force participation by married females.


                                                44
       An explanation of these facts is o¤ered here. The story told focuses on technological
progress in both the household and market sectors. The idea is that investment-speci…c
technological progress in the household sector reduced the need to use labor at home. This
simultaneously allowed women to enter the labor force and eroded the economic incentives
for marriage. The analysis blends together a search model of marriage and divorce with a
model of household production. The economic incentives for marriage derive from economies
of scale in household production. These are whittled away overtime for two reasons. First,
rising wages make it easier to meet or exceed the …xed cost for household maintenance.
This reduces the need to marry to make ends meet. Second, a falling price for labor-saving
household inputs has a bigger impact on single vis à vis married households, since the former
devote a larger share of their spending to these products due to a high rate of diminishing
marginal utility for nonmarket consumption. These two e¤ects increase the (relative) value
of single life.
       So, where can the analysis go from here? Technological progress in the home and market
may a¤ect the pattern of matching in society. There is some evidence that the degree of
assortative mating in the U.S. has increased since 1940.16          Extensions of the model may
be able to capture this. Suppose that individuals di¤er in their labor market productivities.
Assume that married males devote all of their time to market work while married females split
their time between market work and household work. Now, when choosing a potential mate
their earnings on the labor market will be a consideration. This will matter less at early stages
of economic development, since married women will do little market work due to the large
amount of time spent in household production. As women start to work more in the market,
due to technological progress, it will begin to matter more. As an economy advances and
the bene…ts from economies of scale in household consumption diminish, earnings potential
along with marital bliss will become more important criteria when choosing a mate. The
degree of assortative mating will increase. Additionally, such an analysis would likely imply

  16
    See Lam (1997) for some facts on the correlation of income levels across partners and Schwartz and
Mare (2005) for education.



                                                 45
that the drop in the marriage rate should be biggest for those individuals in lower income
groups, since the relative bene…ts from marriage will fall the most for them. Indeed, there
is some evidence suggesting that this has been the case.17


10         Appendix
10.1       Proofs

As a prelude to the proofs of the lemmas and propositions, combine (7) and (8) to obtain

                                              (1      )p
                                    d=[                    ]1=(     1)
                                                                         h    R(p)h:                                           (11)

Using this in (6) then gives

                                    c                                             c
                 c    c = w[(z        )        h]     wpd = w[(z                    )         h]    wpR(p)h:                   (12)
                                    w                                             w

Finally, by substituting (11) and (12) into (8) a single equation can be obtained in one
unknown, namely h:

                                                                                                   c
            [ R(p) + (1       )]1   =
                                         h1        = (1           )(1        )z         [(z          )    h    pR(p)h]:        (13)
                                                                                                   w

The solution is portrayed in Figure 11. It is easy to deduce that the left-hand side of (13) is
increasing in h, since     < 0. It is trivial to see that the right-hand side is decreasing in h:
Proof of Proposition 1. On (i), observe that both R(p) = f[(1                                            )= ]pg1=(   1)
                                                                                                                          and pR(p)
are decreasing in p, since 0 <          < 1. Therefore, the right-hand side of (13) falls with a drop
in p, as    pR(p) is increasing in p. Thus, the RHS curve in Figure 11 will shift down when
p declines. The left-hand side increases with a reduction in p because R(p) is decreasing
in p. Hence, the LHS curve shifts up. As a consequence, h unambiguously drops. For (ii)
and (iii), note that w and c only enter into (13) in the form c=w. It’s trivial to see that the
right-hand side of (13) is decreasing in c=w, while the left-hand side is not a function of c=w.
Therefore, an increase in c=w will cause h to fall. The desired results follow immediately.

  17
    See Wallace (2000) who …nds that the decline in the marriage rate is inversely related to the level of
education.

                                                            46
                    RHS,
                    LHS                             LHS




                                                             RHS



                                                              h




                            Figure 11: The Determination of h.


   What is the relationship between the size of a household, on the one hand, and the
amount of time allocated to housework and spending on goods, on the other hand? One
would expect housework, h, to rise when size, z, increases because the total endowment of
time has risen. This is true. A more interesting question is whether or not housework rises
by a factor more or less than the proportionate increase in household size. On the one hand,
given that the utility function for nonmarket goods is more concave than the one for market
goods, the household has a preference for diverting extra resources into market consumption.
This suggests that housework will increase less than proportionately with size. On the other
hand, at higher levels of income the …xed cost for household maintenance will matter less.
This propones that housework will rise more than proportionately with size. While the result
turns out to be ambiguous, a useful upper bound on the response of housework to household
size can be derived. This is presented in Lemma 3, which is an important step toward
proving Proposition 2. Using this upper bound, it can be shown that married households
spend less than single households do on the inputs into household production, d and h, at
least relative to market consumption, c   c.


                                               47
Lemma 3 A rise in z by a factor of > 1 leads to an increase in h by a factor strictly less
than = ( z c=w)=(z c=w). When = 0 (ln utility for nonmarket goods) a magni…cation
in z by a factor of > 1 will cause h to expand by exactly a factor of .

Proof. Rewrite equation (13) as


   [ R(p) + (1       )]1   =
                               h h + (1        )(1         )[1 + pR(p)]z      h

                                                                       = (1         )(1     )z      (z     c=w):

If z increases by factor       > 1 then z    c=w rises by the factor              ( z     c=w)=(z        c=w) > .
Now, the right-hand side rises by the factor                  . Observe that if h rises by the factor
then the left-hand side will increase by more than the factor                     , because      >          when
  < 0 and 0 <      < 1. Therefore, to restore equality between the left-hand and right-hand
sides of the above equation, h must rise by less than the factor . The …rst part of the lemma
has been established. Last, suppose that             = 0. In this case, (13) reduces to

                                        (1      )(1     )(z c=w)
                    h=                                                       :                               (14)
                               [ R(p) + (1      )] + (1    )(1  )[1 + pR(p)]

The second part of the lemma follows immediately.
   In line with the intuition presented above on the relationship between household size
and allocations, suppose that c = 0. In this case,                 =    . Thus, larger households will
devote proportionately less of their time to housework than smaller ones, since an increase
in household size by a factor       > 1 will lead to a rise in h by a factor less than               = . Next,
suppose that = 0 and c > 0, so that both market goods and nonmarket goods have ln utility.
If z increases by a factor of     then h will rise by exactly the factor ( z              c=w)=(z        c=w) > .
Now, larger households spend proportionately more of their time on housework relative to
smaller ones. This lemma will now be use in the proof of Lemma 1.
Proof of Lemma 1. First, result (iii) is immediate from Lemma (3). Second, it is easy to
see that (ii) is implied by equation (11) and result (iii). By using (ii) and (iii), in conjunction
with equation (12), result (i) can be obtained. Last, the situation for                 = 0 is readily handled
by using the closed-form solution (14).

                                                      48
Proof of Corollary. From Lemma 1, note that when                          0 it transpires that (cm      c)
2(cs   c), since [(2    c=w)=(1    c=w)]     2. Thus, (cm          c)=2        21   (cs   c) > (cs   c). Part
(ii) of the corollary follows trivially.

10.2     The Economic Value of Marriage

What is the economic value of married life? One way to measure this is to compute the
required income, or compensation, that is necessary to make a single person as well o¤ as
a married one with no bliss (b = 0). This can be done by solving the following expenditure
problem:
                                                 cs + pwdes + we
                             E(p; w; um ) = min fe             hs g;                                    (P4)
                                              cs ;des ;e
                                              e        hs

subject to (1) and
                                     cs
                                  ln(e     c) + (1            n s ) = = um :
                                                            )(e                                          (15)

Equation (15) states that the momentary utility level realized by a single agent must equal
that of a married one with no bliss, or um . Hence, problem (P4) …nds the minimum level of
expenditure that makes a single person as well o¤ as a married one. A consumption-based
measure of the economic bene…ts from marriage is then given by

                                                 E(p; w; um )
                                           ln[                ];
                                                      w

where w is the value of a single agent’s time endowment. The solution to the expenditure
problem is surprisingly simple and natural as Lemma 2 illustrates.
Proof of Lemma 2. The solution to the expenditure problem (P4) is once again charac-
terized by (8) and (11) for z = 1, in conjunction with (15). Now, suppose that cm                      c, dm ,
and hm satisfy the married time-allocation problem or (P3) when z = 2. Then, it is easy
             cs
to show that e         c = (cm    c)=2 , des = dm =2 , and e
                                                           hs = hm =2 satisfy the expenditure
                                     cs + pwdes + we
problem. Given this, it follows that e             hs = [(cm                    c) + pwdm + whm ]=2 + c
= (2w      c)=2 + c. The desired result obtains.




                                                      49
10.3     The Impact of Technological Progress on Marriage and Di-
         vorce

The impact of technological progress on marriage and divorce will now be addressed. To this
end, note that by standard arguments [Stokey and Lucas with Prescott (1989, chaps. 4 and
9)] it can be shown that the married value function V is strictly increasing in b. Thus, there
is a unique value for b, or threshold t, that solves the equation V (b) = W . Furthermore,
V (b) R W as b R t. This allows the dynamic programming problems (P1) and (P2) to be
rewritten more simply as
                                           Z    t0                                      Z
                                   s                     0             0
                       W =u +                        W dS(b ) +                              V 0 (b0 )dS(b0 );
                                                                                        t0

and

                                            Z    t0                                          Z
                           m                                  0            0
                 V (b) = u + b +                      W dM (b jb) +                                 V 0 (b0 )dM (b0 jb);
                                                                                               t0

where again us = I(1; p; w) and um = I(2; p; w).
   It is now easy to show that a purely temporary decrease in the price for purchased
household inputs (dp < 0 with dp0 = dp00 =                                 = 0) will make individuals choosier about
their mates.

Lemma 4 A temporary one-shot decline in the price for purchased household inputs, p, will
cause the threshold, t , to rise.

Proof. The above equations imply
                                                     Z   t0                                   Z
                               s       m                          0            0
                    t = u              u +        W dS(b ) +          V 0 (b0 )dS(b0 )
                                                                  t 0
                                   Z t0                 Z
                                        W 0 dM (b0 jb)     V 0 (b0 )dM (b0 jb):
                                                                                   t0

Now note that W 0 , V 0 and t0 are una¤ected by a purely temporary price decrease. Therefore,

                                           dt   d(us um )
                                              =           < 0;
                                           dp       dp

by Proposition 2. Thus, a temporary decline in price will cause the threshold, t, to rise.

                                                                  50
Since all individuals become more pickier about their mates, the rate of marriage will su¤er
a one period fall and the rate of divorce endure a one period increase.
   To say much more, it looks like either some additional structure needs to be imposed on
the framework, or that the model needs to be simulated numerically. The latter strategy is
pursued in Section 6. Following the …rst strategy, the stochastic structure of the model will
be simpli…ed in way that is commonly done with search models.
Assumption Let the stochastic structure governing match quality be speci…ed as follows:
(i) For single agents the cumulative distribution function S has bounded support with upper
bound b;
(ii) For married agents let b evolve in line with
                                    8
                                    < = b;      with Pr( );
                                0
                               b =
                                    : = b; with Pr(1        );

where b< [U s (w; p)   U m (w; p) ] with p representing the upper bound on the price for house-
hold products. The lower bound b is constructed so that it is never optimal to marry given
this match quality.
   Given this, the dynamic programming problems for single and married agents, in a
stationary equilibrium, will appear as
                                         Z
                                    s
                             W =u +           V (b)dS(b) + W S(t);                        (16)
                                          t

and
                           V (b) = um + b +      V (b) + (1      ) W:                     (17)

Lemma 5 A decrease in the price for purchased household inputs, p, causes the steady-state
threshold level of match quality, t, to rise.

Proof. An equation characterizing the threshold, t, will be derived. To this end, …rst rewrite
(17) as
                                        um + b + (1      ) W
                                V (b) =                        :
                                              1


                                                51
Now, use this in (16) to obtain an equation de…ning W :
                                                                                                            Z
                             2                                                                  s
           [1                    (1            )     S(t)(1        )]W = (1                    )u +              (um + b)dS(b):
                                                                                                             t

Note that (17) can also be evaluated at b = t to get W = [um + t]=(1                                                      ). This allows the
above equation to be converted into a condition specifying t. Speci…cally, solving out for W
gives
                              2                                                                             Z
                1                 (1           )               m                                s
            [                                           S(t)](u + t) = (1                     )u +               (um + b)dS(b);
                        1
                                                                                                            t

which can be rearranged to read18
                                                                                                    Z
                                                           m                              s
                    [1 + (1                )       S(t)](u + t) = (1                   )u +             (um + b)dS(b):
                                                                                                    t

This equation determines t. Integrating by parts the right-hand side of the above condition
yields

                                                                                                                                 Zb
                                           m                        s              m
 [1 + (1            )       S(t)](u + t) = (1                      )u + u [1                  S(t)] + b              tS(t)            S(b)db;
                                                                                                                                 t

which can be rewritten as
                                                                                                        Zb
                                                                         s         m
                        [1 + (1                    )]t = (1        )(u             u )+ b                       S(b)db:
                                                                                                        t

Finally, di¤erentiate the above equation to get

                                       dt        (1                 )              d(us        um )
                                          =                                                             < 0;
                                       dp   1 + (1             )         S(t)             dp

where the sign follows from Proposition 2. Hence, a decrease in price, p, will increase t.
      So, how will a decrease in the steady-state price for purchased household inputs, p, a¤ect
the number of people who are married in a steady state? To answer this, let                                                   represent the

 18                               2
      Note that 1                     (1       ) = (1      )[1 + (1          )].


                                                                    52
steady-state fraction of people who are married and s denote the density function that is
associated with S. The fraction of people who are married in a steady state is determined
by the equation
                                 = (1     )[1    S(t)] + (1          );

so that
                                             1       S(t)
                                        =                   :
                                            1+         S(t)
From this it is immediate that

                              d                                 dt
                                 =                       s(t)      > 0;
                              dp   [1 +         S(t)]2          dp

by Lemma 5. Thus, a fall in price will lead to a decrease in the fraction of the population
that is married.

10.4      Sensitivity Analysis

Labor supply estimation, increasing the weight on singles. The estimation scheme weights
marrieds and singles by their prevalence in the population. Instead re-estimate the household
technology parameters, holding …xed the tastes and matching parameters (except for ), just
using the hours data for singles from 1970 on. Doing this results in c = 0:051, p1950 = 0:8481,
and    = 0:0207, when   =    3:6. The predictions for vital statistics are very close to the ones
currently obtained. Note that a higher value for       is picked to compensate for the lower rate
of price decline, . The model …ts the rising portion of single hours nearly perfectly–it fails
to generate any the U shape, though. The …t for married labor supply is a little worse, but
not bad. For predicting the …rst three facts presented in Table 3, the results never di¤er by
more than an absolute value of 0:022, relative to the baseline model–the di¤erence is usually
much smaller. The maximal di¤erence for the last fact, which has di¤erent units, is 2:01.
Alternatively, one could use the whole series for singles hours. A U -shaped pattern emerges
with some worsening of …t elsewhere. The overall …t for the model isn’t noticeably better
for either of these two estimation schemes.



                                                53
   Changing the speci…cation for …xed costs. Suppose that married and single households
have di¤erent …xed costs, m and s. Re-estimating the model, holding …xed the taste and
matching parameters (except for ), results in m = 0:1586, s = 0:1367, p1950 = 15:012,
and    = 0:068, when     =   1:845. Not surprisingly, the …xed cost for married households
is bigger than the one for singles. The …t for married female labor supply is now slightly
better, while the one for singles is about the same. More or less the same predictions for
the vital statistics are obtained. The results for the …rst three targets presented in Table 3
never di¤er by more than an absolute value of 0:002, relative to the baseline model. The
di¤erence for the last target, which again has di¤erent units, is 0:15.
   One could also add a …xed cost for household maintenance expressed in terms of non-
market goods; i.e., rewrite the nonmarket goods part of the utility function as (1       )[(n
n)=z ] = , where n is the …xed cost and z = 1; 2 is household size. A re-estimation of the
household technology parameters for the model (holding …xed the other parameter values)
established that this version of the model matched the hours worked data better than the
benchmark model, in that it can generate a more pronounced [-shape for single female labor
supply. At the old taste and matching parameter values, there are too many marriages in
1950. This is because the incentives to get married are now even higher. On this, the esti-
mation scheme also picks a larger value for c (= 0:1674) in the presence of n (= 0:1040) to
keep singles working in market. The taste and matching parameters can be jiggled however
so that this version of the model gives about as good (or bad) results as before.
   Changing the sample period for the estimation. Recall that the estimation strategy uses
information on the trends in labor supply and vitals statistics over the entire sample to
identify the key parameters c, , and . To check for the robustness of this strategy, the
model was partially re-estimated (over the c, , p1950 , and    parameters) to …t the 1950 to
1970 subperiod. In particular, for c = 0:1461,     = 0:0671, p1950 = 15:6562, and    =    1:72,
the model did a good job matching labor supply and vital statistics for the subperiod. Using
these estimates the model’s predictions for the year 2000 were then generated. They are
surprisingly close to the benchmark model. The results for 1950 are: fraction married,


                                              54
0.814; probability of divorce, 0.011; probability of marriage, 0.129; duration of marriages,
31.20. For 2000 the corresponding …gures are 0.692, 0.024, 0.096, and 22.32.

10.5     Cross-Country Evidence: Additional Discussion
10.5.1    Household Size and the Relative Price of Appliances

The data on relative prices and household size is available for a larger set countries that
includes ex-Communist countries (Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia,
Lithuania, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, and Slovenia). The main results are presented ex-
cluding these countries, since it is hard to know how the communist past a¤ected marital
decisions, etc. For example, these countries, with the exception of Poland, had quite lower
fertility rates than other European countries, despite low income levels.
   Table 9 shows the basic regression results for the larger sample. Only the results in which
the explanatory variables are signi…cant are reported. Note that regression 3 controls for the
population structure, since the results are more sensitive to this in the larger sample. One
might think that countries with high fertility rates, and as a result younger populations,
should have larger households. The measure of household size, which calculates adults
between the ages 18 and 64 per household, however, should be independent of fertility
di¤erences. Still, a large fraction of elderly can a¤ect the measure. If the elderly live in their
own households, they will show up in the denominator of the household size measure, but
not in the numerator.




                                               55
                 table 9: Results with Larger Sample

                                             Regression

              Ind. Variable           1            2            3
              Constant             0.654      -0.385      -3.790**
                                   (0.611)    (0.690)     (1.400)
              Relative Price        0.0087    0.0130** 0.0133***
                                   (0.0053) (0.0051)      (0.0040)
              Religion                        0.804*** 0.777**
                                              (0.204)      (0.194)
              Population 18-64                             5.331**
                                                           (2.442)
              Observations            25           24           24
              Adjusted R2           0.083      0.431        0.550
             *** Signi…cant at 1%, **Signi…cant at 5%, *Signi…cant at 10%

             Standard errors re‡ect Eicker-White correction for heteroscedasticity.

10.5.2   The Fraction of the Population Married or Cohabitating and the Rela-
         tive Price of Appliances

The discussion in Section 7 illustrated that the fraction of the U.S. population that is married
displays a \ shape over the 1920 to 2000 time period. It was suggested that technological
progress in the household sector initially made it easier for young adults to leave their
parents’s homes and marry. The fraction of people married then rose. As this process
continued further young adults could a¤ord to leave home and live an independent single
life. At this point, the fraction of people married declined.
   Figure 12 plots the relationship between the relative price of appliances and the fraction
of the population that is married (or cohabiting) for 16 Western European countries for
the year 2001. Interestingly, it is \ shaped. In order to test the hypothesis of a \-shaped


                                              56
relationship, the following regression is run:

       Married =        10:839 + 0:206          Price        0:0009      Price2 ; R2 (adj) = 0:508:
                        (1:793)     (0:032)                (0:00015)


Both the relative price and its square enter the regression with the expected signs and
their e¤ect is very signi…cant. Indeed, none of the controls studied earlier with household
size (GDP per capita, urbanization, the gender gap, regulation of the retail sector, and
religion) have a signi…cant e¤ect beyond the part accounted for by price and its square.
Controls for population structure do not a¤ect the relationship between the relative price
and married population variables. This \-shaped pattern becomes cloudy when the ex-
communist countries are added into the mix, however. It still survives, albeit at the 10
percent signi…cance level, if Cyprus, Iceland and Luxembourg are also included. These three
countries are often excluded in cross-country analyses because of their very small size.19
      Figure 13 shows the predicted values from the regression. Note some of the countries that
have a small fraction of population being married (or cohabiting) are exactly the countries
with large households (e.g. Greece, Ireland, Spain). What is going on? The same forces
that kept young adults at home at the turn of the century in the U.S. also work to keep
young adults at home in these countries. Hence, in these countries large households are
associated with a small fraction of the population being married. Indeed, as Table 10 shows
all these countries are characterized by very high ages at which young men leave their houses–
European Commission (2007). All in all, the results suggest that in-depth empirical work
on the cross-country relationship between the relative price of appliances, on the one hand,
and household size and/or the fraction of the population married or cohabitating, on the

 19
      None of the earlier regresssion results are e¤ected when they are included.




                                                     57
                                                               0.75




                                                                                                         Portugal
           Fraction of Population Married or Cohabiting, 18+



                                                                0.7


                                                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                           Denmark
                                                               0.65                                                                      France
                                                                                                                                  US
                                                                                                                                   UK
                                                                                        Belgium                                          Greece

                                                                                    Finland        Austria
                                                                                                  Italy Norway
                                                                                                                                        Spain
                                                                0.6



                                                                         Sweden
                                                                                                                                                        Ireland
                                                               0.55




                                                                0.5
                                                                   100            105                  110                  115                   120             125   130
                                                                                                         Relative Price of Household Appliances




Figure 12: The Cross-Country Relationship between the Fraction of the Population that is
Married and the Relative Price of Appliances, 2001.

other, would be interesting.

                                                         table 10: Median Age at which Young Men Leave Home

                                                         Country                                                                  Age
                                                         Greece                                                                   31
                                                         Ireland                                                                  28
                                                         Spain                                                                    30



10.6    Data

Figure 1. The marital status of the population is reported in the U.S. Census Bureau
publications Marital Status and Living Arrangements (March 1950 to March 1998) and
America’s Families and Living Arrangements (March 1999 to March 2000). The fraction
of time spent married is calculated as follows: First, data on life expectancy, e, and the
fractions of total life spent as never married, n, married, m, and divorced, d are collected
from Schoen (1983) and Schoen and Standish (2001). This data covers each year between

                                                                                                                     58
                                                               0.75




                                                                                                         Portugal
           Fraction of Population Married or Cohabiting, 18+



                                                                0.7


                                                                                                              Netherlands
                                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                           Denmark
                                                               0.65                                                                      France
                                                                                                                                  US
                                                                                                                                   UK
                                                                                        Belgium                                          Greece

                                                                                    Finland
                                                                                                                                                            Inverted-U
                                                                                                   Austria
                                                                                                  Italy Norway
                                                                                                                                        Spain
                                                                0.6



                                                                         Sweden
                                                                                                                                                          Ireland
                                                               0.55




                                                                0.5
                                                                   100            105                  110                  115                   120               125   130
                                                                                                         Relative Price of Household Appliances




Figure 13: The Predicted Cross-Country Relationship between the Fraction of the Population
that is Married and the Relative Price of Appliances, 2001.


1950 and 1980, and the years 1983, 1988, and 1995. Second, on the basis of these numbers,
the …gures presented are then calculated as
                                                                                                               e m
                                                                                                                                                      :
                                                                                              e     n        18 + e m + e                         d
Figure 2. The divorce and marriage rates are contained in Clarke (1995a,b). A caveat is in
order. Whereas data is available on the number of unmarried women by age group it is not
available for marriages by age group. Hence, the marriage rate for a particular age group
is computed as the total number of marriages divided by the total number of unmarried
women in the given age group. Therefore, the marriage rates are somewhat sensitive to the
particular age group used as the base for the calculations. Divorce and marriage statistics
(which primarily come from the National Center for Health Statistics) are not available after
1996.
   Figures 3 and 5. Simple tabulations based on U.S. Census data extracted from IPMUS-
USA, Minnesota Population Center, University of Minnesota. To calculate the fraction of
time spent working in the U.S. data for the period 1950-1990, assume that there are 112

                                                                                                                     59
nonsleeping hours in a week. Following the footsteps of McGrattan and Rogerson (1998),
weekly hours per married and single households can be calculated using U.S. Census Data.
For each decennial year between 1950 and 1990 the Census provides hours per week in the
following intervals: 1-14, 15-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40, 41-48, 49-59, and more than 60 hours. Let
Ei denote the number of people that report hours in a particular interval i, ER represent the
total number of people reporting hours, E stand for the total number of people employed,
and N be the total population. Then, the fraction of total nonsleeping time allocated to the
market is calculated as


                                                                                      1 E 1
(7:5E1   14 +22E15 29 +32E30 34 +37E35 39 +40E40 +44:5E41 48 +42E49 59 +62:5E60+ )            :
                                                                                     ER N 112
This fraction is computed by marital status for all males and females between ages 24 and
54. The fractions of total household time allocated to the market by married households,
e
lm , and by single households, e
                               ls , are then calculated as the averages across male and female
                                ltm and e
hours. Thus, an observation for e       lts is obtained for each decade t between 1950 and
1990, inclusive.
   Figure 4, wages. The series for Disposable Personal Income from the National Income and
Product Accounts is taken and divided through by Hours Worked by Full-Time and Part-
Time Employees, both available from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department
of Commerce.
   Figure 6. The fraction of females living with a male is de…ned to be the fraction of females
who are married plus the fraction of females who are unmarried living with a male. The
size of this latter group is tabulated using the Census Bureau’s ‘posslq’household variable–
persons of the opposite sex living together. This variable unfortunately also includes people
who aren’t partners. Still, it probably is a good proxy for the number of cohabitations. Note
that the number of unmarried couples living together before 1960 would have been small
and can be safely ignored.
   Figures 8 and 9. The facts displayed in these graphs are again based on tabulations from
Census data downloaded from IPUMS-USA. In Figure 8 the adjustment for the shift in the

                                             60
age distribution is done using the typical method employed by demographers. Let p denote
the total female population at a point in time. Suppose that this population is made up of I
age groups. De…ne pi to represent the number of women in the i-th age group and allow mi
to proxy for the number of these women who are married. The fraction of married females
in the total population is then given by

                                               X
                                               I
                                                 mi pi
                                          f=                   :
                                               i=1
                                                        pi p

Hence, f depends both on the age composition of the population (or the pi =p terms) and
on the fraction of each age group who is married (or the mi =pi terms). Now, for any year t
de…ne an age-adjusted measure by

                                             X
                                             I
                                               mi;t pi;2000
                                     fbt =                         :
                                             i=1
                                                   pi;t p2000

Thus, fbt calculates the fraction of women that would be married if the age composition of
2000 was in e¤ect at time t. In Figure 9 an independent single female is de…ned to be a
never-married woman who is either the head of a household, or the friend or partner of
a householder. The curve labeled ‘single, on own’ graphs this group relative to all single
females. The curve marked ‘married’shows the number of married females relative to the
number of married plus independent single ones. The plots are restricted to women in the
18-to-30 age group.
   Table 6, labor-force particpation rate for 1920. Prior to 1940 it is not possible to obtain
hours-worked data for married and single females. Thus, for 1920 labor-force participation
rates are used instead. This is done by heroically assuming that the work week is …xed at 40
hours and that there are 112 nonsleeping hours in a week. It is also assumed that all males
work a 40 hour week. Denote the rates of participations for married and single females by
 m         s                           m         s
f1920 and f1920 . Then, for the model f1920 and f1920 can be obtained from hours worked,
hm         s
 1920 and h1920 , by using the formulae

                2     hm1920
                                        m
                               40 + 40 f1920                                       s
                                                                          40 + 40 f1920
                             =               and 1             hs1920 =                 :
                      2           2 112                                      2 112

                                                   61
   Table 7. The numbers in the table for the U.S. data derive as follows: First, the counts
for the fractions of females who are married, m, are taken from the data displayed in Figure
8. Second, in the model only never-married females live at home. Suppose that this is true
in the data as well. The number of never-married females at home is given by the formula for
                   R
y. Third, s = 1      dM(b) y. All numbers in the table refer to women in the 18-to-64 age
group and have been adjusted to control for shifts in the age distribution of the population
(in the manner discussed above). Fourth, to calculate average household size for the U.S.
data simply take the size of the 18-to-64 population and divide it through by the number of
independent households. The same thing can be done for the model, by using the formula
       R
2=[2s + dM(b)].
   Table 8. The sample contained the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain,
United Kingdom, and the United States. Household size is the population between the
ages 18 and 64 per household. For the U.S. the data derives from the 2000 Census. For
all other countries EUROSTAT data on population and social conditions for the year 2001
is used. For the U.S. the relative price of household appliances is de…ned to be the price
index for Kitchen and Other Household Appliances relative to the one for Personal Con-
sumption Expenditures (taken from the National Income and Product Accounts). For the
rest, EUROSTAT’s Harmonized Indices of Consumer Prices (HICP) is used to calculate
the price index for household appliances (cp053) relative to one for all items-HICP (cp00).
GDP per capita (in purchasing power parity U.S. dollars) and the gender gap are the 2001
values given in the Human Development Report (2003). The Product Market Regulation
Index, with higher values indicating more regulation, is for the year 1998. The source is
Conway, Janod and Nicoletti (2005). Religion represents the fraction of people who classify
themselves as religious in the 2000 World Values Survey.
   Section 10.5.2. For all countries, but Sweden and the U.S., EUROSTAT data is used for
the fraction of the adult (above 18) population that is currently married or cohabiting. For
Sweden and the U.S., the data is taken from Stevenson and Wolfers (2007, Table 5).


                                            62
References
   Albanesi, Stefania and Olivetti, Claudia. “Gender Roles and Technological Progress.”
   Mimeo, Boston University, 2006.
   Algan, Yann and Cahuc, Pierre. “The Roots of Low European Employment: Family
   Culture?” In Je¤ery A. Frankel and Christopher A. Pissarides, Editors, NBER Inter-
   national Seminar on Macroeconomics 2005, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2007, 65-109.
   Andolfatto, David and MacDonald, Glenn M. “Technology Di¤usion and Aggregate
   Dynamics.”Review of Economic Dynamics, April 1998,1 (2), 338-370.
   Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.”Economic Journal, September
   1965, 75 (299), 493-517.
   Bethencourt, Carlos and Rios-Rull, Jose-Victor. “On the Living Arrangements of El-
   derly Widows.”Working Paper #21, CAERP, 2004.
   Cavalcanti, Tiago V. de V. and Tavares, Jose. “Assessing the ‘Engines of Liberation’:
   Home Appliances and Female Labor Force Participation.” Review of Economics and
   Statistics, 90 (1), 81-88.
   Chang, Yongsung and Schorfheide, Frank. “Labor-supply Shifts and Economic Fluc-
   tuations.”Journal of Monetary Economics, November 2003, 50 (8), 1751-1768.
   Choo, Eugene and Aloysius Siow. “Who Marries Whom and Why.”Journal of Political
   Economy, February 2006, 114 (1): 175-210.
   Clarke, Sally C. “Advance Report of Final Divorce Statistics, 1989 and 1990.”Monthly
   Vital Statistics Reports, March 1995a, 43 (8 suppl.). Hyattsville, Maryland: National
   Center for Health Statistics.
   Clarke, Sally C. “Advance Report of Final Marriage Statistics, 1989 and 1990.”
   Monthly Vital Statistics Reports, July 1995b, 43 (12 suppl.). Hyattsville, Maryland:
   National Center for Health Statistics.
   Coen-Pirani, Daniele; Leon, Alexis and Lugauer, Steven. “The E¤ect of Household
   Appliances on Female Labor Force Participation: Evidence from Micro Data.”Mimeo,
   Carnegie Mellon University, 2008.
   Conway, Paul; Janod Veronique and Nicoletti, Guiseppe. “Product Market Regula-
   tion in OECD Countries: 1998 to 2003.” Economics Department Working Paper 419,
   OECD, 2005.
   Cooley, Thomas F. and Prescott, Edward C. “Economic Growth and Business Cy-
   cles.” In Thomas F. Cooley, Editor, Frontiers of Business Cycle Research. Princeton:
   Princeton University Press, 1995,1-38.

                                         63
Cornwell, Christopher and Rupert, Peter. “Unobservable Individual E¤ects, Marriage
and the Earnings of Young Men.”Economic Inquiry, April 1997, 35 (2), 285-94.
Espenshade, Thomas J. “Marriage Trends in America: Estimates, Implications, and
Underlying Causes.”Population and Development Review, 11 (2), 193-245.
European Commission. The Social Situation in European Union 2005-2006: The Bal-
ance between Generations in an Ageing Europe. 2007. Brussels, Belgium: Directorate-
General for Employment, Social A¤airs and Equal Opportunities, European Commis-
sion.
Greenwood, Jeremy and Hercowitz, Zvi. “The Allocation of Capital and Time Over
the Business Cycle.”Journal of Political Economy, December 1991, 99 (6), 1188-1214.
Lam, David. “Demographic Variables and Income Inequality.”In Mark R. Rosenzweig
and Oded Stark, Editors, Handbook of Population and Family Economics. Amsterdam:
Elsevier Science B.V., 1997, 1015-1059.
McGrattan, Ellen R.; Rogerson, Richard and Wright, Randall. “An Equilibrium Model
of the Business Cycle with Household Production and Fiscal Policy.” International
Economic Review, May 1997, 38 (2), 267-290.
McGrattan, Ellen R. and Rogerson, Richard. “Changes in Hours Worked Since 1950.”
Quarterly Review, Winter 1998, 2-19.
Mortensen, Dale T. “Matching: Finding a Partner for Life or Otherwise.” American
Journal of Sociology, 1988, 94 (suppl.), S215-S240.
Ogburn, William F. and Nimko¤, Meyer F. Technology and the Changing Family.
Boston: Houghton Mi- in Company, 1955.
Reid, Margaret G. Economics of Household Production. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 1934.
Schoellman, Todd and Tertilt, Michele. “Household Size and the Demand for Private
Goods: United States 1850-2000.”Mimeo, Stanford University, 2007.
Schoen, Robert. United States Marital Status Life Tables for the Period 1910-1975 and
Cohorts Born 1888-1945. Washington, D.C.: National Technical Information Service
(available from), 1983.
Schoen, Robert and Standish, Nicola. “The Retrenchment of Marriage: Results from
Marital Status Life Tables for the United States, 1995.”Population and Development
Review, September 2001, 27, 553-563.
Schwartz, Christine R., and Mare, Robert D. “Trends in Educational Assortative Mar-
riage from 1940 to 2003.”Demography, November 2005, 42 (4): 621-46.

                                      64
Stevenson, Betsey and Wolfers, Justin. “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their
Driving Forces.”The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2007, 21 (2): 27-52.

Stokey, Nancy L. and Lucas, Robert E. Jr. with Prescott, Edward C. Recursive Methods
in Economic Dynamics. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1989.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Consumer Expenditure in 2005. February 2007, Report
998. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor.

Wallace, Geo¤rey L. “An Assessment of Several Explanations for the Decline in Mar-
riage.”Mimeo, La Follette School of Public A¤airs, University of Wisconsin, 2000.

Wolfers, Justin. “Did Unilateral Divorce Laws Raise Divorce Rates? A Reconciliation
and New Results.”American Economic Review, December 2006, 96 (5), 1802-1820.




                                      65
