NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN CAN CHANGES IN EXPECTATIONS
CAUSE BUSINESS CYCLE FLUCTUATIONS
IN NEO-CLASSICAL SETTINGS?
Paul Beaudry
Franck Portier
Working Paper 10776
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10776
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

The authors thank Alain Venditti, Harald Uhlig and participants at seminars at GREQAM and EUREQUA
and Florence 2004 SED meeting for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

When Can Changes in Expectations Cause Business Cycle Fluctuation in Neo-Classical Settings?
Paul Beaudry and Franck Portier
NBER Working Paper No. 10776
September 2004
JEL No. E3

ABSTRACT
It is often argued that changes in expectation are an important driving force of the business cycle.
However, it is well known that changes in expectations cannot generate positive co-movement
between consumption, investment and employment in the most standard neo-classical business cycle
models. This gives rise to the question of whether changes in expectation can cause business cycle
fluctuations in neo-classical setting or whether such a phenomenon is inherently related to market
imperfections. This paper offers a systematic exploration of this issue. Our finding is that expectation
driven business cycle fluctuation can arise in neo-classical models when one allows for a sufficient
rich description of the inter-sectorial production technology, however such a structure is rarely
allowed in macro-models. In particular, the key characteristic which we isolate as giving rise to the
possibility of Expectation Driven Business Cycles is that intermediate good producers exhibit cost
complementarities (i.e., economies of scope) when supplying intermediate goods to different sectors
of the economy.
Paul Beaudry
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver, B.C.
CANADA V6T 1Z1
and NBER
paulbe@interchange.ubc.ca
Franck Portier
Manufacture des Tabacs
Universite des Sciences de Toulouse
21 allee de Brienne
31000 Toulouse
FRANCE
fportier@cict.fr

1

Introduction

A common perception among economic observers is that macroeconomic fluctuations are not driven
only by current developments in the economy but are often influenced by perceptions of future
developments, that is, they may be driven by changes in expectations as opposed to current changes
in opportunities or preferences. In effect, to most business economists, this is an undisputable fact.
The 1999-2001 boom-bust cycle in the US is one example which may fit this idea. For many, the
1999-2001 period was one where agents’ rosy expectations of the future contributed significantly to
the high growth rates of 1999 and 2000, while a revision of these expectations caused the downturn
of 2001. Similar stories are given for the booms and busts observed in the late 1990s in Asia. In
a systematic way, Beaudry and Portier [2004b] show that, using U.S. postwar data, stock prices
movements predict TFP growth, and that such stock price booms are accompanied by an overall
macroeconomic expansion. Given the plausibility that at least some business cycle episodes are
driven by expectations (which may be thought as a type of demand disturbance), it is relevant
to circumscribe the classes of models which are capable of generating such phenomena. Knowing
whether a model has such a characteristic may be a useful element to evaluate its plausibility.
The object of this paper is to examine whether, and if so under what conditions, Expectation
Driven Business Cycles can arise in simple neo-classical settings. That is, we will examine whether
expectations alone could cause booms or busts – defined as positive co-movement in consumption,
investment and employment– in a setting with constant returns to scale technology and perfect
markets. We are interested in examining this question within a constant returns to scale and
perfect market setting for three reasons. First, a substantial body of empirical literature (see
Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo [1995], Basu [1996] and Basu and Fernald [1997]) supports the
assumption of constant returns to scale. Second, perfect competition appears to us as the good
benchmark to begin a systematic exploration of this issue. In particular, by adopting this focus
we can learn whether or not Expectation Driven Business Cycles are inherently related to market
imperfections or whether they can arise in perfect market setting. Third, it is well known in the

3

literature that the simplest one-sector neo-classical model is incapable of supporting expectation
driven booms and bust since, in the absence of a current change in technology, consumption and
employment on the one side and consumption and investment on the other side, always exhibit
negative co-movement.1 Hence, part of our aim is to understand the generality of this observation.
In order to favor tractability and transparency, we limit our analysis to neo-classical models
where the capital stock is the only state variable (this is what we mean by the term simple neoclassical models). One of the attractive features of a one state variable setting is that its dynamics
can be represented on a two dimensional phase diagram and therefore can be easily compared with
well known results in the literature.
The two main results of the paper are: (1) Expectation Driven Business Cycles are possible in
simple neo-classical settings, that is, we show that strictly positive co-movement between consumption, investment and employment can arise in simple perfect market settings as the result of changes
in expectation; and (2) most commonly used macro models restrict the production possibility set in
a manner that precisely rules out the possibility of Expectation Driven Business Cycles in the presence of market clearing. The main technological features we identify as being intimately linked with
the possibility of Expectation Driven Business Cycles is that of a multi-sector setting where firms
exhibit a type of economy of scope. However, most commonly used macro models do not allow for
rich inter-sectorial production technologies, or if they do, they impose linear production possibility
frontiers which rule out any economies of scope. Therefore these models can not support expectation driven booms and busts; instead in these models expectational change always lead to negative
co-movement between consumption and investment. Hence, our results suggest that Expectation
Driven Business Cycles can be explained in a perfect market explanation if one is ready to entertain
the possibility of firms with economies of scope or, in other words, internal cost complementarities
between the production of different goods. Let us stress the necessary technological structure is
not very exotic, nor absent from the literature, as it is implicitly implied by models which adopt
1
Such a consumption-investment correlation pattern can also be found in response to a sunspot shock, as discussed
in Benhabib and Farmer [1996].

4

multi-sectorial investment adjustment costs as in Sims [1989] , Vallés [1997], Huffman and Wynne
[1999] and Kim [2003])2 Whether or not real economies exhibit the cost structure needed to support
the type of expectational driven fluctuations examined here remains an empirical issue, which we
leave for future research. However, we believe that our analysis nicely isolates technological features
which helps explain what is often coined as Keynesian type phenomena, that is Expectation Driven
Business Cycles, without the need to invoke market imperfections.
Before outlining the structure of the paper, let us first clarify that the aim of our analysis is
not to identify whether Expectation Driven Business Cycles are the result of rational or irrational
forecasts. Our aim is to examine whether Expectation Driven Business Cycles can arise when all
current spot markets are required to be in equilibrium. In the main part of our analysis, we will
not need to specify whether the the underlying change in expectation is the result of a properly
forecasted change in future fundamentals or whether it is based on foolish perceptions. Instead
we adopt a temporary equilibrium approach which allows us to directly focus on whether positive
co-movements between consumption, investment and employment can arise as the result of some
expectational change, whether it be rational or irrational. In order to understand our approach, it
is useful to consider the phase diagram associated with a standard one sector neo-classical model as
presented in Figure 1. On this figure, we have traced the stable saddle path as well as some of the
unstable paths. It is well known that starting from an initial steady state, an anticipated change
in a fundamental will cause the economy to jump and evolve along one of the unstable paths until
the anticipated change is realized. The nature of the dynamics in this case implies that a jump
due to an anticipated change in fundamentals will always involve a negative co-movement between
consumption and investment. Specifically, such a jump will either cause an increase in consumption
and a decrease in investment or the converse, regardless of the source of the expectational change.
2

Kim [2003] shows that, in the absence of variable labor supply, multi-sectorial investment costs are observationaly
equivalent to intertemporal investment costs. However, as we will show, this equivalence does not hold with variable
labor supply. In particular, intertemporal adjustment costs model cannot support positive co-movement between
consumption, investment and employment due to changes in expectations, while models with multi-sector investment
costs can.

5

Hence, the issue we want to explore is whether simple neo-classical models inherently imply a
dynamic structure in which an expectational changes always lead to negative co-movement between
consumption and investment; or alternatively, if it is possible for neo-classical models to exhibit the
dynamic structure depicted in Figure 2. In particular, in Figure 2 we have illustrated a dynamic
system which is saddle path stable and which has the property that a jump from the steady state
to an unstable path always involves a positive co-movement between consumption and investment.
Therefore, our main question can be stated as examining the conditions under which (if any) a
neo-classical model can generate a dynamic system similar to that depicted in Figure 2.
The remaining sections of the paper are as follows. In section 2, we present the class of economies
to be considered, and define our notion of Expectation Driven Business Cycles. In section 3,
we examine several standard macroeconomic models to see whether they can possibly support
Expectation Driven Business Cycles. The models examined include standard one and two-sector
models, models with adjustment cost and models with variable capacity utilization. In section 4, we
examine multi-sector models and show that Expectation Driven Business Cycles can arise in such
settings if there are multi-product firms which supply intermediate goods to both the consumption
and investment sectors, and exhibit some cost complementarity in doing so. We also relate the
technological restrictions we have derived with the nature of the economy’s phase diagram in
the consumption-capital space. Finally, in section 5 we present a fully specified example where
Expectation Driven Business Cycles arise under rational expectations. Section 6 offers concluding
comments.

2

Structure

Here we present the economic environment and define the main concepts we use. Assumptions
made for preferences and technology are standard. The only difference is in the notations we use
for technology, that allows to treat comprehensively different production structures. Given those
fundamentals, we define competitive allocations and Expectation Driven Business Cycles.

6

2.1

Preferences and Technology

Let us consider an environment with a representative agent whose preferences over consumption
and leisure are ordered by
E0

∞
X

β t U (Ct , 1 − Lt),

(1)

t=0

where U (·, ·) is a twice continuously differentiable and quasi-concave function, Ct is consumption,
1−Lt is leisure time (i.e. Lt is labor supply) with total per-period time endowment normalized to 1,
and β ∈]0, 1[. The one additional assumption we place on the utility function it that consumption
and leisure are normal goods. More precisely, it is assumed that U1 > 0, U2 > 0, −U11 /U1 > U12 /U2
and −U22 /U2 > U12 /U1 .
At a point in time t, the production opportunities available in the economy are assumed to be
represented by
Ct = G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )

(2)

Here Kt denotes the capital stock, It is the level of investment in capital and ψt represents the
state of technology. For a given ψt , we assume that the function G is homogenous of degree one,
that GKt > 0, GLt > 0, GIt < 0 and that the set {Ct , Kt , Lt , It } defined by Ct − G(Kt , Lt , It ) ≤ 0
is convex.
We further assume that capital is accumulated over time according to
Kt+1 = It + (1 − δ)Kt

(3)

where δ ∈ [0, 1] is the rate of depreciation. Later on we will allow for more general forms of
accumulation.
Remark :

Our formulation of the technological opportunities encompasses many of the those

used in the macro literature. For example, it encompasses the standard one-sector model since in
this case the function G(·) can be written as
G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt ) = F (Kt , Lt ; ψt ) − It
7

where F (·) is the one-sector concave production function. One-sector models with convex capital
adjustment cost are also encompassed, since in this case the function G(·) can be written as
 
It
G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt ) = F (Kt , Lt ; ψt ) − It − φ
Kt
where F (·) is the one-sector concave production function and φ(·) is a convex cost of adjustment
function.
This formulation also encompasses standard two-sector model since the function G(·) can be
seen as a value function defined by
G(Kt , Lt , It )

=

maxKtC ,KtI ,LCt ,LIt F C (KtC , LC
t )

 I I I
 F (Kt , Lt ) ≥ It
K C + KtI
≤ Kt
s.t.
 Ct
Lt + LIt
≤ Lt
where F C (K C , LC ) is the production function for consumption goods and F I (K I , LI ) for investment goods.

2.2

Equilibrium Allocations

We consider a structure in which firms are owned by households. Since the Walrasian equilibrium for this economy is efficient, equilibrium quantities of consumption, employment, capital and
investment are solutions of the following social planner problem:
P
t
maxCt ,It ,Lt ,Kt+1
E0 ∞
t=0 β U (Ct , 1 − Lt)

s.t.

Ct
≤ G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )
Kt+1 ≤ It + (1 − δ)Kt

and therefore need to solve
U2 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )GL (Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )

(4)

Ct = G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )


GK (Kt+1 , Lt+1 , It+1 ; ψt+1 )
U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = βEt U1 (Ct+1 , 1 − Lt+1 )
GI (Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )

(5)

8

Kt+1

GI (Kt+1 , Lt+1 , It+1 ; ψt+1 )
+(1 − δ)
−GI (Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )
= It + (1 − δ)Kt .


(6)
(7)

Equation (4) describes the intratemporal choice between consumption and leisure and equation
(6) describes the intertemporal choice between consumption today and consumption tomorrow. The
two other equations are simply the resource constraint in period t and the accumulation equation.

2.3

Expectation Driven Business Cycles

The question we now want to examine is under what conditions can changes in expectations lead
to positive co-movement between consumption, investment and employment, holding current technology, ψt , and preferences fixed. We will refer to such phenomena as Expectation Driven Business
Cycles, as made explicit in the definition below. To answer this question it is useful to focus on
the two equations (4) and (5). These two equations can be seen as defining combinations of consumption, investment and employment which are consistent with period t market clearing in both
the goods market and the labor market. In other words, the equations (4) and (5) define a surface which represents the set of all possible temporary equilibrium quantities (or the set of current
equilibrium quantity combinations that can arise for some expectation about the future). Hence,
if changes in expectations are to lead to positive co-movement between consumption, investment
and employment, then it must be the case that the surface defined by equations (4) and (5) has
the property that

∂c
∂I

> 0 and

∂L
∂I

> 0. This leads us to the following statement.

Definition 1 Expectation Driven Business Cycles represents a positive co-movement between consumption, investment and employment induced by a change in expectations holding current technology, preferences and government interventions constant.
In Appendix A, we provide another formulation of this definition that make more explicit what
we mean by a change in expectations. Given this definition, the following statement immediately
follows:
9

Lemma 1 Expectation Driven Business Cycles can arise in a Walrasian equilibrium only if the
surface defined by equations (4) and (5) has the property that

∂C
∂I

> 0 and

∂L
∂I

>0

The main objective of the following two sections will be to examine different production structures and preferences to see whether Expectation Driven Business Cycles could potentially arise in
these environments.3 In particular, this will allow us to highlight the role of multi-product firms in
allowing for Expectation Driven Fluctuations.

2.4

A More General Structure

It is useful for future reference to have defined a slightly more general production structure in which
we combine the accumulation equation (3) and the current production possibilities (2) is as follows.
e t , Lt , Kt+1 ; ψt )
Ct = G(K

(8)

e is homogenous of degree one, G
e Kt > 0, G
e Lt > 0, G
e K < 0 and the set {Ct , Kt , Lt , Kt+1 }
where G
t+1
e t , Xt Lt , Kt+1 ) ≤ 0 is convex.4
defined by Ct − G(K
e t , Lt , Kt+1 ; ψt )
Obviously, this formulation encompasses our previous formulation since in such a case G(K
can be defined as G(Kt , Lt , Kt+1 − (1 − δ)Kt ; ψt ). The advantage of this second formulation is that
e
it can encompass models with variable capacity utilization, since G(·)
can be seen as the value
function of the following problem:
e (Kt , Lt , Kt+1 ; ψt ) = max F (νt Kt , Lt ) − Kt+1 + (1 − δ(νt ))Kt ,
G
νt

with

∂δ(νt )
∂νt

e
> 0 and where ν is the rate of capacity utilization. The function G(·)
also allows

to encompass models with “generalized intertemporal adjustment costs”, where the accumulation
equation is of the form:
1

Kt+1 = [Itρ + ((1 − δ)Kt )ρ ] ρ ,
3

ρ < 1.

In Beaudry and Portier [2004a] we illustrated a decreasing returns to scale environment where the temporary
equilibrium had the property that ∂C
= 0 and ∂L
> 0, and hence does not satisfy the more stringent conditions for
∂I
∂I
Expectation Driven Business Cycles we are examining here.
4
b t , Kt+1 , Kt , Lt ) ≤ 0, where this set is convex, with
One could think more generally of a set of the form G(C
b
b
b
b
e as max Ct s.t G(C
b t , Kt+1 , Kt , Lt ) ≤ 0.
G1 , G2 > 0, G3 , G4 < 0. But then one can always redefine a G

10

In the cases where we use this more general structure, we can say that Expectation Driven
Business Cycles can potential arise if the the surface defined by
e L (Kt , Lt , Kt+1 ; ψt )
U2 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )G
e t , Lt , Kt+1 ; ψt )
Ct = G(K
has the property that

3

∂Ct
∂Kt+1

> 0 and

∂Lt
∂Kt+1

(9)
(10)

> 0.

Can Expectation Driven Business Cycles arise in the Walrasian
Equilibrium of One- or Two-Sector Macro Model?

We first state a general necessary condition for the existence of Expectation Driven Business Cycles.
Then, we prove two negative result: Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in one and
two-sector standard models.

3.1

A Necessary Condition for the Existence of Expectation Driven Business
Cycles

Let us first consider the case where current production possibilities can be represented by Ct =
G(Kt , Lt , It ) and where accumulation is Kt+1 = I + (1 − δ)Kt .
Proposition 1 An economy can exhibit Expectation Driven Business Cycles only if GLI > 0.
Proof of proposition 1 : By fully differentiating (4) (with dK = dψ = 0), we obtain
dL = κ1 (−κ2 dC + κ3 dI)
with

(11)


−1
 κ1 = −(GL UCL + UC GLL + ULL ) > 0,
κ2 = GL UCC + ULC < 0,

κ3 = UC GLI S 0.

Taking now the full differentiation of (5) and using (11), we get
G I + G L κ1 κ 3
dC
=
dI
1 − G L κ 1 κ2
11

(12)

If GLI < 0, then κ3 < 0 and

dC
dI

< 0. QED

If we consider the more general case where production possibilities are represented by Ct =
e t , Lt , Kt+1 ), the we have the following proposition.
G(K
e Lt ,K > 0.
Proposition 2 An economy can exhibit Expectation Driven Business Cycles only if G
t+1
Proof of proposition 2 : The proof is a straightforward extension of the proof of Proposition
1. QED

3.2

One-Sector Models

Propositions 1 and 2 allow us to prove the three following corollaries.
Corrollary 1 Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in one-sector models, even with
convex cost of adjusting capital.
Proof of Corollary 1 : In a one-sector model and in a one-sector model with convex
adjustment costs, GLI = 0 and hence by Proposition 1 such economies cannot support Expectation
Driven Business Cycles. QED
Corrollary 2 Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in one-sector models where variable capacity utilization generates production possibilities given by
max F (νt Kt , Lt ) − Kt+1 + (1 − δ(νt ))Kt ,
ν

∂δ
>0
∂ν

eK
e
Proof of corollary 2 : By the envelop theorem, G
t+1 = −1 and hence GKt+1 ,Lt = 0.
Therefore by Proposition 2, such an economy cannot exhibit Expectation Driven Business Cycles.
QED.
Corrollary 3 Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in one-sector models where capital accumulation is of the form
1

Kt+1 = [Itρ + ((1 − δ)Kt )ρ ] ρ ,
12

ρ < 1.

e = F (Kt , Lt ) − [(Kt+1 )ρ +
Proof of corollary 3 : In this case the function is given by G
1

e K ,Lt = 0, and once again by Proposition 2 Expectation Driven Business
((1 − δ)Kt )ρ ] ρ . Hence G
t+1
Cycles cannot arise. QED
The above results indicate that Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in most onesector models used in the macro literature.

5

We now turn to examining whether Expectation

Driven Business Cycles could arise in two-sector models. One reason why it may be interesting to
look into two-sector models is that Propositions 1 and 2 cannot be used to rule out Expectation
Driven Business Cycles, as the following example makes clear. This example also shows that the
necessary condition on the function G is not an exotic one.
Suppose the production function for consumption goods is C = K 1−α (Lc )α , that it is I = (LI )γ
for investment goods, and that LC + LI = L. Then the G(·) for this economy is G(K, L, I) =
1

K 1−α (L − I γ )α , which has GLI > 0. Note that the condition GLI > 0 is only a necessary condition,
and we prove in the next section that it is not always sufficient. Typically, our results for two-sectors
models show that one cannot obtain Expectation Driven Business Cycles in this specific example.

3.3

Two-Sector models

The interest in examining two-sector models is that potentially they satisfy the necessary condition
given in Proposition 1.
Let us define a two-sector model as a model where the production function for consumption
goods and the production function for investment goods are distinct, that is, where the aggregate
production possibility is given by
G(Kt , Lt , It )

=

maxKtC ,KtI ,LCt ,LIt F C (KtC , LC
t )

 I I I
 F (Kt , Lt ) ≥ It
K C + KtI
≤ Kt
s.t.
 Ct
I
Lt + Lt
≤ Lt
5
As explained above, we are restricting ourselves to models where the stock of capital of period t is the only state
variable. A natural question is how robust are our results to a model with time to build, which is an often used model
in the literature. In Appendix B, we show that Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in a time to build
model.

13

where F C (K C , LC ) and F I (K I , LI ) are constant returns to scale and concave production functions.
Proposition 3 Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in two-sector models
Proof of proposition 3 : To prove this proposition, it is helpful to work with the dual
form of the temporary equilibrium. Accordingly, let ΩC (wt , rt ) represent the unit cost function for
the consumption good sector (where r is the rental rate of capital and w in the wage rate) and let
ΩI (wt , rt ) represent the unit cost function for the investment good sector. A temporary equilibrium,
with the consumption good being the numéraire and with q being the price of investment, must
then satisfy the following set of 5 conditions:
ΩC (wt , rt ) = 1

(13)

ΩI (wt , rt ) = qt

(14)

I
ΩC
1 (wt , rt )Ct + Ω1 (wt , rt )It = Lt

(15)

I
ΩC
2 (wt , rt )Ct + Ω2 (wt , rt )It = Kt

(16)

U2 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = wt U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )

(17)

Note that as before, taking Kt as given, this system implicitly defines a set of values for Ct , It
and Lt (as well as values for rt , wt and qt ). The claim is that with this set, an increase in It is
necessarily associated with a decrease in either Ct or Lt or both. Let us prove this be contradiction.
If we assume that Ct , It and Lt increase, then equation (17) implies (by normality of leisure and
consumption) that wt increases. Then if wt increases, equation (13) implies that rt decreases, but
then it is impossible to satisfy equation (16) given that concavity of the production function and
C
I
I
constant returns to scale imply that ΩC
2,2 < 0, Ω1,2 > 0, Ω2,2 < 0 and Ω1,2 > 0.

4

6

QED

Multi-sector models

We now consider a general multi-sectorial structure, for which we prove that Expectation Driven
Business Cycles can arise under some conditions on the technology. Next, these conditions are
6

This proposition can be easily generalized to models with adjustment costs and variable rates of utilization.

14

interpreted and an example is provided. Finally, we relate our result with the structure of the
phase diagram of the model.

4.1

Setup

Let us consider the following multi-sector environment with N > 0 intermediate sectors. The setup
will slightly generalize standard multi-sector models by treating intermediate goods firms as multiproduct producers that sell potentially different inputs to the consumption or investment sector.
The total output of consumption good Ct is given by an aggregator function Ct = J C (X1 , ..., XN )
where Xi denotes the quantity of an intermediate good produced by sector i for the consumption
good sector.
Similarly, the investment good is produced by an aggregate of intermediate inputs, that is,
It = J I (Z1 , ..., ZN ) where Zi denotes the quantity intermediate inputs produced by sector i for
the investment good sector. J C and J I are increasing, concave, and symmetric functions of their
argument (i.e. they are invariant under permutation of their argument) and that they are twice
continuously differentiable and homogeneous of degree one.
Each intermediate good sector i can produce X and Z according to
H(Xi , Zi ) = F (Ki , Li )
where F (·) is a CRS and concave function, H(·) is a CRS convex function, and Ki and Li represent
the amount of labor and capital used in sector i.
In most multi-sector models used in macro, the function H(Xi , Zi ) is simply the linear function
Xi + Zi . For this case, we have the following proposition.
Proposition 4 Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot arise in a multi-sector setting if H(·)
is linear.
Proof of proposition 4 : In this case because of symmetry, the model collapses to a twosector model and the proof of Proposition 3 applies. QED
15

All the above results suggest that Expectation Driven Business Cycles can never arise. However,
the following Proposition actually provides conditions under which Expectation Driven Business
Cycles can arise.
Proposition 5 Expectation Driven Business Cycles can arise in a multi-sector setting if the following condition is satisfied.
L

UL,L
UC,L
HX,Z
FLL
FL
H
− (L )(X
)(
)>L
−L
,
FL
F
HZ
XHX
UL
UL

when

X=C

and

Z = I.

Proof of proposition 3 : In this case, because of symmetry, the temporary equilibrium can
be reduced to the following two conditions:
(
H(Ct , It )
−UL (Ct ,1−Lt )
UC (t C,1−Lt )

= F (Kt , Lt )
t ,Lt )
= FHLC(K
(Ct ,It )

Taking the total differential of this system to obtain

dC
dI ,

and setting this greater than zero gives

the above condition after manipulation. QED
Here we see that a necessary condition for Expectation Driven Business Cycles is that HX,Z
be negative. One way to understand this necessary condition is in terms of decreasing returns.
Given the fixed technology, if one increases investment I, one has to reduce consumption C or
leisure 1 − L. Given that we are assuming decreasing marginal rate of transformation between
investment and leisure, it must be also be the case that we have a decreasing marginal rate of
transformation between investment and consumption, otherwise all the adjustment will be done in
terms of consumption.
More generally, the above condition is rather hard to interpret, especially the left side of the
inequality. The right side of the inequality has an easy interpretation as the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of labor supply (that is, the elasticity of the consumption constant labor supply).
Hence a high labor supply elasticity makes this condition less stringent. In order to better understand the term of the right side, it is useful to expresses it terms of properties of an intermediate
goods firm short run cost function.
16

4.2

Interpretation

Let us define an intermediate goods firm short run cost function, Ω(X, Z, K, w), as follows:

 Ω(X, Z, K, w) = minL wL


s.t.

(Q)

H(X, Z) = F (K, L)

Proposition 6 The intermediate firm’s production function and its associated cost function satisfy
the following relationship
Ω

)
(X ΩX,Z
HX,Z
FLL
FL
H
Z
L
− (L )(X
)(
)=
Ω
FL
F
HZ
XHX
(X ΩX )
Proof of proposition 6 : Let us set up the Lagrangian associated with the cost minimization
problem (Q) as wL + λ(H(X, Z) − F (K, L)). Then by the envelop theorem, ΩX = λHX (X, Z)
and ΩX,Z =

∂λHX (X,Z)
.
∂Z

By totally differentiating the first order conditions associated with the

minimization problem to get

∂λHX (X,Z)
,
∂Z

we can rearrange terms to get the above expression. QED

From the above two propositions, we can see that a necessary condition for the multi-sector
economy to possibly exhibit Expectation Driven Business Cycles is that ΩX,Z be negative, that is,
that the marginal cost of producing X decreases with the production of Z. The property that a
cost function for a multi-product good firm has a negative cross derivative is generally referred to
as a cost complementarity property. Let us emphasize that this cost complementarity condition
does not violate convexity of the cost function as long as (ΩX,Z )2 < (ΩX,X )(ΩZ,Z ). With this result
in mind, we have the following corollary on the possibility of Expectation Driven Business Cycles:
Corrollary 4 If U (C, I − L) = log C + θ(1 − L) (i.e., Hansen-Rogerson preferences), then a
multi-sector economy can exhibit expectation driven fluctuations if the cost function of intermediate
good firms exhibits cost complementarity (that is ΩX,Z < 0. )
Proof of corollary 4 : This follows directly from Propositions 6 and 5 when noticing that
right side of the condition in Proposition 5 is zero with these preferences. QED

17

In the more general case where preferences do not satisfy Hansen-Rogerson, then the condition is
that the cost complementarity be sufficiently large relative to the slope of the consumption-constant
labor supply curve.

4.3

An Example

An example of a cost function exhibiting cost complementarity is given by
Ω(X, Z, K, w) = wK −

1−α
α

1

([X σ + Z σ ] ασ ),

0 < α < 1, σ >

1
α

The associated production function is
1

[X σ + Z σ ] σ = K 1−α Lα
An interpretation of such a production function is the existence of multi-sectorial investment adjustment costs, and this structure has been used in the literature by Sims [1989] , Vallés [1997] ),
Huffman and Wynne [1999] and Kim [2003].

7

If one assumes that preferences are Hansen-Rogerson preferences (U (C, I−L) = log C+θ(1−L)),
then, using Corrolary 4, it is straightforward to prove that economy exhibits Expectation Driven
Business Cycles if σ ≥ α1 .
This result can be extended to the presence of variable capacity utilization. In such a case, the
amount of curvature in the H(·) function needed to support Expectation Driven Business Cycles
can be arbitrarily small (or one can assume an arbitrarily small multi-sectorial adjustment costs).
To see this, assume the production function is
1

[Xtσ + Ztσ ] σ = (νt Kt )1−α Lαt
and the accumulation equation is
Kt+1 = It +

ν 1+γ
1 − δ0 − t
1+γ

7

!
Kt ,

γ≥0

It should be noted that such a aggregate production function is also found in Benhabib and Farmer [1996], but
as the outcome of an equilibrium with sector-specific externalities.

18

then the condition for Expectation Driven Business Cycles is

σ(1+γ)−1
γ

>

1
α.

As γ approaches zero

(high elasticity of capacity utilization), σ can approach 1.

4.4

A General Necessary and Sufficient Condition

We have now identified an environment which has the potential of supporting Expectation Driven
Business Cycles, and we think that it is one which is easy to understand. However, this does not
mean it is the only structure that can support Expectational Driven Fluctuations, and the following
proposition states the necessary and sufficient condition for existence in the general case. Such a
condition does not receive easy further interpretations than the one we gave before.
Proposition 7 When technology is given by Ct = G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt ), the economy exhibits Expectation Driven Business Cycles if and only if
GLI >

GI (GL UCL + UC GLL + ULL )
GL UC

Proof of Proposition 7 : The proof follows directly from the algebra of the proof of Proposition 1. QED

4.5

A Graphical Illustration of the temporary equilibrium constraints

Here, we present a graphical illustration of the temporary equilibrium conditions in four different
models. The diagrammatical representation will be given in the space of consumption and labor,
taking investment as an exogenous shifter. The four models we consider are: the standard one
sector Walrasian model, a model with increasing returns to scale, a model with sticky prices and a
Walrasian model with a technology which satisfies Proposition 7.
One-Sector Model :

In a standard one-sector model, the temporary equilibrium is the triplet

(Ct , Lt , It ) that satisfies the following Good Market equilibrium condition (GM ) and labor market
equilibrium equilibrium condition (LM ):
Ct + It = F (Kt , Lt )
19

(GM )

UC (Ct , 1 − Lt )FL (Kt , Lt ) = −UL

(LM )

For a given level of investment It (that depends on expectations), those two locus can be represented
on a (C, L) plane. Full differentiation of (GM ) gives
dCt + dIt = FL dLt
The (GM ) curve is upward sloping, and shifts to the north-west when I increases.
Full differentiation of (LM ) gives
(UC FLL + ULC FL + ULL )dLt + (UCC FL + ULC )dCt = 0
Given quasi-concavity of U and F , the LM curve slopes down, and is not affected by a change in
investment I. Those two curves are depicted on Figure 3. It is easy to see from this Figure that
Expectation Driven Business Cycles cannot occur. An increase in investment dI > 0 moves the
economy from temporary equilibrium E to temporary equilibrium E 0 . As LM is downward sloping,
employment increases but consumptions decreases from E to E 0
A Model with Increasing Returns : Here we consider a simple analytic version of Benhabib
and Farmer [1994]. Although the result can be obtained without specifying analytical forms, we
assume quasi-linear preferences
U (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = log(Ct ) + B(1 − Lt )
and a production function with constant private returns to scale and constant social returns to
scale:
 0 
α 1−α
Yi,t = Ki,t
Li,t
Ktα Lβt
where Lt and Kt stand for aggregate levels and Ki,t , Li,t for individual ones. There is a continuum
of measure 1 of competitive firms, that take aggregate levels as given. We consider symmetrical
equilibrium allocations. The temporary equilibrium of this economy can be shown to be the triplet

20

(Ct , Lt , It ) that satisfies a (GM ) and a (LM ) equation, that can be written after some algebraic
manipulations
dCt + dIt = (1 − α + β)
dCt = (β − α)

Yt
dLt
Lt

Ct
dLt
Lt

(GM )
(LM )

As in the standard model, the GM curve slopes up, and shift to the North-West with I. Similarly,
the LM curve position is independent of I. If the externality on the labor input β is mild (less
than α), the LM curve slopes down, and there cannot be Expectation Driven Business Cycles. If
the externality is large enough (β > α), then LM slopes upwards. It is easy to check that in that
case
slope of (GM )
β−α
Ct
=
×
<1
slope of (LM )
1+β−α
Yt
so that (LM ) is steeper that (GM ).8 Those two curves are depicted on Figure 4 in the case β > α.
In such a model, Expectation Driven Business Cycles can occur as seen in the figure. In particular,
an increase in investment corresponds to a shift along the upward sloping (GM ) condition and
therefore is associated with a rise in both consumption and employment.
A Sticky-Price Model:

Let us consider here a very simplified model with money. We assume

standard preferences and technology. Money cannot be carried over from one period to another, is
distributed in every period to household in a lump-sum way, and has a positive price because it is
needed to buy consumption. In such a case, the household problem is given by
P
maxC,L,M d E0 t β t U (Ct , Lt )
s.t.
Pt Ct + Pt It + Mtd ≤ Pt wt Lt + Pt zt Kt + Mt
Kt+1 ≤ (1 − δ)Kt + It
Pt Ct ≤ Mtd
where P is the nominal price level, w and z are the real rental prices of labor and capital, M d
nominal balances demand and M the monetary lump-sum injection. On the firm side, we assume
competitive behavior, so that the representative firm equalizes marginal productivity of factors with
8

The condition β > α corresponds to the upward sloping labor demand condition of Benhabib and Farmer [1994].

21

their rental price. In this economy, the flex-price temporary equilibrium allocations can be described
by the following three equations, where (M M ) is the money market equilibrium condition:
Ct + It = F (K, L)

(GM )

UC (C, 1 − L)FL (K, L) = −UL

(LM )

Ct =

M
Pt

(M M )

Not surprisingly, money in neutral in a temporary equilibrium: for a given level of investment It ,
(GM ) and (LM ) determine consumption and worked hours, while (M M ) sets the price level. We
now assume that prices are preset, so that they are fixed in a temporary equilibrium. We also
assume that when prices are not at their Walrasian levels, labor market allocations are always
determined by labor demand. Under those conditions, a fix-price equilibrium is a (Ct , Lt , It ) that
satisfies equations (GM ) and (M M ), the labor market being generically not in equilibrium.
Equations (GM ) and (M M ) are drawn on Figure 5. A shock on expectations that increases
investment moves the economy from E to E 0 . As prices are fixed, consumption does not move. In
a weak sense (dI > 0, dL > 0 and dC ≥ 0), one gets Expectation Driven Business Cycles. This
fix-price temporary equilibrium allocation corresponds to the IS − LM model in the specific case
where money demand depends positively of consumption (and not total income), and is inelastic
to the nominal interest rate. One could easily obtain a positively (but not infinitely) sloped (M M )
curve, and therefore the existence of Expectation Driven Business Cycles in a strong sense ((dI > 0,
dL > 0 and dC > 0)) by allowing for a more richer modelling of money demand.

9

We think that

this simple example is enough for the point we want to make.
Walrasian model with economies of scope: Here we make the use of our G function terminology. The temporary equilibrium of this economy can be shown to be the triplet (Ct , Lt , It ) that
satisfies a (GM ) and a (LM ) equation, that are given by
Ct = G(Kt , Lt , It )
9

(GM )

In the setting we have proposed here, including nominal labor income in the cash constraint would give rise to
Expectation Driven Business Cycles in a strong sense.

22

UC (Ct , 1 − Lt )GL (Kt , Lt , It ) = −UL (Ct , 1 − Lt )

(LM )

As already noted, the simple one-sector model corresponds to the case GI = −1. By full differentiation of (GM ), we obtain
dCt = GL dLt + GI dIt .
The (GM ) curve is again upward sloping, and shifts to the north-west when I increases because
GI < 0. Full differentiation of (LM ) gives
(UC GLL + ULC GL + ULL )dL + (UCC GL + ULC )dCt + UC GLI dIt = 0
Given quasi-concavity of U and F , the LM curve slopes down again. What is different is that it is
affected by a change in investment I: an increase in investment shift the curve to the North-East
if GLI is positive. In the standard one sector model this was not the case as GLI = 0. Those two
curves are depicted on Figure 6. A necessary condition for the occurrence of Expectation Driven
Business Cycles is that the LM curve shifts to the North-East for dI > 0. A sufficient condition is
that it shifts enough, to guarantee that E 0 is in the positive orthant with origin E. This sufficient
conditions involves GLI and the slope of (GM ). In words, GLI should be large enough.

4.6

Expectation Driven Fluctuation and the Structure of Phase Diagrams

Phase diagrams are often used in economics as a tool for understanding how dynamic systems,
with forward looking components, react to announcements of a future changes in fundamentals.
In particular, in the case of a saddle path stable equilibrium, the properties of the system’s dynamics between the time of an announcement and the implementation of the announced change
are governed entirely by the properties of the system’s unstable paths. In effect, following an announcement, the perfect foresight path in a stable equilibrium involves a jump to an unstable path
and an evolution along that path until the announced change takes effect; hence these dynamics
can be captured in a phase diagram. As is well known, the dynamics induced by announcements
mimic closely the dynamics induced by an expected change in fundamentals in a stochastic version

23

of the same system. For this reason, it is of interest to examine the link between the conditions
derived in section 4 and the nature of the phase diagram of the continuous time market economy
which satisfies these conditions. For example, by examining the properties of the associated system’s phase diagram we will be able to show that our conditions for the possibility of Expectation
Driven Business Cycles translate in to a particular structure for the unstable paths. In effect, our
condition for the possibility of Expectation Driven Business Cycles produces unstable paths that
necessarily involve positive co-movement between consumption and capital (as well as investment
and employment) when starting from the steady state.
Let us begin by reviewing the nature of the phase diagram of a one-sector model with the
preferences of the representative household given by
Z ∞
U (Ct , 1 − Lt ) expρt dt
0

with U (Ct , 1−Lt ) satisfying the conditions outlined in section 2 (i.e., quasi concavity and normality
of goods). Technology is given by a constant returns to scale and concave producing function
F (Kt , Lt ) and capital accumulated according to
K̇ = I − δK
Under these conditions, it is easy to verify that the phase diagram associated with the Walrasian
equilibrium of such an economy will take the form depicted in Figure 1 in the proximity of the
steady state. As can be seen in this Figure, the stable arm of the system is positively sloped and
the unstable arm is negatively sloped. Therefore, in such a system, if there is an announcement
when the system is initially in its steady state, it will necessarily induce negative co-movements
between consumption and capital accumulation. For example, without needing to specify the source
of the announcement, we know that if the announcement leads to a jump up in consumption, it
places the system on a path with increasing consumption but falling capital, that is a path with
negative co-movement between consumption and capital. If the announcement leads to a negative
jump in consumption, it places the system on a path of falling consumption and increasing capital.
Hence, regardless of the source of the announcement, in creates negative co-movement.
24

Let us now contrast the properties of the phase diagram in Figure 1 with that of a economy with the same preferences and accumulation structure, but where the technological opportunities are instead described by the set Ct ≤ G(Kt , Lt , It ) where G(·) satisfies the condition
GLI >

GI (GL UCL +UC GLL +ULL )
,
GL UC

which has be proven to be the necessary and sufficient condition for

the existence of Expectation Driven Business Cycles in Proposition 7. In this case, the K̇ = 0 is implicitly defined by the system of three equations, I − δK = 0,
GL (K, L, I)UC (C, L). Those equations imply that

∂C
∂K

C = G(K, L, I),

−UL (C, 1 − L) =

> 0. Therefore, the slope of this locus re-

mains positive, but the space above it is now associated with decreases in K. Hence, the stable arm
maintains a positive slope, but with a slope which is smaller that that of the K̇ = 0 locus. Given
that the system is saddle path stable, in this case the unstable arm must have a positive slope that
is greater the slope of the K̇ = 0 locus. Consequently, the configuration of the phase diagram is as
depicted in Figure 2.
There are two main aspects to note when comparing Figures 1 and 2. First, both have positively
sloped stable arms and hence their transitional dynamics have similar quantitative properties.10
Second, and most important, the slopes of the unstable paths above and below the system’s steady
state are reversed. In Figure 2, when starting at the steady state, any announcement will induce
a positive co-movement between consumption and capital. In effect, if the announcement leads
to a jump up in consumption, it will be followed by further increases in consumption and capital.
Similarly, if the announcement leads to a decrease in consumption, it will again lead to a positive
co-movement between consumption and capital. Hence, in this case, we can unambiguously say
that announced changes in fundamentals creates positive co-movement between consumption and
capital and therefore announced changes (or expected changes) in fundamentals in this setting
are potential sources of business cycle type fluctuations. Note that such positive co-movement
between C and K induced by announcements in Figure 2 should not be surprising given that the
10
Even though the transitional dynamics of both systems is governed by a positively slope stable arm, their
transitional dynamics are not identical. In the transitional dynamics underlying Figure 1, there is a negative comovement between the growth rate of consumption and the growth rate of investment, while it is positive in Figure
2.

25

condition GLI >

GI (GL UCL +UC GLL +ULL )
GL UC

guarantees a positive co-movement between the growth of

consumption and the growth of investment on all the trajectories (stable and unstable) in Figure
2, since all these trajectories must belong to the same temporary equilibrium surface.
As a last note on the phase diagram, it is of interest to note how the system depicted in Figure
2 would evolve following an announced change that is eventually not realized.

11

In this case, the

economy would appear to go through a cycle, either starting by a boom followed by a bust, or
starting by a bust and then a boom.

5

A Complete Example of Expectation Driven Business Cycles
under Rational Expectations

Up to now, we have identified a set of properties that a model must satisfy if changes in expectations
are to cause positive co-movement between consumption, investment and employment. In this
section we present a fully developed example whereby Expectation Driven Business Cycles arise
under rational expectations. For this to be possible, two conditions must be met. One the one hand,
there must be a driving force which is at least partially predictable in order to have an independent
role for expectations. Second, the environment must satisfy the conditions outlined in section 4,
which implies the presence of more than one sector. One possibility would be to consider the effect
of expected changes in technology. However, given we are in a multi-sector environment, modelling
an expected technological change is complicated by the fact that we must specify which sector is
affected and that the results are sensitive to such specification.12 We choose to focus on tax changes
in order to bypass this difficulty and to allow a better understanding of the mechanisms. We will
assume that agents receive information about a tax change before it is actually implemented. Hence,
agents will react to this information, which will be the underlying fundamental driving force behind
11

Our interest in this case is that such a sequence of events corresponds rather closely to what would happen in
this system if agents make an expectation error, that is, if agents expect a change in fundamentals and such a change
does not materialize.
12
For example, expected technological change in the capital goods producing sector generally causes a recession,
while expected technological change in the consumption good sector can generate a boom.

26

expectations. On the production side, we will adopt the multi-sector (or intratemporal adjustment
cost) framework presented in the example in section 4. We will compare the behavior of the model
under the assumption that σ = 1 (one-sector or no intratemporal adjustment cost) and the case
where σ > 1, for both the cases when the tax change in anticipated and when it is not. As we will
see, the models’ implications are almost identical when the tax change is an entirely unanticipated
shock, but that the two models (i.e., models having different σ) differ dramatically in their responses
to news about future tax changes.
The non-stochastic aspects of the model are standard in that we assume that instantaneous
utility is given by log Ct + η(1 − Lt ). The only non-standard feature of the model is the specification
1

of the aggregate production function, which is given by (aCtσ + bItσ ) σ = A(Kt µt )1−α (Xt Lt )α . Note
that σ = 1 corresponds to the standard one-sector model. As explained in section 4, σ > 1 can be
interpreted as reflecting the presence of firms with economies of scope.
We introduce into this economy a capital income tax τkt and a labor income tax τ`t , and we
assume that the proceeds of those taxes are redistributed to households in a lump sum way. Hence,
these taxes simply create distortions in the economy and have no other role. In such a case, it is
straightforward to verify that the walrasian equilibrium allocations are the solution to the following
set of equations:
U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )GL (Kt , Lt , It )(1 − τ`t ) = U2 (Ct , 1 − Lt )

(18)

Ct = G(Kt , Lt , It )
(19)


GK (Kt+1 , Lt+1 , It+1 )(1 − τkt+1 )
U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = βEt U1 (Ct1 , 1 − Lt+1 )
−GI (Kt , Lt , It )

GI (Kt+1 , Lt+1 , It+1 )
+(1 − δ)
(20)
GI (Kt , Lt , It )
Kt+1 = It + (1 − δ)Kt .
(21)
The parameters values we use are presented in table 1. The length of a period is set at a
quarter. The parameters (α, δ, η, β, γ) are set to values commonly accepted in the literature.
The parameters a and b of the aggregate production function are set to one, so that we have
27

the standard one-sector model when σ = 1. In the case with productive complementarity, we
assume that σ = 1.65, which is slightly above the limit value 1/α (=1.5) that we have computed
in the previous section. Using the same functional form of intratemporal adjustment costs, Vallés
[1997] calibrates σ to match the estimated responses of investment to three shocks: a preference
shock, a technological shock and a shock to intratemporal adjustment costs. He obtains a value
σ = 1.8. A specification similar to our is also used in Sims [1989], where it is assumed there,
without justification, that σ = 3.
We assume an initial 20% uniform income taxation, so that τ` = τk = 20%. The shock is a
permanent four hundred basis points cut in both tax rate (from 20% to 16%). This shock is either
a surprise in period one; or is announced in period one and implemented five periods ahead. Of
course, a more complex shock structure would be needed to reproduce fluctuations, allowing also
for technology shocks, noisy signals and gradual resolution of uncertainty (see Beaudry and Portier
[2004a] for a richer modeling of the informational structure in a setup with news about future
productivity growth). Here, we are only interested in conditional responses to news, we think it is
more illustrative to keep a simple shock structure.
We check that with those parameters, consumption represents 75% of output, capital is 9.18
times quarterly output, the labor share is two-thirds and the steady state level of worked hours is
18% of the period time endowment.
Table 1: Parameters Values
σ
α
n
δ
η
β
a
b

degree of productive complementarity
share of labor icome
# of periods in advance the news occurs
depreciation rate
disutility of leisure parameter
psychological discount factor
production function parameter
production function parameter

28

1 or 1.65
2/3
5
.125
5
.9899
1
1

Given those parameters values, we solve for the Walrasian equilibrium by log-linearizing equations (18)- (21) to obtain an approximate solution to the model. We then compute impulse response
functions for the model with and without economies of scope.

5.1

Responses To a Tax Cut Surprise and to a Tax Cut News

Let us first consider responses to a tax surprise in the two cases σ = 1 (standard one-sector model)
and σ = 1.65 (multi-sector model with economies of scope). Four variables are plotted in figure
7: the income tax rate, worked, hours, consumption and investment. Each variable is expressed in
percentage deviation from the initial steady-state. In both versions of the model, an unanticipated
permanent decrease in the income tax rate permanently increases consumption, investment and
hours. The qualitative response of all variables is similar in both versions of the model, as the tax
cut surprise creates an aggregate boom. In the case with σ = 1, investment and hours overshoot in
order to smooth consumption. Notice that in the multi-sector case, the productive complementarity
dampens investment response and pushes up the response of consumption. This comes from the
fact that there is less of a tradeoff here between investment and consumption.
We now turn to a tax cut announcement in period 1, that is implemented in period 6. Figure
8 presents the responses of the four variables under consideration during the interim periods (the
first five periods), i.e. between the announcement date and the implementation of the tax cut.
The two models are now qualitatively very different. In the case of σ = 1, consumption increases
on impact because of a wealth effect, stays above its initial steady state level but decreases after
period 1 until the tax cut is effectively implemented. Simultaneously, investment and hours decrease
on impact and during interim periods. Therefore, the announced reduction in distortionary taxes
creates a recession in output, investment and hours. In contrast, the figure shows that in the
multi-sector model all variables increase on impact and during the interim periods: hence the tax
cut announcement creates an expectation driven aggregate expansion.

29

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we have shown that: (1) Expectation Driven Business Cycles are possible in simple
neo-classical settings, meaning that strictly positive co-movement between consumption, investment
and employment can arise in simple perfect market settings as the result of changes in expectation;
and (2) most commonly used macro models restrict the production possibility set in a manner that
precisely rules out the possibility of Expectation Driven Business Cycles in the presence of market
clearing. The main technological features we identified as being necessary for Expectation Driven
Business Cycles is that of a multi-sector setting where where firms experience economies of scope.
In closing, let us emphasize that a model which allows for Expectation Driven Business fluctuations is a close cousin to a simple Keynesien cross model since in both cases an autonomous increase
in investment leads to a more than one-for-one increase in output. Our results therefore can be
thought as linking the possibility of Keynesian Cross type phenomena with a technological feature
that is close in spirit to those emphasized in the Complementarity and Coordination literature.13 .
In particular, our results identify technological conditions under which business cycles may arise
as a purely demand driven phenomena, as in traditional Keynesian models, even in the absence of
sticky prices, imperfect competition, increasing returns to scale or externatilities. In this sense, our
analysis highlights a new mechanism which may help explain why market economies may exhibit
business cycle fluctuations driven by changes in expectations.

References
Basu, S. (1996): “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization?,” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(3), 719–751.
Basu, S., and J. Fernald (1997): “Returns to Scale in U.S. Production: Estimates and Implications,” Journal of Political Economy, 105(2), 249–283.
13

See Cooper [1999] for an exposition of that literature.

30

Beaudry, P., and F. Portier (2004a): “An Exploration into Pigou’s Theory of Cycles,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 51(6), 1183–1216.
(2004b): “News, Stock Prices and Economic Fluctuations,” Working Paper 10548, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Benhabib, J., and R. Farmer (1994): “Indeterminacy and increasing returns,” Journal of Economic Theory, 63(1), 19–41.
(1996): “Indeterminacy and sector-specific externalities,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
37(3), 421–443.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (1995): “Capital Utilization and Returns to
Scale,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1995, pp. 67–109.
Christiano, L., and R. Todd (19976): “Time to Plan and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Quarterly
Review of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, 20(1), 14–27.
Cooper, R. (1999): Coordination Games : Complementarities and Macroeconomics. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Huffman, G., and M. Wynne (1999): “The role of intratemporal adjustment costs in a multisector economy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 43, 317–350.
Kim, J. (2003): “Functional equivalence between intertemporal and multisectoral investment adjustment costs,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 27, 533–549.
Kydland, F., and E. Prescott (1982): “Time to Build and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 50(6), 1345–1370.
Sims, C. (1989): “Models and their Uses,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, pp. 489–
494.

31

Vallés, J. (1997): “Aggregate investment in a business cycle model with adjustment costs,”
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21, 1181–1198.

32

Appendix
A

Another Formulation of the Expectation Driven Business Cycles

In this appendix, we explicitly consider the fact that agents at time t have a (possibly subjective)
distribution for ψt+1 and It+1 , that is, they are endowed with a joint probability density function
for these two variables, which we denote by Φ(ψt+1 , It+1 ). In this case, the conditions
U2 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )GL (Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )

(22)

Ct = G(Kt , Lt , It ; ψt )


GK (t + 1)
GI (t + 1)
U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt ) = βEt u1 (Ct1 , 1 − Lt+1 )(
+ (1 − δ)
)
−GI (t)
GI (t)
Kt+1 = It + (1 − δ)Kt .

(23)
(24)
(25)

plus the two conditions
U2 (Ct+1 , 1 − Lt+1 ) = U1 (Ct+1 , 1 − Lt+1 )GL (Kt+1 , Lt+1 , It+1 ; ψt+1 )

(26)

Ct+1 = G(Kt+1 , Lt+1 , It+1 ; ψt+1 )

(27)

simultaneously define a distribution for Ct+1 and Lt+1 , as well as values for Lt , It , Kt+1 , Ct as a
function of Φ(·). Then, in this framework, we can ask when can a change in Φ(·, ·) leads to a
positive co-movement between Lt , It , Kt+1 , Ct . The answer is precisely when the surface defined by
the two equations (4) and (5) of the main text has the property that

B

∂C
∂I

> 0 and

∂L
∂I

> 0.

A Model with Time to Build

Here we examine a time to build model that possesses more than one state variable. The model
can be described as follows. Preferences have the standard form.
E0

∞
X

β t U (Ct , 1 − Lt).

t=0

33

(28)

Output is produced according to
Yt = F (Kt , Lt ).

(29)

To model time to build, we use the formulation of Kydland and Prescott [1982] and Christiano and
Todd [19976]. Investment in period t is given by
It =

n
X

ωj Sj,t

(30)

j=1

where Sjt is the volume of projects j-periods away from completion at the beginning of period t
and ωj is the resource cost associated with work on a project j periods away from completion, for
j = 1, ..., n. Investment projects progress according to
Sj,t+1 = Sj+1,t for 1 < j ≤ n

(31)

and starts during period t are represented by Sn,t . Thus the capital stock evolves according to
Kt+1 = (1 − δ)Kt + S1,t

(32)

In the following, we restrict ourselves to n = 2 without loss of generality for the result. The
optimal allocation program can be reduced to
max E0

S2,t ,Lt

∞
X

β t U [F [(1 − δ)Kt−1 + S2,t−2 , Lt ] + (1 − δ)((1 − δ)Kt−1 + S2,t−2 ) − ω1 S2,t−1 − ω2 S2,t , 1 − Lt ]

t=0

with K0 and S1,0 given. The first-order conditions associated with this program are
Ct + ω1 S1,t + ω2 S2,t = F (Kt , Lt )

(33)

U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )F2 (Kt , Lt ) = U2 (Ct , 1 − Lt )

(34)

U1 (Ct , 1 − Lt )ω2 + βEt [U1 (Ct+1 , 1 − Lt+1 )ω1 ] = β 2 Et [U1 (Ct+2 , 1 − Lt+2 )(F1 (Kt+2 , Lt+2 ) + 1 − δ)]
(35)
and a transversality condition.

34

In a given period t, Kt and S1,t are given. A temporary equilibrium of this economy is a triplet
(Ct , Lt , S2,t ) that satisfies equations (33) and (34). Here, S2,t stands for new investment. Let us
define the G function as
Ct = G(Kt , Lt , S1,t , S2,t ) = F (Kt , Lt ) − ω1 S1,t − ω2 S2,t
As previously shown, a necessary condition for Expectation Driven Business Cycles is GLS2 > 0.
In the time to build model GLS2 = −ω2 < 0, so that one cannot generate Expectation Driven
Business Cycles.

C

Figures
Figure 1: Phase Diagram in a One-Sector Model

35

Figure 2: Phase Diagram in a G Model Economy

Figure 3: The Standard One-Sector Model

36

Figure 4: A Model with (enough) Increasing Returns (β > α)

Figure 5: A Model with Sticky Prices

37

Figure 6: A Model with (large enough) Positive G23

38

Figure 7: Response to a Tax Cut Surprise
Income Tax Rate

Hours

0

12

σ=1
σ=1.65

−5

11

%

10

%

−10
−15

9

−20

8

−25

2

4

6

8

7

10

0

2

Consumption

4

6

8

10

8

10

Investment

4.5

35

4

30

3.5
25
%

%

3
2.5

20

2
15

1.5
1

0

2

4

6

8

10

10

0

2

4

6

This figure shows the response of the tax rate, worked hours, consumption and investment to a
permanent tax cut of 400 basis points. This tax cut is unexpected and implemented in period 1. All
variables are expressed in percentage deviations from their initial steady state level.

39

Figure 8: Response to a Tax Cut News
Income Tax Rate

Hours

20

1.5

σ=1
σ=1.65

1
0.5
%

%

10

0

0
−0.5

−10
−1
−20

1

2

3

4

−1.5

5

1

2

Consumption

3

4

5

4

5

Investment

0.4

4

0.35

2

0.3
0
%

%

0.25
0.2

−2

0.15
−4

0.1
0.05

1

2

3

4

−6

5

1

2

3

This figure shows the response of the tax rate, worked hours, consumption and investment to a
permanent tax cut of 400 basis points. This tax cut is announced in period 1 and implemented in
period 6. All variables are expressed in percentage deviations from their initial steady state level.

40

