NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ON THE INDUSTRY CONCENTRATION OF
ACTIVELY MANAGED EQUITY MUTUAL FUNDS
Marcin Kacperczyk
Clemens Sialm
Lu Zheng
Working Paper 10770
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10770
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

Kacperczyk is from the Sauder School of Business at University of British Columbia. Sialm and Zheng are
from the Michigan Business School, Ann Arbor. We thank Sreedhar Bharath, Sugato Bhattacharyya, Fang
Cai, Joel Dickson, William Goetzmann, Rick Green, Gautam Kaul, Lutz Kilian, Zbigniew Kominek, Francine
Lafontaine, Luboš Pástor, Tyler Shumway, Laura Starks, Steve Todd, Zhi Wang, Russ Wermers, Toni
Whited, and especially an anonymous referee. We also benefited from helpful comments by seminar
participants at the 2002 CIRANO seminar in Montreal, the 2003 European Financial Management
Association Meeting in Helsinki, the 2003 Summer Meeting of the Econometric Society, the 2004 European
Finance Association Meeting in Maastricht, Michigan State University, the University of Colorado at
Boulder, the University of Florida, the University of Michigan, and the University of St. Gallen. We are
grateful to Paul Michaud for his support with the CDA/Spectrum database. We thank the authors of DGTW
(1997) for providing us with the characteristic-adjusted stock returns reported in their paper. We
acknowledge the financial support from Mitsui Life Center in acquiring the CDA/Spectrum data. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

On the Industry Concentration of Actively Managed Equity Mutual Funds
Marcin Kacperczyk, Clemens Sialm, and Lu Zheng
NBER Working Paper No. 10770
September 2004
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
Mutual fund managers may decide to deviate from a well-diversified portfolio and concentrate their
holdings in industries where they have informational advantages. In this paper, we study the relation
between the industry concentration and the performance of actively managed U.S. mutual funds from
1984 to 1999. Our results indicate that, on average, more concentrated funds perform better after
controlling for risk and style differences using various performance measures. This finding suggests
that investment ability is more evident among managers who hold portfolios concentrated in a few
industries.
Marcin Kacperczyk
Sauder School of Business
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6T 1Z2
marcin.kacperczyk@sauder.ubc.ca
Clemens Sialm
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
D3219
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu
Lu Zheng
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
luzheng@umich.edu

Actively managed mutual funds are an important constituent of the financial sector.
Despite the well-documented evidence that, on average, actively managed funds
underperform passive benchmarks, mutual fund managers might still differ substantially
in their investment abilities.1 In this paper, we examine whether some fund managers
create value by concentrating their portfolios in industries where they have informational
advantages.
Conventional wisdom suggests that investors should widely diversify their
holdings across industries to reduce their portfolios’ idiosyncratic risk. Fund managers,
however, might want to hold concentrated portfolios if they believe some industries will
outperform the overall market or if they have superior information to select profitable
stocks in specific industries. Consistent with this hypothesis, we would expect funds with
skilled managers to hold more concentrated portfolios. As a result, we should observe a
positive relation between fund performance and industry concentration.
Mutual fund managers may also hold concentrated portfolios due to a potential
conflict of interest between fund managers and investors. Several studies indicate that
investors reward stellar performance with disproportionately high money inflows but do
not penalize poor performance equivalently.2 This behavior results in a convex optionlike payoff profile for mutual funds. Consequently, some managers, especially those with
1

For evidence on fund performance, see, for example, Jensen (1968); Grinblatt and Titman (1989); Elton,
Gruber, Das, and Hlavka (1993); Hendricks, Patel, and Zeckhauser (1993); Malkiel (1995); Brown and
Goetzmann (1995); Ferson and Schadt (1996); Gruber (1996); Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers
(DGTW 1997); Baks, Metrick, and Wachter (2001); Kosowski, Timmermann, White, and Wermers (2001);
Carhart, Carpenter, Lynch and Musto (2002); Cohen, Coval, and Pástor (2004); and Lynch, Wachter, and
Boudry (2004).
2
Numerous studies have called attention to the nonlinearity in the performance-flow relation, for example,
Ippolito (1992), Gruber (1996), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), Goetzmann and Peles (1997), Sirri and

2

lower investment abilities, may have an incentive to adopt volatile investment strategies
to increase their chances of having extreme performance. Consistent with this hypothesis,
funds pursuing such gaming strategies would hold more concentrated portfolios. In this
case, we should not observe a positive relation between fund performance and industry
concentration.
The literature analyzing the net returns of mutual funds documents that mutual
funds, on average, under-perform passive benchmarks by a statistically and economically
significant margin. However, several studies based on the gross returns of the portfolio
holdings of mutual funds conclude that managers who follow active investment strategies
have stock-picking abilities. For example, Grinblatt and Titman (1989, 1993); Grinblatt,
Titman, and Wermers (1995); Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (DGTW 1997);
Wermers (2000); and Frank, Poterba, Shackelford, and Shoven (2004) find evidence that
mutual fund managers outperform their benchmarks based on the returns of fund
holdings.
Coval and Moskowitz (1999, 2001) show that mutual funds exhibit a strong
preference for investing in locally headquartered firms where they appear to have
informational advantages. Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004) provide evidence that fund
families following more focused investment strategies across funds perform better, likely
due to their informational advantages. To further investigate the informational advantages
or investment abilities of mutual fund managers, we analyze in this paper whether some
fund managers can create value by holding portfolios concentrated in specific industries.

Tufano (1998), Del Guercio and Tkac (2002), and Nanda, Wang, and Zheng (2004).

3

Recent studies suggest the size of a fund affects its ability to outperform the
benchmark. In a theoretical paper, Berk and Green (2004) explain many stylized facts
related to fund performance using a model with rational agents. In their model, skilled
active managers do not outperform passive benchmarks after deducting expenses because
of a competitive market for capital provision combined with decreasing returns to scale in
active management. In a related empirical study, Chen, Hong, Huang, and Kubik (2002)
find that smaller funds tend to outperform larger funds due to diseconomies of scale.
While the size of the fund negatively affects its performance, it is possible that a wide
dispersion of holdings across many industries also may erode its performance. Our paper
investigates whether such diseconomies of scope have important implications for asset
management.
This paper evaluates a fund’s performance conditioned upon its industry
concentration. The rationale for selecting industry concentration as the conditioning
variable is that skilled fund managers may exhibit superior performance by holding more
concentrated portfolios to exploit their informational advantages. To date, there has been
no research on whether portfolio concentration is related to fund performance.
Using U.S. mutual fund data from 1984 to 1999, we construct portfolios of funds
with different industry concentration levels. We develop our measure, the Industry
Concentration Index, to quantify the extent of portfolio concentration in ten broadly
defined industries. This index is based on the difference between the industry weights of
a mutual fund and the industry weights of the total market portfolio. Our analysis
indicates that mutual funds differ substantially in their industry concentration and that

4

concentrated funds tend to follow distinct investment styles. Managers of more
concentrated funds overweigh growth and small-cap stocks, whereas managers of more
diversified funds hold portfolios that closely resemble the total market portfolio.
We find that more concentrated funds perform better after adjusting for risk and
style differences using the four-factor model of Carhart (1997). Mutual funds with above
median industry concentration yield an average abnormal return of 1.58% per year before
deducting expenses and 0.33% per year after deducting expenses, whereas mutual funds
with below median industry concentration yield an average abnormal return of 0.36%
before and -0.77% after expenses. We confirm the relation between fund concentration
and performance using panel regressions controlling for other fund characteristics. Using
the conditional measures of Ferson and Schadt (1996), we establish that the superior
performance of concentrated funds is not due to their greater responsiveness to macroeconomic conditions.
To investigate the causes of the abnormal performance of concentrated portfolios,
we follow DGTW (1997) and measure the performance of mutual funds based on their
portfolio holdings using characteristic-based benchmarks. The results indicate that the
superior performance of concentrated mutual funds is primarily due to their stock
selection ability. Furthermore, we find that concentrated funds are able to select better
stocks even after controlling for the average industry performance.
We also examine the trades of mutual funds and find that the stocks purchased
tend to significantly outperform the stocks sold. Moreover, we show that the return
difference between the buys and the sells by mutual funds increases significantly with

5

industry concentration. This finding indicates that concentrated mutual funds are more
successful in selecting securities than diversified funds.
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We describe the data in Section I.
Sections II and III define the concentration and performance measures, respectively.
Section IV documents the empirical results and reports several robustness tests. Section
V concludes.

I. Data
The main data set has been created by merging the CRSP Survivorship Bias Free
Mutual Fund Database with the CDA/Spectrum holdings database and the CRSP stock
price data. The CRSP Mutual Fund Database includes information on fund returns, total
net assets, different types of fees, investment objectives, and other fund characteristics.
One major constraint imposed on researchers using CRSP is that it does not provide
detailed information about fund holdings. We follow Wermers (2000) and merge the
CRSP database with the stockholdings database published by CDA Investments
Technologies. The CDA database provides stockholdings of virtually all U.S. mutual
funds. The data are collected both from reports filed by mutual funds with the SEC and
from voluntary reports generated by the funds. We link each reported stock holding to the
CRSP stock database in order to find its price and industry classification code. The vast
majority of funds have holdings of companies listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, or AMEX
stock exchanges. However, there also are funds for which we are not able to identify the
price and the industry code of certain holdings. The missing data, however, constitute less

6

than 1% of all holdings. The Appendix provides further details pertaining to the merging
process.
Our final sample spans the period between January 1984 and December 1999. We
eliminate balanced, bond, index, international, and sector funds, and focus our analysis
on actively managed diversified equity funds. In addition, we include funds with multiple
share classes only once. We also eliminate all observations where fewer than 11 stock
holdings could be identified. Finally, we exclude all fund observations where the size of
the fund in the previous quarter does not exceed $1 million. With all the exclusions, our
final sample includes 1,771 actively managed diversified equity funds. Panel A of Table I
presents summary statistics of the data.
[Insert Table I around here]

II. Industry Concentration Index
We define our measure of industry concentration, the Industry Concentration
Index, based on the fund holdings. Specifically, we assign each stock held by a mutual
fund to one of ten industries. In the Appendix, we present the detailed composition of the
industries. The Industry Concentration Index (ICI) at time t for a mutual fund is defined
as the sum of the squared deviations of the value weights for each of the ten different
industries held by the mutual fund, w j ,t , relative to the industry weights of the total stock
market, w j ,t .

7

10

(

ICI t = ∑ w j ,t − w j ,t
j =1

2

).

(1)

The Industry Concentration Index measures how much a mutual fund portfolio
deviates from the market portfolio. This index is equal to zero if a mutual fund has
exactly the same industry composition as the market portfolio, and increases as a mutual
fund becomes more concentrated in a few industries.
The Industry Concentration Index is related to the Herfindahl Index, which is
commonly used in Industrial Organization to measure the concentration of companies in
an industry.3 The Industry Concentration Index can be thought of as a market-adjusted
Herfindahl Index. In our sample, it has a correlation coefficient of 0.93 with the
Herfindahl Index. We choose the Industry Concentration Index for two reasons. First, the
industry weights of the total market vary over time. The Industry Concentration Index
takes this variation into account by adjusting for the time-varying industry weights in the
market portfolio. Second, a mutual fund can have a lower Herfindahl Index than the
entire market portfolio if it is more equally invested in the different industries. The
Industry Concentration Index is not subject to this problem, because the market portfolio
has the lowest possible index value of zero.
Panel A of Table I documents summary statistics for the Industry Concentration
Index and other fund characteristics. The average actively managed mutual fund has an
Industry Concentration Index of 5.98%. The Industry Concentration Index ranges

8

between 0.01 and 83.42%, which demonstrates a significant cross-sectional variation of
mutual funds with respect to their concentration level. Concentrated funds may differ
substantially from diversified funds in numerous characteristics such as size, age,
managerial fees, loads, and turnover. In Panel B of Table I, we examine the correlation
between the Industry Concentration Index and fund characteristics. In general, we
observe statistically significant correlations between the different characteristics. On
average, concentrated funds have higher turnover and higher expenses than diversified
funds. On the other hand, concentrated funds are younger and have a lower value of
assets under management.

III. Performance Measures
To examine the relation between industry concentration and fund performance,
we use both factor-based and holding-based performance measures. In this section, we
describe the different measures we use to evaluate fund performance.

A. Carhart Four-Factor Measure
One of our measures is the Carhart (1997) four-factor model, which controls for
risk and style factors. It is especially important to adjust for momentum in stock returns
(Jegadeesh and Titman, 1993) of our industry concentration portfolios, as momentum is

3

( )
i =1

2

N

The Herfindahl Index is defined as HIt = ∑ wi ,t . Using the Herfindahl Index instead of the Industry

Concentration Index does not change the qualitative aspects of our results.

9

stronger at an industry level (Moskowitz and Grinblatt, 1999).4 We estimate the
following regression:
Ri,t – RF, t = αi + βi,M (RM,t – RF,t) + βi,SMB SMBt + βi,HML HMLt + βi,MOM MOMt + ei,t,

(2)

where the dependent variable is the quarterly return on portfolio i in quarter t minus the
risk-free rate, and the independent variables are given by the returns of the four zeroinvestment factor portfolios. The expression RMt – RFt denotes the excess return of the
market portfolio over the risk-free rate;5 SMB is the return difference between small and
large capitalization stocks; HML is the return difference between high and low book-tomarket stocks; and MOM is the return difference between stocks with high and low past
returns.6 The intercept of the model, αi, is the Carhart measure of abnormal performance.
To account for possible differences in idiosyncratic risk exposure, we also
compute the appraisal ratio of Treynor and Black (1973), defined as the ratio of the
intercept from the regression equation (2) and the standard deviation of the residuals from
the same regression.

4

Carhart (1997) indicates that performance persistence mainly can be explained by including a momentum
factor. Zheng (1999) suggests that the "smart-money" effect is closely related to momentum in stock
returns. Nevertheless, our findings remain similar when we use the Fama and French (1993) three-factor
model.
5
The market return is calculated as the value-weighted return on all NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks
using the CRSP database. The monthly return of the one-month Treasury bill rate is obtained from Ibbotson
Associates.
6
The size, the value, and the momentum factor returns were taken from Kenneth French’s Web site
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library.

10

B. Ferson-Schadt Conditional Measure
Ferson and Schadt (1996) argue that the traditional unconditional measures of
abnormal performance might be unreliable, because common variation in risk levels and
risk premia will be confounded with average performance. They argue that a managed
portfolio strategy that can be replicated using readily available public information should
not be judged as having superior performance. They advocate a model based on
conditional performance, which uses predetermined instruments to capture the timevarying factor loadings. Our specification of the conditional model follows Wermers
(2003) and includes interaction terms between the excess market returns and various
macro-economic variables:
Ri,t–RF,t = αi + βi,M (RM,t–RF,t) + βi,SMBSMBt + βi,HMLHMLt + βi,MOMMOMt
+ ∑4j=1βi,j[zj,t-1(RM,t–RF,t)]+ei,t,

(3)

where zj,t-1 is the demeaned value of the lagged macro-economic variable j. Consistent
with the previous studies, we consider the following four macro-economic variables: the
one-month Treasury bill yield, the dividend yield of the S&P 500 Index, the Treasury
yield spread (long- minus short-term bonds), and the quality spread in the corporate bond
market (low- minus high-grade bonds).7 The intercept of the model, αi, is the conditional
measure of performance.

7

Ferson and Schadt (1996) also include an indicator variable for January. We exclude this indicator
variable because our data are at a quarterly frequency and because the coefficient on the interaction term
between the excess market return and an indicator variable for the first quarter is usually not statistically
significantly different from 0.

11

C. DGTW Measures
To investigate the causes of the abnormal performance, we use an alternative set
of measures based on the fund holdings rather than the time-series of fund returns.
DGTW (1997) decompose the overall return of a fund into a “Characteristic Selectivity”
measure CS, a “Characteristic Timing” measure CT, and an “Average Style” measure AS.
To form the benchmark portfolios, we follow DGTW (1997) and group the
universe of common stocks listed on the NYSE, NASDAQ, and AMEX into quintiles
along the dimensions of size (market value of equity), book-to-market ratio, and
momentum (the return of a stock in the previous year). This sequential sorting results in
125 passive portfolios. We calculate the value-weighted returns on each benchmark
portfolio. DGTW (1997) describe the computation of these benchmarks in more detail.
The variable CS denotes a measure of stock selection ability and uses as a
benchmark the return of a portfolio of stocks that is matched to each of the fund’s stock
holdings every quarter along the dimensions of size, book-to-market ratio, and
momentum:
CSt = ∑jwj,t-1[Rj,t – BRt(j, t – 1)],

(4)

where Rj,t is the return on stock j during period t; BRt(j, t – k) is the return on a benchmark
portfolio during period t to which stock j was allocated during period t – k according to
its size, value, and momentum characteristics; and wj,t-k is the relative weight of stock j at
the end of period t–k in the mutual fund.

12

The variable CT denotes a measure of style timing ability, which examines
whether fund managers can generate additional performance by exploiting time-varying
expected returns of the size, book-to-market, or momentum benchmark portfolios:
CTt = ∑j[wj,t-1 BRt(j, t – 1) – wj,t-5BRt(j, t – 5)].

(5)

As in DGTW (1997), we use the AS measure to capture the returns earned by a
fund due to a fund’s tendency to hold stocks with certain characteristics. The AS measure
is defined as:
ASt = ∑j[wj,t-5BRt(j, t – 5)].

(6)

D. Industry-Adjusted Measures
To adjust a fund’s performance for industry returns, we develop the industry stock
selectivity measure, IS, and the industry timing measure, IT. The variable IS measures a
manager’s ability to select superior stocks within industries, while IT is a measure of a
manager’s ability to select superior industries. The measures IS and IT are defined in two
steps. In the first step, we compute the industry-adjusted performance using the returns of
the 48 industries:
ISt = ∑jwj,t-1[Rj,t – IRt (j, t – 1)]

ITt = ∑j[wj,t-1 IRt (j, t – 1) – wj,t-5 IRt (j, t – 5)],

13

(7)

(8)

where IRt (j, t – k) is the return on an industry portfolio during period t, to which stock j
was allocated during period t – k. The variables R and w are the same as defined
previously. In the second step, we regress the IS and IT measures on the Carhart fourfactor model to obtain industry-adjusted abnormal returns.

E. Trade Portfolios
Chen, Jagadeesh, and Wermers (2000) and Kothari and Warner (2001) suggest
that examining trades can be a more powerful method to find value in active fund
management than examining holdings. To analyze mutual fund trades, we compute for
each fund the average quarterly returns of the stocks purchased and sold during the
previous six months. The average returns of the buys and sells of a mutual fund during
quarter t are computed as follows:

RtBuys =

∑~

(w

w j ,t −1 > w j ,t −3

j ,t −1

(w

∑~

w j ,t −1 > w j ,t −3

RtSells =

∑~

(w

w j ,t −1 < w j ,t −3

∑

~
w j ,t −1 < w
j ,t − 3

j ,t −1

j ,t −1

(w

)

~
−w
j ,t −3 R j ,t
~
−w
j ,t −3

)

(9)

)

~
−w
j ,t −3 R j ,t

~
j ,t −1 − w j ,t −3

)

.

(10)

The weight of stock j in a mutual fund at the end of the previous quarter is
denoted by w j ,t −1 and the return of stock j during quarter t is denoted by R j ,t . We adjust

14

for the weight changes that occur due to price changes in buy-and-hold portfolios. Thus,

~
the lagged weight w
j ,t −3 is defined as follows:

~
w
j ,t −3 =

(

)(

w j ,t −3 1 + R j ,t −2 1 + R j ,t −1

)

∑ w j ,t −3 (1 + R j ,t −2 )(1 + R j ,t −1 )

.

(11)

j

We also compute the return difference between stock purchases and liquidations:
RtBuys − Sells = RtBuys − RtSells .

(12)

We use two measures of performance for the trades. The first measure is the raw
return and the second measure is the stock selection ability measure CS from DGTW
(1997). For the second measure, we replace the raw returns R in equations (9), (10), and
(12) with the style-adjusted returns CS.

IV. Empirical Evidence
In this section, we present the empirical results. First, we investigate the relation
between industry concentration and fund performance using both a portfolio and a
regression approach. We then examine how fund size and investment style interact with
the observed relation. Finally, we analyze the trades of mutual funds to further explore
the relation between industry concentration and fund performance.

15

A. Portfolio Evidence
To gauge the relative performance of funds with different concentration levels, we
sort all mutual funds into ten portfolios according to their Industry Concentration Index at
the end of each quarter. For each decile portfolio, we compute the equally weighted
average return for each quarter. For this estimation, we use the performance information
from all funds, including funds with short return histories, thus mitigating a potential
selection bias.

A.1. Factor-Based Performance Measures
Table II summarizes the results of the unconditional and conditional four-factor
models, as in equations (2) and (3). We examine the factor-adjusted returns before and
after subtracting expenses. Looking at the returns before expenses enables us to better
evaluate the investment ability of mutual fund managers, since managers with better
skills may charge higher expenses to extract rents, as discussed in Berk and Green
(2004). On the other hand, the returns after expenses are important for mutual fund
investors.
[Insert Table II around here]
The unconditional abnormal returns before expenses are summarized in the first
column. The results indicate that the most diversified fund portfolio generates an
abnormal return of 0.09% per quarter, while the most concentrated fund portfolio
generates an abnormal return of 0.53% per quarter. The abnormal returns of the five most
concentrated portfolios are all significantly positive at the 10% level. In contrast, the

16

abnormal returns of the five most diversified portfolios are all not significantly different
from 0. The difference in the quarterly abnormal returns between the five most and the
five least concentrated deciles equals 0.30 percentage points per quarter, which is
statistically significant at the 5% level. The magnitude of the performance difference
increases further if we compare the top and the bottom quintiles or deciles. The Spearman
rank correlation between fund concentration and performance equals 0.87 and is
significant at the 1% level. Hence, the evidence indicates that concentrated funds perform
better than diversified funds before deducting expenses.
The second column summarizes the abnormal performance using the conditional
four-factor model. In general, the results of the conditional model are stronger and
statistically more significant than the results using the unconditional model. Thus, the
performance difference between the concentrated and the diversified funds are not driven
by their responses to macro-economic conditions.
The ranking of the concentration deciles for the abnormal returns after expenses is
very similar to the one before expenses. The most concentrated fund portfolios tend to
have positive abnormal net returns, while the least concentrated portfolios tend to have
negative abnormal net returns. The difference in the performance between concentrated
and diversified funds declines slightly if we study after-expense returns, because highly
concentrated funds charge higher expenses than diversified funds. In particular, the
average quarterly expenses range from 0.38% for the most concentrated funds to 0.26%
for the most diversified funds. The after-expense abnormal return of the five most
concentrated deciles exceeds that of the five least concentrated deciles by 0.24 percentage

17

points per quarter. A trading strategy of going long in the most concentrated portfolios
and going short in the most diversified portfolios would have generated these riskadjusted returns. Therefore, concentrated funds appear to outperform diversified funds
even after taking into account fund expense ratios.
To examine the risk and style characteristics of the decile portfolios, we report the
factor loadings of an unconditional four-factor model using before-expense returns in the
last four columns of Table II. In our sample, the coefficient on the market factor does not
differ much among the ten portfolios. We observe that diversified funds tend to hold
large and value companies, whereas concentrated funds tend to hold small and growth
companies. Concentrated funds exhibit more momentum in their returns than diversified
funds. Therefore, we rely on the four-factor Carhart model and the DGTW model to
control for momentum.

A.2. Holding-Based Performance Measures
DGTW (1997) propose an alternative method to estimate the performance of
mutual funds based on the portfolio holdings (equations 4 to 6). This method sheds light
on the causes of the performance of mutual funds. Specifically, the DGTW performance
measures detect whether mutual fund managers successfully select stocks that outperform
a portfolio of stocks with the same characteristics and whether fund managers
successfully time these characteristics.

18

Table III summarizes the three performance measures for the concentration decile
portfolios. Overall, the average performance during our sample period, 1984 to 1999, is
similar to that reported by DGTW (1997) using data from 1975 to 1994.8
[Insert Table III around here]
Concentrated mutual funds tend to have higher selectivity measures CS and
higher timing measures CT than diversified mutual funds. The difference in the CS
measures between the five most and the five least concentrated deciles equals 0.20
percentage points per quarter, while the respective difference in the CT measures equals
0.06 percentage points per quarter. The CS and the CT measures of the decile portfolios
increase almost monotonically with the Industry Concentration Index, which results in
statistically significant Spearman rank correlations. Consistent with our earlier results,
concentrated funds exhibit better stock picking and style timing abilities than diversified
funds.

B. Multivariate Regression Evidence
In this section, we further extend our analysis using multivariate regressions. This
approach differs from the portfolio approach in three major respects. First, the decile
portfolio analysis does not control for mutual fund characteristics that are related to fund
performance. For example, well-diversified mutual funds are, on average, larger than
concentrated funds. It might be that smaller funds perform better than larger funds, and
8

DGTW compute an annualized average CS measure of 0.77%, while our results show an annualized
average CS measure of 0.96%. Their results are statistically significant at the 5% level, while our results
are significant at the 10% level. The CT measure is neither statistically significant in their paper nor in our
paper.

19

that the concentration level matters only because it is correlated with size. A multivariate
regression framework simultaneously controls for these different factors. Second, the
portfolio approach aggregates mutual funds of similar concentration levels into different
groups. Here, we take advantage of the rich panel of individual mutual funds. Third, in
the previous section we assume constant factor loadings across time. To take into account
possible time variations in the factor loadings of individual funds, the regressions use past
data to estimate the four-factor model and determine the abnormal returns during a
subsequent period. In the regression analyses, we examine the concentration-performance
relation using the unconditional and conditional four-factor as well as the holding-based
performance measures.

B.1. Factor-Based Performance Measures
We use three years of past monthly returns to estimate the coefficients of the
unconditional and conditional factor models. Subsequently, we subtract the expected
return from the realized fund return to determine the abnormal return of a fund in each
quarter.9
Next, we regress the abnormal return of each mutual fund in each quarter on the
Industry Concentration Index and on other fund characteristics. We lag all explanatory
variables by one quarter, except for expenses and turnover, which are lagged by one year
due to data availability. Using the lagged explanatory variables mitigates potential
endogeneity problems. We take the natural logarithms of the age and the size variables,

20

because both variables are skewed to the right. Wermers (2003) shows that flows by
mutual fund investors can have an impact on asset prices. To control for the effect of
lagged inflows, we include the lagged-quarter flows into each mutual fund as an
additional explanatory variable.10 Each regression additionally includes time fixed
effects.
We estimate the regressions with panel-corrected standard errors (PCSE). The
PCSE specification adjusts for the contemporaneous correlation and heteroskedasticity
among fund returns as well as for the autocorrelation within each fund’s returns (Beck
and Katz, 1995). We analyze the unbalanced panel, since most mutual funds do not exist
over the whole sample period. Table IV summarizes the regression results.
[Insert Table IV around here]
The first column shows the coefficients from the panel regression using the
abnormal return based on the unconditional four-factor model as the dependent variable.
The sign and magnitude of the coefficient on the Industry Concentration Index are
consistent with our previous analysis using the concentration decile portfolios.
Specifically, an increase in the Industry Concentration Index by 5 percentage points
(corresponding approximately to one-standard-deviation of the Industry Concentration
Index) increases the quarterly abnormal return of a mutual fund by 13 basis points (=
2.57*5 = 12.85), or by approximately 0.52 percentage points on an annual basis. This
effect is economically and statistically significant. On average, expenses have a

9

One limitation of this approach is that we have to exclude young mutual funds that do not have a
sufficiently long return history.
10
We calculate quarter flows following Gruber (1996) and Zheng (1999).

21

statistically significant negative effect on the abnormal return of the mutual fund. Fund
age is negatively related to fund performance, and lagged cash flow is positively related
to fund performance.
In the second column of Table IV, we use the conditional abnormal return as the
dependent variable. The coefficient on the Industry Concentration Index remains similar
and is statistically significant at the 1% level. This result indicates that the superior
performance of concentrated funds cannot be attributed to their greater responsiveness to
macro-economic conditions.

B.2. Holding-Based Performance Measures
Columns three and four of Table IV summarize estimation results using holdingbased performance measures, CS or CT, as the dependent variable, respectively. The
results show that mutual funds with a high Industry Concentration Index have better
stock selection and better style timing abilities. Specifically, a one-standard-deviation
increase in the Industry Concentration Index increases the quarterly CS measure by 14.7
basis points, and the CT measure by 4.7 basis points. Compared to the previous portfolio
results, taking advantage of the rich panel structure of our data set and controlling for
other mutual fund characteristics result in a significant relation between mutual fund
concentration and characteristic-based performance measures.
Overall, the regression results confirm our earlier evidence using decile portfolios
that concentrated funds outperform diversified funds by an economically significant
margin during our sample period.

22

B.3. Industry-Adjusted Abnormal Performance
One explanation for the superior performance of concentrated funds is that they
select industries with high returns. We test this hypothesis using the previously defined IS
and IT measures (equations 7 and 8). The measure IS evaluates the stock-picking ability
of a fund within industries, while IT captures the ability of the fund to time industries.
The first two columns of Table V summarize the results of adjusting the portfolio returns
for industry, risk, and style. A one-standard-deviation increase in the Industry
Concentration Index increases the quarterly IS measure by 9.5 basis points. Likewise, a
one-standard-deviation increase in the Industry Concentration Index increases the
quarterly IT measure by 7.3 basis points. Both effects are significant at the 1% level.
[Insert Table V around here]
These results indicate that concentrated funds outperform diversified funds even
after adjusting for the industry performance. Concentrated funds appear to have the
ability to select better performing stocks within industries and select better performing
industries.

B.4. Appraisal Ratio
As a portfolio deviates from the market portfolio, it will be exposed to
idiosyncratic risk. To take into account the different amount of unique risk across our
sample of funds, we use as a performance measure a modified appraisal ratio of Treynor
and Black (1973). The appraisal ratio is calculated by dividing the abnormal return by the

23

standard deviation of the residuals from a four-factor model. Brown, Goetzmann, and
Ross (1995) show that survivorship bias is positively related to fund return variance.
Thus, the higher the return volatility, the greater the difference between the ex-post
observed mean and the ex-ante expected return. Using the alpha scaled by the
idiosyncratic risk as our performance measure mitigates such survivorship problems.
The regression results using the appraisal ratio are presented in the third column
of Table V. Consistent with our earlier findings, we observe a positive relation between
portfolio concentration and fund performance, which is statistically significant at the 1%
level. The coefficients on the other variables are similar to those using the alternative
performance measures. Thus, the empirical results suggest the superior performance of
concentrated funds is not driven by the amount of idiosyncratic risk, which is related to
survival conditions.

B.5. Sub-Period Performance
We examine the relation between portfolio concentration and fund performance
for two sample periods: 1987 to 1993 and 1994 to 1999. There are significant differences
in fund characteristics for the two time periods. For example, many new funds entered the
market and the average TNA per fund increased substantially during the latter period.
The two periods differ also in the overall stock market performance. The average
quarterly market return equals 3.4% in the first sub-sample and 5.3% in the second subsample. Thus, it is possible that the concentration-performance relation may differ across
the two sub-periods. The results of this analysis, presented in Table VI, suggest that a

24

similar positive relation between portfolio concentration and fund performance exists in
both sample periods.
[Insert Table VI around here]

C. Size Portfolios
To further analyze whether the effect of the Industry Concentration Index depends
on the size of the mutual funds, we segregate the mutual funds into different size
portfolios and compare the performance of concentrated and diversified funds within
these size portfolios.
The distribution of the assets under management by mutual funds is highly
skewed to the right. For example, the median mutual fund in our sample has a TNA of
$104 million, while the largest mutual fund (Fidelity Magellan) reached a TNA of
$97,594 million in 1999. Diseconomies of scale in money management, as discussed by
Berk and Green (2004), make it difficult for very large funds to outperform passive
benchmarks even if fund managers are skilled.
To gauge the impact of fund size on the concentration-performance relation, we
first sort funds into size quintiles based on the TNAs at the end of the previous quarter.
Subsequently, we sort the mutual funds within each size quintile into two equally-sized
groups according to their Industry Concentration Index. Mutual funds in the first quintile
manage on average $10.19 million, while funds in the fifth quintile manage on average
$2,604 million.

25

Our findings, reported in Table VII, confirm the results in Chen, Hong, Huang,
and Kubik (2002) that small mutual funds outperform large funds. Specifically, mutual
funds in the small size quintile have an abnormal return before expenses of 0.48% per
quarter using the unconditional four-factor model, while funds in the large size quintile
have an abnormal return of 0.16% per quarter. This difference in the abnormal
performance is statistically significantly different from zero at the 5% level.
[Insert Table VII around here]
Table VII focuses primarily on the effects of the Industry Concentration Index on
abnormal performance within the size quintiles. We observe a positive performance
difference between the high and low concentration funds in all size quintiles using the
various performance measures. The concentration effect does not differ significantly
between the different size quintiles. This finding indicates that our results are not
primarily driven by the smallest mutual funds.

D. Style Portfolios
Funds frequently concentrate their holdings in specific investment styles, for
example, value vs. growth or small vs. large capitalization stocks. In this section, we
investigate to what extent our concentration results are related to funds’ investment
styles. We sort our sample of mutual funds into four investment styles based on the
characteristics of their stock holdings.
Each stock traded on the major U.S. exchanges is grouped into respective
quintiles according to its market value and its book-to-market ratio. Subsequently, using

26

the quintile information, we compute the value-weighted size score and value score for
each mutual fund in each period. For example, a mutual fund that invests only in stocks
in the smallest size quintile would have a size score of 1, while a mutual fund that invests
only in the largest size quintile would have a size score of 5. Next, we group all mutual
funds according to their size scores and value scores into four portfolios. The smallgrowth portfolio includes mutual funds with below median size scores and below median
value scores. Similarly, we define the large-growth, small-value, and large-value
portfolios. Finally, we subdivide each of these four portfolios according to their Industry
Concentration Index. As a result, we obtain eight portfolios of mutual funds according to
their style and concentration characteristics.
Table VIII summarizes the different performance measures of these portfolios of
mutual funds. The first two columns report the four-factor abnormal returns before
subtracting expenses; the remaining columns report the holding-based DGTW
performance measures. Consistent with the findings in DGTW (1997) and Chen,
Jegadeesh, and Wermers (2000), we observe that mutual funds investing primarily in
small or growth stocks outperform other mutual funds with respect to all performance
measures. On the other hand, mutual funds specializing in large-value stocks tend to
perform the worst according to all measures. Specifically, mutual funds focusing on
small-growth stocks outperform mutual funds specializing in large-value stocks by 0.39%
per quarter, using the unconditional four-factor model. This performance difference is
statistically significant at the 10% level.

27

[Insert Table VIII around here]
Consistent with our earlier findings, mutual funds with a higher industry
concentration tend to generate higher abnormal returns before expenses within style
categories, unless they specialize in large-value stocks. The least concentrated 50% of
small-growth mutual funds have an abnormal return before expenses of 0.18% per
quarter, while the most concentrated 50% have an abnormal return of 0.59% per quarter
using the unconditional four-factor model. On the other hand, the least concentrated 50%
of large-value mutual funds have an abnormal return before expenses of 0.06% per
quarter, while the most concentrated 50% have an abnormal return of -0.08% per quarter.
The effect of the Industry Concentration Index on the abnormal returns and the statistical
significance of the return differences strengthen if we compute conditional instead of
unconditional abnormal returns. The results using the holding-based performance
measures are also consistent with the results using the abnormal four-factor performance.

E. Trade Portfolios
To further examine whether concentrated funds have informational advantages,
we study the performance of mutual fund trades. Specifically, for each fund, we compute
the average quarterly returns of the stocks purchased and sold during the previous six
months, as described in Section III-E. In our test, we sort the mutual funds according to
their Industry Concentration Index and group them into ten portfolios, as in Tables II and
III.

28

Table IX summarizes the two performance measures for the portfolios based on
stock trades by mutual funds in different concentration deciles. The stocks purchased
tend to perform significantly better than the stocks sold. Overall, the stocks purchased
have a raw return that exceeds the return of the stocks sold by 1.35% per quarter. The
difference between the buy and the sell portfolio tends to increase with the Industry
Concentration Index. The return difference equals 0.95% for the most diversified decile
and 2.11% for the most concentrated decile. The difference in the differences is both
statistically and economically highly significant. The superior performance of the trades
of the concentrated funds is due to higher returns of the stocks purchased and lower
returns of the stocks sold.
[Insert Table IX around here]
The last three columns of Table IX summarize the return differences for the
characteristic-adjusted CS measure. These results confirm the earlier findings using the
raw returns that the trades of concentrated funds create significantly more value than the
trades of diversified funds.

V. Conclusions
The value of active fund management has been a long-standing debate among
researchers and practitioners. Mutual fund managers may deviate from the passive market
portfolio by concentrating their holdings in specific industries. We investigate whether
mutual fund managers hold concentrated portfolios because they have investment skills
that are linked to specific industries.

29

Using U.S. mutual fund data from 1984 to 1999, we find that mutual funds differ
substantially in their industry concentration, and that concentrated funds tend to follow
distinct investment styles. In particular, managers of more concentrated funds overweigh
growth and small stocks, whereas managers of more diversified funds hold portfolios that
closely resemble the total market portfolio.
We find that funds with concentrated portfolios perform better than funds with
diversified portfolios. This finding is robust to various risk-adjusted performance
measures, including the four-factor model of Carhart (1997), the conditional factor model
of Ferson and Schadt (1996), and the holding-based performance measures of Daniel,
Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997). Analyzing the buy and sell decisions of mutual
funds, we find evidence that the trades of concentrated portfolios add more value than the
trades of diversified portfolios.
In summary, this paper finds that investment ability is more evident among
managers who hold portfolios concentrated in a few industries. The evidence lends
support to the value of active fund management.

30

APPENDIX

A. Matching of the CRSP and the CDA Data Sets
To analyze the relation between industry concentration of mutual funds and their
style characteristics, one of our main tasks includes the matching of the CDA mutual
fund holdings database and the CRSP mutual fund database. We match funds in the
CRSP database to the CDA holdings database. Specifically, given that both data sets have
different identifying numbers, we need to use different characteristics to perform the
merge. A natural common characteristic used as a merging variable is the name of the
fund. The matching procedure is done manually and very often, to avoid any spurious
matches, supplemented by additional information from the Web sites of particular funds.
In cases where matching by name is not conclusive, we support our matching with
additional information about the TNA and the investment objective of the fund.
At the outset, our matched data set includes 4,253 different funds identified both
in the CRSP and the CDA databases, which existed at any time between January 1984
and December 1999.11 For this sample, we apply another filter, in which we exclude all
bond, balanced, money market, index, international, and sector funds.12 We also
eliminate fund observations where the TNA of a fund in the previous quarter is less than
$1 million or where fewer than 11 stock holdings are identified. In summary, our final
sample includes 1,771 distinct equity funds with complete characteristics of returns, total

11
12

For funds with multiple share classes, we include the dominant class of shares in CRSP.
We exclude funds that do not predominantly hold U.S. equities.

31

net assets, age, expenses, loads, turnover, portfolio holdings, style objective, and full
name in at least one quarter between 1984 and 1999.

B. Industry Composition
Kenneth French lists on his Web page the SIC codes for a 48-industry classification
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/Data_Library) used in Fama and
French (1997). Our analysis aggregates these 48 industries into 10 main industry groups
as described in Table AI.
[Insert Table AI around here]

32

REFERENCES

Baks, Klaas P., Andrew Metrick, and Jessica Wachter, 2001, Should investors
avoid all actively managed mutual funds? A study in Bayesian performance evaluation,
Journal of Finance 56, 45–86.
Beck, Nathaniel, and Jonathan N. Katz, 1995, What to do (and not to do) with
time-series cross-section data, American Political Science Review 89(3), 634–647.
Berk, Jonathan, and Richard C. Green, 2004, Mutual fund flows and performance
in rational markets, Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Brown, Stephen J., and William N. Goetzmann, 1995, Performance persistence,
Journal of Finance 50, 679–698.
Brown, Stephen J., William N. Goetzmann, and Stephen Ross, 1995, Survival,
Journal of Finance 50, 853–873.
Carhart, Mark M., 1997, On persistence in mutual fund performance, Journal of
Finance 52, 57–82.
Carhart, Mark M., Jennifer N. Carpenter, Anthony W. Lynch, and David K.
Musto, 2002, Mutual fund survivorship, Review of Financial Studies, 15, 1439–1463.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a
response to incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105, 1167–1200.

33

Chen, Hsiu-Lang, Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Russ Wermers, 2000, An
examination of the stockholdings and trades of fund managers, Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis 35, 343–368.
Chen, Joseph, Harrison Hong, Ming Huang, and Jeffrey Kubik, 2002, Does fund
size erode performance? Liquidity, organizational diseconomies and active money
management, Working paper, University of Southern California.
Cohen, Randolph, Joshua D. Coval, and Luboš Pástor, 2004, Judging fund
managers by the company that they keep, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local
equity preference in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 2045–2074.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 2001, The Geography of Investment:
Informed Trading and Asset Prices, Journal of Political Economy 109 (4), 811–841.
Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997,
Measuring mutual fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of
Finance 52, 1035–1058.
Del Guercio, Diane, and Paula A. Tkac, 2002, The determinants of the flow of
funds of managed portfolios: Mutual funds versus pension funds, Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis 37, 523–557.

34

Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka, 1993,
Efficiency with costly information: A reinterpretation of evidence for managed
portfolios, Review of Financial Studies 6, 1–22.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1993, Common risk factors in the
return on bonds and stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–53.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1997, Industry costs of equity, Journal
of Financial Economics 43, 153–193.
Ferson, Wayne, and Rudi Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and performance
in changing economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425–462.
Frank, Mary M., James M. Poterba, Douglas A. Shackelford, and John B. Shoven,
2004, Copycat funds: Information disclosure regulation and the returns to active
management in the mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics, forthcoming.
Goetzmann, William N., and Nadev Peles, 1997, Cognitive dissonance and
mutual fund investors, Journal of Financial Research 20, 145–158.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Mutual fund performance: An
analysis of quarterly portfolio holdings, Journal of Business 62, 393–416.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without
benchmarks: An examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66, 47–68.

35

Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, Momentum
investment strategies, portfolio performance, and herding: A study of mutual fund
behavior, American Economic Review 85, 1088–1105.
Gruber, Martin J., 1996, Another puzzle: The growth in actively managed mutual
funds, Journal of Finance 51, 783–810.
Hendricks, Darryll, Jayendu Patel, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1993, Hot hands in
mutual funds: The persistence of performance 1974-1988, Journal of Finance 48, 93–
130.
Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality:
Evidence from the mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45–70.
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners
and selling losers: Implication for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65–91.
Jensen, Michael C., 1968, The performance of mutual funds in the period 1945–
1964, Journal of Finance 23, 389–416.
Kosowski, Robert, Allan Timmermann, Hal White, and Russ Wermers, 2001, Can
mutual fund “stars” really pick stocks? New evidence from a bootstrap analysis, Working
paper, INSEAD.
Kothari, S.P., and Jerold B. Warner, 2001, Evaluating mutual fund performance,
Journal of Finance 56, 1985–2010.
36

Lynch, Anthony W., Jessica Wachter, and Walter Boudry, 2004, Does mutual
fund performance vary over the business cycle? Working paper, New York University.
Malkiel, Burton G., 1995, Returns from investing in equity mutual funds 19711991, Journal of Finance 50, 549–572.
Moskowitz, Tobias J., and Mark Grinblatt, 1999, Do industries explain
momentum? Journal of Finance 54, 1249–1290.
Nanda, Vikram, Zhi Wang, and Lu Zheng, 2004, Family values and the star
phenomenon, Review of Financial Studies 17 (3), 667–698.
Sirri, Erik, and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal
of Finance 53, 1589–1622.
Treynor, Jack L., and Fisher Black, 1973, How to use security analysis to improve
portfolio selection, Journal of Business 46, 66–86.
Wermers, Russ, 2000, Mutual fund performance: An empirical decomposition
into stock-picking talent, style, transaction costs, and expenses, Journal of Finance 55,
1655–1703.
Wermers, Russ, 2003, Is money really “smart”? New evidence on the relation
between mutual fund flows, manager behavior, and performance persistence, Working
paper, University of Maryland.

37

Zheng, Lu, 1999, Is money smart? A study of mutual fund investors’ fund
selection ability, Journal of Finance 54, 901–933.

38

Table I
Summary Statistics
Panel A presents the summary statistics of the actively managed equity mutual funds included in the paper.
Panel B reports the contemporaneous correlations between the main variables used in the paper. The
Industry Concentration Index is defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the mutual fund
holdings in industry j and w j is the weight of the market in industry j.
Panel A: Fund Characteristics
Total Number of Funds
Number of Stocks Held by Fund
TNA (Total Net Assets) (in Millions)
Age (in Years)
Expenses (in %)
Turnover (in %)
Total Load (in %)
Quarterly Raw Return (in %)
Industry Concentration Index (in %)

Mean
1,771
97.12
623.44
14.58
1.26
88.28
2.55
4.44
5.98

Panel B: Correlation Structure
Variables
Industry
Expenses
Turnover
Concentration
Index
Concentration
1.00
Index
Expenses
0.21***
1.00
Turnover
0.15***
0.14***
1.00
Age
-0.08***
-0.19***
-0.07***
TNA
-0.06***
-0.15***
-0.03***
Loads
-0.05***
0.01***
-0.04***
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

39

Median

Minimum

Maximum

65
107.18
8
1.17
64.0
0
4.29
4.36

11
1.001
1
0.01
0.04
0
-49.32
0.01

3,439
97,594
77
14.54
4263
8.98
130.62
83.42

Age

TNA

1.00
0.20***
0.17***

1.00
0.02***

Loads

1.00

Table II
Decile Portfolios
This table summarizes abnormal returns and the factor loadings using the Carhart (1997) four-factor model for
different portfolios of mutual funds for the period of 1984 to 1999. The first and third columns show the
unconditional abnormal returns before and after expenses. The second and fourth columns show the conditional
abnormal returns according to Ferson and Schadt (1996), using the lagged level of the one-month Treasury bill
yield, the lagged dividend yield of the S&P 500 Index, the lagged measure of the slope of the term structure, and the
lagged quality spread in the bond market. The last four columns summarize the factor loadings for the unconditional
model using returns before expenses. We divide the sample into deciles based on the lagged Industry Concentration
Index ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is the weight of
the market in industry j. The returns are expressed at a quarterly frequency and the portfolios are rebalanced
quarterly. The standard errors of the regressions are given in parentheses. The table includes the differences in the
abnormal returns along with their standard errors before and after expenses between the top and the bottom deciles,
the top and the bottom quintiles, and the top and the bottom halves of the mutual funds. Spearman rank correlations
have been included together with their respective p-values.
Abnormal Return
Factor Loadings
(in % per quarter)
Before Expenses
After Expenses
Before Expenses
UnconConUnconConUnconditional Model
ditional
ditional
ditional
ditional
Market
Size
Value
Momentum
All Funds
0.24***
0.21**
-0.07
-0.11
0.96*** 0.28*** -0.09***
0.03**
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.09)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.01)
1
0.09
0.01
-0.17*
-0.25**
0.97*** -0.07*** 0.01
0.00
Diversified
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
2
0.08
0.03
-0.19*
-0.24**
0.96*** 0.03
0.01
-0.01
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
3
0.10
0.07
-0.18
-0.22*
0.96*** 0.13*** 0.01
0.00
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
(0.02)
4
0.08
-0.03
-0.21
-0.32*
0.97*** 0.21*** 0.02
0.02
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
5
0.10
0.02
-0.21
-0.30*
0.97*** 0.24*** -0.00
-0.01
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.17)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.02)
6
0.33*
0.29
0.16
-0.03
0.97*** 0.31*** -0.02
0.02
(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.03)
7
0.44**
0.37*
0.11
0.04
0.96*** 0.38*** -0.07**
0.03
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.02)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
-0.04
0.97*** 0.49*** -0.16***
0.05**
8
0.26*
0.30*
-0.08
(0.16)
(0.16)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.16)
(0.16)
9
0.42**
0.41**
0.07
0.07
0.99*** 0.49*** -0.25***
0.07**
(0.18)
(0.20)
(0.18)
(0.20)
(0.02)
(0.04)
(0.03)
(0.03)
10
0.53*
0.59**
0.15
0.22
0.93*** 0.64*** -0.47***
0.12***
Concentrated
(0.29)
(0.30)
(0.29)
(0.30)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.05)
(0.04)
2nd Half –
0.30**
0.37***
0.24*
0.32**
-0.00
0.35*** -0.20***
0.06***
1st Half
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.02)
(0.03)
(0.03)
(0.02)
0.39**
0.48**
0.29
0.39*
-0.01
0.58*** -0.37***
0.10***
5th Quintile –
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.04)
(0.03)
1st Quintile
10th Decile –
0.44
0.58*
0.32
0.47
-0.04
0.70*** -0.48***
0.12**
(0.30)
(0.32)
(0.30)
(0.32)
(0.04)
(0.06)
(0.06)
(0.05)
1st Decile
Spearman
0.87***
0.85***
0.71**
0.78***
-0.04
0.99*** -0.92***
0.82***
Rank Correl.
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.02)
(0.01)
(0.91)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

40

Table III
Holding-Based Performance
This table summarizes holding-based performance measures according to DGTW (1997) for different
portfolios of mutual funds for the period of 1984 to 1999. We divide the sample into deciles based on the
lagged Industry Concentration Index, which is defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the
mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is the weight of the market in industry j. The returns are
expressed at a quarterly frequency and the portfolios are rebalanced quarterly. The characteristic-based
performance measures are denoted by CS, CT, and AS. The stock selection ability is defined as CS =
∑wj,t-1[Rj,t – BRt(j, t – 1)], where BRt(j, t – 1) denotes the return of a benchmark portfolio during period t to
which stock j was allocated during period t – 1 according to its size, value, and momentum characteristics.
The style-timing ability is defined as CT = ∑[wj,t-1 BRt(j, t – 1)– wj,t-5BRt(j, t – 5)] and the style-selection
ability is defined as AS = ∑[wj,t-5BRt(j, t – 5)]. The standard errors of the regressions are given in
parentheses. The table includes the differences in the abnormal returns along with their standard errors
between the top and the bottom deciles, the top and the bottom quintiles, and the top and the bottom halves
of the mutual funds. Spearman rank correlations have been included together with their respective p-values.
Deciles
Holding-Based Performance (in % per quarter)
CS
CT
AS
All Funds
0.24*
0.08
4.26***
(0.13)
(0.06)
(1.12)
1 Diversified
0.13
0.03
4.48***
(0.12)
(0.08)
(1.03)
2
0.14
0.04
4.36***
(0.11)
(0.07)
(1.04)
3
0.13
0.04
4.31***
(0.11)
(0.06)
(1.07)
4
0.16
0.08
4.23***
(0.12)
(0.06)
(1.08)
5
0.14
0.06
4.20***
(0.12)
(0.06)
(1.09)
6
0.24*
0.05
4.26***
(0.13)
(0.06)
(1.12)
7
0.33**
0.09
4.17***
(0.17)
(0.06)
(1.14)
8
0.21
0.11
4.17***
(0.20)
(0.08)
(1.18)
9
0.40*
0.15*
4.17***
(0.24)
(0.09)
(1.20)
10 Concentrated
0.53
0.13
4.22***
(0.33)
(0.10)
(1.27)
0.20
0.06
-0.12
2nd Half – 1st Half
(0.15)
(0.05)
(0.20)
5th Quintile – 1st Quintile
0.33
0.11
-0.23
(0.28)
(0.08)
(0.34)
10th Decile – 1st Decile
0.40
0.11
-0.26
(0.34)
(0.11)
(0.41)
Spearman Rank Correlation
0.88***
0.93***
-0.82***
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

41

Table IV
Regression Evidence

This table reports the coefficients of the quarterly panel regression of the general form: PERFi,t = β0 +
β1*ICIi,t-1 + β2*LTNAi,t-1 + β3*EXPi,t-1 + β4*LAGEi,t-1 + β5*TUi,t-1 + β6*NMGi,t-1 + εi,t. The sample includes
actively managed equity mutual funds and spans the period of 1984 to 1999 (including the data used for
calculating the abnormal returns). The dependent variable, PERF, measures the quarterly performance
using the four-factor model of Carhart (1997) based on 36 months of lagged data, the conditional
performance according to Ferson and Schadt (1996), and the holding-based performance measures, CS and
CT according to DGTW (1997). The Industry Concentration Index is defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where
wj is the weight of the mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is the weight of the market in industry j.
We denote the expense ratio by EXP, the turnover ratio by TU, the natural logarithm of age by LAGE, the
natural logarithm of total net assets by LTNA, and the new money growth by NMG. All regressions include
time dummies. Panel-corrected standard errors for panel regressions have been provided in parentheses.
Dependent Variable: Quarterly Performance (in bp)
Four-Factor
Holding-Based
Abnormal Return
Performance
Unconditional
Conditional
2.57***
2.82***
(0.62)
(0.77)
-40.16***
-46.07***
(6.84)
(10.26)
0.04
0.07
(0.05)
(0.06)
-12.37***
-20.10***
(3.21)
(4.18)
LTNA
-1.16
-1.65
(1.64)
(2.09)
NMG
0.16
0.16
(0.18)
(0.23)
No. of obs.
30,645
30,645
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance
ICI
(in %)
EXP
(in %)
TU
(in %)
LAGE

42

CS
2.94***
(0.56)
-2.15
(5.70)
0.18***
(0.04)
1.71
(2.70)
2.15
(1.53)
0.28**
(0.13)
42,659

CT
0.94***
(0.23)
2.61
(2.48)
0.06***
(0.02)
-1.66
(1.34)
0.16
(0.74)
0.20***
(0.07)
36,325

Table V
Alternative Risk Adjustments
This table reports the coefficients of the quarterly panel and cross-sectional regression of the general form:
PERFi,t = β0 + β1*ICIi,t-1 + β2*LTNAi,t-1 + β3*EXPi,t-1 + β4*LAGEi,t-1 + β5*TUi,t-1 + β6*NMGi,t-1 + εi,t. The
sample includes actively managed equity mutual funds and spans the period of 1984 to 1999 (including the
data used for calculating the abnormal returns). The dependent variable, PERF, equals the industryadjusted stock selectivity measure (IS), the industry-adjusted timing measure (IT), or the appraisal ratio of
Treynor and Black (1973) based on the four-factor model. The Industry Concentration Index is defined as
ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is the weight
of the market in industry j. We denote the expense ratio by EXP, the turnover ratio by TU, the natural
logarithm of age by LAGE, the natural logarithm of total net assets by LTNA, and the new money growth by
NMG. All regressions include time dummies. Panel-corrected standard errors for panel regressions have
been provided in parentheses.
Dependent Variable: Quarterly Performance (in bp)
Industry-Adjusted Abnormal Performance
Appraisal Ratio
IS
IT
Four-factor
ICI
1.89***
1.46***
0.65***
(in %)
(0.47)
(0.19)
(0.09)
EXP
7.32
3.24
-6.58***
(in %)
(5.98)
(2.78)
(0.95)
TU
0.10***
0.12***
0.01**
(in %)
(0.03)
(0.02)
(0.01)
LAGE
-1.51
-8.72***
-2.54***
(2.32)
(1.15)
(0.72)
LTNA
9.91***
2.00***
-0.43
(1.38)
(0.62)
(0.35)
NMG
0.23**
0.13**
0.91
(0.11)
(0.06)
(3.49)
Obs.
37,177
33,025
30,645
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

43

Table VI
Sub-Period Evidence

This table reports the coefficients of the quarterly panel regression of the general form: PERFi,t = β0 +
β1*ICIi,t-1 + β2*LTNAi,t-1 + β3*EXPi,t-1 + β4*LAGEi,t-1 + β5*TUi,t-1 + β6*NMGi,t-1 + εi,t. The sample includes
actively managed equity mutual funds and spans the period of 1987 to 1993 (left panel) and 1994 to 1999
(right panel). The dependent variable, PERF, measures the quarterly abnormal performance using the fourfactor model of Carhart (1997) based on 36 months of lagged data. The Industry Concentration Index is
defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is
the weight of the market in industry j. We denote the expense ratio by EXP, the turnover ratio by TU, the
natural logarithm of age by LAGE, the natural logarithm of total net assets by LTNA, and the new money
growth by NMG. All regressions include time dummies. Panel-corrected standard errors have been
provided in parentheses.
Dependent Variable: Quarterly Abnormal Returns (in bp)
Four-Factor Model
1987-1993
1994-1999
ICI
2.44***
2.85***
(in %)
(0.85)
(0.88)
EXP
-30.61***
-45.59***
(in %)
(8.03)
(11.18)
TU
-0.01
0.08
(in %)
(0.05)
(0.07)
LAGE
-12.40***
-11.74***
(4.43)
(4.40)
LTNA
4.39*
-3.44
(2.61)
(2.12)
NMG
0.04
0.21
(0.32)
(0.23)
Observations
10,948
19,697
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

44

Table VII
Mutual Fund Size Portfolios
Mutual funds are sorted at the beginning of each period into five equally-sized portfolios according to the
lagged TNA of the mutual funds. The mutual funds in each of these five portfolios are further divided into
two groups according to the lagged Industry Concentration Index. The Industry Concentration Index is
defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is
the weight of the market in industry j. The returns are expressed at a quarterly frequency and the portfolios
are rebalanced quarterly. The abnormal returns before expenses using the Carhart (1997) four-factor model
are summarized for different portfolios of mutual funds for the period of 1984 to 1999. The characteristicbased performance measures are denoted by CS and CT. The stock selection ability is defined as CS =
∑wj,t-1[Rj,t – BRt(j, t – 1)], where BRt(j, t – 1) denotes the return of a benchmark portfolio during period t to
which stock j was allocated during period t – 1 according to its size, value, and momentum characteristics.
The style-timing ability is defined as CT = ∑[wj,t-1 BRt(j, t – 1)– wj,t-5BRt(j, t – 5)]. The standard errors of the
regressions are given in parentheses.
Four Factor
Holding-Based Performance
Abnormal Return
Measures
Size Quintiles
Industry
Unconditional
Conditional
CS
CT
Concentration
Quintile 1
Low
0.36**
0.28*
0.19*
0.08
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.11)
(0.07)
High
0.60***
0.56***
0.26
0.12
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.10)
Mean TNA:
High – Low
0.24
0.28
0.07
0.04
$10.19 M
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.15)
(0.08)
Quintile 2
Low
0.08
0.00
0.13
0.08
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.11)
(0.07)
High
0.38**
0.41***
0.43**
0.14*
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.17)
(0.08)
Mean TNA:
High – Low
0.30**
0.40***
0.30**
0.05
$42.03 M
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.06)
Quintile 3
Low
0.07
-0.04
0.10
0.01
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.11)
(0.06)
High
0.27
0.27
0.28
0.09
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.23)
(0.06)
Mean TNA:
High – Low
0.20
0.31*
0.18
0.07
$109.11 M
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.05)
Quintile 4
Low
0.02
-0.05
0.14
0.03
(0.14)
(0.10)
(0.11)
(0.08)
High
0.34*
0.31
0.38*
0.08
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.07)
Mean TNA:
High – Low
0.33*
0.35*
0.24
0.05
$302.37 M
(0.17)
(0.18)
(0.17)
(0.06)
Quintile 5
Low
0.07
0.05
0.16
0.05
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.12)
(0.07)
High
0.24
0.28
0.27
0.10
(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.21)
(0.07)
Mean TNA:
High – Low
0.18
0.23
0.11
0.05
$2,604.22 M
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.16)
(0.06)
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

45

Table VIII
Style Portfolios
Mutual funds are sorted at the beginning of each period into four portfolios according to the lagged market
values (small vs. large cap) and the lagged book-to-market ratios (growth vs. value) of their holdings. The
mutual funds in each of these four portfolios are further divided into two groups according to the lagged
Industry Concentration Index. The Industry Concentration Index is defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where
wj is the weight of the mutual fund holdings in industry j and w j is the weight of the market in industry j.
The returns are expressed at a quarterly frequency and the portfolios are rebalanced quarterly. The
abnormal returns before expenses using the Carhart (1997) four-factor model are summarized for different
portfolios of mutual funds for the period of 1984 to 1999. The characteristic-based performance measures
are denoted by CS and CT. The stock selection ability is defined as CS = ∑wj,t-1[Rj,t – BRt(j, t – 1)], where
BRt(j, t – 1) denotes the return of a benchmark portfolio during period t to which stock j was allocated
during period t – 1 according to its size, value, and momentum characteristics. The style-timing ability is
defined as CT = ∑[wj,t-1 BRt(j, t – 1)– wj,t-5BRt(j, t – 5)]. The standard errors of the regressions are given in
parentheses.
Four-Factor
Holding-Based Performance
Abnormal Return
Measures
Style
Industry
Unconditional
Conditional
CS
CT
Concentration
Small
Low
0.18
0.02
0.21
0.08
Growth
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.16)
(0.08)
High
0.59**
0.72**
0.62*
0.19
(0.28)
(0.29)
(0.37)
(0.14)
High – Low
0.40
0.70**
0.41
0.11
(0.33)
(0.31)
(0.28)
(0.11)
Small
Low
0.06
0.04
0.09
0.03
Value
(0.20)
(0.22)
(0.13)
(0.05)
High
0.41**
0.41*
0.14
0.08
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.17)
(0.05)
High – Low
0.35**
0.37**
0.05
0.05
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.11)
(0.04)
Large
Low
0.12
-0.01
0.18
0.08
Growth
(0.14)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.09)
High
0.41**
0.39*
0.41*
0.16
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.24)
(0.10)
High – Low
0.29
0.41**
0.24
0.07
(0.21)
(0.20)
(0.20)
(0.06)
Large
Low
0.06
0.01
0.09
0.01
Value
(0.17)
(0.18)
(0.13)
(0.09)
High
-0.08
-0.14
0.06
-0.02
(0.20)
(0.21)
(0.16)
(0.09)
High – Low
-0.14
-0.15
-0.03
-0.03
(0.12)
(0.12)
(0.09)
(0.05)
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

46

Table IX
Trade Portfolios
This table summarizes the returns of the stocks purchased and sold by different portfolios of mutual funds
for the period of 1984 to 1999. We divide the sample into deciles based on the lagged Industry
Concentration Index, which is defined as ICI = ∑( wj – w j )2, where wj is the weight of the mutual fund
holdings in industry j and w j is the weight of the market in industry j. The returns are expressed at a
quarterly frequency and the portfolios are rebalanced quarterly. For each mutual fund, we compute the raw
returns and style-adjusted returns of their stock purchases and sells. The style adjusted return is a measure
of stock selection ability and is defined as CS = ∑wj,t-1[Rj,t – BRt(j, t – 1)], where BRt(j, t – 1) is the return of
a benchmark portfolio during period t to which stock j was allocated during period t – 1 according to its
size, value, and momentum characteristics. The table includes the differences in the returns along with their
standard errors between the top and the bottom deciles, the top and the bottom quintiles, and the top and the
bottom halves of the mutual funds. Spearman rank correlations have been included together with their
respective p-values.
Raw Returns
CS-Measure
Buys
Sells
Buys - Sells
Buys
Sells
Buys - Sells
All
5.01***
3.66***
1.35****
0.57***
-0.50*
1.06***
Funds
(1.31)
(1.22)
(0.42)
(0.22)
(0.29)
(0.31)
1
4.96***
4.01***
0.95**
0.33**
-0.28
0.61**
Diversified
(1.12)
(1.09)
(0.40)
(0.16)
(0.26)
(0.28)
2
4.99***
3.91***
1.08***
0.45***
-0.26
0.71**
(1.18)
(1.09)
(0.41)
(0.16)
(0.25)
(0.28)
3
4.81***
3.68***
1.13***
0.39**
-0.52*
0.92***
(1.19)
(1.16)
(0.37)
(0.16)
(0.27)
(0.28)
4
4.93***
3.70***
1.24***
0.50***
-0.46
0.97***
(1.24)
(1.19)
(0.39)
(0.18)
(0.29)
(0.30)
5
4.79***
3.61***
1.17***
0.41**
-0.52
0.93***
(1.26)
(1.20)
(0.41)
(0.19)
(0.31)
(0.35)
6
4.86***
3.73***
1.13**
0.45**
-0.43
0.88***
(1.30)
(1.24)
(0.36)
(0.20)
(0.32)
(0.29)
7
4.91***
3.50***
1.40***
0.54**
-0.62*
1.16***
(1.34)
(1.25)
(0.41)
(0.23)
(0.33)
(0.33)
8
5.00***
3.36**
1.64***
0.61*
-0.72*
1.32***
(1.46)
(1.32)
(0.50)
(0.34)
(0.38)
(0.39)
9
5.20***
3.53***
1.66***
0.76**
-0.60
1.35***
(1.51)
(1.33)
(0.52)
(0.37)
(0.39)
(0.38)
2.11***
1.28**
-0.55
1.82***
10
5.69***
3.57**
(1.47)
(0.62)
(0.52)
(0.48)
(0.49)
Concentrated
(1.68)
2nd Half –
0.23
-0.24
0.48***
0.31
-0.17
0.48***
1st Half
(0.37)
(0.30)
(0.17)
(0.22)
(0.23)
(0.17)
0.46
-0.41
0.87***
0.62
-0.31
0.93***
5th Quintile –
(0.64)
(0.52)
(0.30)
(0.40)
(0.39)
(0.29)
1st Quintile
10th Decile –
0.72
-0.44
1.16***
0.94*
-0.27
1.21***
(0.81)
(0.64)
(0.40)
(0.52)
(0.48)
(0.39)
1st Decile
Spearman Rank
0.48
-0.81***
0.94***
0.89***
-0.78***
0.95***
Correlation
(0.16)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.00)
(0.01)
(0.00)
*** 1% significance; ** 5% significance; * 10% significance

47

Table AI
Industry Classification
10-Industry Classification
1. Consumer Non-Durables

Weight (in %)
10.08

2. Consumer Durables

8.74

3. Healthcare

7.81

4. Manufacturing

5. Energy

6. Utilities
7. Telecom
8. Business Equipment and
Services
9. Wholesale and Retail
10. Finance

15.24

7.78

6.67
5.42
11.92

8.30
18.04

48-Industry French Classification
1. Agriculture
2. Food Products
3. Candy and Soda
4. Beer and Liquor
5. Tobacco Products
7. Entertainment
8. Printing and Publishing
10. Apparel
16. Textiles
33. Personal Services
6. Toys
9. Consumer Goods
23. Automobiles and Trucks
11. Healthcare
12. Medical Equipment
13. Pharmaceutical Products
14. Chemicals
15. Rubber and Plastic Products
17. Construction Materials
18. Construction
19. Steel Works
20. Fabricated Products
21. Machinery
22. Electrical Equipment
24. Aircraft
25. Shipbuilding and Railroad Equip.
26. Defense
38. Business Supplies
39. Shipping Containers
40. Transportation
48. Miscellaneous
27. Precious Metals
28. Mining
29. Coal
30. Oil
31. Utilities
32. Communications
34. Business Services
35. Computers
36. Electronic Equipment
37. Measuring and Control Equip.
41. Wholesale
42. Retail
43. Restaurants, Hotels, and Motels
44. Banking
45. Insurance
46. Real Estate
47. Trading

48

Weight (in %)
0.10
2.48
1.93
0.46
1.75
0.81
1.57
0.48
0.20
0.30
0.55
5.46
2.73
0.90
1.39
5.52
2.99
0.25
1.75
0.27
1.03
0.10
1.62
1.23
1.07
0.12
0.27
1.45
0.89
1.40
0.78
0.25
0.32
0.06
7.15
6.67
5.42
4.09
4.48
2.47
0.88
1.61
5.40
1.28
3.66
3.09
0.23
11.05

