NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHEN IT RAINS, IT POURS: PROCYCLICAL CAPITAL FLOWS
AND MACROECONOMIC POLICIES
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Carmen M. Reinhart
Carlos A. Végh
Working Paper 10780
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10780
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

Kaminsky was visiting the IMF Institute and Végh was Senior Resident Scholar at the IMF’s Research
Department when this paper was written. They both gratefully acknowledge the IMF’s hospitality. Kaminsky
and Végh also wish to thank the Institute of Public Policy at George Washington University and the UCLA
Senate, respectively, for financial support. The authors wish to thank Peter Benczur, Mark Gertler, Gita
Gopinath, Ayhan Kose, Pablo Lopez Murphy, Attila Raftai, Raghu Rajan, Alessandro Rebucci, Vincent R.
Reinhart, Roberto Rigobon, Kenneth S. Rogoff, Evan Tanner, and Guillermo Tolosa for useful comments
and suggestions and Eric Bang and, especially, Ioannis Tokatlidis for excellent research assistance. This
paper was prepared for the NBER’s 19th Conference on Macroeconomics, organized by Mark Gertler and
Kenneth S. Rogoff. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
IMF or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Graciela L. Kaminsky, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

When it Rains, it Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies
Graciela L. Kaminsky, Carmen M. Reinhart, and Carlos A. Végh
NBER Working Paper No. 10780
September 2004
JEL No. F41, E52, E62

ABSTRACT
Based on a sample of 104 countries, we document four key stylized facts regarding the interaction
between capital flows, fiscal policy, and monetary policy. First, net capital inflows are procyclical
(i.e., external borrowing increases in good times and falls in bad times) in most OECD and
developing countries. Second, fiscal policy is procyclical (i.e., government spending increases in
good times and falls in bad times) for the majority of developing countries. Third, for emerging
markets, monetary policy appears to be procyclical (i.e., policy rates are lowered in good times and
raised in bad times). Fourth, in developing countries

and particularly for emerging markets

periods of capital inflows are associated with expansionary macroeconomic policies and periods of
capital outflows with contractionary macroeconomic policies. In such countries, therefore, when it
rains, it does indeed pour.
Graciela L. Kaminsky
George Washington University
Department of Economics
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
Carmen M. Reinhart
School of Public Affairs and
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
4105 Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
creinhar@umd.edu
Carlos A. Végh
Department of Economics
University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
cvegh@ucla.edu

I. INTRODUCTION
Any expert on financial crises in emerging markets could cite ample anecdotal evidence to
support the view that macroeconomic policies are highly procyclical, at least in moments of extreme
duress. At the time that economic activity is contracting (often markedly) amidst a crisis, the fiscal
authority cuts budgets deficits while the central bank raises interest rates – possibly exacerbating the
economic contraction. Procyclical policies, however, do not appear to be limited to crisis periods in many
developing countries. In fact, the roots of most of the debt crises in emerging market are all too often
found in governments that go through bouts of high spending and borrowing when the times are favorable
and international capital is plentiful.1
Gavin and Perotti (1997) first called attention to the phenomenon of procyclical fiscal policy by
showing that fiscal policy in Latin America tends to be expansionary in good times and contractionary in
bad times. Talvi and Végh (2000) argued that, far from being a phenomenon peculiar to Latin America,
procyclical fiscal policy seems to be the norm in the developing world just as fiscal policy is acyclical in
the advanced economies.

Using a different econometric approach, Braun (2001) reaches a similar

conclusion for developing countries, though he finds evidence that fiscal policy is countercyclical in
OECD countries.

Lane (2003b) also provides evidence on the procyclicality of fiscal policy in

developing countries compared to OECD countries.

In the same vein, Gupta et al (2004) find

econometric support for the procyclicality of government spending in developing countries, though the
degree of procyclicality varies across spending categories.
Several explanations have been advanced to explain the procyclicality of fiscal policy in
developing countries compared to industrial countries. Gavin and Perotti (1997), among others, have
argued that developing countries face credit constraints that prevent them from borrowing in bad times.
Hence, they are “forced” to repay in bad times, which requires a contractionary fiscal policy. In contrast,
Tornell and Lane (1999) develop a political-economy model in which competition for a common pool of
1

See Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003) for an analysis of borrowing/default cycles.

1

funds among different units (ministries, provinces) leads to the so-called “voracity effect,” whereby
expenditure could actually exceed a given windfall. Taking as given such a political distortion, Talvi and
Végh (2000) show how policymakers would find it optimal to run smaller primary surpluses in good
times by increasing government spending and reducing tax rates. Lastly, Riascos and Végh (2003) show
how incomplete markets could explain procyclical fiscal policy as the outcome of a Ramsey problem
without having to impose any additional frictions.
In terms of monetary policy, while the impression certainly exists that developing countries often
tighten the monetary strings in bad times (see Lane, 2003b), systematic empirical work is scant.2 This is
probably due to the notorious difficulties (present even for advanced countries) in empirically
characterizing the stance of monetary policy.3
Relying on data for 104 countries for the period 1960-2003, this paper revisits the evidence on the
procyclicality of fiscal policy and, as far as we know, presents a first systematic effort to document
empirically the cyclical properties of monetary policy in developing countries. It departs from earlier
efforts investigating fiscal policy cycles in several dimensions. First, it provides an analytical framework
for how to interpret the behavior of a broad variety of fiscal indicators, which leads to a reinterpretation of
some earlier results in the literature. Second, it analyzes countries grouped by income levels to capture
the fact that while wealthier countries have continuous access to international capital markets, lowincome countries are almost exclusively shut out at all times, and middle-income countries have a
precarious and volatile relationship with international capital. Third, it examines closely the interaction

2

Of course if “bad times” are defined exclusively as currency or banking crises, then there is a small but growing
theoretical literature on monetary policy in general and interest rate defenses in particular (see, for instance, Aghion,
Bacchetta, and Banerjee (2001), Flood and Jeanne (2000), and Lahiri and Végh (2003)). The empirical evidence in
this area is, however, rather inconclusive.
3

For a discussion of some of the challenges in estimating monetary policy rules for industrial countries, see Clarida,
Gali, and Gertler (1999).

2

between the business cycle, international capital flows, and macroeconomic policy.4 Our premise is that
the capital flow cycle is tied to the business cycle and may even influence macroeconomic policies,
particularly in middle income countries. Fourth, it offers an eclectic approach toward defining “good” and
“bad” times and measuring the stance of fiscal and monetary policy by employing a broad range of
indicators. Fifth, it disaggregates the sample along a variety of dimensions, by (i) differentiating crises
episodes from tranquil periods, (ii) treating the more rigid exchange rate arrangements separately from the
more flexible ones, and (iii) comparing earlier and more recent periods to assess whether the degree of
capital market integration has altered cyclical patterns and relationships. Lastly, the analysis offers more
comprehensive country coverage than earlier efforts.
The paper proceeds as follows. The next section discusses the underlying conceptual framework
used to interpret the data on capital flows and fiscal and monetary policy and describes the approach
followed to define business cycles. Section III presents a broad brush view of our main findings while
Section IV provides greater detail on the main stylized facts by grouping countries according to income
per capita levels, type of exchange rate arrangement, and other relevant subsamples. Section V contains
concluding remarks.

II. CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
This section lays out the conceptual framework used to interpret our empirical findings in the
following sections. Specifically, we will discuss how to think about the cyclical properties of capital
flows, fiscal policy, and monetary policy. A thorough reading of the blossoming literature in the area of
policy cyclicality in developing countries reveals a somewhat loose approach to defining basic concepts,
which often renders the discussion rather imprecise. For instance, countercyclical fiscal policy is often
defined as running fiscal deficits in bad times and surpluses in good times (i.e., as a positive correlation

4

Throughout this paper, “business cycle” refers to the real GDP cycle.

3

between changes in output and changes in the fiscal balance). As we will argue, however, this is an
unfortunate way of defining the concept since running a fiscal deficit in bad times may be consistent with
rather different approaches to fiscal stabilization. In the same vein, considering fiscal variables as a
proportion of GDP – as is most often done in this literature – could yield misleading results since the
cyclical stance of fiscal policy may be dominated by the cyclical behavior of output.
In light of these critical conceptual issues – and at the risk of perhaps appearing sometimes
obvious – we will be very specific as to how we define countercyclicality, procyclicality, and acyclicality.

II.1 Capital flows
We define the cyclical properties of capital flows as follows (Table 1):
Table 1
Capital Flows: Theoretical Correlations with the Business Cycle
Net Capital Inflows

Net Capital
Inflows/GDP

+
0

+/0/-

Countercyclical
Procyclical
Acyclical

i. Capital flows into a country are said to be countercyclical when the correlation between the cyclical
components of net capital inflows and output is negative. In other words, the economy borrows from
abroad in bad times (i.e., capital flows in) and lends/repays in good times (i.e., capital flows out).
ii. Capital flows are procyclical when the correlation between the cyclical components of net capital
inflows and output is positive. The economy thus borrows from abroad in good times (i.e., capital flows
in) and lends/repays in bad times (i.e., capital flows out).
iii. Capital flows are acyclical when the correlation between the cyclical components of net capital
inflows and output is not statistically significant. The pattern of international borrowing and lending is
thus not systematically related to the business cycle.

4

While this may appear self evident, the mapping between the cyclical properties of net capital
inflows as a share of GDP (a commonly used measure) and the business cycle is not clear cut. As the
third column of Table 1 indicates, in the case of countercyclical capital inflows, this ratio should also
have a negative correlation with output since in good (bad) times, net capital inflows fall (increase) and
GDP increases (fall). In the case of procyclical net capital inflows, however, this ratio could have any sign
since in good (bad) times, net capital inflows increase (fall) and GDP also increases (falls). In the
acyclical case, the behavior of the ratio is dominated by the changes in GDP and therefore has a negative
correlation. Thus, the ratio of net capital inflows to GDP will only provide an unambiguous indication of
the cyclicality of net capital inflows if it has a positive sign (or is zero) in which case it would be
indicating procylical capital flows. However, if it has a negative sign, it does not allow us to discriminate
among the three cyclical patterns.
Our definition of the cyclical properties of capital flows thus focuses on whether capital flows
tend to reinforce or "stabilize" the business cycle. To fix ideas, consider the standard endowment model
of a small open economy (with no money). In the absence of any intertemporal distortion, households
would want to keep consumption flat over time. Thus, in response to a temporary negative endowment
shock, the economy would borrow from abroad to sustain the permanent level of consumption. During
good times, the economy would repay its debt. Saving is thus positively correlated with the business
cycle. Hence, in the standard model with no investment, capital inflows would be countercyclical and
would tend to stabilize the cycle. Naturally, the counterpart of countercyclical borrowing in the standard
real model is a procyclical current account.
Conversely, if the economy borrowed during good times and lent during bad times, capital flows
would be procyclical as they would tend to reinforce the business cycle. In this case, the counterpart
would be a countercyclical current account. Plausible theoretical explanations for procyclical capital
flows include the following. First, suppose that physical capital is added to the basic model described
above and that the business cycle is driven by productivity shocks. Then, a temporary and positive
productivity shock would lead to an increase in saving (for the consumption smoothing motives described

5

above) and to an increase in investment (as the return on capital has increased). If the investment effect
dominates, then borrowing would be procyclical as the need to finance profitable investment more than
offsets the saving effect.
A second explanation – particularly relevant for emerging countries – would result from
intertemporal distortions in consumption imposed by temporary policies (like inflation stabilization
programs or temporary liberalization policies; see Calvo, 1987, and Calvo and Végh, 1999). An
unintended consequence of such temporary policies is to make consumption relatively cheaper during
good times (by reducing the effective price of consumption), thus leading to a consumption boom which
is financed by borrowing from abroad. In this case, saving falls in good times which renders capital flows
procyclical.5
A third possibility – also relevant for emerging countries – is that the availability of international
capital varies with the business cycle. If foreign investors respond to the evidence of an improving local
economy by bidding down country risk premiums (perhaps encouraged by low interest rates at financial
centers), residents of the small economy may view this as a temporary opportunity to finance
consumption cheaply and, therefore, dissave.6

We should remember that the consumption booms

financed by capital inflows in many emerging market economies in the first part of the 1990s were seen at
the time as an example of the “capital inflow problem,” as in Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993,
1994).
Finally, notice that, in practice, movements in international reserves could break the link between
procyclical borrowing and current account deficits (or countercyclical borrowing and current account
surpluses) that would arise in the basic real intertemporal model. Indeed, recall the basic balance of
payments accounting identity:
5

Lane and Tornell (1998) offer some empirical evidence that shows that saving in Latin American countries has
often been countercyclical (i.e., saving falls in good times and vice versa).
6

Section IV presents evidence in support of this hypothesis. See also Neumeyer and Perri (2004) who examine the
importance of country risk in driving the business cycle in emerging economies.

6

Change in international reserves = Current account balance + capital account balance.
Hence, say, positive net capital inflows (a capital account surplus) would not necessarily be associated
with a negative current account balance if international reserves were increasing. Therefore, the cyclical
properties of the current account are an imperfect indicator of those of capital flows.

II.2 Fiscal policy
Since the concept of policy cyclicality is important to the extent that it can help us understand or
guide actual policy, it only makes sense to define policy cyclicality in terms of policy instruments, as
opposed to outcomes (i.e., endogenous variables). Hence, we will define the cyclicality of fiscal policy in
terms of government spending (g) and tax rates (τ) (instead of defining it in terms of, say, the fiscal
balance or tax revenues). Given this definition, we will then examine the cyclical implications for
important endogenous variables such as the primary fiscal balance, tax revenues, and fiscal variables as a
proportion of GDP. We define fiscal policy cyclicality as follows (see Table 2):
Table 2
Fiscal Indicators: Theoretical Correlations with the Business Cycle

Countercyclical
Procyclical
Acyclical

g

τ

Tax
Revenues

Primary
Balance

g/GDP

Tax
Revenues/GDP

Primary
Balance/
GDP

+
0

+
0

+
+/0/+

+
+/0/+

+/0/-

+/0/+/0/+/0/-

+/0/+/0/+/0/-

i. A countercyclical fiscal policy involves lower (higher) government spending and higher (lower) tax
rates in good (bad) times. We call such a policy countercyclical because it would tend to stabilize the
business cycle (i.e., fiscal policy is contractionary in good times and expansionary in bad times).

7

ii. A procyclical fiscal policy involves higher (lower) government spending and lower (higher) tax
rates in good (bad) times. We call such a policy procyclical because it would tend to reinforce the
business cycle (i.e., fiscal policy is expansionary in good times and contractionary in bad times). 7
iii. An acyclical fiscal policy involves constant government spending and constant tax rates over the
cycle (or, more precisely for the case of a stochastic world, government spending and tax rates do not
vary systematically with the business cycle). We call such a policy acyclical because it neither reinforces
nor stabilizes the business cycle.
The correlations implied by these definitions are shown in the first two columns of Table 2.
We next turn to the implications of these cyclical definitions of fiscal policy for the behavior of
tax revenues, the primary fiscal balance, and government expenditure, tax revenues, and primary balance
as a proportion of GDP.8 In doing so, we will make use of the following two definitions:
Tax revenues = Tax rate × tax base
Primary balance = Tax revenues - government expenditures (excluding interest payments)
Consider first an acyclical fiscal policy. Since the tax rate is constant over the cycle and the tax
base increases in good times and falls in bad times, tax revenues will have a positive correlation with the
business cycle. This, in turn, implies that the primary balance will also be positively correlated with the
cycle. The ratio of government expenditure (net of interest payments) to GDP will be negatively
correlated with the cycle because government expenditure does not vary and, by definition, GDP is high
(low) in good (bad) times. Given that tax revenues are higher (lower) in good (bad) times, the correlation
7

It is important to notice that, under this definition, a procyclical fiscal policy implies a negative correlation
between tax rates and output over the business cycle. Our terminology thus differs from the one in the real business
cycle literature in which any variable positively (negatively) correlated with the output cycle is referred to as
procyclical (countercyclical).
8

It is worth emphasizing that, in deriving the theoretical correlations below, the only assumption made is that the tax
base (output or consumption) is high in good times and low in bad times. This is true by definition in the case of
output and amply documented for the case of consumption. Aside from this basic assumption, what follows is an
accounting exercise that is independent of any particular model.

8

of the ratio of tax revenues to GDP with the cycle is ambiguous (i.e., it could be positive, zero, or
negative as indicated in Table 2). As a result, the correlation of the primary balance as a proportion of
GDP with the cycle will also be ambiguous.
Consider procyclical fiscal policy. Since, by definition, the tax rate goes down (up) in good (bad)
times but the tax base moves in the opposite direction, the correlation of tax revenues with the cycle is
ambiguous. Since g goes up in good times, the correlation of g/GDP can, in principle, take on any value.
Given the ambiguous cyclical behavior of tax revenues, the cyclical behavior of tax revenues as a
proportion of GDP is also ambiguous. The behavior of the primary balance as a proportion of GDP will
also be ambiguous.
Lastly, consider countercyclical fiscal policy. By definition, tax rates are high in good times and
low in bad times, which imply that tax revenues vary positively with the cycle. The same is true of the
primary balance since tax revenues increase (fall) and government spending falls (increases) in good
(bad) times. The ratio g/GDP will vary negatively with the cycle because g falls (increases) in good (bad)
times. Since tax revenues increase in good times, the behavior of tax revenues as a proportion of GDP
will be ambiguous and, hence, so will be the behavior of the primary balance as a proportion of GDP.
Several important observations follow from Table 2 regarding the usefulness of different
indicators in discriminating among the three cases:
i. From a theoretical point of view, the best indicators to look at would be government spending
and tax rates. By definition, these indicators would clearly discriminate among the three cases. As Table 2
makes clear, no other indicator has such discriminatory power. In practice, however, there is no
systematic data on tax rates (other than perhaps the inflation tax rate), leaving us with government
spending as the best indicator.
ii. The cyclical behavior of tax revenues will be useful only to the extent that it has a negative or
zero correlation with the business cycle. This would be an unambiguous indication that fiscal policy is
procyclical. It would signal a case in which the degree of procyclicality is so extreme that in, say, bad
times, the rise in tax rates is so pronounced that it either matches or dominates the fall in the tax base.

9

iii. The cyclical behavior of the primary balance will be useful only to the extent that it has a
negative or zero correlation with the business cycle. This would be an unambiguous indication that fiscal
policy is procyclical. It would indicate a case in which, in good times, the rise in government spending
either matches or more than offsets a possible increase in tax revenues or a case in which a fall in tax
revenues in good times reinforces the effect of higher government spending on the primary balance.
Given our definition of fiscal policy cyclicality, it would be incorrect to infer that a primary deficit in bad
times signals countercyclical fiscal policy. A primary deficit in bad times is, in principle, consistent with
any of three cases.9
iv. The cyclical behavior of the primary balance as a proportion of GDP will never provide an
unambiguous reading of the cyclical stance of fiscal policy. Interestingly, most of the literature (Gavin
and Perotti (1997), Braun (2001), Dixon (2003), Lane (2003b), and Calderon and Schmidt-Hebbel
(2003)) has drawn conclusions from looking at this indicator. For instance, Gavin and Perotti (1997) find
that the response of the fiscal surplus as a proportion of GDP to a one-percentage-point increase in the
rate of output growth is not statistically different from zero in Latin America and take this as an indication
of procyclical fiscal policy. Calderon and Schmidt-Hebbel (2003), in contrast, find a negative effect of
the output gap on deviations of the fiscal balance from its sample mean and interpret this as
countercyclical fiscal policy. Given our definitions, however, one would not be able to draw either
conclusion (as the last column of Table 2 makes clear).
v. The cyclical behavior of the ratio g/GDP will be useful only to the extent that it has a positive
or zero correlation with the business cycle. This would be an unambiguous indication that fiscal policy is
procyclical. In other words, finding that this ratio is negatively correlated with the cycle does not allow us

9

By the same token, it would also seem unwise to define procyclical fiscal policy as a negative correlation between
output and the fiscal balance (as sometimes done in the literature) since a zero or even positive correlation could also
be consistent with procyclical fiscal policy, as defined above.

10

to discriminate among the three cases. Once again, this suggests caution in interpreting some of the
existing literature which relies on this indicator for drawing conclusions.
vi. Lastly, the cyclical behavior of the ratio of tax revenues to GDP will not be particularly useful
in telling us about the cyclical properties of fiscal policy since its theoretical behavior is ambiguous in all
three cases.
In sum, our discussion suggests that extreme caution should be exercised in drawing conclusions
on policy cyclicality based either on the primary balance or on the primary balance, government
spending, and tax revenues as a proportion of GDP. In light of this, we will only rely on indicators that,
given our definition of procyclicality, provide an unambiguous measure of the stance of fiscal policy:
government spending and -- as a proxy for a tax rate -- the inflation tax rate.10
From a theoretical point of view, there are various models that could rationalize different stances
of fiscal policy over the business cycle. Countercyclical fiscal policy could be rationalized by resorting to
a traditional Keynesian model (in old or new clothes) with an objective function that penalizes deviations
of output from trend since an increase (reduction) in government spending and/or a reduction (increase) in
tax rates would expand (contract) output.

An acyclical fiscal policy could be rationalized by neo-

classical models of optimal fiscal policy which call for roughly constant tax rates over the business cycle
(see Chari and Kehoe (1999)). If government spending is endogeneized (by, say, providing direct utility),
it would optimally behave in a similar way to private consumption and hence would be acyclical in the
presence of complete markets (Riascos and Végh (2003)). Procyclical fiscal policy could be rationalized
by resorting to political distortions (Tornell and Lane (1999) and Talvi and Végh (2000)), borrowing
constraints (Gavin and Perotti (1997) and Aizeman, Gavin, and Hausmann (1996)), or incomplete markets
(Riascos and Végh (2003)).
10

We are, of course, fully aware that there is certainly no consensus on whether the inflation tax should be thought
of as “just another tax”. While the theoretical basis for doing so goes back to Phelps (1973) and has been greatly
refined ever since (see, for example, Chari and Kehoe (1999)), the empirical implications of inflation as an optimal
tax have received mixed support (see Calvo and Végh (1999) for a discussion).

11

II.3 Monetary policy
Performing the same conceptual exercise for monetary policy is much more difficult because (i)
monetary policy instruments may depend on the existing exchange rate regime and (ii) establishing
outcomes (i.e., determining the behavior of endogenous variables) requires the use of some (implicit)
model.
For our purposes, it is enough to define two exchange rate regimes: fixed or predetermined
exchange rates and flexible exchange rates (which we define as including any regime in which the
exchange rate is allowed some flexibility).

By definition, flexible exchange rate regimes include

relatively clean floats (which are rare) and dirty floats (a more common type, as documented in Reinhart
and Rogoff (2004)).
Under certain assumptions, a common policy instrument across these two different regimes
would be a short-term interest rate. The most prominent example is the federal funds rate in the United
States, an overnight interbank interest rate that constitutes the Federal Reserve's main policy target. From
a theoretical point of view, under flexible exchange rates, monetary policy can certainly be thought of in
terms of some short-term interest rate since changes in the money supply will directly influence interest
rates. Under fixed or predetermined exchange rates, the only assumption needed for a short-term interest
rate to also be thought of as a policy instrument is that there be some imperfect substitution between
domestic and foreign assets (see Flood and Jeanne (2000) and Lahiri and Végh, (2003)). In fact, it is
common practice for central banks to raise some short-term interest rate to defend a fixed (or more rigid)
exchange rate.
In principle, then, observing the correlation between a policy-controlled short-term interest rate
and the business cycle would indicate whether monetary policy is countercyclical (the interest rate is
raised in good times and reduced in bad times, implying a positive correlation), procyclical (the interest
rate is reduced in good times and increased in bad times, implying a negative correlation) or acyclical (the
interest rate is not systematically used over the business cycle, implying no correlation), as indicated in
Table 3.

12

Table 3
Monetary Indicators: Theoretical Correlations with The Business Cycle

Countercyclical
Procyclical
Acyclical

Short-Term
Interest Rate

Rate of
Growth of
Central Bank
Domestic
Credit

Real Money
Balances
(M1 and M2)

Real Interest
Rate

+
0

+
0

+/0/+
+

+/0/-

The expected correlations with other monetary variables are more complex. In the absence of an
active interest rate policy, we expect real money balances (in terms of any monetary aggregate) to be high
in good times and low in bad times (i.e., positively correlated with the business cycle) and real interest
rates to be lower in good times and high in bad times (i.e., negatively correlated with the cycle).11 A
procyclical interest rate policy would reinforce this cyclical pattern.12 A countercyclical interest rate
policy would in principle call for lower real money balances and higher real interest rates in good times
relative to the benchmark of no activist policy. In principle, this leaning-against-the wind policy could be
so effective as to render the correlation between real money balances and output zero or even negative
and the correlation between real interest rates and the cycle zero or even positive (as indicated in Table 3).
In sum – and as Table 3 makes clear – the cyclical behavior of real money balances and real interest rates
will only be informative in a subset of cases:

11

A negative correlation between real interest rates and output would arise in a standard endowment economy
model (i.e., a model with exogenous output) in which high real interest rates today signal today’s scarcity of goods
relative to tomorrow. In a production economy driven by technology shocks, however, this relationship could have
the opposite sign. In addition, demand shocks, in and of themselves, would lead to higher real interest rates in good
times and vice versa. Given these different possibilities, any inferences drawn on the cyclical stance of monetary
policy from the behavior of real interest rates should be treated with extreme caution.

12

If, as part of a procyclical monetary policy, policymakers were lowering reserve requirements, this should lead to
even higher real money balances.

13

i. A negative or zero correlation between (the cyclical components of) real money balances and
output would indicate countercyclical monetary policy. In this case, real money balances would fall in
good times and rise in bad times. In contrast, a positive correlation is, in principle, consistent with any
monetary policy stance.
ii. A positive or zero correlation between (the cyclical components of) the real interest rate and output
would indicate countercyclical monetary policy. In this case, policy countercyclicality is so extreme that
real interest rates increase in good times and fall in bad times. In contrast, a negative correlation is, in
principle, consistent with any monetary policy stance.
Unfortunately, in practice, even large databases typically carry information on overnight or very
short-term interest rates for only a small number of countries. Hence, the interest rates that one observes
in practice are of longer maturities and thus include an endogenous cyclical component (for instance, the
changes in inflationary expectations, term premiums, or risk premiums over the cycle). To the extent that
the inflation rate tends to have a small positive correlation with the business cycle in industrial countries
and a negative correlation with the business cycle in developing countries, there will be a bias towards
concluding that monetary policy is countercyclical in industrial countries and procyclical in developing
countries. To reduce this bias, we will choose interbank/overnight rates whenever possible.
A second policy instrument under either regime is the rate of growth of the central bank's
domestic credit. Naturally, how much a given change in domestic credit affects the monetary base and,
hence, interest rates will depend on the particular exchange rate regime. Under predetermined exchange
rates and perfect substitution between domestic and foreign assets, the monetary approach to the balance
of payments tells us that the change in domestic credit will be exactly undone by an opposite change in
reserves. However, under imperfect substitution between domestic and foreign assets, a, say, increase in
domestic credit will have some effect on the monetary base. The same is true under a dirty floating
regime, since the change in reserves will not fully offset the change in domestic credit.
In this context, a countercyclical monetary policy would imply reducing the rate of domestic
credit growth during good times and vice versa (i.e., a negative correlation). A procyclical monetary

14

policy would imply increasing the rate of domestic credit growth during good times and vice versa (i.e., a
positive correlation). An acyclical policy would not systematically vary the rate of growth of domestic
credit over the business cycle.13 Of course, changes in domestic credit growth can be seen as the
counterpart of movements in short-term interest rates, with a reduction (an increase) in domestic credit
growth leading to an increase (reduction) in short-term interest rates.
In addition to computing the correlations indicated in the above table, we will attempt to establish
whether monetary policy is procyclical, acyclical, or countercyclical by estimating Taylor rules for every
country for which data are available (see Taylor (1993)). Following Clarida, Gali, and Gertler (1999), our
specification takes the form:
it = α + β1(πt – π) + β2 yct,

(1)

where it is a policy-controlled short-term interest rate, πt – π captures deviations of actual inflation from
its sample average, π , and yct is the output gap, measured as the cyclical component of output (i.e., actual
output minus trend) divided by actual output. The coefficient β2 in equation (1) would indicate the stance
of monetary policy over the business cycle (see Table 4) – over and above the monetary authority’s
concerns about inflation which are captured by the coefficient β1.
Table 4
Taylor Rules
Nature of Monetary Policy

Expected Sign on β2

Countercyclical
Procyclical
Acyclical

+ and significant
- and significant
insignificant

13

In practice, however, using domestic credit to measure the stance of monetary policy is greatly complicated by the
fact that inflation (especially in developing countries) tends to be high and variable. Hence, a large growth rate does
not always reflect expansionary policies. For this reason, in the empirical section we will restrict our attention to
short-term nominal interest rates as a policy instrument.

15

Several remarks are in order regarding equation (1). First, we are assuming that current inflation
is a good predictor of future inflation. Second, we are assuming that the mean inflation rate is a good
representation of some implicit/explicit inflation target on the basis that central banks deliver on average
the inflation rate that they desire. Third, given potential endogeneity problems, the relation captured in
equation (1) is probably best interpreted as a long-run cointegrating relationship. Fourth, since our
estimation will be based on annual data, equation (1) does not incorporate the possibility of gradual
adjustments of the nominal interest rate to some target interest rate. Fifth, by estimating equation (1) we
certainly do not mean to imply that every country in our sample has followed some type of Taylor rule
throughout the sample. Rather, we see it as a potentially useful way of characterizing the correlation
between a short-term interest rate and the output gap once one controls for the monetary authority’s
implicit or explicit inflation target.
There are by now numerous studies that have estimated Taylor rules, though most are limited to
developed countries. For example, for the United States, Japan, and Germany, Clarida, Gali and Gertler
(1997) report that, in the post-1979 period, the inflation coefficient is significantly above one (indicating
that in response to a rise in expected inflation, central banks raised nominal rates enough to raise real
rates) and the coefficient on the output gap is significantly positive except for the United States. In other
words – and using the terminology spelled out in Table 4 -- since 1979 Japan and Germany have pursued
countercyclical monetary policy (lowering interest rates in bad times and increasing them in good times)
but monetary policy in the United States has been acyclical. In the pre-1979 period, however, the Federal
Reserve also pursued countercyclical monetary policy (see Clarida, Gertler, and Gali (1999)). For Peru,
Moron and Castro (2000) – using the change in the monetary base as the dependent variable and adding
an additional term involving the deviation of the real exchange rate from trend – find that monetary policy
is countercyclical. For Chile, Corbo (2000) finds that monetary policy does not respond to output (i.e., is
acyclical).
In terms of the theoretical literature, there has been extensive work on how to theoretically derive
Taylor-type rules in the context of Keynesian models (see, for example, Clarida, Gertler, and Gali

16

(1999)). This literature would rationalize countercyclical monetary policy on the basis that increases
(decreases) in the output gap (i.e., actual minus trend output) call for higher (lower) short-term interest
rates to reduce (boost) aggregate demand. Acyclical monetary policy could be rationalized in terms of
neo-classical models of optimal monetary policy which call for keeping the nominal interest rate close to
zero (see Chari and Kehoe (1999)). Collection costs for conventional taxes could optimally explain a
positive – but still constant over the cycle – level of nominal interest rates (see Calvo and Végh (1999)
and the references therein).

Some of the stories put forward to explain procyclical fiscal policy

mentioned above could also be used to explain procyclical monetary policy if the nominal interest rate is
part of the policy set available to the Ramsey planner. Non-fiscal based explanations for procyclical
monetary policy might include the need for defending the domestic currency under flexible exchange
rates (Lahiri and Végh (2004)) –which in bad times would call for higher interest rates to prevent the
domestic currency from depreciating further – and models in which higher interest rates may provide a
signal of the policymaker’s intentions (see Drazen (2000)). In these models, establishing “credibility” in
bad times may call for higher interest rates.

II.4 Measuring “good” and “bad” times
Not all advanced economies have as clearly defined business cycle turning points as those
established by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) for the United States. For developing
economies, where quarterly data for the national income accounts is at best recent and most often
nonexistent, even less is known about economic fluctuations and points of inflexion. Thus, to pursue our
goal of assessing the cyclical stance of capital flows and macroeconomic policies, we must develop some
criterion that breaks down economic conditions into “good” and “bad” times. Taking an eclectic approach
to sort out this issue, we will follow three different techniques: a non-parametric approach and two
filtering techniques commonly used in the literature.

17

The non-parametric approach consists in dividing the sample into episodes where annual real
GDP growth is above the median (“good times”) and those times where growth falls below the median
(“bad times”). The relevant median or cutoff point is calculated on a country-by-country basis. We then
compute the “amplitude” of the cycle in different variables by comparing the behavior of the variable in
question in good and bad times. We should notice that, although growth below the median need not
signal a recession, restricting the definition of recession to involve only periods where GDP growth is
negative is too narrow a definition of bad times for countries which have rapid population growth (which
encompasses the majority of our sample), rapid productivity growth, or countries that have seldom
experienced a recession by NBER standards. This approach has the appeal that it is nonparametric and
free from the usual estimation problems that arise when all the variables in question are potentially
endogenous.
The other two approaches consist of decomposing each time series into its stochastic trend and
cyclical component using two popular filters—the ubiquitous Hodrick-Prescott filter (HP) and the bandpass filter developed in Baxter and King (1999). After decomposing each series into its trend and cyclical
component, we report a variety of pairwise correlations between the cyclical components of GDP, net
capital inflows, and fiscal and monetary indicators for each of the four income groups. These correlations
are used to establish contemporaneous comovements, but a fruitful area for future research would be to
analyze potential temporal causal patterns.

III.

THE BIG PICTURE
This section presents a visual overview of the main stylized facts that we have uncovered, leaving the

more detailed analysis of the results for the following sections.14 Our aim here is to contrast OECD and
developing (i.e., non-OECD) countries and synthesize our findings in terms of key stylized facts. It is
14

Our data set covers 104 countries for the period 1960-2003 (the starting date for each series varies across
countries and indicators). See Appendix Table 1 for data sources and Appendix Table 2 for the list of countries.

18

worth stressing that we are not trying to identify underlying “structural” parameters or “shocks” that may
give rise to these empirical regularities, but merely trying to uncover “reduced-form” correlations hidden
in the data. Our findings can be summarized in terms of four stylized facts.
Stylized fact # 1. Net capital inflows are procyclical in most OECD and developing countries.
This is illustrated in Figure 1, which plots the correlation between the cyclical components of net capital
inflows and GDP. As the plot makes clear, most countries exhibit a positive correlation, indicating that
countries tend to borrow in good times and repay in bad times.
Stylized fact # 2. With regard to fiscal policy, OECD countries are, by and large, either countercyclical
or acyclical. In sharp contrast, developing countries are predominantly procyclical.
Figures 2 through 4 illustrate this critical difference in fiscal policy between advanced and developing
economies.

Figure 2 plots the correlation between the cyclical components of real GDP and real

government spending. As is clear from the graph, most OECD countries have a negative correlation
while most developing countries have a positive correlation. Figure 3 plots the difference between the
percent change in real government spending when GDP growth is above the median (good times) and
when it is below the median (bad times). This provides a measure of the amplitude of the fiscal policy
cycle: large negative numbers suggest that the growth in real government spending is markedly higher in
bad times (and thus policy is strongly countercyclical), while large positive numbers indicate that the
growth in real government spending is markedly lower in bad times (and thus policy is strongly
procyclical).

In our sample, the most extreme case of procyclicality is given by Liberia, where the

growth in real government spending is 32.4 percentage points higher in good times compared to bad
times, whereas the most extreme cases of countercyclicality are Sudan and Denmark, where real
government spending growth is over 7 percentage points lower during expansions. Furthermore, in
addition to a more volatile cycle – and as Aguiar and Gopinath (2004) show for some of the larger
emerging markets – the trend component of output is itself highly volatile, which would also be captured
in this measure of amplitude. Finally, Figure 4 plots the correlation between the cyclical components of
output and the inflation tax. A negative correlation indicates procyclical fiscal policy since it implies that

19

the inflation tax rate is lower in good times. Figure 4 makes clear that most OECD countries exhibit a
positive correlation (countercyclical policy) while most developing countries exhibit a negative
correlation (procyclical policy).
Stylized fact # 3. With regard to monetary policy, most OECD countries are countercyclical, while
developing countries are mostly procyclical or acyclical.
This is illustrated in Figure 5 for nominal lending rates. This holds for other nominal interest rates
(including various measures of policy rates), as described in the next section. We plot the lending rate
because it is highly correlated with the policy rates but offers more comprehensive data coverage.
Stylized fact # 4. In developing countries, the capital flow cycle and the macroeconomic policy cycle
reinforce each other (we dub this positive relationship as the “when it rains, it pours” phenomenon).
Put differently, macroeconomic policies are expansionary when capital is flowing in and contractionary
when capital is flowing out. This is illustrated in Figures 6 through 8. Figure 6 shows that most
developing countries exhibit a positive correlation between the cyclical components of government
spending and net capital inflows, but there does not seem to be an overall pattern for OECD countries. In
the same vein, Figure 7 shows that in developing countries the correlation between the cyclical
components of net capital inflows and the inflation tax is mostly negative while no pattern is apparent for
OECD countries. Lastly, Figure 8 shows a predominance of negative correlations between the cyclical
components of net capital inflows and the nominal lending rate for developing countries, suggesting that
the capital flow and the monetary policy cycle reinforce each other. The opposite appears to be true for
OECD countries.

IV.

FURTHER EVIDENCE ON BUSINESS, CAPITAL FLOWS, AND POLICY CYCLES
This section examines in greater depth the four stylized facts presented in the preceding section

by looking at alternative definitions of monetary and fiscal policy, using different methods to define the
cyclical patterns in economic activity, international capital flows, and macroeconomic policies, and
splitting the sample along several dimensions. In particular – and as discussed in Section II above – we
20

will use three different approaches to define good and bad times: a non-parametric approach that allows
us to quantify the amplitude of the cycles and two more standard filtering techniques: the HodrickPrescott filter and the band-pass filter.

IV. 1 Capital flows
Tables 5 through 7 present additional evidence on stylized fact # 1 (i.e., net capital inflows are
procyclical in most OECD and developing countries).
Table 5
Amplitude of the Capital Flow Cycle

Countries
OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

Good Times
(1)
0.5
4.4
4.2
3.9

Net Capital Inflows/GDP
Bad Times
(2)
0.4
3.0
3.0
3.6

Amplitude
(1)-(2)
0.1
1.4
1.2
0.3

Notes: Capital inflows/GDP is expressed in percentage terms.
Good (bad) times are defined as those years in which GDP growth is above (below) the median.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

Table 5 shows that net capital inflows as a proportion of GDP tend to be larger in good times than
in bad times for all groups of countries, which indicates procyclical net capital inflows (recall from Table
1 that a positive correlation between capital inflows as a proportion of GDP and real GDP implies
procyclical net capital inflows). 15 16 The decline in capital inflows as a proportion of GDP in bad times is
largest for the middle-high income economies (1.4 percent of GDP). This should come as no surprise

15

Based on data for 33 poor countries over a 25 year period, Pallage and Robe (2001) conclude that foreign aid has
also been procyclical, which is consistent with our overall message.

16

We also found that, for both groups of middle-income countries, the current account deficit is larger in good times
than in bad times, which is consistent with procyclical capital flows.

21

since this group of countries is noted for having on-and-off access to international private capital markets,
partly due to a history of serial default.17
The behavior of international credit ratings, such as the Institutional Investor Index, also provides
insights on capital market access.18 As discussed in Reinhart, Rogoff and Savastano (2003), at very low
ratings (the low-income countries), the probability of default is sufficiently high that countries are entirely
shut out of international private capital markets, while ratings at the high end of the spectrum are a sign of
uninterrupted market access. These observations are borne out in Tables 6 and 7. Table 6 shows that
there is essentially no difference in credit ratings during good and bad times for the wealthy OECD
economies and the low-income countries. The largest difference in ratings across good and bad times is
for the middle-income countries, where ratings are procyclical (i.e., high in good times and low in bad
times).
Table 6
International Credit Ratings

Countries
OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

Institutional Investor Ratings
Good Times
Bad Times
Amplitude
(1)
(2)
(1)-(2)
78.5
78.4
0.1
42.2
40.4
1.8
32.9
30.8
2.1
24.2
24.2
0.0

Good (bad) times are defined as those years in which GDP growth is above (below) the
median.
Sources: Institutional Investor and IMF, World Economic Outlook.

17

See Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003).

18

The Institutional Investor ratings, which are compiled twice a year, are based on information provided by
economists and sovereign risk analysts at leading global banks and securities firms. The ratings grade each country
on a scale going from zero to 100, with a rating of 100 given to countries which are perceived as having the lowest
chance of defaulting on its government debt obligations.

22

This “U-shaped” pattern is also evident in the volatility of the credit ratings. Table 7 presents
basic descriptive statistics for growth and the Institutional Investor ratings. Not surprisingly, ratings are
far more stable for OECD economies (the coefficient of variation is 0.06) but so is growth, with a
coefficient of variation of 0.8. Despite the fact that output is the most volatile for the group of low
income economies (with a coefficient of variation of 1.6, or twice the level of the OECD group), its
international ratings (0.18) are more stable than those of middle income countries (0.22 and 0.23).
Table 7
International Credit Ratings and Real GDP: Descriptive Statistics

Statistics

Coefficient of variation
Mean
Coefficient of variation
Mean

Countries
Middle-High
Middle-Low
Income
Income
Institutional Investor Index: 1979-2003
0.06
0.22
0.23
79.9
41.5
32.0
Real GDP Growth: 1960-2003
0.80
1.20
1.20
3.90
4.90
4.70
OECD

Low
Income
0.18
21.8
1.60
3.30

Sources: Institutional Investor and IMF, World Economic Outlook.

Finally, Table 8 presents correlations (using our two different filters) between the cyclical
components of real GDP and net capital inflows.19 The correlations are positive and significant for all
four groups of countries and for both filters. Not surprisingly, the correlations are the highest for OECD
and middle-high income countries and the lowest for low income countries. These results thus strongly
support the idea that capital inflows are indeed procyclical for both industrial and developing countries.

19

Tables 8, 10, 12, and 14 report the average country correlation for the indicated group of countries. We use a
standard t-test to ascertain where the average is significantly different from zero.

23

Table 8
Correlations between the Cyclical Components
of Net Capital Inflows and Real GDP
Countries
HP Filter
OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

0.30*
0.35*
0.24*
0.16*

Correlations
Band-Pass Filter
0.25*
0.26*
0.20*
0.10*

Note: An asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent level.
Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics and World Economic
Outlook.

IV.2 Fiscal policy
With regard to Stylized fact # 2 (i.e., fiscal policy in OECD countries is, by and large, either
countercyclical or acyclical while in developing countries fiscal policy is predominantly procyclical),
Table 9 provides a measure of the amplitude of the fiscal policy cycle by showing – for six different
measures of government spending – the difference between the change in real government spending when
GDP growth is above the median and when it is below the median. Under this definition, a positive
amplitude indicates procyclical government spending. The inflation tax is also included as the remaining
fiscal indicator, with a negative amplitude denoting a procyclical tax rate. As argued in section 2,
government spending and the inflation tax rate provide the best indicators to look at in terms of their
ability to discriminate among different cyclical policy stances (recall Table 3). Other indicators – such as
fiscal balances or tax revenues – convey less information.
The striking aspect of Table 9 is that, as shown in the last column, the amplitude of the fiscal
spending cycle for non-OECD countries is considerably large for all measures of government spending.
This suggests that, in particular for the two middle income groups, fiscal policy is not only procyclical,
but markedly so. In contrast, while positive, the analogous figures for OECD countries are quite small,
suggesting, on average, an acyclical fiscal policy.

24

Table 9
Amplitude of the Fiscal Policy Cycle

Fiscal Indicators

Increase in the Fiscal Indicator
Good Times
Bad Times
Amplitude
(1)
(2)
(1)-(2)
OECD Countries

Central government:
Expenditure (WEO)
3.4
Current expenditure minus interest payments
4.2
Expenditure on goods and services
3.0
Expenditure on wages and salaries
2.6
General or consolidated government:
Expenditure (WEO)
3.6
Current expenditure minus interest payments
4.1
4.5
Inflation tax, π/ (1+π)
Middle-High Income Countries
Central government:
Expenditure (WEO)
8.1
Current expenditure minus interest payments
9.6
Expenditure on goods and services
8.1
Expenditure on goods and services
8.3
General or consolidated government:
Expenditure (WEO)
6.9
Current expenditure minus interest payments
7.6
10.9
Inflation tax, π/ (1+π)
Middle-Low Income Countries
Central government:
Expenditure (WEO)
6.7
Current expenditure minus interest payments
9.3
Expenditure on goods and services
9.7
Expenditure on goods and services
8.9
General or consolidated government:
Expenditure (WEO)
6.4
Current expenditure minus interest payments
8.5
8.7
Inflation tax, π/ (1+π)
Low Income Countries
Central government:
Expenditure (WEO)
8.3
Current expenditure minus interest payments
5.0
Expenditure on goods and services
5.1
Expenditure on wages and salaries
4.0
General or consolidated government:
Expenditure (WEO)
7.3
Current expenditure minus interest payments
5.7
9.4
Inflation tax, π/ (1+π)

3.1
2.8
2.0
1.3

0.3
1.4
1.0
1.3

3.2
3.5
5.4

0.4
0.6
-0.9

0.0
-0.1
-0.3
0.4

8.1
9.7
8.4
7.9

-0.1
1.8
13.1

7.0
5.8
-2.2

2.7
3.1
3.6
4.2

4.0
6.2
6.1
4.7

2.5
-2.1
10.1

3.9
10.6
-1.4

-0.2
0.5
0.6
0.8

8.5
4.5
4.5
3.2

-0.5
-0.4
12.4

7.8
6.1
-3.0

Notes: All data are from International Monetary Fund, Government Financial Statistics unless otherwise noted.
The increase for the fiscal spending indicators is the average annual real rate of growth expressed in percentage terms.
The inflation tax figure is multiplied by one hundred. The increase in the inflation tax denotes the average
change in this indicator.
Good (bad) times are defined as those years with GDP growth above (below) the median.
Sources: IMF, Government Financial Statistics and World Economic Outlook (WEO)

Furthermore, based on the country-by-country computations of the amplitude of the fiscal
spending cycle underlying Table 9 (which are illustrated in Figure 3), the conclusion that non-OECD
countries are predominantly procyclical is overwhelming. For instance, for real central government
expenditure, 94 percent of low-income countries exhibit a positive amplitude. For middle-low income
countries this figure is 91 percent. Remarkably, every single country in the middle-high income category
registers as procyclical. In contrast, when it comes to OECD countries, there is an even split between
procyclical and countercyclical countries.
Turning to the inflation tax rate, π/(1+π), it registers as procyclical in all of the four groups. The
amplitude is the largest for the low income group (3 percentage points and the smallest for OECD
countries (0.9 percentage point).20 Not surprisingly, the increase in the inflation tax rate is the highest
during recessions (13.1 percent) for the middle-high income countries (which include chronic high
inflation countries like Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay) and lowest for the OECD at 5.4 percent.
Table 10 presents the pairwise correlations for the expenditure measures shown in Table 9 as well
as for the inflation tax rate. With regard to the correlations between the cyclical components of GDP and
government expenditure, the most salient feature of the results presented in Table 10 is that for the three
developing country groups, all of the 36 correlations reported in Table 10 (18 correlations per filter) are
positive irrespective of the expenditure series used or the type of filter. By contrast, all of the 12
correlations reported for the OECD are negative (though low). This is not to say that the relationship
between the fiscal expenditure and business cycle is an extremely tight one (several entries in Table 10
show low correlations that are not significantly differently from zero—consistent with an acyclical pattern
as defined in Table 2). However, when one examines these results, it becomes evident that for nonOECD countries (at least according to this exercise), fiscal policy is squarely procyclical.21

20

Figures on the inflation tax are multiplied by one hundred.

21

In terms of the country-by-country computations underlying Table 10, it is worth noting that for, say, real central
government expenditure, 91 percent of the correlations for developing countries are positive (indicating procyclical

(continued)
25

Table 10
Correlations between Fiscal Policy, Real GDP, and Net Capital Inflows

Expenditure
Countries

Central Government
Expenditure
Expenditure
Minus
on
Interest
Goods and
Payments
Services

Expenditure
on Wages
and
Salaries

General
Government
Expenditure

Consolidated
Government
Expenditure
Minus Interest
Payments

-0.06
0.43*
0.20*
0.37*

-0.07
0.10
0.12
0.17*

0.16*
-0.15*
-0.09*
-0.20*

0.09
0.25*
0.18*
0.24*

0.03
0.20*
0.13
-0.16

0.04
-0.31*
-0.14*
-0.09*

-0.02
0.44*
0.23*
0.34*

-0.12
0.23*
0.23*
0.32*

0.15*
-0.13*
-0.10*
-0.16*

0.14*
0.16*
0.16*
0.22*

0.00
0.09
0.11
0.13

0.02
-0.25*
-0.10*
-0.07*

Inflation
Tax

HP Filter

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

-0.13*
0.38*
0.22*
0.38*

-0.05
0.10
0.13
0.24*

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

0.03
0.25*
0.16*
0.20*

0.05
0.22*
0.11
0.05

Correlation with Real GDP
-0.06
-0.15*
0.08
0.01
0.07
0.03
0.54*
0.59*
Correlation with Net Capital Inflows
0.04
0.04
0.28*
0.27*
0.13
0.12
0.20
0.37
Band-Pass Filter

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

-0.05
0.53*
0.29*
0.46*

-0.15*
0.19*
0.29*
0.42*

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

0.07
0.19*
0.14*
0.19*

0.08
0.12
0.08
0.25*

Correlation with Real GDP
-0.11
-0.20*
0.23*
0.13
0.26*
0.23*
0.53*
0.59*
Correlation with Net Capital Inflows
0.05
0.04
0.28*
0.25*
0.05
0.10
0.27*
0.39*

Notes: An asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent level.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

In terms of the inflation tax, the results for both filters coincide: the correlation between the
cyclical components of GDP and the inflation tax is positive and significant for OECD countries
(indicating countercyclical fiscal policy) and negative and significant for all groups of developing
countries (indicating procyclical fiscal policy).
Table 10 also presents evidence on the relationship between capital inflows and fiscal policy.
Our premise is that the capital flow cycle may affect macroeconomic policies in developing countries,
particularly in the highly volatile economies that comprise the middle-high income countries. To this end,
we report the correlations (using both the HP and bandpass filters) of the cyclical components of the fiscal
variables and net capital inflows. Remarkably, all but one of the 36 correlations (18 per filter) for nonOECD countries are positive with 21 of them being significantly different from zero. This provides clear
support for the idea that the fiscal spending cycle is positively linked to the capital flow cycle (Stylized
fact #4.) The evidence is particularly strong for middle-high income countries (with 10 out of the 12
positive correlations being significant). We do not pretend, of course, to draw inferences on causality
from pairwise correlations, but it is not unreasonable to expect that a plausible causal relationship may
run from capital flows to fiscal spending—an issue that clearly warrants further study. More surprising is
the evidence suggesting that the relationship between the fiscal spending cycle and capital flows is also
important for low income countries (most of which have little access to international capital markets). It
may be fruitful to explore to what extent this result may owe to links between cycles in commodity prices
and government expenditure.22 In sharp contrast to developing countries, the correlations for OECD
countries are – with only one exception – never significantly different from zero, which suggests that
there is no link between the capital flow cycle and fiscal spending.

fiscal policy) whereas 65 percent of the correlations for OECD countries are negative (indicating countercyclical
fiscal policy), as illustrated in Figure 2.
22

In this regard, see Cuddington (1989).

26

Table 10 also indicates that the inflation tax is significantly and negatively correlated with the
capital flow cycle for all developing countries (and both filters). Our conjecture is that inflation provides
a form of alternative financing when international capital market conditions deteriorate. For OECD
countries, this correlation is not significantly different from zero.

IV.3. Monetary policy
To document Stylized fact # 3 (i.e., monetary policy is countercyclical in most OECD countries
while it is mostly procyclical in developing ones), we perform the same kind of exercises carried out for
the fiscal indicators but, in addition, we also estimate variants of the Taylor rule, as described in Section
II.
Table 11 presents the same exercise performed in Table 9 for the five nominal interest rate series
used in this study. As discussed in Section II, a short-term policy instrument, such as the interbank rate
(or in some countries the T-bill or discount rate), is the best indicator of the stance of monetary policy. In
this case, a negative amplitude denotes procyclical monetary policy. The difference between the OECD
countries and the other groups is striking. For the OECD countries, interest rates decline in recessions
and increase in expansions (for example, the interbank interest rate falls on average 0.7 percent or 70
basis points during recessions). In sharp contrast, in non-OECD countries, most of the nominal interest
rates decline in expansions and increase in recessions (for instance, interbank rates in middle high income
countries rise by 2.3 percent or 230 basis points in recessions). Thus the pattern for the non-OECD group
is broadly indicative of procyclical monetary policy.23
23

Appendix Tables 3 and 4 show results analogous to those in Table 11 for real interest rates and real monetary
aggregates, respectively. Broadly speaking, real rates for OECD countries show a positive correlation with the cycle
(i.e., they generally rise in good times and fall in bad times). This is, in principle, consistent with countercyclical
monetary policy (recall Table 3). In contrast, for middle high and middle low income countries, real interest rates
appear to be negatively correlated with the cycle. These results are consistent with those reported in Neumeyer and
Perri (2004). The results for low income countries are harder to interpret as they are more similar to those for
OECD countries. The results for real money balances in Appendix Table 4 are in line with our priors – with real
money balances rising more in good times than in bad times. This positive correlation, however, does not allow us
to draw any inference on the stance of monetary policy (recall Table 3).

27

Table 11
Amplitude of the Monetary Policy Cycle

Interest Rate

Interbank rate
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate
Lending rate
Deposit rate
Interbank rate *
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate
Lending rate
Deposit rate *
Interbank rate
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate
Lending rate
Deposit rate
Interbank rate
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate*
Lending rate
Deposit rate*

Increases in Nominal Interest Rates
Good Times
Bad Times
Amplitude
(1)
(2)
(1)-(2)
OECD Countries
0.3
-0.7
1.0
0.2
-0.4
0.6
0.5
-0.5
1.0
0.0
-0.3
0.3
0.1
-0.3
0.4
Middle-High Income Countries
-2.2
2.3
-4.5
-2.6
-1.5
-1.1
-1.5
2.7
-4.2
-4.0
2.1
-6.1
0.7
1.0
-0.3
Middle-Low Income Countries
-0.8
-0.1
-0.7
-0.7
1.1
-1.8
0.5
0.5
0.0
-1.0
0.4
-1.4
-0.5
-0.5
0.0
Low Income Countries
-1.3
1.5
-2.8
-1.0
0.5
-1.5
-0.8
0.2
-1.0
-4.7
0.2
-4.9
-1.6
0.2
-1.8

Notes: Increases in interest rates are defined as the average annual change
in interest rates (with interest rates expressed in percentage points)
Good (bad) times are defined as those years with GDP growth above (below) the
median.
* The median is reported in lieu of the average, as the average is distorted by one
or more very high inflation (or hyperinflation) episodes.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics.

Table 12 presents the correlations of the cyclical components of real GDP, capital inflows, and
the five nominal interest rates introduced in the previous table. In terms of the cyclical stance of
monetary policy, the evidence seems the most compelling for OECD countries (countercyclical monetary
policy), where all 10 correlations are positive and seven significantly so. There is also evidence to suggest
procyclical monetary policy in middle-high income countries (all ten correlations are negative and four
significantly so). The evidence is more mixed for the other two groups of countries where the lack of
statistical significance partly reflects the fact that they have relative shorter time series on interest rates.24
Turning to the correlations between net capital inflows and interest rates in Table 12, the evidence
is again strongest for the OECD countries (with all 10 correlations significantly positive), clearly
indicating that higher interest rates are associated with capital inflows. For middle-high income countries,
8 out of the 10 correlations are negative but not significantly different from zero (again, shorter time
series are an important drawback). Still, we take this as suggestive evidence of the when-it–rains-it-pours
syndrome.
Given the notorious difficulties (present even for advanced countries such as the United States) in
empirically characterizing the stance of monetary policy, we performed a complementary exercise as a
robustness check for all income groups. Specifically, we estimated the Taylor rule specified in Section II.
Table 13 reports the results for the three nominal interest rates that are, at least in principle, more likely to
serve as policy instruments (interbank, T-bill, and discount.)

Recalling that countercyclical policy

requires a positive and significant β2, the main results are as follows.25 First, monetary policy in OECD
countries appears to be countercyclical (as captured by positive and significant coefficients in two out of
the three specifications). Second, there is some evidence of monetary policy procyclicality in middle-

24

It is important to warn the reader that the data on interest rates for non-OECD countries is spotty and rather
incomplete. Our results should thus be interpreted with caution and as merely suggestive.

25

As an aside, notice that the coefficient on the inflation gap is always positive and significant.

28

Table 12
Correlations between Monetary Policy, Real GDP, and Net Capital Inflows
Countries

Nominal Interest Rates
T-bill
Discount Lending
HP Filter
Correlation with Real GDP
0.28*
0.39*
0.37*
0.23*
-0.24*
-0.09
-0.02
-0.24*
0.02
0.00
0.04
0.07
-0.12
-0.02
0.04
-0.02
Correlation with Net Capital Inflows
0.14*
0.25*
0.20*
0.19*
-0.11
-0.24
0.11
-0.13
0.04
0.03
0.07
0.05
0.01
0.06
0.03
-0.11
Band-Pass Filter
Correlation with Real GDP
0.12
0.13*
0.23*
0.01
-0.23
-0.14
-0.10
-0.10
0.19*
0.00
-0.03
0.03
-0.09
-0.04
-0.07
-0.07
Correlation with Net Capital Inflows
0.16*
0.28*
0.19*
0.16*
-0.05
-0.17
0.08
-0.18
0.30*
-0.03
0.11
0.00
0.12
0.07
0.02
-0.11
Interbank

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income
OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income
OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

Deposit

0.21*
-0.21*
0.01
-0.10
0.11*
-0.09
0.00
0.05

0.06
-0.13*
-0.03
-0.08
0.13*
-0.11
-0.07
0.04

Notes: An asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent level.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics.

Table 13
Taylor Rules
Regression it = α + β1(πt – π) + β2 yct + ut
it = Short term interest rate. Definitions of the rates are given below.
πt – π = Inflation rate minus sample mean.
yct = Cyclical component of real GDP (HP filter) divided by actual output
β1
Dependent variable
β2
R2
(number of observations)
OECD Countries
Interbank rate (663)

0.56*

0.02

0.27

T-bill rate (503)

0.60*

0.12*

0.39

Discount rate (758)

0.49*

0.15*

0.25

Middle-High Income Countries
Interbank rate (187)

4.84*

-0.31

0.48

T-bill rate (152)

0.32*

-0.12*

0.04

Discount rate (413)

0.43*

-0.11

0.01

Middle-Low Income Countries
Interbank rate (250)

0.81*

-0.19

0.34

T-bill rate (218)

0.44*

-0.27*

0.11

Discount rate (686)

1.21*

0.26

0.42

Low Income Countries
Interbank rate (282)

0.38*

0.18*

0.09

T-bill rate (258)

0.29*

0.11

0.17

Discount rate (951)

6.03*

1.59

0.22

Notes: The equations have been estimated using panel data with fixed effects.
* Denotes significance at the 10 percent level.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics.

income countries (as captured by the negative and significant coefficients for the T-bill regressions). This
overall message is thus broadly consistent with that of Tables 11 and 12.

IV.4 Exchange rate arrangements, capital market integration, and crises
In the remainder of this section, we divide the sample along three different dimensions in order to
assess whether our results are affected by the degree of capital mobility in the world economy, the
existing exchange rate regime, and the presence of crises. First, to examine whether the increased capital
account integration of the more recent past has affected the cyclical patterns of the variables of interest,
we split our sample into two subperiods (1960-1979 and 1980-2003) and performed all the exercises
described earlier in this section. Second, we break up the sample according to a rough measure of the de
facto degree of exchange rate flexibility. Lastly, we split the sample into currency crisis periods and
tranquil periods. This enables us to ascertain whether our results on procyclicality are driven to some
extent by the more extreme crises episodes. The results for each of these partitions – which are presented
in Table 14 -- will be discussed in turn.26

a. 1960-1979 versus 1980-2003
The four main results that emerge from dividing the sample into 1960-1979 and 1980-2003 are
the following. First, capital flows are consistently procyclical in both periods, with the correlation
increasing in the latter period for middle-high income countries. Second, the cyclical stance of
government spending does not appear to change across periods for non-OECD countries (i.e., fiscal
policy is procyclical in both periods) but OECD countries appear to have been acyclical in the pre-1980
period and turn countercyclical in the post-1980 period. Third, the inflation tax appears to be essentially
acyclical in the pre-1980 period only to turn significantly countercyclical for OECD countries and

26

To conserve on space, Table 14 presents results for only one measure of government spending and one interest
rate using the HP filter. The remaining results are available upon request from the authors.

29

Table 14
Cyclical Characteristics of Net Capital Inflows, Fiscal Policy, and Monetary Policy

Countries

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

Correlation with Real GDP
Fiscal Policy
Net Capital Inflows Central Government
Inflation Tax
Expenditure
Pre-1980
n/a
0.25*
0.28*
0.20*

Post-1980 Pre-1980
0.38*
-0.19
0.38*
0.43*
0.26*
0.39*
0.17*
0.43*

Post-1980 Pre-1980
-0.14*
0.11
0.33*
-0.04
0.19*
-0.01
0.38*
-0.08

Monetary Policy
Lending Rate

Post-1980 Pre-1980
0.22*
0.04
-0.16*
n/a
-0.12*
n/a
-0.23*
n/a

Post-1980
0.25*
-0.23*
0.03
0.03

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

Fix
0.35*
0.39*
0.21*
0.27*

Flex
0.40*
0.35*
0.34*
0.20*

Fix
-0.09
0.39*
0.24*
0.40*

Flex
-0.19
0.22*
0.31*
0.28*

Fix
0.11
-0.15*
0.04
-0.13*

Flex
0.26*
-0.26*
-0.15*
-0.21*

Fix
0.13
-0.12
0.06
-0.01

Flex
0.38*
-0.06
0.29*
0.01

OECD
Middle-High Income
Middle-Low Income
Low Income

Crisis
n/a
0.56*
0.57*
0.14

Tranquil
0.37*
0.36*
0.28*
0.14*

Crisis
n/a
0.38*
0.05
0.30*

Tranquil
-0.13*
0.41*
0.24*
0.32*

Crisis
n/a
-0.41*
-0.15
-0.09

Tranquil
0.17*
-0.14*
-0.06*
-0.09*

Crisis
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Tranquil
0.23*
-0.22*
0.08
-0.06

Notes: All correlations were computed using the HP filter.
Pre-1980: Includes observations from 1960 to 1979.
Post-1980: Includes observations from 1980 to 2003.
Fix: Includes years with pegs and crawling pegs.
Flex: Includes years with managed floating and freely floating.
Crisis: Includes years with a 25 percent or higher monthly depreciation that is at least 10 percent higher than the
previous month’s depreciation as well as the two years following the devaluation.
Tranquil: Includes years not defined as crisis years.
An asterisk denotes statistical significance at the 10 percent level.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics.

procyclical for the rest of the groups in the post-1980 period. Fourth, monetary policy seems to have
switched from acyclical to countercyclical for OECD countries. Lack of data for developing countries
precludes a comparison with the earlier period.

b. Fixed versus flexible exchange rates
Our second partition assesses whether the cyclical patterns in net capital inflows and
macroeconomic policies differ across exchange rate regimes (broadly defined). To this effect, we split
the sample into three groups (a coarser version of the five-way de facto classification in Reinhart and
Rogoff, 2004). The fixed exchange rate group comprises the exchange rate regimes labeled 1 and 2 (pegs
and crawling pegs) in the five-way classification just mentioned. The flexible exchange rate group
comprises categories 3 (managed floating) and 4 (freely floating). Those labeled “freely falling” by the
Reinhart and Rogoff classification (category 5) were excluded from the analysis altogether.
The main results to come out of this exercise are as follows. First, there are no discernible differences
in the correlations between net capital inflows and real GDP cycles across the two groups. Second, no
differences are detected either for government spending. Third, the inflation tax appears to be more
countercyclical for OECD countries and more procyclical for non-OECD countries in flexible regimes.
Lastly, monetary policy is more countercyclical for the OECD group under flexible rates.

c. Crisis versus tranquil periods
We define currency crashes as referring to a 25 percent or higher monthly depreciation that is at least 10
percent higher than the previous month’s depreciation. Those years (as well as the two years following
the crisis) are treated separately from tranquil periods. The idea is to check whether our main results are
driven by the presence of crises. Table 14 suggests that this is definitely not the case. Indeed, our results
appear to hold also as strongly – if not more -- in tranquil times. We thus conclude that the paper’s
message does not depend on our having crises periods in our sample.

30

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have studied the cyclical properties of capital flows and fiscal and monetary policies for 104
countries for the period 1960-2003.

Much more analysis needs to be undertaken to refine our

understanding of the links between the business cycle, capital flows, and macroeconomic policies,
particularly across such a heterogeneous group of countries and circumstances (and especially in light of
endemic data limitations). With these considerations in mind, our main findings can be summarized as
follows:
i)

Net capital inflows are procyclical in most OECD and developing countries.

ii) Fiscal policy is procyclical for most developing countries and markedly so in middle-high
income countries.
iii) Though highly preliminary, we find some evidence of monetary policy procyclicality in
developing countries, particularly for the middle-high income countries. There is also some
evidence of countercyclical monetary policy for the OECD countries.
iv) For developing countries – and particularly for middle high income countries -- the capital
flow cycle and the macroeconomic cycle reinforce each other (the when-it-rains-it pours
syndrome).
From a policy point of view, the implications of our findings appear to be of great practical
importance. While macroeconomic policies in OECD countries seem to be mostly aimed at stabilizing
the business cycle (or, at the very least, remaining neutral), macroeconomic policies in developing
countries seem to mostly reinforce the business cycle, turning sunny days into scorching infernos and
rainy days into torrential downpours.

While there may be a variety of frictions explaining this

phenomenon (for instance, political distortions, weak institutions, and capital market imperfections), the
inescapable conclusion is that developing countries – and in particular emerging countries – need to find
mechanisms that would enable macro-policies to be conducted in a neutral or stabilizing way. In fact,
there is some evidence to suggest that emerging countries with a reputation of highly-skilled
policymaking (the case of Chile immediately comes to mind) have been able to “graduate” from the
31

procyclical gang and conduct neutral/countercyclical fiscal policies (see Calderon and Schmidt-Hebbel
(2003)). In the particular case of Chile, the adoption of fiscal rules specifically designed to encourage
public saving in good times may have helped in this endeavor.
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that our empirical objective has consisted in computing “reducedform” correlations (in the spirit of the real business cycle literature) and not in identifying policy rules or
structural parameters. The types of friction that one would need to introduce into general equilibrium
models in order to explain the when-it-rains-it-pours syndrome identified in this paper should be the
subject of further research. In sum, we hope that the empirical regularities identified in this paper will
stimulate theoreticians to reconsider existing models that may be at odds with the facts and empiricists to
revisit the data with more refined techniques.

32

REFERENCES
Aghion, Phillipe, Philippe Bacchetta and Abhijit Banerjee, “Currency Crises and Monetary Policy in an
Economy with Credit Constraints,” European Economic Review, Vol. 45 (2001), pp. 1121-1150.
Aizenman, Joshua, Michael Gavin, and Ricardo Hausmann, "Optimal Tax Policy with Endogenous
Borrowing Constraints," NBER Working Paper No. 5558 (1996).
Aguiar, Mark, and Gita Gopinath, “Emerging Market Business Cycles: The Cycle is the Trend,” mimeo
(University of Chicago, 2004).
Baxter, Marianne, and Robert G. King. “Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass Filters for
Economic Time Series.” Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (1999): 575–93.
Braun, Miguel, “Why Is Fiscal Policy Procyclical in Developing Countries” (mimeo, Harvard University,
2001).
Calderon, Cesar and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel, “Macroeconomic Policies and Performance in Latin
America,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 22 (2003), pp. 895-923.
Calvo, Guillermo A. "On the Costs of Temporary Policy," Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 27
(1987), pp. 245-262.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart, “Capital Inflows and Real
Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors,” IMF Staff Papers,
Vol. 40 (1993), pp. 108-151.
Calvo, Guillermo A., Leonardo Leiderman, and Carmen M. Reinhart, “The Capital Inflows Problem:
Concepts and Issues,” Contemporary Economic Policy, Vol. XII (1994), pp. 54-66.
Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carlos A. Végh, "Inflation Stabilization and BOP Crises in Developing
Countries" in John Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics (Volume
C; North Holland, 1999), pp. 1531-1614.
Chari, V.V. and Patrick Kehoe, “Optimal Fiscal and Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Papers No. 6891
(1999).
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “Monetary Policy Rules in Practice: Some International
Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 6254 (1997).
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy; A New Keynesian
Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 37 (1999), pp. 1161-1707.
Corbo, Vittorio, “Monetary Policy in Latin America in the 90s,” Central Bank of Chile Working Paper
No. 78 (2000).
Cuddington, John, “Commodity Export Booms in Developing Countries” The World Bank Research
Observer, Vol. 4, No. 2, July 1989, 143-165.
Dixon, Jay, “Voracity, Volatility, and Growth” (mimeo, UCLA, 2003).

33

Drazen, Alan, “Interest Rate and Borrowing Defense Against Speculative Attack,” Carnegie-Rochester
Series on Public Policy, Vol. 53 (2000).
Flood, Robert P. and Olivier Jeanne, “An Interest Rate Defense of a Fixed Exchange Rate?” IMF
Working Paper No. 00/159 (2000).
Gavin, Michael, and Roberto Perotti, “Fiscal Policy in Latin America,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1997), pp. 11-61.
Gupta, Sanjeev, Benedict Clements, Bernardin Akitoby, and Gabriela Inchauste, “The Cyclicality of
Government Spending in Developing Countries” (mimeo, IMF, 2004).
Lahiri, Amartya and Carlos A. Végh, “Delaying the Inevitable: Interest Rate Defense and BOP Crises,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 111 (2003), pp. 404-424.
Lahiri, Amartya and Carlos A. Végh, “On the Non-Monotonic Relation between Interest Rates and the
Exchange Rate,” mimeo (New York Fed and UCLA, 2004).
Lane, Philip, “The Cyclical Behavior of Fiscal Policy: Evidence from the OECD” Journal of Public
Economics, Vol. 87 (2003a), pp. 2661-2675.
Lane, Philip, “Business Cycles and Macroeconomic Policy in Emerging Market Economies” (mimeo,
Trinity College, Dublin, 2003b).
Lane, Philip and Aaron Tornell, “Why Aren’t Latin American Savings Rates Procyclical? Journal of
Development Economics, Vol. 57 (1998), pp. 185-200.
Moron, Eduardo and Juan Francisco Castro, 2000, “Uncovering Central Bank’s Monetary Policy
Objective: Going Beyond the Fear of Floating,” (mimeo, Universidad del Pacifico).
Neumeyer, Pablo A., and Fabrizio Perri, “Business Cycles in Emerging Economies: The Role of Interest
Rates,” NBER Working Paper No. 10837 (2004).
Pallage, Stephane, and Michel A. Robe, “Foreign Aid and the Business Cycle,” Review of International
Economics, Vol. 9 (2001), pp. 637-668.
Phelps, Edmund (1973), “Inflation in the Theory of Public Finance,” Swedish Journal of Economics, Vol.
(75), pp. 67-82.
Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth S. Rogoff. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: A
Reinterpretation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. CXIX No. 1, February 2004, 1-48
Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel A. Savastano. “Debt Intolerance,” in William
Brainard and George Perry, eds., Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol.1 Spring 2003, 174.
Riascos, Alvaro and Carlos A. Végh, “Procyclical Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries: The Role of
Incomplete Markets” (mimeo, UCLA and Banco Republica, Colombia, 2003).

34

Talvi, Ernesto, and Carlos A. Végh, “Tax Base Variability and Procyclical Fiscal Policy,” NBER
Working Paper No. 7499 (2000), forthcoming Journal of Development Economics.
Taylor, John, “Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy, Vol. 39 (1993), pp. 195-214.
Tornell, Aaron and Philip Lane, "The Voracity Effect," American Economic Review, Vol. 89 (1999), pp.
22-46.
World Bank, various issues. Global Development Finance. (Washington DC: The World Bank).

35

APPENDIX. INDEX OF CYCLICALITY OF FISCAL POLICY
This paper has explored the cyclical properties of a variety of fiscal policy indicators. We now
construct a summary measure of the cyclical properties of fiscal policy. This composite index could be
used to rank individual countries in terms of their fiscal policy stance and, in future empirical work, to
explain this cross-country variation using a variety of economic, political, and institutional variables.
While the selection of both the components of the composite index and the weights attached to them is
necessarily arbitrary, the indicators were selected on the basis that they provide an unambiguous reading
of the stance of policy. The composite fiscal policy index, denoted by cf, is constructed as follows (see
Appendix Table 5):
cf = 0.40 ρg + 0.40 Percentile{ag -bg} - 0.20 ρπ ,
where ρg is the (HP) correlation between the cyclical components of real GDP and central government
expenditure, ag is the average growth in central government expenditure when GDP is above the median,
bg is the average growth in central government expenditure when GDP is below the median (as shown in
Table 9), and ρπ is the (HP) correlation between real GDP and the inflation tax, π/(1+π) (as shown in
Table 9). Thus, ag -bg provides a measure of the amplitude of the fiscal spending cycle that correlations
do not reveal. To normalize this measure of amplitude – so that it lies in the interval between minus one
and one and is thus in the same units as the correlations – we distribute positive and negative observations
into percentiles and then assign that particular percentile to the country. For instance, as revealed by
Appendix Table 5, Argentina has an amplitude of 5.35 percentage points (i.e., the growth rate of
government spending is 5.35 percentage points higher in good times than in bad times). This observation
corresponds to the 17th percentile of all positive observations. We thus assign Argentina the value of
0.17.
The first two components are given a higher weight (0.40) in the composite, as many countries in
our sample (both developed and developing) did not rely as heavily on the inflation tax, which is assigned

36

a weight of 0.20. Hence, since each component of the index, cf , is confined to values between one and
minus one, so is the index, with 1 being most procyclical and -1 most countercyclical.

37

-0.5
Mauritania
Nigeria
Saudi Arabia
Zambia
Morocco
Cape Verde
Senegal
Tanzania
Austria
Myanmar
Togo
Bangladesh
Greece
New Zealand
Swaziland
Trinidad Tobago

1

0.5

0
Ghana
Angola
Jamaica
Iran
Tunisia
Gambia
Nicaragua
Nepal
South Africa
Comoros
Pakistan
Jordan
Lebanon
Congo, Rep
Mozambique
Algeria
Canada
Mali
Uganda
Botswana
Honduras
China: Mainland
Mauritius
Cent Afr Rep.
Lao PDR
El Salvador
Rwanda
Finland
Gabon
Cambodia
Egypt
Norway
Sudan
Sweden
Panama
Australia
Switzerland
Costa Rica
Madagascar
Cameroon
Oman
Zimbabwe
Yemen, Republic of
Paraguay
United States
Ecuador
Côte d'Ivoire
Brazil
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Ireland
Portugal
Vietnam
Haiti
Peru
France
Philippines
Sri Lanka
Italy
Chad
Netherlands
Guatemala
Japan
Dominican Rep
India
Denmark
Belgium
Benin
Syria
Sierra Leone
United Kingdom
Seychelles
Bolivia
Turkey
Niger
Colombia
Uruguay
Mexico
Kenya
Spain
Chile
Germany
Mongolia
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Thailand
Argentina

Figure 1

Country Correlations between
the Cyclical Components of Net Capital Inflows and Real GDP
1960-2003

-1

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
A positive correlation indicates procyclical capital flows.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook .

-0.5

-1
Finland
United Kingdom
Switzerland
France
Jamaica
United States
Sudan
Korea
Austria
Australia
Spain
Norway
Swaziland
El Salvador
Turkey
Denmark
Canada
Italy
Netherlands
Colombia

1

0.5
Mexico
South Africa
Greece
Japan
Indonesia
Lao PDR
New Zealand
Ireland
Bolivia
Sri Lanka
Panama
Costa Rica
Brazil
Cape Verde
Zambia
Vietnam
Gambia
Morocco
Nepal
Jordan
China: Mainland
Honduras
Angola
Chile
Comoros
Haiti
Argentina
Ghana
Malaysia
Egypt
Kenya
Tunisia
Senegal
Nigeria
Pakistan
Mozambique
Algeria
Mali
Mauritania
Saudi Arabia
Tanzania
Cent Afr Rep.
Côte d'Ivoire
Uganda
Congo, Rep
Nicaragua
Lebanon
Belgium
Portugal
Togo
India
Mauritius
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Benin
Bangladesh
Germany
Zimbabwe
Guatemala
Paraguay
Madagascar
Philippines
Uruguay
Myanmar
Yemen, Republic of
Peru
Syria
Niger
Iran
Seychelles
Trinidad Tobago
Cambodia
Chad
Sierra Leone
Dominican Rep
Cameroon
Gabon
Botswana
Rwanda
Oman

Figure 2

Country Correlations between
the Cyclical Components of Real Government Expenditure and Real GDP
1960-2003

0

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
A positive correlation indicates procyclical fiscal policy. Real government expenditure is defined as Central Government expenditure deflated by the GDP deflator.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

-10
-5
Germany
Finland
Zambia
United Kingdom
Canada
United States
New Zealand
China: Mainland
France
Swaziland
Spain
Australia

Sudan
Denmark

20

15

10

5
Austria
Portugal
Colombia
Switzerland
India
Lao PDR
Cape Verde
Bangladesh
Sri Lanka
Ireland
Malaysia
Italy
Jamaica
Morocco
Jordan
Egypt
Norway
Philippines
Belgium
Korea
El Salvador
Greece
Netherlands
Vietnam
Tanzania
Bolivia
South Africa
Mauritius
Congo, Rep
Chile
Indonesia
Zimbabwe
Honduras
Cambodia
Japan
Paraguay
Peru
Turkey
Argentina
Nepal
Costa Rica
Tunisia
Algeria
Guatemala
Nigeria
Botswana
Saudi Arabia
Comoros
Myanmar
Kenya
Mexico
Panama
Mali
Benin
Cent Afr Rep.
Togo
Senegal
Pakistan
Dominican Rep
Mauritania
Angola
Yemen, Republic of
Gambia
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Trinidad Tobago
Haiti
Mozambique
Brazil
Seychelles
Iran
Cameroon
Uruguay
Syria
C e d'Ivoire
Sierra Leone
Madagascar
Chad
Niger
Oman
Lebanon
Rwanda
Nicaragua
Ghana
Gabon

25
Uganda

35
Liberia

Figure 3

Amplitude of the Fiscal Policy Cycle
1960-2003

30

0

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The amplitude of the fiscal policy cycle is captured by the difference (in percentage points)
between the growth of real government expenditure in good times and bad times. Real government expenditure is defined as Central Government expenditure deflated by the GDP deflator.
Good (bad) times are defined as those years in which GDP growth is above (below) the median. A positive amplitude indicates procyclical fiscal policy.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

0

-0.5
Mongolia
Bangladesh
Angola
Argentina
Chile
Peru
Oman
Uruguay
Mexico
Rwanda
Costa Rica
Bolivia
Uganda
Sudan
Côte d'Ivoire
Jordan
Syria
Zimbabwe
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Cape Verde
Myanmar
Paraguay
Cameroon
Gambia
Senegal
Brazil
Madagascar
Denmark
Kenya
Haiti
India
Comoros
Gabon
Mali
Chad
Congo, Rep
Belgium
Dominican Rep
Guatemala
Sierra Leone
Nepal
Swaziland
Nicaragua
Indonesia
Botswana
Yemen, Republic of
Ghana
Portugal
Sri Lanka
Turkey
Ireland
Algeria
Tunisia
New Zealand
Cambodia
Philippines
Honduras
Norway
Mozambique
Vietnam
Togo
South Africa
Iran
United States

0.5
Lao PDR
Mauritius
Mauritania
Niger
Egypt
Nigeria
Benin
Cent Afr Rep.
Morocco
Panama
Tanzania
Korea
Malaysia
United Kingdom
Thailand
France
Pakistan
El Salvador
Colombia
Greece
Australia
Japan
Seychelles
Jamaica
Netherlands
Trinidad Tobago
Lebanon
Italy
China: Mainland
Zambia
Canada
Ecuador
Finland
Saudi Arabia
Sweden
Germany
Spain
Austria

1
Switzerland

Figure 4

Country Correlations between
the Cyclical Components of the Inflation Tax and Real GDP
1960-2003

-1

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
A positive correlation indicates countercyclical fiscal policy.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics .

-0.5
0.5

-1

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
A positive correlation indicates countercyclical monetary policy.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistics .
1
Colombia

Ecuador

New Zealand

Belgium

Germany

Australia

Spain

Switzerland

Netherlands

Benin

Mali

Japan

France

Canada

United Kingdom

Ireland

Niger

China: Mainland

Jamaica

Zimbabwe

South Africa

Thailand

Sierra Leone

Cape Verde

Gabon

Nigeria

Guatemala

Congo, Rep

Malaysia

United States

Trinidad Tobago

El Salvador

Côte d'Ivoire

Sweden

Bangladesh

Honduras

Portugal

0
Greece

Finland

Togo

Philippines

Syria

Rwanda

Venezuela, Rep. Bol.

Senegal

Mauritius

Cent Afr Rep.

Costa Rica

Cameroon

Kenya

Botswana

Chad

Gambia

Oman

Norway

Sri Lanka

Chile

Italy

Denmark

India

Bolivia

Swaziland

Korea

Peru

Indonesia

Panama

Uruguay

Figure 5

Country Correlations between
the Cyclical Components of the Nominal Lending Interest Rate and Real GDP
1960-2003

1

0.5

-0.5
Greece
Ghana
Nepal
Uganda
Jamaica
Canada
Mali
Botswana
Lao PDR
Turkey
Mauritius
Nigeria
Mauritania
Sudan
Panama
Switzerland
Portugal
Nicaragua
Costa Rica
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Zambia
Peru
Rwanda
Japan
Lebanon
Swaziland
Algeria
Tanzania
Italy
Germany
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Togo
Côte d'Ivoire
Cent Afr Rep.
United States
Gambia
Sri Lanka
Niger
Philippines
Haiti
Kenya
Argentina
Brazil
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Vietnam
Chad
Senegal
Trinidad Tobago
Chile
Belgium
Tunisia
Congo, Rep
Cambodia
Comoros
Honduras
Colombia
Angola
Malaysia
Seychelles
Paraguay
Norway
Dominican Rep
Benin
South Africa
Guatemala
Sierra Leone
Oman
Gabon
Yemen, Republic of
Uruguay
Cameroon
Madagascar

0

United Kingdom
Pakistan
Bolivia
Bangladesh
Mexico
China: Mainland
Indonesia
Netherlands
Egypt
Korea
Spain
Denmark
Austria
Iran
Jordan
Ireland
El Salvador
Australia
Zimbabwe
India
New Zealand
France
Cape Verde
Finland

Figure 6

Country Correlations between the Cyclical Components
of Real Government Expenditure and Net Capital Inflows
1960-2003

-1

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
Real government expenditure is defined as Central Government expenditure deflated by the GDP deflator.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

0.5

-0.5

-1
Australia
Denmark
Tunisia
Austria
Honduras
Finland
India
Benin
Mauritania
Japan
Thailand
Nepal
Lao PDR
Pakistan
Madagascar
Comoros
Cent Afr Rep.
Korea
Switzerland
Sweden
Zimbabwe
Vietnam
France
Bangladesh
Jordan
Mozambique
Niger
Cambodia
Spain
Cape Verde
Italy
China: Mainland
United Kingdom
Greece

0

Brazil
Mexico
Yemen, Republic of
Mongolia
Argentina
Guatemala
Gabon
Oman
Saudi Arabia
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Paraguay
Uruguay
South Africa
Trinidad Tobago
Bolivia
Zambia
Cameroon
Chile
Norway
Iran
Kenya
Sierra Leone
Rwanda
Turkey
Côte d'Ivoire
Belgium
United States
Mali
Angola
Indonesia
Senegal
Algeria
El Salvador
Ecuador
Tanzania
Gambia
Uganda
Egypt
Syria
Swaziland
Botswana
Nigeria
Philippines
Sudan
Panama
Peru
Netherlands
Congo, Rep
Togo
Morocco
Myanmar
Mauritius
Dominican Rep
Jamaica
Sri Lanka
Colombia
Costa Rica
Ireland
Canada
Malaysia
Seychelles
Nicaragua
New Zealand
Lebanon
Haiti
Germany
Portugal
Chad
Ghana

Figure 7

Country Correlations between the Cyclical Components
of the Inflation Tax and Net Capital Inflows

1

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.

Rwanda

-0.5
El Salvador

Congo, Rep

Philippines

New Zealand

India

Nigeria

Oman

Netherlands

Trinidad Tobago

Cent Afr Rep.

Gambia

Peru

Chile

Togo

Zimbabwe

Bolivia

Malaysia

Kenya

Guatemala

United States

Honduras

Korea

Jamaica

Chad

Gabon

Uruguay

Indonesia

Cameroon

0

0.5

-1

Notes: Dark bars are OECD countries and light ones are non-OECD countries. The cyclical components have been estimated using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter.
Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook.
Spain

Finland

Colombia

Benin

Niger

China: Mainland

Belgium

Costa Rica

South Africa

France

Germany

Syria

Japan

Australia

Sweden

Ireland

Senegal

Sierra Leone

United Kingdom

Switzerland

Ecuador

Thailand

Swaziland

Italy

Côte d'Ivoire

Mauritius

Venezuela, Rep. Bol.

Bangladesh

Cape Verde

Greece

Botswana

Sri Lanka

Portugal

Panama

Mali

Denmark

Norway

Canada

Figure 8

Country Correlations between the Cyclical Components
of the Nominal Lending Interest Rate and Net Capital Inflows
1960-2003

1

Appendix Table 1
Data Sources

Indicator

Source

1. External
IMF, World Economic Outlook (WEO)
Financial account (net capital inflows)
Institutional Investor Ratings
Institutional Investor
2. Fiscal
Central government:
Expenditure
IMF, WEO
Current expenditure, Current expenditure IMF, Government Financial Statistics (GFS)
minus interest payments, Expenditure on goods
and services, Expenditure on wages and
salaries
General or consolidated government:
IMF, WEO
Expenditure
Current expenditure, Current expenditure IMF, GFS
minus interest payments, Expenditure on goods
and services, Expenditure on wages and
salaries
IMF, International Financial Statistics (IFS)
Inflation tax, π/ (1+π)
3. Monetary
Domestic credit, M0, M1, M2, Interbank rate, IMF, IFS
Treasury bill rate, Discount rate, Lending rate,
Deposit Rate
4. Other
Real GDP
GDP deflator
Consumer Price Index

IMF, WEO
IMF, WEO
IMF, IFS

Note: WEO uses the concept of Central and General government expenditure, while GFS
uses Central Government Budgetary Accounts and Consolidated Government Accounts.

Appendix Table 2
Countries in the Sample
Low-Income Countries
(40)
Angola
Bangladesh
Benin
Burma (now Myanmar)
Cambodia
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo (Republic of)
Côte D’Ivoire
The Gambia
Ghana
Haiti
India
Indonesia
Kenya
Laos
Liberia
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritania
Mongolia
Mozambique
Nepal
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Pakistan
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Middle-Low Income
Countries (25)
Algeria
Bolivia
Cape Verde
China
Colombia
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Guatemala
Honduras
Iran
Iraq
Jamaica
Jordan
Morocco
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
South Africa
Sri Lanka
Syria
Thailand
Tunisia
Turkey

Middle-High Income
Countries (18)
Argentina
Botswana
Brazil
Chile
Costa Rica
Gabon
Korea, Rep. of
Lebanon
Malaysia
Mauritius
Mexico
Oman
Panama
Saudi Arabia
Seychelles
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

OECD Countries
(21)
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Japan
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Note: The total number of countries is 104.
Iceland and Luxembourg are not included in our sample of OECD countries and Korea is included
in the middle-high income countries.

Appendix Table 3
Amplitude of the Real Interest Rate Cycle
Real
Interest Rate

Interbank rate
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate
Lending rate
Deposit rate
Interbank rate *
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate
Lending rate
Deposit rate *
Interbank rate
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate
Lending rate*
Deposit rate*
Interbank rate
Treasury bill rate
Discount rate*
Lending rate*
Deposit rate*

Increases in Real Interest Rates
Good Times
Bad Times
Amplitude
(1)
(2)
(1)-(2)
OECD
0.1
-0.2
0.3
0.4
-0.2
0.6
0.3
-0.4
0.7
-0.1
0.1
-0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
Middle-High Income Countries
2.2
3.1
-0.9
-2.8
1.6
-4.4
-1.0
2.6
-3.6
-2.5
1.7
-4.2
1.1
0.8
0.3
Middle-Low Income Countries
-0.4
0.4
-0.8
-0.6
1.1
-1.7
0.4
-0.4
0.8
-0.6
1.0
-1.6
-0.4
-0.1
-0.3
Low Income Countries
1.3
0.1
1.2
4.8
-0.9
5.7
1.1
-2.3
3.4
-1.4
-0.2
-1.2
0.4
-1.0
1.4

Notes: Increases in real interest rates are defined as the average annual
change in real interest rates (with real interest rates expressed in
percentage points)
Good (bad) times are defined as those years with GDP growth
above (below) the median.
* The median is reported in lieu of the average, as the average is distorted by
or more very high inflation (or hyperinflation) episodes.
Sources: IMF, World Economic Outlook and International Financial Statistic

Appendix Table 4
Amplitude of the Real Monetary Aggregate Cycle
Real
Monetary
Aggregates
M0
M1
M2

Increases in Real Monetary Aggregates
Good Times
Bad Times
Amplitude
(1)
(2)
(1)-(2)
OECD Countries
3.2
0.8
2.4
5.4
4.0
1.4
6.6
3.3
3.3

M0
M1
M2

Middle-High Income Countries
7.7
3.0
8.3
1.0
11.5
3.3

4.7
7.3
8.2

M0
M1
M2

Middle-Low Income Countries
6.2
2.4
5.9
2.4
8.2
4.5

3.8
3.5
3.7

M0
M1
M2

Low Income Countries
4.3
0.8
3.2
0.9
6.7
1.4

3.5
2.3
5.3

Notes: The increase in real monetary aggregates is the
average annual real rate of growth expressed in percentage terms.
Good (bad) times are defined as those years with GDP growth
above (below) the median.
Sources: IMF, International Financial Statistics.

Appendix Table 5
Index of Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy

Countries

Algeria
Angola
Argentina
Australia
Austria
Bangladesh
Belgium
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cent Afr Rep.
Chad
Chile
China: Mainland
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Rep
Costa Rica
Cote dIvoire
Denmark
Dominican Rep
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
India
Indonesia
Iran
Ireland
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Korea
Lao PDR
Lebanon
Liberia

Correlations between the Cyclical
Components of Real GDP and
Real Central
Inflation Tax
Government Expenditure
(1)
(2)
0.35
0.21
0.25
-0.26
-0.26
0.47
0.42
0.46
0.09
0.82
0.11
0.71
0.78
-0.12
0.12
0.38
0.71
0.22
0.16
-0.01
0.23
0.40
0.10
0.39
-0.13
0.72
na
0.27
-0.16
-0.80
-0.45
0.78
0.14
0.47
0.25
0.04
0.54
0.25
0.17
0.43
0.05
0.60
0.07
-0.10
-0.40
0.04
0.15
0.28
-0.32
0.06
0.41
0.00

-0.08
-0.56
-0.55
0.17
0.46
-0.57
-0.20
0.05
-0.43
-0.12
-0.30
-0.06
-0.33
0.32
-0.34
0.05
-0.23
-0.51
0.26
0.14
-0.28
-0.23
-0.44
-0.38
-0.29
-0.19
0.32
0.03
0.12
0.33
0.11
-0.28
-0.32
0.40
-0.12
0.15
-0.19
-0.29
-0.06
-0.29
-0.12
-0.02
-0.09
0.26
0.20
0.18
-0.38
-0.29
0.09
0.01
0.24
0.00

Amplitude of the Cycle of
Central Government Expenditure
Level
Percentiles
(Percentage Points)
(3)
(4)
5.58
8.46
5.35
-0.31
0.56
1.53
2.86
7.56
3.43
6.33
9.50
4.70
10.79
-0.88
1.38
7.73
14.12
3.69
-0.66
0.99
6.76
3.67
5.41
11.49
-7.18
8.32
na
2.31
3.05
-2.31
-0.62
17.82
8.67
-2.40
16.11
3.07
6.13
8.95
4.62
1.04
3.86
10.35
1.67
1.86
2.11
4.93
2.17
7.00
3.00
1.31
15.51
32.42

0.18
0.27
0.17
-0.04
0.02
0.05
0.09
0.24
0.11
0.20
0.30
0.15
0.34
-0.11
0.05
0.24
0.44
0.12
-0.09
0.04
0.21
0.12
0.17
0.36
-0.97
0.26
na
0.08
0.10
-0.31
-0.08
0.55
0.27
-0.32
0.50
0.10
0.19
0.28
0.15
0.04
0.12
0.32
0.06
0.06
0.07
0.16
0.07
0.22
0.10
0.05
0.48
1.00

Index of Cyclicality
of
Fiscal Policy

Countries

0.4*(1)+0.4*(4)-0.2*(4)
0.23
0.30
0.28
-0.15
-0.19
0.32
0.24
0.27
0.16
0.43
0.22
0.36
0.51
-0.16
0.14
0.24
0.51
0.24
-0.03
-0.02
0.23
0.25
0.20
0.38
-0.38
0.43
na
0.14
-0.05
-0.51
-0.24
0.59
0.23
-0.02
0.33
0.03
0.33
0.27
0.14
0.25
0.09
0.37
0.07
-0.07
-0.17
0.05
0.16
0.26
-0.11
0.04
0.31
0.40

Madagascar
Malaysia
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Portugal
Rwanda
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Trinidad Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.
Vietnam
Yemen, Republic of
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Correlations between the Cyclical
Components of Real GDP and
Real Central
Inflation Tax
Government Expenditure
(1)
(2)
0.57
0.25
0.35
0.37
0.45
0.02
na
0.14
0.34
0.59
0.14
-0.07
0.07
0.40
0.59
0.33
-0.22
0.87
0.33
0.10
0.57
0.59
0.57
0.42
0.84
0.38
0.31
0.66
0.71
0.03
-0.25
0.09
-0.33
-0.20
na
-0.49
0.59
0.38
na
0.42
0.67
0.30
-0.14
0.39
-0.67
-0.37
0.58
0.46
0.13
0.59
0.13
0.53

-0.30
0.10
-0.25
0.02
0.02
-0.46
-0.74
0.06
-0.06
-0.33
-0.18
0.22
-0.07
-0.16
0.02
0.04
-0.06
-0.47
0.11
0.06
-0.33
-0.49
-0.06
-0.12
-0.46
0.33
-0.30
0.20
-0.19
-0.02
0.45
-0.11
-0.40
-0.17
0.38
0.74
-0.37
0.08
0.11
-0.03
0.24
-0.08
-0.10
-0.41
0.11
0.00
-0.46
-0.35
-0.05
-0.12
0.28
-0.35

Amplitude of the Cycle of
Central Government Expenditure
Level
Percentiles
(Percentage Points)
(3)
(4)
13.56
1.86
7.10
8.39
3.66
7.05
na
2.17
9.05
6.90
5.40
3.19
-0.77
15.92
14.56
6.30
2.61
15.22
8.12
7.06
4.97
5.12
2.74
0.79
15.59
6.37
8.07
10.15
13.10
3.53
-0.34
1.58
-7.35
-0.53
na
1.00
11.20
3.39
na
7.93
8.85
5.47
5.25
24.47
-1.61
-0.86
10.98
8.67
3.33
8.59
-2.04
3.96

0.42
0.06
0.22
0.26
0.12
0.22
na
0.07
0.28
0.22
0.17
0.10
-0.10
0.50
0.45
0.20
0.09
0.47
0.26
0.22
0.16
0.16
0.09
0.03
0.49
0.20
0.25
0.32
0.41
0.11
-0.04
0.05
-0.99
-0.07
na
0.04
0.35
0.11
na
0.25
0.28
0.17
0.17
0.76
-0.21
-0.11
0.34
0.27
0.11
0.27
-0.27
0.13

Notes: The Index of Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy is a composite index that includes two measures of correlations of the cyclical components of fiscal policy instruments (Real Central Government Expenditure and the Inflation Tax) and real GDP (obtained using the HP Filter) and a measure of the amplitude of
Real Central Government Expenditure Cycle as captured by the difference in growth of real central government expenditure in "Good" and "Bad" Times. The amplitude of the real central government expenditure cycle is transformed to a (-1,1) indicator (comparable in values with the correlation indicators
using the percentiles of the distribution of the negative and positive amplitudes.

Index of Cyclicality
of
Fiscal Policy
0.4*(1)+0.4*(4)-0.2*(4)
0.46
0.11
0.28
0.25
0.22
0.19
na
0.07
0.26
0.39
0.16
-0.03
0.00
0.39
0.41
0.20
-0.04
0.63
0.21
0.11
0.36
0.40
0.28
0.20
0.63
0.16
0.28
0.35
0.49
0.06
-0.20
0.08
-0.45
-0.08
na
-0.33
0.45
0.18
na
0.27
0.33
0.21
0.03
0.54
-0.37
-0.19
0.46
0.36
0.11
0.37
-0.11
0.33

