                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            SUPPLY OR DEMAND:
        WHY IS THE MARKET FOR LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE SO SMALL?

                                            Jeffrey R. Brown
                                            Amy Finkelstein

                                         Working Paper 10782
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10782


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We thank David Cutler, John Cutler, Cheryl DeMaio, Robert Gagne, Estelle James, Kathleen McGarry,
JaneMarie Mulvey, Dennis O’Brien, Ben Olken, Al Schmitz, Karl Scholz, Jonathan Skinner, Mark
Warshawsky, Steve Zeldes, and participants at the University of Wisconsin, the NBER Public Economics
meetings, the Risk Theory seminar and the American Risk and Insurance Association annual meeting for
helpful comments and discussions. We are especially grateful to Jim Robinson for generously sharing his
data on long-term care utilization, and to Norma Coe for exceptional research assistance. We are grateful to
the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, TIAA-CREF and the Campus Research Board at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or the IMF.

©2004 by Jeffrey R. Brown and Amy Finkelstein All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Supply or Demand: Why is the Market for Long-Term Care Insurance So Small?
Jeffrey R. Brown and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 10782
September 2004
JEL No. H0, I11, G22, J14

                                            ABSTRACT

Long-term care represents one of the largest uninsured financial risks facing the elderly in the United
States. Whether the small size of this market is driven primarily by supply side market imperfections
or by limitations to demand, however, is unresolved, largely due to the paucity of data about the
structure of the private market. We provide what is to our knowledge the first empirical evidence on
the pricing and benefit structure of long-term care insurance policies. We estimate that the typical
policy purchased by a 65-year old has an average pricing load of about 18 percent and has a very
limited benefit structure, covering only one-third of the expected present discounted value of long-
term care expenditures. These findings are consistent with the presence of supply side market
imperfections. However, we also find enormous gender differences in pricing          typical loads are
44 cents on the dollar for men but better than actuarially fair for women    that do not translate into
differences in coverage. And, although purchased policies provide limited benefits, we demonstrate
that more comprehensive policies are widely-available at similar loads, but are rarely purchased.
These findings suggest that while supply-side market imperfections exist, they are not the primary
cause of the small size of the private long-term care insurance market.

Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@uiuc.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Harvard Society of Fellows and
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
afinkels@nber.org
1. Introduction

    As the baby-boom generation approaches retirement, concerns about financial security in retirement

are increasing in importance as a public policy issue. One of the largest uninsured financial risks facing

the elderly in the United States today is expenditures for long-term care, such as home health care and

nursing homes. Expenditures for long-term care were $135 billion in 2004, representing 8.5% of total

health expenditures for all ages and about 1.2% of GDP. Importantly, only 4 percent of these

expenditures are paid for by private insurance, while one-third are paid for out of pocket (CBO, 2004). By

contrast, in the health sector as a whole, private insurance pays for 35 percent of expenditures and only 17

percent are paid for out of pocket (National Center for Health Statistics, 2002).

    The limited insurance coverage for long-term care expenditures has important implications for the

welfare of the elderly. Its importance will only become more pronounced as the population continues to

age and as medical care costs continue to rise. Indeed, the Congressional Budget Office projects that real

long-term care expenditures will triple by 2040 (CBO, 1999).

    Standard insurance theory suggests that the random and costly nature of long-term care expenditures

makes this precisely the type of risk for which risk averse individuals would find insurance valuable. As a

result, an extensive theoretical literature has proposed a host of potential explanations for the limited size

of the private long-term care insurance market (see Sloan and Norton, 1997 or Norton, 2000 for a review

of this literature). An important divide in these explanations is whether they assume that the limited size

of the market is due primarily to factors that limit demand for private insurance (such as the public

Medicaid program, the informal insurance provided by family members, or limited consumer rationality)

or to supply side market failures (such as asymmetric information, imperfect competition, or uninsured

aggregate risks).

    Conceptually, it is possible to learn about the existence and importance of supply side market

imperfections by studying the characteristics of the insurance policies that are offered and purchased in

the private market. This is because the major potential supply side limitations, including high

transactions costs, imperfect competition, asymmetric information, or the aggregate risk of rising costs,


                                                                                                              1
have at least one of two empirical implications. First, these imperfections may cause prices to be higher

than actuarially fair levels. Second, these imperfections may cause contracts to offer a constrained set of

benefit options that are less than fully comprehensive; we refer to a restriction on the comprehensiveness

of offered insurance contracts as “quantity rationing.”

    Unfortunately, the literature thus far has been hampered by the paucity of relevant information about

the basic characteristics of the private long-term care insurance market. In addition to limiting our

economic understanding of the causes of the small market size, the lack of evidence impairs informed

public policy making as well. For example, concerns about perceived high prices in this market have

recently motivated the introduction of generous tax subsidies to long-term care insurance at both the

federal and state level (Wiener et al., 2000; Cohen and Weinrobe, 2000) as well as proposals for further

expansion of these subsidies (Lewis et al., 2003). Yet we know of no evidence on whether prices are

substantially above actuarially fair levels in this market, let alone whether this is an important factor in

explaining the market’s limited size.

    To begin filling this void, this paper provides, to our knowledge, the first estimates of the loads on

private insurance policies and the share of expenditure risk covered by these policies. To do so, we

develop an analytical framework for estimating the pricing load and the comprehensiveness of private

long-term care insurance contracts. We implement these frameworks using detailed actuarial data on the

distribution of long-term care expenditure risk and market-wide survey data on the characteristics of

typical policies. We also investigate the extent to which supply-side market failures are important in

understanding the limited size of the private market.

    The key findings of this paper are that supply side limitations do exist in this market, but that these

limitations are not primarily responsible for the limited size of the market. The evidence for the existence

of supply side imperfections is that commonly purchased policies exhibit high average prices and limited

benefits. Our central pricing estimates indicate that the typical policy purchased by a 65-year old (which

is roughly the average age of purchase) and held until death has a load of 0.18. In other words, on

average, an individual who buys a long-term care insurance policy will get back only 82 cents in expected


                                                                                                               2
present discounted value benefits for every dollar paid in expected present discounted value premiums.

This is substantially higher than the typical load of 0.06 to 0.10 on purchased acute health insurance

policies (Newhouse, 2002). With regard to quantity, we find that typically purchased policies cover only

one-third of the expected present discounted value of long-term care expenditures.

    However, we present several additional pieces of evidence that suggest that these high prices and

limited benefits are not the primary cause of the small size of the private long-term care insurance market.

We find enormous differences in loads based on gender, yet these large pricing differentials do not

translate into differences in coverage. Loads on the typical policy purchased are 44 cents on the dollar for

65 year-old men, and better than actuarial fair prices (a load of –0.04 cents on the dollar) for women.

Despite these better than actuarially fair prices for women, insurance coverage rates for elderly women

are very low and similar to those of elderly men at about 10 percent. Nor can these findings be explained

solely by high within-household correlation in coverage decisions. In well over half of married

households where at least one spouse has insurance, the other spouse does not have insurance.

    In addition, we find that although the typical purchased policy provides only limited coverage,

insurance companies offer policies that cover a substantially larger share of long-term care expenditures.

We demonstrate that there are widely available policies that will cover about 90 percent of the expected

present value of expenditures for a 65 year old. Moreover, these policies are available at similar loads to

the less comprehensive policies that are typically purchased; thus for women, they are available at prices

that are at least actuarially fair. This suggests that the limited benefits in purchased policies reflect a lack

of demand for more comprehensive policies, rather than a market failure in their supply.

    This paper proceeds as follows: In section 1, we show how information on the pricing and

comprehensiveness of policies can be used to distinguish demand-side explanations for the market’s small

size from explanations routed in supply-side market failures. Section 2 provides descriptive statistics on

the structure and pricing of long-term care insurance policies. We develop our analytical framework for

measuring pricing loads and benefit comprehensiveness in section 3, and the data for implementing these

approaches are described in section 4. In section 5, we provide our central empirical estimates of loads


                                                                                                                   3
and comprehensiveness of typical policies purchased. In section 6, we provide evidence suggesting that,

despite the existence of supply side imperfections, the limited market size is not driven primarily by these

supply side factors. Section 7 concludes.

1. Theories of Limited Market Size

    A variety of theoretical explanations have been proposed to explain the extremely limited proportion

of the elderly who purchase private long-term care insurance market (see Sloan and Norton, 1997 or

Norton, 2000 for a detailed review of this literature). These theories can be broadly classified into two

categories: factors that limit the demand for private insurance, and supply side limitations to the market.

    On the demand side, problems of limited consumer rationality may limit demand for private long-

term care insurance. For example, individuals may have difficulty understanding low-probability, high-

loss events (see e.g. Kunreuther, 1978), or may simply avoid having to think about the unpleasant

possibility of ending up in a nursing home. Another major factor that may limit demand for private long-

term care insurance is the availability of imperfect but cheaper substitutes. These may come in the form of

government assistance (e.g., the Medicaid program), financial transfers from children, or unpaid care

provided directly by family members in lieu of formal paid care (Pauly, 1990). These are all likely to be

imperfect substitutes for comprehensive private insurance. For example, Medicaid’s income and asset

eligibility requirements place substantial restrictions on individuals’ abilities to smooth consumption over

time and across states of care, as well as to bequeath upon death, and thus provides only limited

consumption smoothing benefits (Brown and Finkelstein, 2004). Nevertheless, an imperfect but publicly-

or family-funded source of long-term care insurance has the potential to substantially reduce demand for

private insurance coverage. Pauly (1989, 1990) provides a stylized model that demonstrates this

theoretical possibility.

    On the supply side, four market problems have been suggested as potential explanations for the small

size of the market. Three are problems that may be common to many insurance markets: high transactions

costs, imperfect competition, and asymmetric information (either adverse selection or moral hazard). The




                                                                                                              4
fourth – the uninsured aggregate risk of rising long-term care costs – is specific to insurance markets with

an undiversifiable component to the risk.

    The focus of this paper is to distinguish at a broad level whether the limited market size is due

primarily to demand side or supply side explanations. Rather than test each of the individual hypotheses

separately, our approach is motivated by the observation that each of these four supply-side problems has

at least one of two empirical implications. First, the price of private insurance will substantially exceed

actuarially fair levels. Second, policies will be quantity-rationed through some form of benefit limitation.

In other words, individuals may be willing to purchase more comprehensive policies at existing loads, but

such policies are not offered.1

    Transactions costs may stem from the unavoidable costs of insurance sales and claim processing.

They may be exacerbated by imperfection competition (e.g., a form of X-inefficiency) or by the cost of

gathering and verifying detailed health information at the time of purchase or time of claim in order to try

to reduce any information asymmetries. While both transaction costs and imperfect competition may – by

raising prices – reduce the quantity of insurance demanded in equilibrium, neither will produce quantity

rationing per se.

    Asymmetric information – in the form of either adverse selection or moral hazard – may produce

quantity rationing. This quantity rationing may take the form of an unraveling of the insurance market so

that policies are not offered (e.g. Akerlof, 1970). Or it may be on the intensive margin through the use the

use of co-payments and deductibles that limit the amount of insurance provided (Rothschild and Stiglitz,

1976). In addition, if the population of insured individuals is above-average risk relative to the general

population, asymmetric information will raise the price of insurance above the actuarially fair price for

the population as a whole.

    Finally, Cutler (1996) has argued that a substantial component of long-term care expenditure risk is

the intertemporal aggregate risk of increased long-term care costs. This cannot be diversified through the

1
 Naturally, anything that raises prices above actuarially fair levels may contribute to an equilibrium with limited
quantities, but we reserve the term “quantity rationing” to situations in which individuals demand more
comprehensive benefits at existing prices but such policies are not available in the market.


                                                                                                                      5
traditional insurance approach of pooling idiosyncratic risks because, if medical costs rise, it will affect

the entire insurance pool. The presence of aggregate risk may therefore raise premiums because

companies charge a “risk premium” in order to be compensated for bearing this aggregate risk (Froot,

1999). Alternatively, insurance companies may instead limit policies to cover only the idiosyncratic risk

– for example by capping the dollar amount of payment per day in care – which is thus a form of quantity

rationing (Cutler, 1996).

    In this paper, we provide empirical evidence on the extent to which these supply-side market

imperfections are relevant by examining the pricing and benefit comprehensiveness of policies that are

currently available in the market. Doing so allows a first opportunity to assess the importance of these

factors in limiting market size.

2. Descriptive Statistics on the Long-Term Care Insurance Market

    Before developing a formal analytical framework for estimating pricing and comprehensiveness, we

present some descriptive statistics on the long-term care insurance market and the structure and pricing of

long-term care insurance policies.

2.1 Who has private long-term care insurance?

    Table 1 presents statistics on private long-term care insurance ownership rates among individuals

aged 60 and over from the 2000 Health and Retirement Survey. Only about 10 percent of the elderly have

private long-term care insurance. Coverage rates are similar for men and women, slightly higher for

married than single individuals, and increase substantially with asset levels. These basic findings appear

in many other data sources as well (e.g. HIAA, 2000a and Cohen, forthcoming). Data from a survey of

long-term care insurance buyers indicate that most purchasers are elderly; among individuals aged 55 and

older, the average age of buyers in 2000 was 67, and one-fifth were 75 or older (HIAA, 2000a).

    In contrast to the market for health insurance for acute medical expenditures, the vast majority (about

80 percent) of private long-term care insurance contracts are sold through the individual (non-group




                                                                                                               6
market).2 We therefore focus in this paper on the non-group market; all subsequent statistics refer

exclusively to this market. The market first began in the early 1980s (HIAA, 2001), but for a long time

was extraordinarily small. By 2001, annualized in force premiums collected had reached $5.3 billion

(LIMRA, 2001).

2.2 The structure of private long-term care insurance contracts

    Table 2 presents information on the characteristics of typical policies purchased in 2000. All of these

policies are written for an individual; in the long-term care insurance market, one cannot buy a “joint”

policy to insure both members of the couple.

    Over three-fourths of private policies purchased are designed to cover all forms of long-term care,

including expenditures on home care as well as nursing homes, although it is possible to purchase a

policy that only covers facility based care or only home based care. Most policies also have a deductible,

known as the “elimination period,” that specifies the number of days the individual must be receiving care

before benefit payments can begin; approximately 70 percent of policies had deductibles of 30 to 100

days. Policies also specify a maximum “benefit period” which limits the total number of days the

individual may receive benefits for care expenditures during the lifetime of the policy. Limits of 1-5 years

are often specified, although almost one-third of all policies have unlimited (i.e. “lifetime”) benefit

durations. Another important feature of the policy is whether the benefits are fixed or escalating at a pre-

set amount (such as 3 or 5 percent) in nominal terms; about 40% of policies sold in 2000 had this

escalation feature (see Table 2).3

    A feature of private long-term care insurance policies that distinguishes them from the typical health

insurance policy is the use of a maximum daily benefit. Specifically, long-term care insurance policies

typically pay either a fixed dollar amount per day in care, or reimburse costs up to a maximum daily

benefit cap. The average maximum daily benefit purchased for nursing home care in 2000 was $109; the

modal benefit was $100.

2
 The remaining share are sold through employer-sponsored plans or life insurance (HIAA 2000b).
3
  This is termed by the industry “inflation protection” although the nomenclature is misleading. Almost none are
actually linked to the CPI (Weiss, 2002).


                                                                                                                   7
    Finally, for care to be eligible for reimbursement, most private long term care policies require that the

individual using the care must satisfy certain health-related criteria known as “benefit triggers.” About 90

percent of recent sales are for policies that use the benefit triggers required by the 1996 Health Insurance

Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) for a plan to be eligible for tax benefits. These benefit

triggers require that the individual must either need substantial assistance in performing at least 2 out of 6

specified activities of daily living and assistance must be expected to last at least 90 days, or the

individual requires substantial supervision due to severe cognitive impairment (Wiener et al., 2000;

LIMRA, 2002; Lewis et al., 2003). These benefit triggers ensure that any covered care is for a chronic

condition (rather than for acute rehabilitative care that Medicare or private health insurance would

otherwise pay for).

2.3 The pricing of long-term care insurance contracts

    To gain insight into the pricing of these policies, we purchased market-wide data on premiums for

non-group long-term care insurance policies in 2002. These data were collected in March 2002 by Weiss

Ratings, Inc, in their annual survey of all known companies in the United States that sell long-term care

insurance. The responding companies include, among others, all of the top five sellers of long-term care

insurance policies; these sellers alone account for two-thirds of industry sales (LIMRA, 2002).

    All long-term care insurance policy premiums are paid on a periodic (usually annual) basis and are

pre-specified at a constant, nominal amount. At purchase, premiums tend to vary only with age, and with

one of three broad, health-related rate categories: preferred, standard or extra-risk. The majority of buyers

tend to quality for the standard rate (ALCI, 2001; Weiss, 2002).

    Policies are guaranteed renewable and are not experience rated for the individual if he experiences a

change in health. However, premiums can be raised for a class of individuals, such as all those holding a

particular type of policy or all those above a certain age (AARP, 2002; ACLI, 2001). Thus individuals

face some risk of premium increases in the future. Indeed, rate increases have been common in the past

(AARP, 2002).




                                                                                                               8
    The market has traditionally been largely unregulated. Recently, however, the National Association of

Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has enacted stringent new model regulations – and many states have

adopted them – to ensure that rates are set to avoid future premium increases on whole block of business

(NAIC, 2002a; NAIC, 2002b; Lewis et al., 2003). To the extent that these regulations are not fully

successful at stabilizing rates, thus leaving some risk of future premium increases, the loads we estimate

understate the ultimate cost of the policy.

    Weiss asks each company to report the “standard” premium for four common policy “scenarios”

which they choose to be representative of the entire range of products available. These four scenarios are

summarized in Table 3. They are labeled scenarios 1 through 4 in order of increasing benefit generosity.

All policies pay a $100 maximum daily benefit and all cover facility care (i.e. nursing home care and

assisted living facilities). All scenarios except the least generous cover home care. They differ in terms of

their deductible, and their maximum benefit period. For each scenario, Weiss reports premiums for

policies that have a constant maximum daily benefit of $100 per day, and policies whose maximum daily

benefit starts at $100 but escalates at 5% per year in nominal terms. The data on policy purchases in Table

2 indicate that the typical policy purchased is likely to be a constant nominal benefit policy with benefits

somewhat less comprehensive than those in scenario 2.4

    Table 4 presents descriptive information on annual median premiums in 2002 for each of the four

scenarios in the Weiss data. For all ages below 85 and all scenarios except scenario 4, the sample

includes at least 8 policies.5 All policies in the sample use the HIPPA-specified benefit triggers discussed

above. Prices are not reported by gender because insurance companies do not offer different prices by

gender (Society of Actuaries, 2002). This is somewhat puzzling, given the large differences in expected

long-term care expenditures between men and women and the absence of regulatory restrictions

4
  A limitation to the data in Table 2 is that they do not permit cross-tabulations by policy characteristic. However,
we also examined over 15,000 non-group policies sold to individuals aged 64 to 66 in 2000 or 2001 by one of the
top five long-term care insurance companies and reached a similar conclusion.
5
  The Weiss data include a larger sample of companies offering similar policies but we excluded policies when
slight differences in policy structure (e.g., different benefit triggers) would make the estimates of loads non-
comparable. The smaller sample size for Scenario 4 is not due to limited availability of these policies per se, but
rather that Weiss gave the companies a choice to report either Scenario 3 or Scenario 4.


                                                                                                                        9
prohibiting gender-based pricing. More generally, it relates to a broader puzzle in many insurance markets

are of why firms do not use available information about expected utilization in pricing insurance (see e.g.

Finkelstein and Poterba, 2002).

    For a medium-generosity policy, such as a Scenario 2 policy covering all types of care with a 60-day

deductible, a 4-year benefit period, and a $100 maximum daily benefit, a 65-year old would pay nearly

$1,200 annually for a policy with constant nominal benefits. The same policy costs over $2,100 if the

maximum daily benefit escalates at a nominal rate of 5% per year. Premiums rise sharply with age, with

over a ten-fold premium increase from age 50 to age 85.

    Substantial price dispersion across companies is a common feature of many insurance markets,

including automobile insurance (e.g. Dahlby and West, 1986), life insurance (e.g. Brown and Goolsbee,

2002) and annuities (e.g. Mitchell et al., 1999). Such price dispersion is also evident in the long-term care

insurance market. For example, for the constant nominal benefit, Scenario 2 policy for a 65 year old

discussed above, annual premiums range from a low of $1,016 to a high of $2,010 (not shown). While

statistics on offer prices may overstate the amount of actual price dispersion if very little business is

transacted at the high-end of the pricing distribution, we show below that our estimates of the load are

very similar if we restrict our analysis to the top 5 companies.

3. Analytical Framework for Estimating Loads and Comprehensiveness

    We define the load, or price, on an insurance contract as the difference between unity and the ratio of

the expected present discounted value (EPDV) of benefits to the EPDV of premiums.6 The higher the

load, the lower the expected return for the premium; an actuarially fair policy has a load of 0.

    The load for a simple policy with no deductible and an unlimited benefit period is therefore given by:




6
  Our definition of the load is closely related to the “money’s worth” concept that has been widely used in other
insurance markets, such as annuities (e.g. Mitchell et al., 1999). In fact, the load is simply 1 – money’s worth.


                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                        Qt , s min{X t , s , Bt , s }
                                                       T   5

                                          ∑∑                     t                   
                      EPDV(Benefits)
                                          t = 0 s =1
                                                       
                                                       
                                                                Π
                                                                j =0
                                                                     (1 + i j )       
                                                                                      
          Load = 1 −                 = 1−                                                                 (1)
                     EPDV(Premiums)                                            
                                                                               
                                                              Qt , s Ps 
                                                    T    5

                                                 ∑∑           t                
                                                              Π (1 + i j ) 
                                                  t = 0 s =1

                                                              j =0             

While equation (1) omits deductibles and maximum benefit periods from the formula for notational

simplicity, we account for such features when calculating the loads for actual policies below. All financial

inputs are specified in nominal terms. The index t denotes calendar time in monthly increments, with

purchase occurring at t=0. The index s denotes the state of care that the individual is in; we allow for five

states of care: 1) receiving no paid care, 2) receiving paid home care, 3) residing in an assisted living

facility, 4) residing in a nursing home, and 5) dead. The middle three states involve long-term care

expenditures. Qt , s denotes the probability of being in health state s at time t, given that the individual was

out of care at the age of purchase (a requirement of most policies).7

    Because a typical insurance policy reimburses covered per-period care expenditures ( X t ,s ) up to a

                                                                                          {       }
maximum per-period benefit amount ( Bt ,s ) , the per-period benefits are min X t , s , Bt , s , . i denotes the

nominal short-term interest rate used to discount from period t back to period t-1 (with i0 = 0). Ps denotes

the per-period, nominal long-term care insurance premium. These premiums vary with the state of care (s)

since an individual does not pay premiums when receiving benefits, but are constant over time in nominal

terms.

    The comprehensiveness of a policy is defined similarly as the ratio of the expected present discounted

value of benefits from a policy to the ratio of the EPDV of total insurable care expenditures for which the

individual is at risk. As with the formula for the load, we present the formula for comprehensiveness for a



7
 In practice, we use age- and gender-specific care utilization probabilities but for notational simplicity we have
suppressed the gender subscript and use calendar time t to reflect the aging of the individual.


                                                                                                                     11
policy with no deductible and an unlimited benefit period for notational simplicity, but fully account for

such features in our calculations:

                                                                                    
                                                                                    
                                                  T Q 5
                                                   t ,s   min   {X        , B     }
                                                                               t ,s 
                                      ∑∑                    t
                                                                     t ,s
                                                                                     
                                      t = 0 s =1
                                                  
                                                  
                                                           Π
                                                           j =0
                                                                (1 +  i  j  )        
                                                                                     
                  Comprehensiveness =                                                          (2)
                                                                             
                                                                             
                                                T     5      Q    X
                                                          t , s t,s 
                                              ∑∑          t                  
                                                          Π (1 + i j ) 
                                              t = 0 s =1

                                                          j =0               

The policy comprehensiveness thus captures the expected share of long-term care expenditures that the

policy will cover.

    It is worth noting at this point how the public insurance programs Medicare and Medicaid affect

estimates of the policy’s comprehensiveness and load. Medicaid is the public health insurance program

for the indigent and pays for 35% long-term care expenditures (CBO, 2004). However, it is a secondary

payer; therefore, if the individual has private long-term care insurance, the private policy pays whatever

benefits it owes before Medicaid makes any payments. It thus does not affect estimation of benefit

comprehensiveness or load. Put differently, the load provides a measure of the net and gross expected

return on the policy to the insurance company, but only the gross return on the policy to the individual.

The net return to the individual will therefore be lower than the gross return to the extent that the policy

premium pays for benefits that would otherwise have been covered by Medicaid.

    Medicare is the public health insurance program for the elderly. Because it is a primary payer, any

care that is eligible for Medicare is not reimbursed by private insurance and is not included in our

estimate of per-period care expenditures ( X t ,s ) . Medicare pays for 16% of institutional care (specifically,

nursing home care) and 30% of home health care for the elderly (U.S. Congress, 2000). However,

because very little of Medicare-covered nursing home expenditures would be otherwise eligible for

private long-term care insurance benefits, we do not incorporate Medicare’s nursing home benefits into




                                                                                                             12
our estimation of comprehensiveness or of loads, which are based on insurable expenses.8 Medicare

coverage for home health care, by contrast, pays for services that would otherwise be eligible for private

insurance coverage. We therefore take account of Medicare in estimating policy loads and

comprehensiveness; the details are discussed in Section 4.2 below.

4. Data Sources

    We use the 2002 Weiss data described above for information on premiums ( Pt ,s ) and benefits ( Bt ,s ) .

This section describes the data for the remainder of the necessary inputs.

4.1 Data on care utilization (Qt ,s )

    One of the most important inputs for our analysis is the distribution of long-term care utilization risk.

We require information not only on nursing home utilization – for which there currently exist many

published studies (e.g. Dick et al., 1994; Kemper and Murtaugh, 1991; Murtaugh et al. 1997) – but also

information on utilization of assisted living facilities and home health care, both of which are covered by

most policies. We also need to be able to distinguish across types of individuals and types of care

utilization in the same manner as private insurance companies. Individuals tend to be denied non-group

long-term care insurance policies if they have any limitations to activities of daily living (ADLs) or any

cognitive impairment at the time of purchase (Murtaugh et al., 1995; Finkelstein and McGarry, 2003). In

addition, as noted earlier, long-term care insurance policies specify health conditions (known as “benefit

triggers”) that must be satisfied in order for the individual to be eligible to receive benefits for care

covered by the policy. To meet all of these requirements, we makes use of a “state of the art” model of

health and institutional transitions that was developed and provided to us by Jim Robinson, an actuary and

former member of the Society of Actuaries’ long-term care insurance valuation methods task force



8
  Medicare will cover nursing home stays only if: (1) they are stays in skilled nursing home days and (2) follow
within 30 days a hospital discharge. Medicare will only cover up to 100 days per spell of illness. Beyond 20 days,
Medicare requires a co-payment of $97 in 2000 (U.S. Congress, 2000); this is approximately equal to the $100
benefit cap. Finally, the criteria for Medicare coverage results in Medicare covering mostly stays that are for
recovery from acute illness; by contrast, as discussed earlier, long-term care insurance benefit triggers require that
there be little likelihood of recovery within 90 days (U.S. Congress, 2000).


                                                                                                                     13
(Society of Actuaries, 1996). The model has two components.9 The first uses data from the 1982, 1984,

1989 and 1994 National Long Term Care Surveys to estimate transition probabilities across seven

different health states, defined by the number of limitations to activities of daily living (ADLs) and

limitations to instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), the presence or absence of cognitive

impairment, and death. The transition model is based on a Continuous-Time Markov Chain that allows

the transition rates to vary with the sex and the age of the individual. The second component uses the

1985 National Nursing Home Survey as well as the National Long Term Care Surveys to estimate the

probability that individuals are in each of the five care states (no care, home care, assisted living, nursing

home, or death) as a function of age, gender, current health status, and the length of time in the health

status.

       Together, this information can be combined to produce Markov transition probabilities across care

states. The model also produces estimates of the number of hours of skilled home care and unskilled

home care provided during a home care episode. Because the model provides information not only on the

transitions across care states but also across the number of ADLs and IADLs and the presence or absence

of cognitive impairment, we can construct transition probabilities specifically for individuals who are, at

the time of purchase, healthy enough to be eligible for insurance. We can also identify which care

episodes satisfy the benefit triggers built into most policies.

       The estimates produced by the model are designed to be representative of the entire population. We

do not make any adjustments to reflect the possibility that moral hazard or adverse selection may result in

an insured population with different rates of care utilization than non-insured individuals. This is because

the utilization experience of insured individuals is quite similar to that of the population as a whole

(Society of Actuaries, 2002; Finkelstein and McGarry, 2003). Thus, these estimates are representative of

the insured population as well.

       The estimates do not incorporate any projected changes in morbidity or care utilization. This is

standard practice for the industry (see e.g. Tillinghast-Towers Perrin, 2002, and conversations with

9
    Readers interested in a more detailed description of the model are encouraged to consult Robinson (1996).


                                                                                                                14
several actuaries) as well as for academic research (e.g. Wiener et al., 1994). This practice may reflect the

substantial disagreement in the literature over the sign of projected changes in morbidity (compare e.g.

Manton et al., 1997 and Manton and Gu, 2001 to Lakdawalla et al., 2001) or in care utilization

conditional on morbidity (compare e.g. Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002 to CBO, 1999).

     The model has a very strong pedigree. Versions of the model have been used by insurance regulators,

private insurance companies, state agencies administering public long-term care benefit programs, and the

Society of Actuaries LTC Valuation Methods Task Force (Robinson, 2002). We spoke with numerous

actuaries in consulting firms, insurance companies, and the Society of Actuaries who confirmed that the

model is widely used to price long-term care insurance policies and that it is very highly regarded. We

also independently verified that the model produces estimates that are broadly consistent with published

estimates, where comparable; Appendix Table A summarizes the results of this validation exercise.

     Table 5 presents some summary statistics on care utilization in the Robinson model for 65-year old

men and women. To make the statistics relevant for someone’s long-term care insurance policy, the

statistics assume the individual is medically eligible for insurance at age 65 and counts care utilization

only if benefit triggers are satisfied. A 65-year old man has a 27 percent chance of ever using nursing

home care; a 65 year old woman has a 44 percent chance of ever using nursing home care. Among those

who use care, the amount of care used is also higher for women. For example, women who enter a

nursing home spend on average 2 years there and have a 12 percent chance of spending more than 5 years

there; for men who enter a nursing home, the average amount of time spent there is 1.3 years, and they

have only a 5 percent chance of spending more than 5 years there. These gender differences in utilization

are only partially explained by longevity differences.10 They likely also reflect the fact that elderly men

are more likely than elderly women to receive unpaid care from their spouses in lieu of formal, paid care

(Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002) as well as underlying health differences between men and women.




10
  For example, among individuals who survive until age 80, women have a 10 percent change of having used
nursing home care before age 80, compared to only 7 percent for men (results not shown).


                                                                                                             15
     There is substantial churning across types of care as well as exit from care for reasons other than

death. For example, a man who uses a nursing home has a 55% chance of also using home health care

(results not shown). In addition, almost two-thirds of individuals who use a nursing home will at some

point leave the nursing home alive; this is consistent with other studies (e.g. Dick et al., 1994) that

indicate a substantial amount of recovery from nursing home care. On the other hand, we find that about

half of individuals who use a nursing home will ultimately die in a nursing home (results not shown).

4.2 Other inputs

     Data on average national daily care costs for nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and home health

care ( X t , s ) are taken from Metlife Market Survey data (MetLife, 2002a; MetLife, 2002b). These data

were collected in order to determine pricing for the new federal long-term care insurance program. The

survey covers all 50 states and the District of Columbia. We use the national average costs because

insurance companies do not vary premiums with location. In addition, using a restricted access version of

the 2000 Health and Retirement Survey (HRS) that includes each individual’s state of residence, we

found no evidence of a statistically or substantively significant correlation between the average daily

nursing home cost in the state and the probability of holding long-term care insurance.

     The national average daily cost of nursing home care in 2002 is $143 per day for a semi-private room

(private rooms are more expensive). Care costs for an assisted living facility are on average about half

that, at $72 per day. Home health care is by far the least expensive type of care, and accounts for only

one-quarter of total long-term care expenditures (U.S. Congress, 2000). Using the data on hours of home

health care use described above, we estimate that even a current 90 year old male (female) in home health

care would only incur, on average, $30 ($45) per day of insurable home health care costs. Moreover, we

adjust home health care expenditures downward in estimating equations (1) and (2) to account for the fact

that Medicare pays an estimated 35% of home health care costs.11



11
  Our estimate of 35% is based on the fact that Medicare covers 30% of home health care expenditures (U.S.
Congress, 2000), and our estimate from the Robinson data that 85% of total home health care expenditures meet the
private benefit trigger. Since the health-related criteria for Medicare eligibility are more stringent than those for


                                                                                                                   16
    We project forward these estimates of 2002 long-term care costs using the general consensus that,

since the primary cost for all of these types of care is the labor input, they will grow at the rate of real

wage growth (Wiener et al., 1994, and conversations with industry officials).12 We use the Wiener et al.

(1994) and Abt (2001) assumption of 1.5 percentage point annual real growth in care costs, although we

also examine the sensitivity of our findings to both lower and higher assumptions about real cost growth.

    To put cost growth into nominal terms, we apply expected rates of inflation as of March 2002, the

date of the survey. The expected inflation rate is determined using the yield differential between nominal

U.S. Treasury securities and TIPS. For our nominal interest rates ( it ), we use the term structure on yields

of U.S. Treasury strips from this same date. In the analysis below we examine the sensitivity of our

findings to using the corporate term structure instead of the Treasury term structure for discounting.

5. Estimates of Loads and Benefit Comprehensiveness of Typical Purchased Policies

5.1 Basic results

    Table 6 reports the estimated load and comprehensiveness of the typical policy purchased by a 65

year old. Relating back to Table 3, this is a “scenario 2” policy with $100 constant nominal daily

benefits, covering all three types of long-term care with a 60 day deductible and a 4 year maximum

benefit period. The results are shown using a unisex actuarial table because policies are sold on a unisex

basis.

    The first row shows the results using the “base case” assumptions discussed above. Under these

assumptions, the typical policy purchased by a 65 year old has a load of 0.18. This indicates that a 65 year

old who purchases this policy receives, in expectation, only 82 cents in expected present discounted

benefits for every dollar he pays in expected present discounted value premiums.




“tax qualified” private insurance (see e.g. Bishop and Skwara, 1993; GAO, 1996; U.S. Congress 2000), we assume
that all Medicare home health care payments are for home health care that meets the private policy benefit triggers.
12
   The image of an individual in a nursing home hooked up to many machines is in fact a tiny share of the nursing
home population. As Wiener et al. (1994) note, “long-term care is extremely labor intensive, and much of it involves
hands-on, personal services, where opportunities for substantial gains in productivity are few.”


                                                                                                                 17
     It is surprisingly difficult to find estimates of loads in other insurance markets. However we were able

to compare our 18 percent load estimate for long-term care insurance policies to estimates of loads on life

annuities and on acute health insurance. The load for long-term care insurance is roughly comparable to

that found for life annuities which, for 65 year olds are in the range of 13 to 15 percent (Brown, Mitchell

and Poterba, 2002). Like long-term care insurance, life annuities are also sold by life insurance companies

to elderly consumers and are a relatively small market. The long-term care insurance load is higher than

the typical loads on acute health insurance, which is a much more substantial market; these are on the

order of 6 to 10 percent (Newhouse, 2002).13

     The second column of Table 6 indicates that the typical policy purchased by a 65 year old will cover

only about one-third (34 percent) of the individual’s expected present discounted value of long-term care

expenditures. The limited coverage is due primarily to the presence of the $100 constant nominal daily

benefit cap rather than to the 60-day deductible or 4-year maximum benefit period. For example, if we

re-estimate the comprehensiveness eliminating the deductible and maximum benefit period, the

comprehensiveness increases by only 44 percent (to 49 percent, results not shown). By contrast, if we

keep the deductible and maximum benefit period but remove the daily benefit cap so that all insurable

expenditures are reimbursed, the comprehensiveness increases by 100 percent (to 68 percent, results not

shown). This is because, at $143 per day for a semi-private room, current nursing home costs already

exceed the $100 daily benefit cap. Moreover, a 65 year old who purchases a policy now and eventually

enters a nursing home will not, on average, enter that nursing home for 18.5 years (see Table 5); by that

time, the $100 daily benefit cap will cover only one-third of his daily nursing home costs.

5.2 Results under alternative assumptions

      The remaining rows of Table 6 show the estimates for the load and comprehensiveness under

alternative assumptions. The first alternative shows the effect of using the higher term structure for BAA

corporate bonds instead of U.S. Treasury strips. Not surprisingly, this increases the load (from 0.18 to


13
  This is the estimate of the load on group health insurance. Loads on non-group health insurance can be as high as
25 to 40 percent, but the vast majority of acute health insurance policies sold are group policies (Newhouse, 2002).


                                                                                                                  18
0.27) because premium payments begin almost immediately while benefits do not begin, on average, for

another 15 to 20 years. Comprehensiveness also increases (but only slightly from 0.34 to 0.36); the ratio

of insured to total expenditures is higher in more heavily weighted earlier years, reflecting both the

limited benefit period and the fact that the fixed nominal daily benefit cap covers a declining fraction of

expenditures over time. The next two rows vary the real cost growth rate from the base case of 1.5 percent

to 3 percent (the assumption used by Mulvey and Li, 2002 and CBO, 1999) and 0.75 percent (the “lower

bound” assumption used by Abt, 2001). As expected, higher real cost growth results in lower loads but

also lower comprehensiveness while lower real cost growth results in higher loads and higher

comprehensiveness. The effect on loads is tempered however, by the presence of the $100 constant

nominal benefit cap since cost growth above the cap does not affect the load estimates.

     Given the large documented price dispersion in other insurance markets, we also estimated loads

based on the median premium for the policy offered by the top five sellers of long-term care insurance.

Table 6 shows that the load is essentially the same for this more limited sample.

     The next two rows consider the effect of a “spousal discount” on loads. Insurance companies do not

offer long-term care insurance policies that jointly cover a husband and wife. However, many companies

provide discounts on the premium if both members of the couple purchase a policy. Spousal discounts of

10 percent are common in the Weiss data. We estimate in the 2000 Health and Retirement Survey (HRS)

that about two-fifths of policies are held in households where both spouses are covered.14 Under the

generous assumption that all of these policies receive a spousal discount, the 10 percent spousal discount

reduces the average load to 0.14.

     The loads presented thus far are calculated from the perspective of an individual who buys a policy

and pays premiums until death. In practice, however, about 7 percent of policies each year lapse due to

failure to pay the regularly scheduled premiums within the time required; lapse rates are similar for both

genders (Society of Actuaries, 2002). This lapse rate will have a substantial impact on the estimated load

14
  This number is not artificially low due to possibility that there was a two-owner married couple in which one
spouse has died. In the 2000 HRS, we estimate that of currently married households in which at least one spouse has
insurance, 60 percent of these households have only one spouse holding insurance.


                                                                                                                19
because in the early years of the policy expected premium payments are substantially higher than

expected benefits; on average, it is only after 15 to 20 years that individuals begin receiving benefits.

Moreover, lapse activity usually results in the forfeiture of any future benefits; fewer than 3 percent of the

policies in the Weiss data provide any benefits after a policy lapses. In the last row of table 6, therefore,

we estimate the load assuming that the individual faces the insured-population average probability of

lapsing each year.15 Accounting for this lapse activity raises the estimate of the load to 0.51, almost a 3-

fold increase over the base case.

     The reasons for these policy lapses are not well understood. An industry survey of individuals who

had lapsed from their existing long-term care insurance policies found that the most common explanation

given for this lapsation was an “affordability problem”; most individuals who let their policy lapse do not

subsequently buy a new policy (HIAA, 1993). Dynamic selection – as insured individuals learn more

about their expected care utilization – may also be part of the explanation for lapsation. There is evidence

that individuals who let their long-term care insurance contract lapse have, ex-post, a lower risk if nursing

home use than individuals who were otherwise-equivalent at the time of purchase who do not drop out of

their contracts (Finkelstein et al., 2004).

5.3 Where does the load come from?

     As noted earlier, loads on private insurance products may be produced by administrative costs,

imperfect competition, asymmetric information and aggregate risk. If the estimated long-term care

insurance load was due primarily to the aggregate risk of medical cost inflation or increased care

utilization, we should expect to see loads decreasing with age. This is because at older ages, the

remaining time horizon for care – and hence the risk of an aggregate shock – is smaller. Figure 1

however indicates that loads rise with age, suggesting that the explanation for high loads lies elsewhere.

While inconsistent with aggregate risk, this age-load pattern is consistent with individuals having private

information about risk type that increases with age. Indeed, recent empirical evidence indicates that

15
 Data on lapse rates for non-group policies come from the Society of Actuaries (2002). It is possible that these data
may overstate lapse rates as terminations for unknown reasons (which may include death) are counted as a lapse.
However, a survey on this issue indicates that less than 10% of recorded lapses may in fact be deaths (HIAA, 1993).


                                                                                                                  20
asymmetric information exists in the private long-term care insurance market. However, asymmetric

information is unlikely to contribute to the baseline loads, as the average utilization of insured individuals

is similar to the utilization of the population as a whole (Finkelstein and McGarry, 2003).16

     By contrast, administrative costs are likely to contribute to the loads. Indeed, it is unrealistic to

presume that an insurance company will be able to price insurance in an actuarially fair manner, as they

must cover their expenses (including commissions for agents and brokers) and earn a normal profit in

order to stay in business over the long run. Estimates of administrative costs in the health insurance

industry as a whole vary from as low as 15 percent (Cutler and Zeckhauser, 2004), to as high as 40

percent for individual / small group policies (Council of Economic Advisers, 1994), and vary widely by

lines of insurance and by company (Mulligan and Philipson, 2003). Unfortunately, we have been unable

to find reliable estimates of administrative costs for long-term care insurance.

     Imperfect competition is also a likely contributor to the estimated loads. While markets for financial

products such as insurance are generally thought to be fairly competitive, analysis of the U.S. life

insurance industry suggests that it may be less efficient than other financial services industries such as

property-liability insurance and banking, and that price competition is relatively low (Cummins, 1999).

Moreover, the market for long-term care insurance is fairly concentrated. The top company (G.E.)

accounts for one-quarter of market sales and the top five companies account for two-thirds of the market

(LIMRA, 2002). On net, therefore, the evidence suggests that the existing loads arise from a combination

of administrative costs and imperfect competition, although it is not possible to distinguish the relative

contribution of the two using currently available data.

6. Can Supply Side Problems Explain the Limited Private Market?

     The preceding results indicate that most policies purchased in the private market are priced well in

excess of actuarially fair levels and they provide only very limited coverage. In this section, we

16
  Although individuals who have private information that they are higher risk are more likely to purchase insurance,
another group of individuals that tends to purchase insurance are unobservably more “cautious” about their health
and are lower risk than the insurance company would estimate. These two factors cancel each other out and produce
an insured population that, on average, has a similar risk profile to the population as a whole (Finkelstein and
McGarry, 2003).


                                                                                                                 21
investigate whether the high loads and limited benefits – and implicitly, the private market problems that

may be behind them – appear to be important factors in explaining the limited proportion of people who

buy private policies and the limited amount of insurance bought by those who do buy these policies. We

provide several pieces of complementary evidence that suggests that this is not the case.

6.1 Is pricing to blame?

     The results in Table 7 show a striking disparity in the loads by gender. This arises from the fact that

premiums are offered on a unisex basis (see Table 4) whereas utilization rates are much higher for women

(see Table 5). As a result, the base case estimates indicate that typical load for a 65 year-old male is 44

cents on the dollar, which means that the typical male who purchases a long-term care insurance policy

can expect to receive only 56 cents in benefits for every dollar spent in premiums. By contrast, the

premiums are actually better than actuarially fair for the typical woman, with loads of -0.04.17 In other

words, a 65 year-old woman would receive $1.04 in EPDV benefits for every dollar paid in EPDV

premiums.

     There are two related implications of these loads by gender, both of which suggest a limited role of

pricing. First, standard expected utility theory indicates that a risk averse individual will want to buy

insurance (in fact, full insurance) if the premium is actuarially fair. The fact that only 10 percent of

elderly women own long-term care insurance policies despite facing prices that are better than actuarially

fair suggests that something other than pricing is constraining demand for private long-term are insurance.

     Second, coverage rates are similar for men and for women despite markedly different loads. Despite

the enormous differences in loads by gender estimated in Table 7, the probability of having insurance is

approximately the same for men and for women (see Table 1). In addition, policies purchased by women

tend to be very similar to those purchased by men. If anything, most differences tend to be in the direction

of women purchasing slightly less comprehensive policies (shorter duration, lower daily benefit, etc),

although these differences are not significant (see Table 2). Clearly, there must be some other demand

17
  Note that the average load using unisex pricing is not simply the equally weighted average of the load on a man’s
and woman’s policies separately, because the unisex pricing approach implicitly places more weight on the woman,
due to her higher rates of utilization and survival.


                                                                                                                 22
side factor that is altering the effective load for men and for women, or else one would expect the

difference between a 44 percent load for men and a negative load for women would lead to differences in

purchase propensities. Even if one took the view that one must consider the probability of allowing a

policy to lapse, in which case the load for women is now positive (see Table 7) and suggests actuarially

unfair pricing, it is still the case that dramatically different load factors for men and women remain, but

do not lead to different utilization probabilities.

     One alternative explanation for the similarity in coverage rates for men and women that is not related

to price directly is that there may be high within-household correlation in coverage decisions. This does

not, however, appear to be the case. In the 2000 HRS, for example, we found that in married households

in which one spouse has purchased insurance, the probability that the other spouse purchases insurance is

only 40 percent.18 While this is considerably higher than the probability for any married individual (which

is about 12 percent), it also indicates that many married individuals make different purchase decisions

than their spouse. Since only about three-quarters of policies are held by married (as opposed to single)

individuals, overall only about two-fifths of policies are held in households in which both spouses are

covered.

6.2 Are quantities rationed?

     We found that the typical policy purchased contains very limited coverage. Various supply-side

market failures could result in more comprehensive policies not being offered, even if individuals were

willing to purchase them. Asymmetric information may produce such quantity-rationing as it may result

in their being no equilibrium price for a particular policy (see e.g. Akerlof, 1970 or Stiglitz and Weiss,

1981). Similarly, aggregate risk could lead to quantity rationing as a way of limiting the insurer’s

exposure to the “right tail” of the expenditure distribution.

     In fact, we find no evidence of quantity rationing. While typically purchased policies provide

limited benefits, the market currently offers substantially more comprehensive policies that are widely


18
  Married households in which only one spouse has insurance are split basically 50-50 in terms of whether it is the
husband or the wife that has insurance.


                                                                                                                 23
available at loads similar to those on less comprehensive policies. Table 8 shows the estimated

comprehensiveness and loads for a typical 65 year old for 8 different policies that, according to the Weiss

data, are widely available. Moving down the rows, the policies are increasing in comprehensiveness. To

conserve space, we report results under the base case assumptions only; in results not reported, we find

that all of the patterns discussed below remain present under the various alternative assumptions from

Table 6.

     The comprehensiveness estimates in Table 8 indicate that policies covering over 90 percent of the

expected present value of long-term care expenditures are available in the market. The key to getting such

a policy is to increase the daily benefit cap. Policies paying constant nominal benefits cover only between

one-quarter and one-half of the expected present value of insurable long-term care expenditures for a 65-

year-old male or female. By contrast, these same policies cover substantially more (between one-half and

almost all) of expenditures if they escalate at 5% per year in nominal terms. The fact that such

comprehensive policies are available indicates that supply-side market failures such as asymmetric

information do not appear to prevent the offering of comprehensive insurance policies.19

     A second key result in Table 8 is that the loads do not rise systematically with the comprehensiveness

of the policy. For example, for women, loads for a given policy scenario are lower on the larger policy

(i.e. escalating vs. constant nominal benefits); however, for a given benefit time-profile, loads tend to be

higher on policy scenarios with more comprehensiveness benefits.20 This lack of a clear pricing pattern

by comprehensiveness is consistent with the utilization-based evidence in Finkelstein and McGarry

(2003) that there are not systematic risk differences across individuals who purchase more or less

comprehensive policies.


19
   Of course, as noted by Cutler (1996), as a result of their daily benefit caps, none of these policies covers the
aggregate risk of dramatically increased nursing home costs. It is unlikely, however, that daily benefit caps primarily
represent a means of rationing insurance coverage against such aggregate risk. The data indicate that older buyers
who – due to the greater proximity of purchase age with expected care use face less aggregate risk than younger
buyers – not only purchase binding daily benefit caps but in fact purchase lower daily benefit amounts and are less
likely to purchase policies with benefit escalation (HIAA 2000a).
20
   The sole exception is Scenario 4, which is likely an artifact of the much more limited set of companies in the data
providing premium information on this policy. When we limit the sample to the companies who offer Scenario 4 and
other scenarios, scenario 4 always has a higher load than the other scenarios.


                                                                                                                   24
     The availability of more comprehensive policies at similar loads suggests that, while typically

purchased policies are of limited comprehensiveness, it is not the case that supply side imperfections have

led to quantity rationing and thus rendered comprehensive policies unavailable. Rather, consumers are

choosing not to buy more comprehensive policies, even though they are available at comparable loads to

less comprehensive ones. Nor is it the case that high loads simply limit demand more for more

comprehensive policies. Were this true, we should see women purchasing more comprehensive policies

than men. The data in Table 2 however suggest that, if anything, women purchase less comprehensive

policies than men. Again, this points to the existence of demand-side factors that in some sense raise the

effective load above that calculated here.

     There is, of course, a different form of quantity rationing that does exist in this market, namely, that

individuals in observably poor health are often denied insurance coverage, at least by the large long-term

care insurance companies (Murtaugh et al., 1995; Weiss, 2002). The practice of denying individuals

rather than offering them higher prices is interesting given the absence of pricing regulation preventing

the offering of high prices. It may reflect issues of reputation or brand name, or it may reflect private

market failures such as asymmetric information which may be more of a problem for people in worse

health. However, this limited type of quantity rationing is unlikely to be a major factor in explaining the

small size of the private long-term care insurance market. An examination of applications from the major

long-term care insurance companies – as well as several of their underwriting guides – indicates that they

deny coverage to individuals who have limitations with respect to activities of daily livings (bathing,

eating, dressing, toileting, walking, and maintaining continence), use of mechanical devices (wheelchair,

walker, crutches, quad cane, oxygen) or suffer from cognitive impairment. We estimate in the 2000 HRS

that about 85 percent of individuals aged 60 to 70 would meet these eligibility requirements.21

     In total, the evidence on pricing and benefit comprehensiveness leads to two findings. First, that

commonly purchased policies tend to be expensive and cover only a small fraction of overall long-term


21
 Our estimate is comparable to that found by other investigators using different data and methods. For example,
Murtaugh et al. (1995) estimate that 12 to 23 percent of 65 year olds would be ineligible for insurance.


                                                                                                                  25
care expenditures. Second, the existence of these high prices and limited benefit is insufficient to explain

the small size of this market. The evidence from prices and benefit availability relative to purchase

behavior suggests that demand side factors are important in understanding the limited size of the market.

7. Conclusion

    The limited size of the market for private long-term care insurance in the U.S. has spawned a number

of theoretical papers exploring a variety of both demand- and supply-side explanations for the lack of

widespread private long-term care insurance. Yet very little evidence exists with which to answer even

the most basic empirical questions about the nature of this market. This paper brings to bear new

evidence on the existing market for long term care insurance policies, and in so doing argues that supply

side market limitations are not the primary reason for the small size of the market.

    The four major supply side hypotheses – administrative costs, imperfect competition, asymmetric

information, and aggregate risk – all have at least one of two empirical implications. First, prices should

be higher than actuarially fair. Second, available policies should be limited in their benefit

comprehensiveness (“quantity rationing”). We begin by showing that, based on the characteristics of

commonly purchased policies, both of these empirical predictions appear to hold. The typical policy

purchased by a 65 year old has a load of 18 percent and covers only about one-third of expected long-

term care expenditures.

    However, we also provide evidence that neither of these factors appear capable of explaining the

limited size of the market. We find enormous differences in loads between men and women – our central

estimates suggest the load on the typical policy purchased by a 65 year old man is 0.44, compared to -0.04

for the typical 65 year old woman – yet virtually no difference in insurance coverage. We also find that

more comprehensive policies are widely available at comparable loads to the more limited, purchased

policies. This suggests that quantity rationing is not a primary factor in this market.

    The results of this paper therefore imply that the limited size of the market is not driven by supply

side imperfections, but rather demand side factors. Possible demand-side factors that have been suggested

by the theoretical literature include limited consumer rationality and the existence of substitutes for


                                                                                                            26
private insurance, such as informal care provided by family members or the public Medicaid program.

Our results indicate that, to explain existing empirical patterns, a demand-side story must not simply

reduce the desirability of insurance for everyone, but also be able to explain why men and women insure

at a comparable rate, despite the very different load factors that they face in the private market.

    In this regard, one particularly promising demand-side explanation is the role of Medicaid. In separate

work (Brown and Finkelstein, 2004) we have estimated that a large part of the premium for private

insurance policies goes to pay for benefits that simply replace benefits that would otherwise have been

provided by Medicaid. Because women’s expected lifetime utilization of long-term care is much greater

than men, women are even more likely than men to end up on Medicaid, with or without private

insurance. As a result, the “implicit tax” that Medicaid imposes on private insurance policies is

substantially larger for women than for men. We consider further explorations of Medicaid’s role in this

market a very important avenue for additional research.




                                                                                                          27
REFERENCES

American Association of Retired Persons (AARP). 2002. “Long-Term Care Insurance: An Assessment of
States’ Capacity to Review and Regulate Rates.” February, MS # 2002-02.

Abt Associates. 2001.”Financing Long-Term Care for the Baby Boom Generation.” HSRE Working
Paper 8.

American Council of Life Insurers (ACLI). 2001. Life Insurers Fact Book, 2001. Washington, DC.

Akerlof, George. 1970. “The Market for “Lemons”: Quality, Uncertainty and The Market Mechanism.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics (74): pp. 488-500.

Bishop, Christine and Kathleen Skwara. 1993. “Recent Growth of Medicare Home Health.” Health
Affairs (Fall): 95-110.

Brown, Jeffrey R. and Amy Finkelstein. 2004. “The Interaction of Public and Private Insurance: Medicaid
and the Long-Term Care Insurance Market.” Unpublished working paper.
http://www.nber.org/~afinkels/papers/BFMcaid.pdf

Brown, Jeffrey R. and Austan Goolsbee. 2002. “Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive?
Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry.” Journal of Political Economy, 110 (3), pp. 481-507.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Olivia Mitchell and James Poterba. 2002. “Mortality Risk, Inflation Risk and
Annuity Products.” In O. Mitchell, Z. Bodie, B. Hammond, and S. Zeldes, Innovations in Retirement
Financing, University of Pennsylvania Press: Philadelphia, PA, pp. 175-197.

Cohen, Marc and Maurice Weinrobe. 2000. “Tax Deductibility of Long-Term Care Insurance Premiums.”
HIAA, March.

Cohen, Marc. Forthcoming. “Private Long-Term Care Insurance.” Journal of Aging and Health.

Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 1999. “Projections on Expenditures for Long-Term Care Services
for the Elderly.” Government Printing Office: Washington, DC. March.

Congressional Budget Office (CBO). 2004. “Financing Long-Term Care for the Elderly.” Government
Printing Office: Washington, DC. April.

Council of Economic Advisers. 1994. Economic Report of the President. Government Printing Office:
Washington DC.

Cummins, J. David. 1999. “Efficiency in the U.S. Life Insurance Industry: Are Insurers Minimizing
Costs and Maximizing Revenues?” In J. David Cummins and Anthony M. Santomero, eds. Changes in
Life Insurance Industry: Efficiency, Technology and Risk Management. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
pp. 75 – 115.

Cutler, David. 1996. “Why Don’t Markets Insure Long-Term Risk?” Unpublished working paper.
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/dcutler/papers/ltc_rev.pdf




                                                                                                    28
Cutler, David and Richard Zeckhauser. 2004. “Extending the Theory to Meet the Practice of Insurance.”
Unpublished working paper. April.
http://post.economics.harvard.edu/faculty/dcutler/papers/cutler_zeckhauser_theory_and_practice_of_insu
rance.pdf

Dahlby, Bev and Douglas S. West. 1986. “Price Dispersion in an Automobile Insurance Market.”
Journal of Political Economy, 94 (April), pp. 418-38.

Dick, Andrew, Alan Garber and Thomas MaCurdy. 1994. “Forecasting Nursing Home Utilization of
Elderly Americans.” In David Wise (ed) Studies in the Economics of Aging.

Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry. 2003. “Private Information and Its Effect on Market
Equilibrium: New Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance.” NBER WP 9957.

Finkelstein, Amy, Kathleen McGarry and Amir Sufi. 2004. “Dynamic Inefficiencies in Insurance
Markets: Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance.” Unpublished working paper.

Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2002. “Selection Effects in the United Kingdom Individual
Annuities Market.” Economic Journal Vol 112, No. 476, pp.28-50.

Froot, Kenneth. 1999. “Introduction.” In Kenneth Froot (ed) The Financing of Catastrophe Risk.
University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

General Accounting Office. 1996. “Medicare: Home Health Utilization Expands While Program Controls
Deteriorate.” Report to the Chairman, Special Committee on Aging, U.S. Senate. Government Printing
Office: Washington, D.C.

Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA). 1993. “Survey Results: Why Do Policyholders
Terminate Their Long-Term Care Insurance Policies?” Washington D.C.

Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA). 2000a. “Who Buys LTC Insurance in 2000?”
Washington D.C.

Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA) 2000b. “LTC Insurance in 1997 – 1998.” Washington
D.C.

Health Insurance Association of America (HIAA). 2001. “Who Buys Long-Term Care Insurance in the
Workplace? A Study of Employer Long-Term Care Insurance Plans 2000-2001.” Washington D.C.

Kemper, Peter and Christopher Murtaugh. 1991. “Lifetime Use of Nursing Home Care.” New England
Journal of Medicine 324: pp. 595-600.

Kunreuther, Howard. 1978. Disaster Insurance Protection: Public Policy Lessons. New York: Wiley.

Lakdawalla, Darius, Jay Bhattacharya, and Dana Goldman. 2001. “Are the Young Becoming More
Disabled?” NBER Working Paper 8247.

Lakdawalla, Darius and Tomas Philipson. 2002. “The Rise of Old-Age Longevity and the Market for
Long-Term Care.” American Economic Review Vol 92, Number 1 pp. 295-306.




                                                                                                    29
Lewis, Stephanie, John Wilkin and Mark Merlis. 2003. “Regulation of Private Long-term Care Insurance:
Implementation Experience and Key Issues.” Prepared for The Kaiser Family Foundation, March.
http://www.kff.org/insurance/loader.cfm?url=/commonspot/security/getfile.cfm&PageID=14371

Life Insurance Marketing Research Association (LIMRA). 2001. “Individual Medicare Supplement and
Long-Term Care Insurance.”

Life Insurance Marketing Research Association (LIMRA). 2002. “Individual Long-term care Insurance.”

Manton, Kenneth, Larry Corder and Eric Stallard. 1997. “Chronic Disability Trends in the Elderly United
States Populations: 1982 – 1994.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Vol 94, pp.2593-
2598. March.

Manton, Kenneth and XiLiang Gu. 2001. “Changes in the Prevalence of Chronic Disability in the United
States Black and Nonblack Population Above Age 65 from 1982 to 1999.” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, Vol 98, no 11, pp. 6354-6359, May.

MetLife Mature Market Institute. 2002a. “MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home and Home Care
Costs 2002.”

MetLife Mature Market Institute. 2002b. “MetLife Survey of Assisted Living Costs 2002.”

Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown. 1999. “New Evidence
on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities.” American Economic Review, 89(December), pp.1299-
1318.

Mulligan, Casey and Tomas Philipson. 2003. “Insurance Market Participation Under Symmetric
Information.” unpublished mimeo.

Mulvey, JaneMarie and Annelise Li. 2002. “Long-Term Care Financing: Options for the Future.” Benefits
Quarterly, Second Quarter: pp.7-14.

Murtaugh, Christopher, Peter Kemper and Brenda Spillman. 1995. “Risky Business: Long-Term Care
Insurance Underwriting.” Inquiry 32 pp. 371-284.

Murtaugh, Christopher, Peter Kemper, Brenda Spillman, and Barbara Carlso. 1997. “Amount,
Distribution, and Timing of Lifetime Nursing Home Use.” Medical Care (35): 3 pp. 204-218.

National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). 2002a. “Executive Summary of Amendments
to the Long-Term Care Insurance Model Regulation.” January.

National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC). 2002b. “State Survey of Long-Term Care
Insurance Rating Practices and Consumer Disclosure Amendments.” September.

National Center for Health Statistics, 2002. Health, United States, 2002 With Chartbook on Trends in the
Health of Americans. Hyattsville, Maryland.

Newhouse, Joseph. 2002. Pricing the Priceless: A Health Care Conundrum. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.

Norton, Edward. 2000. “Long-term Care.” In AJ Culyer and JP Newhouse (eds) Handbook of Health
Economics, vol 1, ch 17. Elsevier Science.


                                                                                                      30
Pauly, Mark. 1989. “Optimal Public Subsidies of Nursing Home Insurance in the United States.” The
Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Vol 14, No 50, pp.3-10.

Pauly, Mark. 1990. “The Rational Nonpurchase of Long-Term-Care Insurance.” Journal of Political
Economy 98(1): pp. 153-168.

Robinson, James. 1996. “A Long-Term Care Status Transition Model,” presented at the 1996 Bowles
Symposium on the Old-Age Crisis: Actuarial Opportunities. Georgia State University, September.

Robinson, James. 2002. “A Long-Term Care Status Transition Model.” Mimeo, University of Wisconsin,
Madison.

Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz. 1976. “An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November), pp.629-649.

Sloan, Frank and Edward Norton. 1997. “Adverse Selection, Bequests, Crowding Out, and Private
Demand for Insurance: Evidence from the Long-Term Care Insurance Market,” Journal of Risk and
Uncertainty 15: pp. 201-219.

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information.”
American Economic Review 71(3): pp. 393-410.

Society of Actuaries. 1996. “Long-Term Care Insurance Valuation Methods; Society of Actuaries Long-
Term Care Insurance Valuation Methods Task Force.” Transactions of the Society of Actuaries, 1995. vol
47. pp.599-773.

Society of Actuaries. 2002. “Long-Term Care Experience Committee InterCompany Study 1984-1999.”
http://www.soa.org/sections/intercompany_study.pdf.

Tillinghast - Towers Perrin. 2002. “2002 Pricing Methodology Survey.” August.

United States Congress, Committee on Ways and Means (2000). Green Book 2000: Background Material
on Programs Under the Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and Means, Washington DC: GPO.

Weiss Ratings Inc. 2002. “Weiss Ratings’ Consumer Guide to Long-Term Care Insurance.” Palm Beach
Gardens, Fl.

Wiener, Joshua, Laurel Hixon Illston, and Raymond Hanley. 1994. Sharing the Burden: Strategies for
Public and Private Long-Term Care Insurance. The Brookings Institution, Washington DC.

Wiener, Joshua, Jane Tilly and Susan Goldenson. 2000. “Federal and State Initiatives to Jump Start the
Market for Private Long-Term Care Insurance.” The ElderLaw Journal 8(1): pp. 57-99.




                                                                                                         31
Table 1: 2000 Private long-term care insurance coverage rate among the elderly in the HRS
                          Whole Men Women            Married    Single            Wealth Quartile
                          Sample                                            1      2    3       4

Long-term care                10.5       10.7     10.1         11.8          8.4          2.8    5.9   11.5     19.4
insurance coverage rate
Note: Sample consists of individuals in 2000 HRS aged 60 and over. Average age is 74. Sample size is 14,937. All
means are weighted using household weights.




Table 2: Characteristics of Individual Long-Term Care Insurance Policies Purchased in 2000
                                                           Percent of
                                                                          Percent of     Percent of
                 Attributes of Policies                  Entire Sample
                                                                             Men          Women
TYPES OF POLICIES SOLD
    Nursing Home Only                                                     14%               12%               16%
    Nursing Home and Home Health Care                                      77                80                74
    Home Health Care Only                                                  9                 8                 10

DEDUCTIBLE
    0 days                                                                23%               22%               24%
    15-20 days                                                             3                 2                 3
    30-60 days                                                             16                16                19
    90-100 days                                                            55                59                51
    > 100 days                                                             3                 4                 3

NURSING HOME BENEFIT PERIOD
    1-2 years                                                            17%               16%              19%
    3 years                                                               23                23               22
    4 years                                                               14                12               15
    5 years                                                               11                12               10
    6 years                                                                5                 4                2
    Lifetime Benefit                                                      30                34               32
    Average duration among Non-Lifetime Policies                       5.5 years         5.6 years        5.3 years

PERCENT CHOOSING INFLATION PROTECTION                                     41%               42%               41%

NURSING HOME DAILY BENEFIT
    up to $30                                                              1%               1%                1%
    $31-$59                                                                 5                5                 6
    $60-$89                                                                17               16                18
    $90-$119                                                               43               42                44
    $120 and Over                                                          34               36                31
Source: LifePlans, Inc. survey of 5,407 policies purchased in 2000 based on a random sample of policies purchased by
12 companies representing more than 80 percent of sales in 1999. Average age of the buyers is 67. First column is taken
directly from HIAA (2000a). Estimates by gender are based on a custom tabulation done by LifePlans, Inc. at the
request of the authors.




                                                                                                                    32
Table 3: Description of common policy scenarios for which prices are listed in Weiss data
                            Scenario 1         Scenario 2         Scenario 3          Scenario 4

Covers Nursing Home                  YES                  YES                   YES                   YES

Covers Assisted Living               YES                  YES                   YES                   YES
Facility

Covers Home and                      NO                   YES                   YES                   YES
Community-Based Care

Deductible                         90 Day                60 day                30 days               0 days

Benefit Period                     2 Year                 4 year             Unlimited             Unlimited

Daily Benefit                       $100                  $100                  $100                  $100
Note: Deductible specifies the number of days in otherwise-covered care during which no benefits are paid toward the
policyholder’s expenses. Benefit period gives the maximum length of time for which the policy will pay the daily
benefit. The daily benefit gives the maximum amount paid by the company per day toward covered care. In all of the
policies studied, the daily benefit is the same across covered care states.




                                                                                                                   33
Table 4: Descriptive statistics on annual median premiums in 2002
                              Age 50     Age 55     Age 60     Age 65     Age 70     Age 75     Age 80     Age 85

Scenario 1:
- Covers Facility Care only
- 90 day deductible
- 2 year benefit period
  Constant Benefit              210        270        360        530        843       1,410      2,470      3,986
  Escalating (5%)               447        558        752       1,016      1,470      2,218      3,320      4,846

Scenario 2:
- All care covered
- 60 day deductible
- 4 year benefit period
  Constant Benefit              459        597        821       1,192      1,907      3,232      5,156      7,707
  Escalating (5%)              1,032      1,271      1,572      2,140      3,268      5,038      7,565      10,189


Scenario 3:
- All care covered
- 30 day deductible
- Unlimited benefit period
  Constant Benefit              751        912       1,280      1,872      3003       5,004      7,875      10,411
  Escalating (5%)              1,630      1,910      2,490      3,450      5,112      7,843      11,930     13,857

Scenario 4:
- All care covered;
- 0 day deductible;
- Unlimited benefit period
  Constant Benefit              602        843       1,147      1,698      2,616      4,345      8,290      10,071
  Escalating (5%)              1,565      2,007      2,496      3,326      4,509      6,613      11,150     12,327

Note: “Premium” refers to median premium. All policies have $100 maximum daily benefit for any covered care.
“Facility care” refers to nursing home and assisted living facilities. “All care” also includes home health care. All
companies quote unisex prices. Weiss requests information on three policy scenarios, with the third defined as either
Scenario 3 or Scenario 4 (the company selects). The somewhat anomalous result that median premiums are lower for
(more generous) Scenario 4 policies than (less generous) Scenario 3 policies arises from heterogeneity in the set of
companies offering these different policies because of whether they chose to report Scenario 3 or Scenario 4.
Comparisons of premiums across ages between 50 and 75 or between men and women are not subject to this difficulty
since companies that offer a given policy will tend to offer it for all of the ages reported and at a unisex price




                                                                                                                     34
Table 5: Descriptive Statistics of Care Utilization for 65 year old, from Robinson Model
                                         Probability of Use              Avg Age      Duration of Use (Among Users)                      Exit and reentry
                                                                         of First                                                         (among users)
                             Prob. Prob. ever use, Prob. ever use, Use             Avg Years Prob use       Prob use                  Prob ever     Avg #
                             Ever cond’l on living cond’l on             (among    Spent in     more than   more than                 exit to non- of
                             Use     to 75              living to 90     users)    Care         1 year      5 years                   death state spells
 Nursing Home Men             0.27         0.33             0.46             83        1.3          0.33        0.05                      0.65        1.28
 (NH)             Women 0.44               0.49             0.59             84        2.0          0.42        0.12                      0.66        1.39

 Assisted          Men         0.12          0.14            0.18                82          0.58           0.16           0.01           0.90        1.18
 Living Facility   Women       0.20          0.22            0.26                85          0.48           0.13           0.01           0.93        1.26
 (ALF)
 Facility Care     Men         0.28          0.34            0.47                83           1.5           0.38           0.07           0.60        1.27
 (NH or ALF)       Women       0.46          0.51            0.61                84           2.3           0.48           0.15           0.62        1.37

 Home Care         Men         0.29          0.31            0.34                79           1.9           0.52           0.09           0.67        1.45
 (HC)              Women       0.35          0.37            0.39                81           2.3           0.52           0.15           0.77        1.68

 Any Care (NH Men               0.40           0.46           0.55                 80            2.9          0.77             0.17           0.33       1.20
 or ALF or           Women 0.54                0.59           0.68                 82            4.2          0.85             0.31           0.35       1.27
 HC)
Note: All statistics are reported for the version of the model used for all of the analysis in the paper. Specifically, all individuals are assumed to be
healthy enough to be eligible for private insurance at the time of purchase (here, age 65) and care utilization is measured as care utilization by
individuals whose health characteristics simultaneously satisfy the benefit triggers required for care costs to be reimbursable by insurance contracts. See
text for further details.




                                                                                                                                                             35
Table 6: Comprehensiveness and Loads on Typical Policy Purchased by a 65 Year Old
                                     Comprehensiveness                      Load
Base Case                                  0.34                              .18

Alternative assumptions
Corporate interest rate                                 0.36                                     .27
Real cost growth 3% / year                              0.28                                     .11
Real cost growth 0.75% / year                           0.38                                    .21
Top five companies                                      ----                                     .19
Spousal Discount (10%)                                  ----                                    .14
Assuming random lapsation                               ----                                    0.51
Note: Policy covers all three types of care (home health care, assisted living facility and nursing home), has a 60 days
deductible, 4 year benefit period, and pays a $100 constant nominal daily benefit; this is Scenario 2 from the Weiss data.
All estimates are done using unisex transition probabilities. Load is calculated using median premiums. “Base case”
uses the Treasury term structure for the nominal interest rate, real cost growth of 1.5% per year, and all companies in
the Weiss data. The remaining rows show the estimates when various assumptions in the “base case” are altered.




Table 7: Loads of Typical Policy Purchased for 65 Year Old, By Gender
                                              Male                                            Female
Base Case                                      0.44                                            -0.04

Alternative assumptions
Corporate interest rate                                 0.50                                    0.07
Real cost growth 3% / year                              0.40                                   -0.12
Real cost growth 0.75% / year                           0.46                                  -0.004
Top five companies                                      0.45                                   -0.03
Spousal Discount 10%
Spousal Discount 25%
Assuming random lapsation                               0.65                                    0.38
Note: Policy covers all three types of care (home health care, assisted living facility and nursing home), has a 60 days
deductible, 4 year benefit period, and pays a $100 constant nominal daily benefit; this is Scenario 2 from the Weiss data.
All estimates are done using gender-specific transition probabilities. Load is calculated using median premiums. All
estimates use the Treasury term structure for the nominal interest rate, real cost growth of 1.5% per year, and all
companies in the Weiss data.




                                                                                                                      36
Table 8: Comprehensiveness and loads of available policies; estimates are all for 65 year olds.
                                                                                 Male            Female
                                                                             Comp Load Comp Load
Constant Nominal Benefits
Scenario 1: Facility only,       90 day deductible, two year benefit period   0.27    0.28    0.21    -0.22
Scenario 2: All 3 types of care, 60 day deductible, four year benefit period  0.38    0.44    0.32    -0.04
Scenario 3: All 3 types of care, 30 day deductible, unlimited benefit period  0.49    0.55    0.47     0.03
Scenario 4: All 3 types of care, no deductible,    unlimited benefit period   0.51    0.48    0.48    -0.10

Benefits Escalate at 5% per year
Scenario 1: Facility only,       90 day deductible, two year benefit period                       0.58        0.20      0.49      -0.47
Scenario 2: All 3 types of care, 60 day deductible, four year benefit period                      0.68        0.45      0.59      -0.08
Scenario 3: All 3 types of care, 30 day deductible, unlimited benefit period                      0.88        0.56      0.91      -0.03
Scenario 4: All 3 types of care, no deductible,    unlimited benefit period                       0.92        0.52      0.94      -0.09
Note: Policy covers all three types of care (home health care, assisted living facility and nursing home), has a 60 days
deductible, 4 year benefit period, and pays a $100 constant nominal daily benefit; this is Scenario 2 from the Weiss data.
All estimates are done using gender-specific transition probabilities. Load is calculated using median premiums. All
estimates use the Treasury term structure for the nominal interest rate, real cost growth of 1.5% per year, and all
companies in the Weiss data.




                                                   Figure 1: Loads By Age
         0.45


          0.4


         0.35


          0.3


         0.25
  Load




          0.2


         0.15


          0.1


         0.05


           0
                    50               55               60              65               70                75              80
                                                                      Age


         Note: Policy covers all three types of care with 60 day deductible, 4 year benefit period, $100 constant nominal daily
         benefit . Loads calculated using median premiums, unisex transition probabilities, and base case assumptions.




                                                                                                                                  37
Appendix Table A1: Comparison of nursing home (NH) utilization estimates: Robinson model and other published studies (65 year old).
Model           Data Sources                 Probability of ever    Average age of first entry into nursing Expected time in  % of those who enter
                                          entering a nursing home        home (conditional on entry)        nursing home      nursing home who
                                                                                                            (conditional on   spend more than
                                                                                                            entry)

                                                 Male    Female     Unisex      Male       Female         Unisex              Unisex            1 year      5 years
                                                                                                                                               (Unisex)    (unisex)
Robinson Model      NLTCS (1982, 1984,           0.30      0.48      0.39       83           84          83 (mean)           1.8 years           40%         11%
                    1989 and 1994) and                                        (median)     (median)
                    NNHS (1985)

Dick et al (1994)   NLTCS (1982, and 1984)                           0.35       81           84                              1.8 years           40%         12%
                    and NNHS (1985)                                           (median)     (median)

Kemper and      1986 National Mortality          0.33      0.52      0.43                                83 (mean)                               55%         21%
Murtaugh (1991) Followback Survey

Murtaugh et al.     1985 NNHS                                        0.39                                                    2.7 years           51%         20%
(1997)

Wiener at al.       NLTCS (1982, 1984) and                           0.49                                                    2.2 years           45%         14%
                    NNHS (1985)

Note: All estimates for Robinson model are based on a version that estimates care utilization without regard to whether the care satisfies policy benefit triggers and
without regard to the health condition of the individual at age 65. This is done to make the Robinson estimates comparable to published estimates that do not make
these restrictions. The Robinson estimates used in the analysis in the paper, however, do incorporate these important restrictions.




                                                                                                                                                                   38
