                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE COMOVEMENT OF RETURNS
                  AND INVESTMENT WITHIN THE MULTINATIONAL FIRM

                                              Mihir A. Desai
                                              C. Fritz Foley

                                          Working Paper 10785
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10785


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




This paper was prepared for the 2004 NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics in Reykjavik,
Iceland. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the
International Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under
arrangements that maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The authors thank José Campa, Fabio Canova,
Richard Clarida, Jeffrey Frankel, Francesco Giavezzi, Evi Pappa, Bill Zeile, and other seminar participants
for helpful comments. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect official positions of
the U.S. Department of Commerce. Desai thanks the Division of Research at Harvard Business School for
generous financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Mihir A. Desai and C. Fritz Foley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Comovement of Returns and Investment Within the Multinational Firm
Mihir A. Desai and C. Fritz Foley
NBER Working Paper No. 10785
September 2004
JEL No. F21, F23, F36, F42, G15

                                              ABSTRACT

Can financial integration, particularly the cross-border investments of multinational firms, help
explain the synchronization of business cycles? This paper presents evidence on the comovement
of returns and investment within U.S. multinational firms to address this question. These firms
constitute significant fractions of economic output and investment in most large economies,
suggesting that they could create significant economic linkages. Aggregate measures of rates of
return and investment rates of U.S. multinational firms located in different countries are highly
correlated across countries. Firm-level regressions demonstrate that rates of return and investment
rates of affiliates are highly correlated with the rates of return and investment of the affiliate's parent
and other affiliates within the same parent system, controlling for country and industry factors. The
evidence on these interrelationships and the importance of multinationals to local economies
suggests that global firms may be an important channel for transmitting economic shocks. This
evidence also sheds light on asset pricing puzzles related to the diversification benefits provided by
multinational firms.

Mihir A. Desai
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

C. Fritz Foley
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
ffoley@hbs.edu
1.     Introduction

       To what degree do increasing levels of financial integration amongst the world’s
major economies lead to changes in the synchronization of business cycles? In particular,
what role could the dramatic increases in foreign direct investment play in explaining the
comovement of aggregate measures of economic activity? This paper sheds light on
these questions by providing facts about the scope of foreign direct investment in
different countries and the correlations in investment and returns of distinct U.S.
multinational operations around the world.

       The relevance of a world factor in explaining movements in economic aggregates
appears to be uncontroversial. What is less well understood is what factors might
account for the high degrees of correlation in macroeconomic variables. High levels of
financial and trade integration, as pointed out by Frankel and Rose (1998) and Heathcote
and Perri (2002), can theoretically lead to either increasingly idiosyncratic or correlated
movements in economic aggregates. The link between financial and trade integration and
the synchronization of business cycles remains an open question, with somewhat
contradictory evidence emerging from econometric analysis of aggregate data.

       Rather than filter the economy-wide data in a distinctive way, we approach this
question with micro data on the behavior of U.S. multinational companies (MNCs) and
emphasize the role that linkages within these firms may play in creating global linkages.
In order to explore this channel, we pose a series of questions about the patterns of U.S.
multinational activity around the world. First, are the activities of multinational firms
sufficiently important to local economies to create these linkages? Second, is there any
evidence that aggregate measures of multinational activity comove in a manner that is
distinctive from the behavior of local firms around the world? Finally, is there evidence
that activities of U.S. multinationals in the U.S. or in other host countries help explain
affiliate investment plans and rates of returns after controlling for conditions in the
affiliate host country and industry? Put differently, is multinational affiliate performance
around the world a function of parent shocks or shocks affecting other affiliates within
the same firm after controlling for national, industry and world factors?




                                                                                              1
         The analysis makes use of measures of the gross product, or value added, of
multinational activity and micro data that capture the inner workings of multinational
firms. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) provides national income accounting
analogs for the activities of U.S. multinationals around the world. These allow for the
comparison of economic output by multinational firms and the size of the local economy.
Additionally, these data allow for the calculation of rates of return that are a staple of
macroeconomic analysis, as in Poterba (1998). Affiliate-level data on investment and
returns are employed to determine the degree to which returns and investments by
multinational affiliates around the world comove with returns and investments of the
same firm outside of the host country controlling for local returns and investment rates.

         The results indicate that U.S. multinationals constitute a significant fraction of
output and investment for many major economies and their significance has grown over
the last two decades. Averaged across the G-6 countries, U.S. multinational affiliates
alone comprised more than four percent of output and capital expenditures in their host
countries in 1999 with levels as high as ten percent in several countries.1 These ratios
indicate the potential for multinationals to act as a channel of economic shocks. A
descriptive look at the correlation coefficients of rates of return for multinational activity
across countries indicates that such correlations are high and in most cases exceed
correlations of returns based on economy wide measures. Similar patterns exist for
correlations of rates of investment of multinational firms relative to local economy
aggregates.

         These high correlations of country-wide returns and investment within
multinational firms suggest that shocks that occur in one part of the world may be
transmitted across borders as a consequence of a multinational firm’s worldwide network
of subsidiaries. In order to test this more rigorously, affiliate-level regressions attempt to
identify how affiliate returns comove with local firm returns, the returns of other foreign
affiliates of the same parent, and the returns on U.S. operations of the affiliate’s parents.
Both within-MNC measures of returns – the returns on U.S. operations and returns on


1
  Throughout the paper, we refer to the G-6 countries to indicate the G-7 (G-8) after excluding the United
States (the United States and Russia). G-6 countries include Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and
the United Kingdom.


                                                                                                             2
other foreign operations of the parent – are significant in explaining the return of
affiliates controlling for local returns. In a similar vein, parent and other foreign affiliate
investment rates retain explanatory power in explaining affiliate investment rates after
controlling for local economy investment rates. These results are robust to the inclusion
of country/year and industry/year fixed effects that control for the country and industry
shocks that have been emphasized in the macroeconomics literature, as in Stockman
(1988) and Glick and Rogoff (1995). These results hold for the overall sample of
affiliates and the sample of affiliates in G6 countries. These results suggest that the
economic linkages created by intrafirm dynamics, emphasized by Peek and Rosengren
(1997, 2000) for the case of Japanese bank lending and California real estate activity,
may be considerably more widespread.

        While the various fixed effects employed in the analysis control for a variety of
alternative explanations, it is possible that the results reflect an important industry with its
own dynamics, the petroleum industry, or linkages created by intrafirm trade. In order to
consider these alternatives, further regression analysis tests if observed correlations differ
for affiliates in manufacturing relative to non-manufacturing and for affiliates that serve
the local market relative to exporting affiliates. Robustness checks indicate that the
dynamics of the petroleum industry are not driving the results, that the patterns hold for
manufacturing affiliates, and that results are similar for affiliates that do and do not sell
goods outside of their host country.

        Taken together, the evidence provided in the paper suggests that the scope and
dynamics of multinational firm activity are consistent with these firms serving as a
meaningful channel for the transmission of economic shocks. Investment and returns are
linked across parts of the same firm located in different countries, and these linkages
cannot be explained by patterns in aggregate investment and returns at the country or
industry level. This analysis raises several questions for future research. What aspects of
firm internal markets – internal capital markets, transfers of technology – might create
these linkages? How much of these linkages can be explained by shocks to input costs
faced by multinationals or by international rent sharing by workers across borders within
multinationals? To what degree are multinational firms contributing to the
synchronization of business cycles relative to trade linkages and bank lending and other

                                                                                                  3
factors? Given the exploratory nature of the analysis in this paper, we believe the results
suggest that further work on how multinational firms create global economic linkages is
merited.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The second section describes the
related literature on international business cycles and the internal capital markets of firms
and outlines the empirical methodology. The third section provides an overview of the
growth of U.S. multinational activity, the changing industrial composition of investment,
the relative importance of U.S. multinational activity to local economies around the
world, and the changing geographic concentration of U.S. multinational activity. The
fourth section provides evidence on the correlation of returns and investment rates to
understand the economic linkages created by multinational firms. The fifth section
discusses results from the firm-level regressions and the sixth section provides robustness
checks for the basic results. A concluding section suggests extensions of this work.

2.     Related Literature and Empirical Methodology

       This investigation of the correlation of returns and investment plans within
multinational firms is related to the growing literature on the synchronization of business
cycles and asset returns and some recent literature on multinational and multidivision
firms that points out potential sources of synchronicity with firms.

2.1.   International Business Cycles

       Studies of the synchronization of business cycles typically rely on econometric
tests employing macroeconomic aggregates, as in Baxter and Stockman (1989), Backus,
Kehoe and Kydland (1992, 1995), Doyle and Faust (2002), Kose, Otrock and Whiteman
(2003), and Stock and Watson (2003). These studies typically find evidence of a world
factor in dictating output variability with somewhat contradictory results on the trend in
degrees of comovement amongst major economies. Heathcote and Perri (2002) find
reduced correlations in output and tie these reduced correlations to increased financial
integration. Brodo and Helbling (2003) suggest that synchronization levels have
increased over a longer historical period and across a variety of exchange rate regimes.
These studies typically conclude, as in Kose, Otrok and Whiteman (2003) and Stock and
Watson (2003), with calls for further investigation of the sources, rather than the degree,


                                                                                              4
of these global correlations. One such investigation of the sources of these correlations is
provided by Frankel and Rose (1998) who provide evidence of a correlation between
trade linkages and output correlations.2

        Linkages between economic aggregates can be particularly trenchant in an
emerging market setting where output fluctuations can be large and appear, to some
observers, to be contagious. Examinations of these linkages of output and stock market
movements in emerging markets have emphasized trade linkages (as in Eichengreen and
Rose (1999)), financial flows (as in Kaminsky, Lyons and Schmukler (2001)), or
combinations of these factors.3 Studies of the comovement of returns in emerging
markets are part of the larger literature on the degree to which stock markets comove
(pioneered in King and Wadhwani (1990) and surveyed recently in Goetzmann, Li and
Rouwenhorst (2002)) and if assets are priced locally or globally, as reviewed in Karolyi
and Stulz (2002).

        As detailed below, the considerable scope of multinational activity around the
world suggests that multinational firms may be a channel for the transmission of
economic shocks around the world. There is limited evidence on this channel with
contradictory conclusions. Forbes and Chinn (2003) indicate that bilateral FDI flows do
not explain global linkages in financial markets while Jansen and Stokman (2004)
indicated that international business cycle comovements are more pronounced for
countries with large amounts of bilateral foreign direct investment flows. An
investigation of the degree to which returns and investment plans comove within firms
using micro data affords the opportunity to isolate more precisely the scope of this
transmission channel. Such an examination also affords the opportunity to incorporate a
rich set of industry and country controls given the interest in the literature, as in
Stockman (1988) and Glick and Rogoff (1995), in the relative importance of industry and
country specific shocks factors in explaining investment and current account behavior.

2.2.    The Internal Linkages of Multinational and Multidivisional Firms


2
  See Canova and Marrinan (1998), Canova and de Nicoló (2003) and Lumsdaine and Prasad (2003) for
alternative econometric techniques for identifying common components to business cycles and their
sources using aggregate data.
3
  See the papers collected in Claessens and Forbes (2001).


                                                                                                    5
           The literature of the internal markets of firms indicates some potential reasons for
why returns and investment comove within a firm. Finance scholars have recently turned
their attention to the efficiency of the allocation of capital within firms.4 Both Rajan,
Servaes and Zingales (2000) and Scharfstein and Stein (2000) propose rationales for how
investment becomes “socialized” through a multi-divisional enterprise leading to
inefficient allocation of capital within conglomerates. Such a socialization of investment
or cross-subsidization would appear as correlated investment and performance across
countries in a multinational setting. In the multinational setting, firms appear to use
internal capital market opportunistically to overcome local rigidities – including costly
external finance and capital controls – as in Desai, Foley and Hines (2003a, 2004). Given
that these internal capital markets appear to be so active, it is conceivable that shocks to
geographically disparate operations could be transmitted around the world through
multinationals.

           Underlying trends in the patterns of real activity by multinationals might also give
rise to global linkages. As described by Feenstra (1995), production processes within
these firms have increasingly become fragmented around the world. As a consequence,
multinational activity within these economies is more likely to be tied to non-local factors
providing another channel for the transmission of shocks and the comovement of returns
within firms. Desai, Foley and Hines (2003b) demonstrate how these patterns of the
internalization of activity have also changed the ownership preferences of multinational
firms.

           It is also possible that changes in input costs for multinationals give rise to
comovement of returns and investment within firms. Budd, Konings, and Slaughter
(2002) consider the process by which wages are set within multinationals and raise the
possibility that this process affects the transmission of shocks across borders. This work
finds evidence that wages in one location depend on the performance of the firm in other
locations. Therefore, international rent sharing across workers of multinational firms
might also induce the comovement of returns within firms.



4
    See Stein (2003) for a survey of this literature.


                                                                                               6
       There has been limited empirical evidence on the interrelationship of investment
plans within firms that span national boundaries. Peek and Rosengren (1997, 2000) find
that Japanese bank lending decisions in California reflect changes in the value of their
Japanese loan portfolios and that these changed lending decisions had real consequences.
More widespread evidence of linkages created by multinational firms has not been
provided. The one exception to this that we know of is the study by Stevens and Lipsey
(1992) of seven multinational firms over twenty years. This study, despite its limited
sample, finds evidence of significant interdependence in investment plans between
foreign and domestic operations. If, indeed, investment plans and returns are highly
correlated around the world within a multinational firm, this may help explain why
investors place a limited value on mutlinationality, as examined in Errunza and Senbet
(1984) and Morck and Yeung (1991), or even a discount on global diversification as in
Denis, Denis and Yost (2002).

2.3.   Data and Empirical Methodology

       In order to isolate the scope and dynamics of U.S. multinational activity, we
employ detailed data collected by the U.S government. We use the 1982 through 1999
results of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) annual survey of U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad to create a panel of data on the gross product, returns, and investment
of U.S. multinational affiliates and parents. These surveys ask reporters to file detailed
survey forms for each affiliate, as well as information on the domestic activities of U.S.
parents. The International Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act governs the
collection of the data. The Act ensures that “use of an individual company’s data for tax,
investigative, or regulatory purposes is prohibited.” Willful noncompliance with the Act
can result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a prison term of one year. As a result of these
assurances and penalties, BEA believes that coverage is close to complete and levels of
accuracy are high.

       U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or
control by a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an
incorporated foreign business enterprise, or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated




                                                                                               7
foreign business enterprise.5 The survey forms that U.S. multinational firms are required
to complete vary depending on the year and the size of the entity surveyed. Although the
most extensive data are available for 1982, 1989, 1994 and 1999, when BEA conducted
Benchmark Surveys, we use data from the intervening years as well.6 Since many of the
variables of interest are not collected for minority owned affiliates, we restrict our sample
to include affiliates in which the combined direct and indirect ownership claim by a U.S.
parent exceeds 50 percent. BEA collects identifiers linking affiliates through time,
thereby permitting the creation of a panel.7

         The BEA data include national income accounting analogs for the activities of
multinational affiliates in countries around the world. Affiliate gross product, a measure
of value-added that is computed by BEA from data reported in the survey, was developed
in order to measure the extent of multinational activities in a way that is free from double
counting, unlike sales data that reflect value-added within an affiliate and the value of
intermediate inputs purchased by an affiliate. As in national income accounting, this
measure is decomposed into employee compensation, profit-type return (a measure of
profits from current production), net interest paid, indirect business taxes, and a capital
consumption allowance.

         The analysis that follows begins by employing the BEA measure of gross product
in order to characterize the distribution of U.S. multinational firms across countries and
industries. Values of aggregate affiliate data within a host country are compared to host
country GDP, as measured by the World Bank (2003), to indicate the prevalence of
multinational activity. We also compute measures of the importance of affiliate
investment in host countries by scaling aggregate affiliate investment by gross fixed
capital formation, taken from the World Bank (2003).

         In order to consider the comovement of returns of the aggregate activities of U.S.
multinationals in distinct host countries, we employ a variety of measures. Using the

5
  In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign affiliate, the foreign business enterprise should be paying
foreign income taxes, have a substantial physical presence abroad, have separate financial records, and
should take title to the goods it sells and receive revenue from the sale. In order to determine ownership
stakes in the presence of indirect ownership, BEA determines the percentage of parent ownership at each
link and then multiplies these percentages to compute the parent’s total effective ownership.
6
  In non-benchmark years, reporting exemption levels were higher and less information is collected.
7
  For a detailed description of the BEA data, see Mataloni (1995).


                                                                                                              8
gross product data, we define the rate of return as the ratio of the sum of the profit-type
return, net interest paid, indirect business taxes and the capital consumption allowance to
total assets. We also employ two financial accounting based measures of returns; return
on equity is the ratio of net income to owners’ equity and return on assets is the ratio of
net income to assets. In order to compute correlations in economy wide returns, we rely
on data in Poterba (1998) and data from Ken French’s website for information on rates of
return and return on equity.8 The Ken French data cover a large sample of publicly
traded firms and include information on the dollar stock return in local markets also. In
studying the comovement of investment, we analyze correlations of aggregate affiliate
capital expenditures across countries as well as these expenditures scaled by aggregate
affiliate gross product and affiliate assets. Economy wide investment is measured as the
value of gross fixed capital formation, and we analyze correlations of this measure and
this measure scaled by GDP.

        In order to analyze the comovement of returns and investment within the firm
more rigorously, we employ a specification where the dependent variable is a measure of
returns or investment at the affiliate-year level. In order to trace through effects of a
multinational parent’s activity elsewhere in the world, we include independent variables
that measure returns or investment for the affiliate’s parent in the U.S. (referred to as
parent returns or parent investment) and the returns or investment of other affiliates of the
parent operating abroad (referred to as other affiliate returns or other affiliate
investment). Finally, measures of local firm activity are also included as explanatory
variables as are varying combinations of affiliate, year, and country/year and
industry/year fixed effects in order to ensure that these within-firm measures are not
reflecting omitted factors. All standard errors are clustered at the firm level to correct for
serial correlation.

3.      The Distribution of Multinational Activity, 1982-1999

        In order to consider the scope and nature of U.S. multinational activity, Table 1
provides some sense of where multinationals have historically been most active, by


8
 The Ken French data can be found at
http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html.


                                                                                              9
country, and how this compares with the share of non-U.S. economic output that these
countries constitute. These figures are presented for the four benchmark years and are
limited to those countries where either the country’s share in worldwide output or the
country’s share of U.S. multinational output was at least one percent in 1999.

       Several patterns emerge from this table. First, U.S. multinational activity is more
concentrated than global output. By 1999, these twenty three countries constitute 83% of
non-U.S. output and 88% of U.S. multinational activity. This level of concentration has
also increased quite markedly over the last two decades. Second, it is useful to consider
those countries for which the two measures of the distribution of activity differ by large
margins. Here, several large discrepancies are apparent. The United Kingdom, Canada,
Australia, and Ireland stand out as countries with disproportionately large shares of U.S.
multinational activity. In contrast, many countries in Asia – most notably Japan – feature
uncharacteristically low levels of U.S. multinational activity. Finally, several large
emerging markets – particularly China and India – that have received large amounts of
attention for their inward foreign direct investment still have relatively little U.S.
multinational activity given their share of world output, despite recent sharp
accelerations. It is reassuring that these figure are relatively well-behaved over time and
conform, largely, to the folklore on U.S. multinational activity as being concentrated in
developed countries, as having a bias toward Anglo countries, and as being of limited
scope in Japan. It is also worth noting that if multinationals did play a significant role in
driving international business cycles, the distribution of U.S. multinational activity would
help explain the patterns presented in Stock and Watson (2003) of an Anglo block of
correlated economies and the distinct dynamic of the Japan economy.

       In order to consider the possibility that multinational firms serve as channel of
economic shocks, it is useful to isolate the relative contribution of U.S. multinationals to
local output or investment. Table 2 presents the ratio of U.S. MNC gross product and
investment to economy wide measures, by country. The first column presents the
average ratio of affiliate gross product to host country GDP over the 1982 to 1999 period,
and the second column presents this ratio for 1999. The third and fourth column present
ratios of affiliate capital expenditures to gross fixed capital formation averaged over the
sample period and for 1999. These ratios are crude measures of the relative importance

                                                                                              10
of multinational activity for local economies. They are crude in several respects. First,
they only represent U.S. multinational activity and, as such, understate the scope of
overall multinational activity. Second, measures of economy-wide activity in the
denominators include government activity, and, therefore, the ratios understate the
relative importance of multinational firms to the private sector in these countries.

       Table 2 reveals several salient facts about the relative importance of U.S.
multinational activity. First, a comparison of the averages from 1982 to 1999 and in
1999 indicates that the relative importance of U.S. multinational activity has increased in
almost all of the countries in the table. Second, the increases in the relative importance of
multinationals are most pronounced in Asia, though multinationals maintain a more
significant presence in Europe than in Asia. Third, the U.S. multinational shares of total
output and investment vary considerably but are seldom trivial and are often quite large.
For Ireland, the United Kingdom, and Canada, these shares are close to or above ten
percent. Most multinational shares are in the single digits, which given the measurement
issues mentioned above, seems a significant enough channel to create global linkages.

       Finally, it is useful to consider the industrial dispersion of U.S. multinational
activity. The share of multinational gross product, by industry is provided in Figure 1.
Unsurprisingly, the share of petroleum, which is separated from manufacturing in the
BEA data and includes extraction, refining, service, and wholesale trade activities related
to oil and gas, has dropped precipitously over the period from 1982 to 1999 as shares of
several sectors – notably, services and finance-related industries – have increased. Given
the distinct dynamics that are potentially associated with the petroleum industry, the
correlations of returns and investment presented below are considered separately for
manufacturing industries.

4.     The Correlations of Returns and Investment Inside Multinational Firms

       We begin by presenting some raw correlations of returns and investment rates of
affiliates across countries and compare these correlations to correlations of economy
wide measures across countries. These correlation tables are obviously only suggestive
since the time series data on U.S. multinational activity only cover the 1982 to 1999
period. Descriptive statistics for the sample employed in the correlation tables and the


                                                                                            11
regression tables are presented in Table 3. Tables 4 and 5 present the correlations across
G-6 countries.

        The top panel of Table 4 provides correlations of our three measures of returns to
affiliate activity; these measures are the rate of return (ROR), the return on equity (ROE),
and the return on assets (ROA). All of these correlations are positive, and all but five of
them differ from zero by statistically significant margins. Correlations of rates of return
are the largest, ranging from 0.87 to 0.97. There is more variation in the correlations of
ROE and ROA than ROR. Part of this variation may result from shortcomings of these
measures in capturing returns to capital. Net income and owners’ equity reflect only a
component of returns and a component of capital. They also reflect the capital structure
choice of affiliates, a choice that is likely to vary through time within countries and one
that may be guided by a variety of tax and managerial considerations.

        The bottom panel of Table 4 presents similar correlations using economy wide
measures of returns. The ROR correlations are all smaller than the ROR correlations
observed for multinational firms. The Ken French data do not cover Canada, but for the
other countries, economy wide correlations of ROE are smaller than affiliate correlations
for all but two country pairs. It is not possible to directly compare correlations of stock
returns to any measure of affiliate returns since most affiliates are not publicly traded, but
these correlations also are smaller that the correlations of affiliate rates of return, and they
are of a similar magnitude as the correlations of affiliate ROE. If attention is restricted to
multinational affiliates in manufacturing, in order to put aside concerns that common
shocks to the petroleum industry are driving our results, the results are largely the same.

        Table 5 shows correlations of measures of investment across countries. The top
panel presents correlations computed from three measures of affiliate investment activity:
the level of capital expenditures, capital expenditures scaled by gross product, and capital
expenditures scaled by assets. All but one of these correlations is positive and more than
three-fourths of the presented correlations are positive and statistically significant. The
correlations of levels of capital expenditures appear to be the highest. Since capital
expenditures are measured in nominal terms, these correlations could reflect correlations
in inflation rates. The other two measures are not subject to this potential shortcoming.



                                                                                              12
          The bottom panel of Table 5 displays correlations of two economy wide measures
of investment. Capital expenditures are measured using data on gross fixed capital
formation, and the correlations cover levels of capital expenditures and capital
expenditures scaled by GDP. Although the correlations of country wide measures of
investment exceed correlations of affiliate measures of investment in just over half of the
comparable cases, both sets of correlations are of a similar magnitude for most country
pairs. As with the correlations of returns, restricting attention to manufacturing affiliates
does not materially change these results. Taken together, the evidence in Tables 4 and 5
indicates that returns and investment are correlated within U.S. multinational firms. In
many cases, the correlations of these measures of activity within firms exceed
correlations of these measures for the broader economy. In order to study the correlates
of affiliate returns more carefully, we now turn to regression analysis that permits for a
richer set of controls for other confounding factors.

5.        Firm Level Regressions

          The specification outlined in section 2.3 provides a method for further analyzing
the degree to which the correlations of aggregate returns and investment represent within-
firm dynamics. Table 6 presents firm-level evidence on the correlation of returns inside
multinational firms. In order to facilitate comparison of returns across the different parts
of a multinational firm, we consider the accounting based measure of return on equity
and employ the Ken French data to control for local firm returns on equity. Observations
are at the affiliate-year level, and the dependent variable is the return on equity,
calculated as the ratio of net income to owner’s equity. The specifications in columns 1-6
employs affiliate fixed effects to control for unobserved heterogeneity across affiliates
and year fixed effects to capture movements in a world factor that might explain the
comovement of returns. It is worth noting that these year fixed effects also control for a
wide variety of global shocks like oil price changes that would potentially drive a world
factor.

          In the simple specification in column 1, the coefficient on parent return on equity
indicates that an affiliate’s parent domestic return helps explain movements in affiliate
returns in a statistically significant manner. Column 2 considers the role of the return on



                                                                                             13
the activities of the other foreign affiliates within a parent system by including this return
as an additional explanatory variable. In this specification the sample size is reduced as
affiliates that are the only foreign affiliate in a parent system are dropped. The
coefficient on the parent’s domestic activity is slightly smaller but remains significant,
and the 0.14 coefficient on the parent’s other foreign activity is positive and highly
significant. Of course, these coefficients might represent the underlying correlation of
country level returns across countries in which a parent is active. In order to address this
concern, the specification in column 3 includes the affiliate’s host country return on
equity. Given the limited coverage of the French ROE data, the sample is reduced quite
dramatically. In this specification, the local return is not significant, and the coefficients
on the parent’s domestic and foreign activities remain largely unchanged.

           Given the prevalence of affiliate activity in G-6 countries, the high level of
interest in the transmissions of shocks among these countries, and the availability of data
within these countries, it useful to run the specification presented in columns 1-3 in just
this setting. The results are largely similar with parent domestic and foreign returns
explaining affiliate returns and local returns having a positive but insignificant sign.
Coefficients on parent ROE and other affiliate ROE are very similar to previous
specifications reflecting the importance of G-6 activity to the overall sample and
suggesting that these factors have a similar relationship to affiliate ROE both inside and
outside the G-6.

           Within the context of the G-6, it is possible to impose even further controls to
account for the dynamics of local economies and affiliate industries. Specifically, the
specification in column 7 employs country/year and industry/year fixed effects.9 The
country/year fixed effects control for a variety of shocks that have similar effects across
firms within a country including changes in interest rates, supply or demand shocks, and
policy changes. These fixed effects also control for time varying factors that are specific
to US/host country country pairs, and therefore they rule out interpretations of the parent
return variable related to such factors. For example, any common variation in affiliate
returns or U.S. parent returns driven by changes in the host country currency to U.S.


9
    Computational constraints limit the use of these fixed effects in the full sample.


                                                                                              14
dollar exchange rate is absorbed by the country/year fixed effects and cannot explain the
results. Since the specification also includes industry/year fixed effects, identification
comes from variation within industries so shocks to specific sectors are also implicitly
controlled for. In the specification in column 7, the coefficients on parent domestic and
foreign returns are similar to their level in previous specifications and retain their
statistical significance. Across all of the specifications, the domestic and foreign within-
MNC returns help explain an affiliate’s returns after controlling for various measures of
local returns.

        Table 7 employs a similar empirical framework to investigate the interrelationship
of investment within the multinational firm. In columns 1 through 7 the dependent
variable is the log of affiliate capital expenditures, and all specifications employ affiliate
and year fixed effects. As with returns, the coefficient on parent domestic investment in
column 1 is positive and highly significant. When the additional independent variable of
other affiliate investment is included in column 2, the coefficient on parent domestic
investment is reduced in magnitude but retains its statistical significance. Other affiliate
investment is also highly significant and the relevance of parent domestic and foreign
activities for affiliate investment mirrors the results in Table 5. In column 3, the
additional control for local investment is highly significant but does not materially
change the coefficients or significance levels of the within-parent variables. When
attention is restricted to the G-6 in columns 4 through 7, the results are qualitatively
similar with parent domestic and foreign activities helping to explain affiliate investments
after controlling for local investment rates. As in Table 6, column 7 of this table includes
country/year and industry/year fixed effects to pick up country or industry specific factors
that might drive affiliate investment. Parent domestic investment and investment by
parent affiliates in other host countries remain positive and significant in explaining
affiliate investment.

        The evidence provided on the correlates of affiliate investment might be affected
by changes in firm scope related to merger activity or spin off activity. In order to
address this concern, we repeat the analysis in Table 7 using scaled measures of
investment activity. The results of this analysis appear in columns 8 through 14 of Table
7. The results are qualitatively similar to those in columns 1 through 7. Both parent

                                                                                             15
domestic investment and investment by other affiliates of a parent are significantly
correlated with affiliate investment. The magnitude of the coefficients on these variables
is similar for the full sample and for G-6 countries, and these results are robust to
controlling for country and industry factors.

6.      Robustness Checks

        The results in Tables 6 and 7 may reflect the dynamics of a particular industry
(particularly petroleum) or the fact that some affiliates selling large fractions of their
output to outside of their host country. The analysis in Table 8 considers these two
possible explanations using specifications similar to those already examined. Although
the results in Tables 6 and 7 are similar for specifications that do and do not include
industry/year fixed effects, it could be the case that the results are driven by patterns in
particularly important sectors such as petroleum. For example, oil price shocks might
have effects that differ across firms but are similar within firms in the petroleum sector.
To address this possibility, we allow estimates of the correlations of affiliate returns and
investment with returns and investment of other parts of the same firm to vary for
affiliates within and outside of manufacturing since all petroleum related industries are
classified outside of manufacturing in the BEA data. We do this by classifying affiliates
into manufacturing and non-manufacturing affiliates and including interactions of a
dummy equal to one for affiliates outside of manufacturing and measures of parent and
other affiliate returns in the basic specifications provided in Table 6.10

        The specification presented in columns 1 of Table 8 is similar to the specifications
of Table 6 but includes the additional interaction terms with the non-manufacturing
dummy. The 0.063 coefficient on parent ROE indicates that the returns of affiliates in
manufacturing are significantly correlated with parent returns, and the 0.007 coefficient
on parent ROE interacted with the non-manufacturing dummy indicates that this
correlation is statistically indistinguishable for non-manufacturing affiliates. The same
pattern holds for the coefficient on other affiliate ROE. Similar results are also obtained


10
  The specifications in Table 8 also include controls for local market ROE and investment and their
interactions with either the non-manufacturing dummy or local sales dummy. These coefficients are not
reported in order to emphasize the relative effect of industry and sales destination on the primary
coefficients of interest.


                                                                                                        16
in the specification presented in column 3 which includes country/year and industry/year
fixed effects and is restricted to the G-6 sample. The specifications in columns 5 and 7 of
Table 8 are similar to those from columns 8 through 12 of Table 7 and illustrate that the
correlations of investment within the multinational firm are also not distinctive for
manufacturing affiliates. It does not appear that peculiarities of a single dominant sector
can explain the interrelationships of returns and investment within multinational firms.

        Another potential explanation of the results in Table 6 and Table 7 is that they
represent the effect of trade linkages within multinational firms. While it is not possible
to isolate the extent to which affiliates buy inputs from abroad, it is possible to consider if
within-firm correlations of returns and investment depend on the degree to which
affiliates sell output locally or outside of their host country. To do this, we create a
dummy that is equal to one for affiliates that sell all of their output in their host country in
all years they appear in the sample, and we interact this dummy with parent returns and
other affiliate returns and include these interactions in specifications similar to those
presented in Table 6.

        The results of these specifications appear in columns 2 and 4 of Table 8. In
column 2, the coefficient on parent ROE indicates that parent returns and affiliate returns
of affiliates that sell some output abroad are positively correlated, and the small and
insignificant coefficient on parent ROE interacted with the local sales focus dummy
illustrates that this correlation is no different for affiliates that are purely focused on
serving the domestic market. The returns of locally focused affiliates and affiliates that
sell goods abroad also exhibit similar correlations with the returns of other affiliates.
These results are similar in the specification in column 4, which includes country/year
and industry/year fixed effects and is restricted to G-6 countries. The correlations of
affiliate capital expenditures and parent capital expenditures and the correlations of
affiliate capital expenditures and other affiliate capital expenditures are also no different
for affiliates that are focused on the local market and those that sell outside of their host
country, as the regressions presented in columns 6 and 8 of Table 8 demonstrate.          This
evidence suggests that observed interrelationships of returns and investment within
multinationals are not driven by the outward orientation of affiliate sales.



                                                                                                 17
7.      Conclusion

        U.S. multinationals comprise significant fractions of output and investment in
much of the world. Their rates of return and investment levels are more highly correlated
around the world than many similar measures for local firms. Controlling for local
returns and investment levels, a multinational parent’s domestic and foreign operations
are highly correlated with an affiliates returns and investment levels. Although the
results do not discriminate among all the channels through which multinationals could
affect the transmission of economic shocks, they do indicate that interrelationship within
multinational firms are not solely driven by affiliates outside of manufacturing or by
affiliates that play a role in a worldwide production process and sell goods outside of
their host country.

        These results generate a number of additional questions. Given the high degree of
interdependence in returns across countries for multinational firms, is it fair to view them
as an asset class that provides exposure to foreign markets? If, indeed, investment plans
and returns are highly correlated around the world within a multinational firm, this may
help explain why investors place a limited value on mutlinationality, as examined in
Errunza and Senbet (1984) and Morck and Yeung (1991). What characteristics of
multinational firms – their internal capital markets, their intrafirm trade, their ability to
explore intangible property in several locations – are driving these linkages in returns and
investments? If these linkages are so significant, how should firms consider capital
budgeting when they allocate capital around the world?

        Similarly, these facts prompt questions related to the nature of economic linkages.
To what degree is the emergence of an Anglo business cycle and the distinct dynamic of
Japan, as in Stock and Watson (2003), a reflection of the nature of FDI flows between
those countries? What exogenous shocks might usefully be employed to better identify
the relevance of multinational firms for transmitting shocks? How can macroeconomic
models used to decompose the sources of global correlations incorporate the activities of
multinational firms? If financial integration through foreign direct investment is
associated with such highly correlated investments and returns, what are the welfare
consequences of such integration? We leave these questions for future research.



                                                                                                18
References
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland (1992). “International Real
   Business Cycles.” Journal of Political Economy 100:4, 745-775.
Backus, David K., Patrick J. Kehoe and Finn E. Kydland (1995). “International Business
   Cycles: Theory and Evidence.” In Charles Plosser, ed., Frontiers of Business Cycle
   Research (Princeton: Princeton University Press), 331-357.
Baxter, Marianne and Alan Stockman (1989). “Business Cycles and the Exchange Rate
   Regime: Some International Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 23:377-400.
Bordo, Michael D. and Thomas Helbling (2003). “Have National Business Cycles
   Become More Synchronized?” NBER Working Paper No. 10130.
Budd, John W., Jozef Konings and Matthew J. Slaughter (2002). “International Rent
   Sharing in Multinational Firms.” NBER Working Paper No. 8809.
Canova, Fabio and Jane Marrinan (1998). “Sources and Propagation of International
   Output Cycles: Common Shocks or Transmission?” Journal of International
   Economics, 46:133–166.
Canova, Fabio and Gianni de Nicoló (2003). “On the Sources of Business Cycles in the
   G-7” Journal of International Economics, 57:77-100.
Claessens, Stijn and Kristin J. Forbes, eds. (2001). International Financial Contagion
   (Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers).
Denis, David J., Diane K. Denis and Keven Yost (2002). “Global Diversification,
   Industrial Diversification, and Firm Value.” Journal of Finance, 57:1951-1979.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2003a). “A Multinational
   Perspective on Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets.” Journal of
   Finance, forthcoming.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2003b). “The Costs of Shared
   Ownership: Evidence from International Joint Ventures.” Journal of Financial
   Economics, forthcoming.
Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2004). “Capital Controls,
   Liberalizations, and Foreign Direct Investment.” NBER Working Paper No. 10337.
Doyle, Brian and Jon Faust (2002). “An Investigation of Co-movements among the
   Growth Rates of the G-7 Countries.” Federal Reserve Bulletin, October, 427–437.
Eichengreen, Barry and Andrew Rose (1999). "Contagious Currency Crises: Channels of
   Conveyance." in Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, eds., Changes in Exchange Rates
   in RapidlyDeveloping Countries: Theory, Practice, and Policy Issues. Chicago:
   University of Chicago Press, 29-50.
Errunza, Vihang R. and Lemma W. Senbet (1984). “International Corporate
   Diversification, Market Valuation, and Size-Adjusted Evidence.” Journal of Finance
   39:3, 727-743.
Feenstra, Robert C. (1998). "Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the
   Global Economy." Journal of Economic Perspectives 12:4, 31-50.

                                                                                         19
Forbes, Kristin J. and Menzie D. Chinn (2003). “A Decomposition of Global Linkages in
   Financial Markets Over Time.” NBER Working Paper No. 9555.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew Rose (1998). “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency
   Area Criteria.” The Economic Journal 108:449, 1009-1025.
Glick, Reuven and Kenneth Rogoff (1995). "Global and Country-Specific Productivity
    Shocks and the Current Account", Journal of Monetary Economics, 35:159-192.
Goetzmann, William N., Lingfeng Li and K. Geert Rouwenhorst (2001). “Long-term
   Global Stock Market Correlations.” NBER Working Paper No. 8612.
Heathcote, Jonathan and Fabrizio Perri (2002). “Financial Globalization and Real
   Regionalization.” NBER Working Paper No. 9292.
Jansen, W. Jos and Ad C. J. Stokman (2004). “Foreign Direct Investment and
   International Business Cycle Comovement.” De Nederlandsche Bank Working Paper.
Kaminsky, Graciela, Richard Lyons, and Sergio Schmukler (2001). “Mutual Fund
  Investment in Emerging Markets: An Overview.” In Stijn Claessens and Kristin
  Forbes, eds., International Financial Contagion (Boston: Kluwer Academic
  Publishers), 158-185.
Karolyi, G. Andrew and René M. Stulz (2002). “Are Financial Assets Priced Locally or
   Globally?” Forthcoming in George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René M. Stulz,
   eds., Handbook of the Economics of Finance (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
King, Mervyn and Sushil Wadhwani. (1990). “Transmission of Volatility between Stock
   Markets.” Review of Financial Studies 3:1, 5-33.
Kose, M. Ayhan, Christopher Otrok, and Charles H. Whiteman (2003). “International
   Business Cycles: World, Region, and Country-Specific Factors.” American Economic
   Review 93:4, 1216-1239.
Lumsdaine, Robin L. and Eswar S. Prasad (2003). “Identifying the Common Component
   in International Economic Fluctuations: A New Approach,” Economic Journal,
   113:101–127.
Mataloni, Raymond J. (1997). “Real Gross Product of U.S. Companies’ Majority-Owned
   Foreign Affiliates in Manufacturing.” Survey of Current Business, April, 8-17.
Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung (1991). “Why Investors Value Multinationality.”
  Journal of Business 64:2, 165-187.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengreen (1997). “The International Transmission of Financial
   Shocks: The Case of Japan.” American Economic Review 87:4, 495-505.
Peek, Joe, and Eric Rosengreen (2000). “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese
   Bank Crisis on Real Activity in the United States.” American Economic Review 90:1,
   30-45.
Poterba, James M. (1998). “The Rate of Return to Corporate Capital and Factor Shares:
   New Estimates Using Revised National Income Accounts and Capital Stock Data.”
   Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy 48, 211-246.



                                                                                        20
Rajan, Raghuran, Henri Servaes and Luigi Zingales (2000). “The Cost of Diversity: The
   Diversification Discount and Inefficient Investment.” Journal of Finance 55:1, 35-80.
Scharfstein, David S. and Jeremy C. Stein (2000). “The Dark Side of Internal Capital
   Markets: Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment.” Journal of Finance
   55:6, 2537-64.
Stein, Jeremy (2003). “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment.” In George
    Constantinides, Milt Harris and Rene Stulz eds., Handbook of the Economics of
    Finance (New York: Elsevier), 111-165.
Stevens, Guy V. G. and Robert Lipsey (1992). “Interactions Between Domestic and
   Foreign Investment.” Journal of International Money and Finance 11:1, 40-62.
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (2003). “Understanding Changes in International
   Business Cycle Dynamics.” NBER Working Paper No. 9859.
Stockman, Alan C. (1988). "Sectoral and National Aggregate Disturbances to Industrial
   Output in Seven European Countries", Journal of Monetary Economics, 21:387-409.
World Bank (2003). World Development Indicators. The World Bank: Washington D.C.




                                                                                       21
                                                   Figure 1: The Sectoral Composition of U.S. Multinational Affiliate Gross Product, 1982-- 1999

                                   40%



                                   35%



                                   30%
Share of Affiliate Gross Product




                                   25%



                                   20%



                                   15%



                                   10%



                                   5%



                                   0%
                                     1982   1983   1984   1985     1986      1987     1988       1989      1990      1991       1992     1993      1994     1995      1996      1997    1998   1999
                                                                                                                Year
                                                          Chemical Manufacturing                                                Electronic and Other Electric Equipment Manufacturing
                                                          Food Manufacturing                                                    Industrial Machinery and Equipment
                                                          Other Manufacturing                                                   Petroleum
                                                          Primary & Fabricated Metal Manufacturing                              Transportation Equipment Manufacturing
                                                          Wholesale Trade                                                       Services
                                                          Other Finance, Insurance, and Real Estate                             Other Industries

                  Note: The figure provides the share of worldwide U.S. multinational gross product by industry from 1982 to 1999.
 Table 1: The Distribution of Global Output and US Multinational Activity Around the World, 1982, 1989, 1994,
                                                  and 1999

                                                                                           Year
                                                1982                         1989                         1994                         1999
                                        GDP          MNC             GDP           MNC            GDP           MNC            GDP           MNC
                                        Share        Share           Share         Share          Share         Share          Share         Share

Asia
           China                         2.81%         0.00%          2.64%          0.00%          2.83%         0.17%          4.68%         0.70%
           Hong Kong                     0.44%         0.43%          0.52%          0.91%          0.68%         1.21%          0.75%         1.41%
           India                         2.71%         0.10%          2.25%          0.05%          1.68%         0.06%          2.10%         0.19%
           Japan                        15.30%         2.05%         22.90%          4.65%         25.10%         5.39%         21.23%         5.34%
           Korea                         1.04%         0.10%          1.70%          0.23%          2.10%         0.36%          1.92%         0.58%
           Singapore                     0.21%         0.50%          0.23%          0.73%          0.36%         1.42%          0.39%         1.74%
           Taiwan                        0.68%         0.28%          1.15%          0.60%          1.27%         0.70%          1.36%         1.07%
Europe
           Belgium                       1.23%          2.29%         1.22%          2.66%          1.23%         2.92%          1.19%         2.33%
           France                        7.84%          5.44%         7.58%          7.02%          7.05%         7.87%          6.82%         6.62%
           Germany                      10.50%         11.07%        10.49%         11.12%         10.91%        13.68%          9.94%        10.93%
           Ireland                       0.29%          0.85%         0.29%          1.39%          0.29%         1.57%          0.45%         2.62%
           Italy                         5.59%          3.79%         6.73%          5.14%          5.35%         4.62%          5.58%         3.96%
           Netherlands                   2.01%          2.41%         1.83%          4.12%          1.82%         3.61%          1.88%         3.36%
           Norway                        0.85%          1.98%         0.76%          1.30%          0.64%         1.12%          0.73%         1.11%
           Spain                         2.59%          1.15%         3.04%          2.30%          2.63%         2.00%          2.85%         1.90%
           Sweden                        1.44%          0.84%         1.53%          0.69%          1.08%         0.63%          1.15%         1.09%
           Switzerland                   1.39%          1.43%         1.38%          1.59%          1.36%         1.75%          1.22%         1.58%
           United Kingdom                6.73%         17.19%         6.49%         16.42%          5.44%        15.55%          6.89%        18.19%
North America
        Canada                            4.22%        15.21%          4.22%        16.24%          2.90%        11.87%          3.07%        11.61%
        Mexico                            2.42%         1.59%          1.72%         1.52%          2.19%         2.44%          2.27%         3.10%
Oceania
           Australia                      2.54%        4.50%           2.35%         4.33%          1.80%         3.72%          1.92%         3.46%
South America
        Argentina                         1.17%        1.30%           0.59%         0.49%          1.34%         1.05%          1.34%         1.28%
        Brazil                            3.92%        5.01%           3.46%         5.49%          2.85%         4.17%          2.51%         2.93%

           Total                        77.92%         79.50%        85.09%         89.00%         82.90%        87.87%         82.22%        87.12%

Note: The table provides information on the distribtuion of GDP and U.S. multinational gross product across countries in 1982, 1989, 1994 and
1999. GDP Share is the ratio of individual country GDP to total non-U.S. GDP. MNC Share is the ratio total U.S. multinational gross product in a
country to the gross product of U.S. multinational affiliates worldwide. The table is restricted to those countries that, in 1999, comprise either one
percent of non-U.S. world output or one percent of U.S. multinational gross product.
                       Table 2: The Scope of U.S. Multinational Activity, 1982-1999 and 1999

                                                                                     Average Ratio of U.S.
                                                                                         MNC Capital        Ratio of U.S. MNC
                                Average Ratio of U.S.       Ratio of U.S. MNC        Expenditures to Gross Capital Expenditures to
                                MNC Gross Product            Gross Product to            Fixed Capital      Gross Fixed Capital
                                 to GDP, 1982-1999              GDP, 1999            Formation, 1982-1999     Formation, 1999

Asia
           China                                 0.10%                    0.40%                       0.24%                       0.45%
           Hong Kong                             3.93%                    5.06%                       3.35%                       3.28%
           India                                 0.10%                    0.24%                       0.14%                       0.37%
           Japan                                 0.49%                    0.67%                       0.21%                       0.32%
           Korea                                 0.38%                    0.81%                       0.26%                       0.41%
           Singapore                             8.43%                   11.92%                       5.08%                       7.57%
           Taiwan                                1.23%                    2.11%                          NA                          NA
Europe
           Belgium                              5.26%                     5.27%                       3.21%                       2.74%
           France                               2.31%                     2.60%                       1.47%                       1.56%
           Germany                              2.82%                     2.94%                       1.59%                       1.79%
           Ireland                             12.00%                    15.65%                       7.64%                       9.69%
           Italy                                1.86%                     1.90%                       0.85%                       0.99%
           Netherlands                          4.49%                     4.78%                       3.38%                       3.25%
           Norway                               4.85%                     4.10%                       5.27%                       4.40%
           Spain                                1.64%                     1.79%                       1.23%                       1.23%
           Sweden                               1.52%                     2.55%                       1.12%                       2.17%
           Switzerland                          2.86%                     3.46%                       1.15%                       2.10%
           United Kingdom                       6.72%                     7.07%                       6.80%                       8.47%
North America
           Canada                                9.47%                   10.12%                       8.45%                     11.16%
           Mexico                                2.42%                    3.65%                       2.56%                      4.15%
Oceania
           Australia                             4.53%                     4.83%                      3.46%                       5.35%
South America
           Argentina                             2.22%                     2.56%                      2.47%                       3.92%
           Brazil                                3.51%                     3.12%                      2.49%                       3.51%

Note: The table provides the ratio of U.S. multinational gross product (capital expenditure) to country GDP (gross fixed capital
formation), by country, averaged from 1982 to 1999 and 1999. The table is restricted to those countries that, in 1999, comprise either
one percent of non-U.S. world output or one percent of U.S. multinational gross product.
                                                  Table 3: Descriptive Statistics

                                                                   Mean                      Median               Standard Deviation
Correlation Tables
Multinational Measures
ROR                                                                        0.1894                      0.1864                      0.0929
ROE                                                                        0.1308                      0.1275                      0.0440
ROA                                                                        0.0399                      0.0392                      0.0158
Capital Expenditures                                                   5,266,974                   4,057,498                   4,464,127
Capital Expenditures/Gross Product                                        0.1383                      0.1311                      0.0391
Capital Expenditures/Assets                                               0.0466                      0.0449                      0.0178
Local Firm Measures
ROR
ROE                                                                        0.1118                      0.1151                      0.0337
Stock Returns                                                              0.1623                      0.1514                      0.3129
Capital Expenditures                                           322,000,000,000            203,000,000,000             328,000,000,000
Capital Expenditures/Gross Product                                      0.2156                     0.2089                      0.0380

Regression Tables
Affiliate ROE                                                              0.1586                      0.1285                      0.3797
Parent ROE                                                                 0.1202                      0.1273                      0.2290
Other Affiliate ROE                                                        0.1381                      0.1284                      0.1958
Host Country ROE                                                           0.1201                      0.1197                      0.0340
Log of Affiliate Capital Expenditures                                      6.3604                     6.5221                       2.4253
Log of Parent Capital Expenditures                                        11.7526                    11.9585                       2.1054
Log of Other Affiliate Capital Expenditures                               10.6546                    10.8314                       2.5011
Log of Host Country Gross Fixed Capital                                   24.9104                    25.1231                       1.5006
Formation
Affiliate Capital Expenditures/Assets                                      0.0504                      0.0161                      0.1108
Parent Capital Expenditures/Assets                                         0.0518                      0.0439                      0.0480
Other Affiliate Capital Expenditures/Assets                                0.0457                      0.0345                      0.0542
Host Country Gross Fixed Capital                                           0.2187                      0.2095                      0.0487
Formation/GDP

Note: The two panels of the table provide descriptive statistics for the correlation tables and regression tables, respectively. Each of the
Multinational Measures in the correlation tables relates to measures for the G-8 (excluding Russia and the U.S.) and are based on the
activities of U.S. multinationals from 1982 to 1999 as described in the text. Local Firm Measures relate to measures for the G-8
(excluding Russia and the U.S.) and are drawn from Poterba (1999), Ken French's website
(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/) and the World Bank Development Indicators as described in the text.
"Affiliate," "Parent" and "Other Affiliate" variables are associated with a multinational affiliate, their parent's domestic activity, and
their parent's other foreign operations, respectively. "Host country" refers to the country of activity for the multinational activity and
that data is drawn from the Ken French website (for ROEs) and World Bank Development Indicators (for gross fixed capital formation).
                                                Table 4: The Correlation of Returns for U.S. Multinationals and Local Firms, 1982-1999

U.S. Multinational Firms
                        Canada                                           France                                 Germany                                     Italy                            United Kingdom
                    ROR          ROE          ROA            ROR          ROE          ROA            ROR          ROE          ROA            ROR          ROE          ROA            ROR          ROE          ROA

France                  0.90         0.54         0.51
                      (0.11)       (0.21)       (0.22)
Germany                 0.90         0.29         0.41          0.94          0.78         0.87
                      (0.11)       (0.24)       (0.23)        (0.09)        (0.16)       (0.12)
Italy                   0.87         0.22         0.20          0.96          0.71         0.68          0.93         0.43          0.59
                      (0.13)       (0.24)       (0.25)        (0.07)        (0.18)       (0.18)        (0.09)       (0.23)        (0.20)
United                  0.96         0.43         0.55          0.94          0.74         0.64          0.96         0.48          0.70          0.94         0.65          0.64
Kingdom               (0.07)       (0.23)       (0.21)        (0.08)        (0.17)       (0.19)        (0.07)       (0.22)        (0.18)        (0.08)       (0.19)        (0.19)
Japan                   0.92         0.66         0.68          0.97          0.83         0.70          0.94         0.51          0.69          0.95         0.64          0.70          0.97         0.66         0.82
                      (0.10)       (0.19)       (0.18)        (0.06)        (0.14)       (0.18)        (0.09)       (0.22)        (0.18)        (0.08)       (0.19)        (0.18)        (0.06)       (0.19)       (0.14)

Local Firms
                                Canada                                   France                                 Germany                                     Italy                          United Kingdom
                                            $ Stock                                  $ Stock                                  $ Stock                                  $ Stock                          $ Stock
                    ROR          ROE                         ROR          ROE                         ROR          ROE                         ROR          ROE                         ROR     ROE
                                            Returns                                  Returns                                  Returns                                  Returns                          Returns
France                  0.31          NA           NA
                      (0.26)
Germany                 0.47          NA           NA           0.90          0.71         0.81
                      (0.25)                                  (0.12)        (0.18)       (0.15)
Italy                   0.50          NA           NA           0.96          0.65         0.88          0.93         0.54          0.84
                      (0.24)                                  (0.08)        (0.19)       (0.12)        (0.11)       (0.21)        (0.13)
United                  0.43          NA           NA           0.49         -0.02         0.58          0.57        -0.07          0.67          0.61         0.25          0.64
Kingdom               (0.25)                                  (0.24)        (0.25)       (0.20)        (0.23)       (0.25)        (0.18)        (0.22)       (0.24)        (0.19)
Japan                   0.20          NA           NA           0.67          0.67         0.60          0.56         0.63          0.31          0.55         0.38          0.50         -0.19        -0.47         0.35
                      (0.27)                                  (0.20)        (0.18)       (0.20)        (0.23)       (0.19)        (0.24)        (0.23)       (0.23)        (0.22)        (0.27)       (0.22)       (0.23)

Note: This table provides correlations of different measures of returns over the 1982-1999 period across G-8 countries excluding the U.S. and Russia. The top panel contains information for the affiliates of
U.S. multinational firms. ROR is the affiliate rate of return which is calculated as the ratio of returns to capital to total assets. Returns to capital include profit-type return, net interest paid, indirect business
taxes, and capital consumption allowances. ROE is the return on equity, measured as the ratio of net income to owners' equity. ROA is the return on assets, measured as the ration of net income to total
assets. The bottom panel contains information for local firms. Measures of rates of return for local firms are taken from Poterba (1999) and cover only the 1982-1996 period. Measures of ROE and $ Stock
Returns for local firms are taken from the Ken French website. Standard error appear below each correlation coefficient in parentheses.
                                        Table 5: The Correlation of Investment Rates for U.S. Multinationals and Local Firms, 1982-1999
U.S. Multinational Firms
                                  Canada                                  France                                 Germany                                 Italy                           United Kingdom
                                 Capital                           Capital                           Capital                           Capital                           Capital
                               Expenditure Capital               Expenditure Capital               Expenditure Capital               Expenditure Capital               Expenditure Capital
                     Capital     s/Gross Expenditure   Capital     s/Gross Expenditure   Capital     s/Gross Expenditure   Capital     s/Gross Expenditure   Capital     s/Gross Expenditure
                   Expenditures Product    s/Assets  Expenditures Product    s/Assets  Expenditures Product    s/Assets  Expenditures Product    s/Assets  Expenditures Product    s/Assets

France                    0.77       -0.40         0.66
                        (0.16)      (0.23)       (0.19)
Germany                   0.87        0.29         0.68          0.92        0.22          0.95
                        (0.12)      (0.24)       (0.18)        (0.10)      (0.24)        (0.08)
Italy                     0.85        0.47         0.76          0.94        0.29          0.89         0.95         0.39         0.89
                        (0.13)      (0.22)       (0.16)        (0.09)      (0.24)        (0.11)       (0.08)       (0.23)       (0.11)
United                    0.89        0.06         0.85          0.83        0.60          0.90         0.92         0.57         0.90          0.90        0.50          0.94
Kingdom                 (0.12)      (0.25)       (0.13)        (0.14)      (0.20)        (0.11)       (0.10)       (0.21)       (0.11)        (0.11)      (0.22)        (0.08)
                          0.93        0.34         0.80          0.89        0.37          0.92         0.94         0.55         0.93          0.91        0.38          0.91         0.88         0.25         0.93
Japan
                        (0.09)      (0.24)       (0.15)        (0.11)      (0.23)        (0.10)       (0.08)       (0.21)       (0.09)        (0.10)      (0.23)        (0.10)       (0.12)       (0.24)       (0.09)

Local Firms
                                  Canada                                  France                                 Germany                                 Italy                           United Kingdom

                                        Capital                                 Capital                                Capital                                 Capital                                Capital
                     Capital       Expenditures/Gross        Capital       Expenditures/Gross       Capital       Expenditures/Gross        Capital       Expenditures/Gross       Capital       Expenditures/Gross
                   Expenditures         Product            Expenditures         Product           Expenditures         Product            Expenditures         Product           Expenditures         Product

France                    0.88           0.72
                        (0.12)          (0.17)
Germany                   0.76           -0.59                   0.96            -0.13
                        (0.16)          (0.20)                 (0.07)           (0.25)
Italy                     0.91           0.67                    0.96            0.83                   0.87            -0.44
                        (0.11)          (0.19)                 (0.07)           (0.14)                (0.12)           (0.22)
United                    0.79           0.33                    0.95            0.74                   0.98            0.39                    0.86            0.36
Kingdom                 (0.15)          (0.24)                 (0.08)           (0.17)                (0.06)           (0.23)                 (0.13)           (0.23)
                          0.96           0.82                    0.90            0.68                   0.82            -0.45                   0.90            0.49                   0.81            0.48
Japan                   (0.07)          (0.14)                 (0.11)           (0.18)                (0.14)           (0.22)                 (0.11)           (0.22)                (0.15)           (0.22)
Note:This table provides correlations of different measures of investment activity over the 1982-1999 period across G-8 countries excluding the U.S. and Russia. The top panel contains information for
the affiliates of U.S. multinational firms. Capital Expenditures is the log of affiliate capital expenditures and capital expenditures/gross product is the ratio of affiliate capital expenditures to affiliate gross
product. Capital expenditures/assets is the ratio of affiliate capital expenditures to affiliate assets. The bottom panel contains information for local firms. Gross fixed capital formation data from the
World Banks are used to measure country investment and the log of these expenditures and these expenditures scaled by country GDP are used as measures of capital expenditures and capital
expenditures/gross product. Standard error appear below each correlation coefficient in parentheses.
                                                                  Table 6

                             The Interrelationship of Returns Within Multinational Firms

      Dependent Variable:                                                         Affiliate ROE


                                                     Full Sample                                                G-6

                                             (1)           (2)          (3)                 (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)

Constant                                    0.1638   0.1458   0.1584                       0.1062   0.1514   0.1320   0.1975
                                          (0.0063) (0.0068) (0.0134)                     (0.0083) (0.0082) (0.0166) (0.0653)
Parent ROE                                  0.0878   0.0679   0.0671                       0.0887   0.0662   0.0668   0.0620
                                          (0.0111) (0.0102) (0.0135)                     (0.0134) (0.0135) (0.0165) (0.0133)
Other Affiliate ROE                                       0.1400   0.1619                                0.1318   0.1598   0.1256
                                                        (0.0144) (0.0192)                              (0.0161) (0.0214) (0.0158)
Host Country ROE                                                        0.0465                                         0.1563
                                                                      (0.0817)                                       (0.1314)

Affiliate and Year Fixed
Effects?                                      Y            Y             Y                   Y            Y             Y             N
Affiliate, Country/Year, and
Industry/Year Fixed Effects?                  N            N             N                   N            N             N             Y
No. of Obs.                                178,980      170,634         99,696             76,372        70,892        54,141        70,892
R-Squared                                   0.5156       0.5184         0.5064             0.4981        0.5014        0.5027        0.5063
Note: The dependent variable in these specifications is affiliate ROE defined as the ratio of net income to owner's equity. The
specifications in columns in 4 through 7 are restricted to affiliates in G-6 countries. The specifications in columns 1 through 6 and 8
employ affiliate and year fixed effects. The specification in column 7 employs affiliate, country/year and industry/year fixed effects.
"Parent ROE" is the ratio of net income to owner's equity of the affiliate's parent in the U.S. "Other Affiliate ROE" is the ratio of net
income to owner's equity of the other foreign affiliates of the affiliate's parent. "Host Country ROE" is the return on equity for local firms
taken from the Ken French website. Standard errors are clustered at the affiliate level.
                                                                                                        Table 7
                                                          The Interrelationship of Capital Expenditures Within Multinational Firms

   Dependent Variable:                                      Log Affiliate Capital Exenditure                                                          Affiliate Capital Expenditure/Assets

                                              All countries                                       G-6                                     All countries                                       G-6
                                       (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)         (14)

Constant                              3.7416 2.6550 -12.5957 3.6315 2.9509 -17.1811 2.4224 0.0505 0.0380 0.0264 0.0289 0.0196 0.0177 0.1631
                                    (0.2156) (0.2524) (1.1998) (0.2128) (0.2597) (2.4016) (0.4886) (0.0022) (0.0031) (0.0051) (0.0020) (0.0025) (0.0075) (0.0213)

Log of Parent Capital                 0.2043 0.1445 0.1385 0.2102 0.1574 0.1564 0.1455
Exenditure                          (0.0190) (0.0161) (0.0154) (0.0194) (0.0188) (0.0186) (0.0186)

Log of Other Affiliate                             0.2106 0.2071                           0.1902 0.1898 0.1848
Capital Expenditure                              (0.0155) (0.0151)                       (0.0164) (0.0164) (0.0166)

Log of Host Country Gross                                        0.6104                                 0.7582
Fixed Capital Formation                                        (0.0465)                               (0.0906)

Parent Capital                                                                                                                    0.1455 0.0961 0.0991 0.1177 0.0842 0.0842 0.0809
Exenditure/Assets                                                                                                               (0.0273) (0.0208) (0.0217) (0.0261) (0.0216) (0.0216) (0.0211)

Other Affiliate Capital                                                                                                                        0.2928 0.3043                           0.2771 0.2771 0.2703
Expenditure/Assets                                                                                                                           (0.0409) (0.0437)                       (0.0483) (0.0483) (0.0477)

Host Country Gross Fixed                                                                                                                                    0.0362                                  0.0096
Capital Formation/GDP                                                                                                                                     (0.0201)                                (0.0359)

Affiliate and Year Fixed                Y            Y            Y            Y             Y            Y            N            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y            Y             N
Effects?
Affiliate, Country/Year,
and Industry/Year Fixed                 N            N            N            N             N            N            Y            N            N            N            N            N            N             Y
Effects?
No. of Obs.                          161,034 153,022 146,262                  71,325       65,691       65,691       65,687 210,132 201,042 186,693                       89,201       83,227       83,227       83,227
R-Squared                             0.7867 0.7906 0.7894                    0.7950       0.8008       0.8018       0.8075 0.5867 0.5946 0.5940                          0.5673       0.5780       0.5780       0.5829
Note: The dependent variable in the specifications presented in columns 1 through 7 is the log of affiliate capital expenditures. The dependent variable in the specifications presented in columns 8 through 14 is
the ratio of affiliate capital expenditures to affiliate assets. The specifications in columns in 4 through 7 and 11 through 14 are restricted to affiliates in G-6 countries. The specifications in columns 1 through 6
and 8 through 13 employ affiliate and year fixed effects. The specifications in columns 7 and 14 employ affiliate, country/year and industry/year fixed effects. "Log of Parent Capital Expenditures" is the log of
capital expenditures of the affiliates parent in the U.S. "Log of Other Affiliate Capital Expenditure" is the log of capital expenditures of other foreign affiliates of the affiliate's parent. "Log of Host Country
Fixed Capital Formation" is the log of gross fixed capital formation in the country of the affiliate. "Parent Capital Expenditure/Assets" is the ratio of the capital expenditure of an affiliate's parent in the U.S. to
their U.S. assets. "Other Affiliate Capital Expenditure/Assets" is the ratio of the capital expenditure of an affiliate's parent abroad to their foreign assets. "Host Country Gross Fixed Capital
Formation/GDP" is the ratio of gross fixed capital formation to GDP in the country of the affilaite. Standard errors are clustered at the affiliate level.
                                                                                                   Table 8
                                     Industry Factors, Trade Linkages, and the Interrelationship of Returns and Capital Expenditures

        Dependent Variable:                                         Affiliate ROE                                                                           Affiliate Capital Expenditure/Assets
                                                      All Countries                      G-6                                                                All Countries                       G-6
                                                     (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)                                                        (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
Constant                                             0.1589        0.1597         0.1238         0.1171       Constant                                     0.0254         0.0280         0.1781        -0.3292
                                                   (0.0136)      (0.0130)       (0.0771)       (0.0717)                                                  (0.0050)       (0.0052)       (0.0169)       (0.0105)

Parent ROE                                           0.0626        0.0712         0.0473         0.0604       Parent CapEx/Assets                          0.1370         0.1006         0.1292         0.0935
                                                   (0.0189)      (0.0158)       (0.0190)       (0.0167)                                                  (0.0230)       (0.0193)       (0.0250)       (0.0161)

Parent ROE * Non                                     0.0072                       0.0330                      Parent CapEx/Assets * Non                   -0.0584                       -0.0748
Manufacturing Dummy                                (0.0230)                     (0.0262)                      Manufacturing Dummy                        (0.0385)                      (0.0402)

Parent ROE * Local Sales Focus                                    -0.0232                       -0.0001       Parent CapEx/Assets * Local                                 0.0088                       -0.0228
                                                                 (0.0254)                      (0.0271)       Sales Focus Dummy                                         (0.0529)                      (0.0636)

Other Affiliate ROE                                  0.1650        0.1760         0.1142         0.1340       Other Affiliate CapEx/Assets                 0.2577         0.2507         0.2078         0.2406
                                                   (0.0249)      (0.0205)       (0.0211)       (0.0188)                                                  (0.0307)       (0.0374)       (0.0384)       (0.0435)

Other Affiliate ROE * Non                           -0.0034                       0.0148                      Other Affiliate CapEx/Assets                 0.0705                        0.1021
Manufacturing Dummy                                (0.0339)                     (0.0299)                      * Non Manufacturing Dummy                  (0.0651)                      (0.0795)

Other Affiliate ROE * Local                                       -0.0591                       -0.0381       Other Affiliate CapEx/Assets                                0.2091                        0.1340
Sales Focus Dummy                                                (0.0362)                      (0.0304)       * Local Sales Focus Dummy                                 (0.1125)                      (0.1341)

Affiliate and Year Fixed Effects?                     Y              Y             N              N                                                          Y             Y              N              N
Affiliate, Country/Year, and
Industry/Year Fixed Effects?                          N              N             Y              Y                                                         N              N              Y              Y
No. of Obs.                                          96,169         91,977        68,441         65,655                                                   180,167        171,904         80,244         77,215
R-Squared                                            0.5056         0.4975        0.5044         0.4985                                                    0.5964         0.5722         0.5844         0.5642
Note: The dependent variable in the specifications presented in columns 1 through 4 is affiliate ROE. The dependent variable in the specifications presented in columns 5 through 8 is the ratio of
affiliate capital expenditures to affiliate assets. The specifications in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 employ affiliate and year fixed effects. The specifications in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 are restricted to G-6
countries and employ affiliate, country/year and industry/year fixed effects. "Non Manufacturing Dummy" is equal to one if an affiliate's main industry is not a manufacturing industry. "Local Sales
Focus Dummy" is equal to one if all of the affiliate's sale are directed at the affiliate's host country market. "Parent ROE" is the ratio of net income to owner's equity of the affiliate's parent in the
U.S. "Other Affiliate ROE" is the ratio of net income to owner's equity of the other foreign affiliates of the affiliate's parent. "Parent CapEx/Assets" is the ratio of the capital expenditure of an
affiliate's parent in the U.S. to their U.S. assets. "Other Affiliate CapEx/Assets" is the ratio of the capital expenditure of an affiliate's parent abroad to their foreign assets. All specifications include,
but do not report, measures of host country activity (as in Tables 6 and 7) and those measures interacted with the dummy variables. Standard errors are clustered at the affiliate level.
