NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DOES THE PUBLIC KNOW ABOUT ECONOMIC POLICY,
AND HOW DOES IT KNOW IT?
Alan S. Blinder
Alan B. Krueger
Working Paper 10787
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10787
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

We are indebted to Ed Freeland, Jesse Thomas, Marc Weiner and the staff at the Princeton Survey Research
Center for help conducting the survey used in this paper, to Princeton’s Center for Economic Policy Studies
for research support, to Jane Garrison, Courtney Stoddard, and Kathleen Hurley for expert assistance, and
to members of the Brookings Panel for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Alan S. Blinder and Alan B. Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

What Does the Public Know about Economic Policy, and How Does It Know It?
Alan S. Blinder and Alan B. Krueger
NBER Working Paper No. 10787
September 2004
JEL No. D70, E60

ABSTRACT
Public opinion influences politicians, and therefore influences public policy decisions. What are the
roles of self-interest, knowledge, and ideology in public opinion formation? And how do people
learn about economic issues? Using a new, specially-designed survey, we find that most respondents
express a strong desire to be well informed on economic policy issues, and that television is their
dominant source of information. On a variety of major policy issues (e.g., taxes, social security,
health insurance), ideology is the most important determinant of public opinion, while measures of
self-interest are the least important. Knowledge about the economy ranks somewhere in between.
Alan S. Blinder
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
blinder@princeton.edu
Alan B. Krueger
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@princeton.edu

A long tradition in economic theory models economic policy decisions as solutions to
optimization problems solved by rational and well-informed agents:1 A single
policymaker minimizes a loss function subject to some constraints. Another body of
literature models policy decisions as if they were made by well-informed voters in
elections of some sort.2
As everyone knows, each of these approaches is allegorical in some respects—two of
which are germane to this paper. First, apart from votes on school budgets and on some
bond issues, economic (and other) policy decisions are rarely taken by direct democracy.
We instead utilize representative democracy, in which elected politicians decide on our
behalf. Second, in many cases, the agents making the decisions may neither be as well
informed nor as rational as homo economicus. Blendon et al. (1997), for example, find
large gaps between measured economic performance and the public’s perception thereof.
Monetary policy decisionmaking may perhaps approximate the loss-function model.
Decisions there are taken by a technocrat or by a committee of technocrats, many of
whom think like (or actually are) economists.3 But fiscal policy clearly is not made this
way. Even if we model the President of the United States as minimizing a loss function,
his recommendation is just the starting point of a long process of political horse trading.
There may be 536 relevant loss functions rather than just one—and they will not all be
the same. Similarly, a complex brew of politicians makes the major decisions in virtually
all other areas of economic policy—such as labor laws, tax laws, environmental policy,
and social insurance programs, to name just a few.4

1

“Well informed” need not connote perfectly informed. A large literature, of course, deals with imperfect
information.
2
Black (1948) is an early reference on the median voter model. Downs (1957) extended the model to allow
for political parties. See Persson and Tabellini (2000) for a modern treatment of political economy.
3
On the difference between individual and group decisionmaking in monetary policy, see Blinder and
Morgan (forthcoming).
4
Why this is so is an interesting question that we do not deal with here. See Blinder (1997).

1

Of course, the fact that the voting and loss-function models are allegorical does not
necessarily make them misleading, when interpreted as “as if” hypotheses. But to make a
judgment on the applicability of these models of decisionmaking, it seems worth digging
down deeper into the actual processes that guide policymaking. This paper takes a step in
that direction.
Specifically, we take it as axiomatic that (a) the political mechanism makes almost all
important economic policy decisions, and (b) the decisions of elected politicians are
heavily influenced by public opinion polls. These are hardly dazzling insights. Point (a)
simply states a fact; it is also central to both standard approaches to the economic theory
of policymaking: loss functions and voting. Point (b) is rarely discussed by economists in
their scholarly work. But its importance is apparent from the tremendous resources that
politicians devote to assessing public opinion, and there is plenty of supportive evidence
in political science.5
Legitimate doubts have been raised about whether the types of questions commonly
asked in public opinion polls assess individuals’ true preferences.6 That is not our
question here because understanding the determinants of public opinion as expressed in
standard polls remains important as long as these polls influence politicians’ policy
decisions. This point remains valid irrespective of whether people understand the issues
well or are confused about them, whether they are self-interested or public-spirited, and
whether they are well-informed or poorly-informed.
If we accept these points, a host of interesting questions arise, two of which are the
foci of this paper. First, to what extent is mass public opinion shaped by political
ideology, self-interest, and—don’t laugh—economic knowledge? Second, to the extent
that knowledge is relevant to opinions on issues, how do people inform themselves?

5
6

Among the many references that could be cited, see Page and Shapiro (1983) and Monroe (1979).
See, for example, Kahneman (1986).

2

This paper offers many detailed answers to these and related questions, so it may be
useful to begin with a broad characterization that may help the reader see the forest
amidst all the trees to follow. Subject to many caveats, we find that ideology is the most
consistently important determinant of public opinion on a number of major economic
policy issues, and objective measures of material self-interest are the least important.7
Knowledge about the economy ranks somewhere in between—sometimes it is important,
but sometimes it is not. To us, this does not paint a picture in which homo economicus is
in charge.
Our evidence comes from a unique, new telephone survey of a random sample of the
U.S. population over age 18. The paper is organized as follows. We begin by setting up a
recursive model of the formulation of public opinion. Next, we explain the survey that we
designed and implemented, including some of the specific questions.8 Two lengthy
sections comprise most of the paper. The first discusses some of the more interesting
tabulations and cross-tabulations of the data; these are the straight facts. The second
presents estimates of our econometric model of public opinion. We conclude with some
overarching, though admittedly speculative, interpretations of our findings.

On The Determinants of Public Opinion
To formulate an estimable model of how public opinion on economic policy issues is
formed, we work backward. To the extent that the process is rational at the individual
level, a person’s position on an issue should depend on (a) her self interest, (b) her
7

Our findings are consistent with Citrin and Green’s (1990, pp. 16-17) survey of the political science
literature, which concludes, “Taken as a group, the studies summarized above appear devastating for the
claim that self-interest, defined narrowly as the pursuit of immediate material benefits, is the central motive
underlying American public opinion. … When self-interest effects did appear, they generally were weaker
than the influence of alternative sources of opinions such as values, feelings of group solidarity or
ideology.”
8
We do not include the survey instrument here because it is long (over 40 pages) and a bit hard to read
owing to complexities in the skip pattern. It is available, along with additional descriptive statistics, under
“Economic Issues Survey” on the website of the Princeton Survey Research Center at
http://www.wws.princeton.edu/~psrc/surveys.html.

3

ideology or “values”, (c) her factual knowledge and conceptual understanding of the
issue, and (d) the degree to which she bases her decision on self interest versus her
perception of what is in the public interest.9 The last of these is likely the hardest to
measure, even by asking people. Our basic model is:
(1) OPi = f(SIi, IDi, Ki, EDi, Xi) + e1i,
where OP=opinion of person i at the time of the survey, SI=self-interest, ID=ideology,
K=knowledge, ED=education, X=a vector of “demographic” variables such as race, sex,
age, and income, and e1i is an error term.10
Our survey elicits some information about each respondent’s ideology and self
interest. But we make no attempt to explain how any particular person’s values and
ideology were formed, nor why his or her self interest is what it is. We simply treat these
variables as econometrically exogenous. (For example, one of our “self interest”
variables is income. We make no attempt to explain family income.) Our main focus is
on the acquisition of information, where the survey probed much more deeply.
The amount and kind of knowledge a person has on any particular economic issue
ought to depend on the costs and benefits of acquiring such knowledge. Our survey was
thus designed not only to measure how well-informed respondents are, but also how and
where they get their information. Thus:
(2)

Ki = g(EDi, Di, Si, Qi, Xi) + e2i,

where D is a survey measure of how strongly the respondent desires to be informed about
the economy and economic policy, S is a vector representing the sources of information
that the individual uses, and Q is an indicator of the quantity or intensity of information.
The specific definitions are explained in the next section.

9

See Zaller (1992) for an alternative, though related, framework of how individuals acquire and transform
information into responses to public opinion questions that does not start by assuming rationality.
10
There might well be lags in this process, but we have no time-series information.

4

Finally, we try to explain why people do or do not choose to inform themselves, and
in what ways:
(3) Si = h1(EDi, Di, SIi, IDi, Xi) + e3i
(4) Qi = h2(EDi, Di, SIi, IDi, Xi) + e4i
(5) Di = h3(EDi, SIi, IDi, Xi) + e5i
So, and now working forward from “causes” to “effects,” our model is that people’s
self-interest, ideology, education, and desire to be informed combine to determine how
much information they acquire—and what kinds of information (equations 3-5). This
information, along with their education and desire to be informed, determines their
knowledge of an issue (equation 2). And this knowledge, along with their ideology and
self interest, determines their opinions (equation 1). We pay closest attention to the first
three equations: how people inform themselves, the determinants of knowledge, and the
determinants of mass public opinion.

The Survey
In the spring of 2003, we conducted a telephone survey of a random sample of the
U.S. population over the age of 18, using random digit dialing.11 As is typical for surveys
of this type, the response rate (calculated according to the American Association of
Public Opinion Research guidelines) was low—just 26% of working residential numbers.
But, perhaps surprisingly, the available evidence does not suggest that such low response
rates lead to major statistical biases.12 In any case, we completed 1,002 interviews and
then weighted the responses to match the March 2002 CPS population estimates in the

11

The survey was conducted by Princeton University’s Survey Research Center. The interviews began on
March 28th and ended on June 3rd. In the case of “no answers,” the survey protocols called for up to eight
call-backs. It has been suggested to us that mentioning Princeton University might have affected the
response rates. But the sample did not look exceptional in terms of education, age, or other objective
attributes.
12
See, for example, Keeter et al. (2000).

5

following five respects: race, age, sex, education, and geographical region.13 All the
numbers reported in this paper reflect that weighting.
The survey, which typically took 12-17 minutes to administer, began with a series of
questions about economic policy issues—some of which are factual and some of which
solicit the respondent’s opinion. An example of the former is:
•

Roughly what size (in billions of dollars) is this year’s federal budget deficit?

An example of the latter is:
•

Do you think the federal budget deficit ought to be reduced?

The five policy issues we dealt with are taxes, the federal budget deficit, the minimum
wage, Social Security, and health insurance. Each issue involves several questions. In
some cases (detailed below), the ordering of the questions was randomized. But ordering
rarely mattered.
After thus giving people an idea of the sort of economic policy issues in which we
were interested, the survey went on to inquire about how they become informed about
such issues. The transition question to that part of the survey was:
•

Next, we’d like to know how important it is to you to keep well-informed about major
economic policy issues, such as the ones we have just been discussing. Would you
say it is extremely important, very important, somewhat important, not very
important, or not important at all? (emphasis added)

The answers to this question comprise the “desire to be informed” variable, Di in
equations (3)-(5). Notice the deliberate framing of what we mean by “major economic
policy issues.”
That initial question about the importance of information was followed by a series of
inquiries into “the sources of information you use, either to learn about economic issues
or to learn the opinions of others on these issues.” One prototypical example is:

13

Without weighting, females, senior citizens, the college educated, and non-Hispanic whites would all
have been over-represented. The weights for each observation are derived from an iterative procedure that
balances the five variables. So we do not match the CPS counts exactly.

6

•

Do you watch television regularly, occasionally, or not at all to learn about economic
issues?

Similar questions were asked for 10 other sources of information: radio, newspapers,
magazines, books, statements by political leaders, statements by business leaders,
statements by economists, statements by civic or religious leaders, discussions with
friends and relatives, and the Internet (in that order). Most people presumably encounter
statements by political leaders, business leaders, or economists via one of the standard
media channels (e.g., television or newspapers). But, in our judgment, information from
these three groups of “experts” was sufficiently different from the standard media fare
(e.g., new reports) that they merited inclusion on their own.
The final section of the survey collected data on individual characteristics, including
the usual demographic variables (race, age, sex, etc.), but also including less standard
variables that relate to the five policy issues, such as income, whether the person reported
voting in the 2000 election, whether or not the respondent was covered by health
insurance, and whether the respondent’s parents were alive.

Some Straight Facts
There are no well-accepted models of the phenomena we are studying, the directions
of causation among the variables we have collected are not always obvious (and in some
cases are clearly multi-directional), and we have a paucity of truly exogenous variables.
(Race, sex, and age are the only unexceptionable ones.) So valid objections can surely be
raised against any identifying assumptions we might propose in formulating a regression
model—such as the recursive structure we impose. Undaunted, we will nonetheless do so
when we estimate econometric models later. But before jumping into such controversial
waters, we first provide an exploratory analysis of the data without imposing any
structure on them.
7

The demand for economic information
We begin with the desire to be informed, the variable D in the model. Almost 24% of
respondents said it was “extremely important” “to keep well-informed about major
economic policy issues,” and just over 50% said it was “very important.” Another 23.5%
characterized keeping well informed as “somewhat important,” leaving under 3% of the
sample in the “not very important” or “not important at all” categories. Frankly, we were
surprised—and pleased—by the strength of the expressed desire to be informed.14
When we look across subgroups of the population, the answers to this question do not
vary significantly (at the 5% level) by race, sex, education, or income. But older
respondents expressed a slightly stronger desire to be well-informed. We also divided the
sample into those who were working at the time of the survey (56% of the sample) and
those who were not. The working population turned out to have a slightly weaker desire
to be informed, compared to the heterogeneous non-working group, which includes the
unemployed, retirees, homemakers, and students.
In a survey that inquires about information relevant to economic policy issues, we
expected to find many systematic differences by political ideology. So respondents were
asked to classify themselves as liberal (15% of our sample), conservative (29%),
moderate (19%), other (4%), or “haven’t thought much about it” (33%). As a shorthand,
we will refer to the latter group as the “non-politicals”. Notice that it is the largest group.
Using all five categories in a χ2 test of independence, we find little evidence of
differences in the desire to be informed by ideology (χ2 = 28.6, p= .133).

14

The interviewers’ script began: “Hi. My name is _____, and I’m calling from Princeton University to
conduct a 15-minute survey about economics and access to economic information.” Given this preface,
perhaps respondents believed they should express a desire to be informed. On the other hand, the question
about desire to be informed came after a series of daunting questions on policy issues, which may have
deflated some respondents’ beliefs about how well informed they actually were.

8

However, we do find rather strong differences by a variable that might be called
“political engagement” (rather than partisanship). Specifically, we asked respondents
whether they voted in the 2000 presidential election. The answers to this question do not
represent actual voting behavior accurately, since 68% of our respondents claim to have
voted whereas the national data show that only 51% actually did.15 They may instead
indicate which respondents believe they should have voted (as well as those who actually
voted). In any case, the self-described “voters” were considerably and significantly (χ2=
26.0, p= .001) more interested in keeping informed than were the non-voters. Fully 78%
of “voters” said keeping well-informed was either extremely or very important to them,
versus only 66% of nonvoters. This strong correlation supports our view that selfprofessed voting is an indicator of political engagement. As further support of the notion
that the so-called “non-politicals” are disengaged, we note that only 47% of them
reported voting in 2000—versus 79% of everyone else.
Multiple regression estimates of equation (5) above were not very informative,
however, and hence are not reported. We began by estimating an ordered probit model
using the three regressors suggested by the simple correlations: age, working status, and
whether the individual claims to have voted. Only the last of these was significant. We
then experimented with a variety of demographic, ideology, and self-interest variables, as
per equation (5), but found hardly any other significant regressors. In a word, our ability
to predict a person’s desire to be informed based on measurable variables is negligible.
The next survey question asked each respondent who said that being informed was at
least “somewhat important” to tell us “the main reasons why you wish to be wellinformed,” listing as choices the five reasons shown in Table 1. Just over half of our
respondents gave the last response, which might be called “the civics class answer.” But,
15

See the Federal Election Commission data at www.fec.gov/pages/2000turnout/reg&to00.htm. Our
finding of over reporting of voting by 17 percentage points is in line with other surveys (see, for example,
Erikson).

9

perhaps inconsistently, only 22% offered politics or voting as a reason. Slightly more
than half mentioned the relevance of economic issues to their personal finances. But, in a
big surprise to us, under 4% specifically mentioned the stock market as a reason for
wanting to keep informed. Do these answers vary by personal characteristics? The only
general answer is: somewhat. More specifically:
Demographics: Differences by age, sex, and race were generally minor. The only
notable ones were that older people were slightly more likely to list the last response
shown in Table 1 than younger people (59% versus 51%; p=.043),16 and that men were
more likely than women to list the idea that being informed might be politically important
or affect their vote (by 26% versus 19%; p=.010). Because racial differences are so
ubiquitous in cross-section work, we were surprised to find no significant racial
differences in the professed reasons for desiring to be well-informed.
Economic status: Differences by education, employment status, and income were
more notable. For example, college-educated people were substantially more likely than
others to list three of the five reasons for wanting to be informed: the relevance of
economic information for politics or their vote (by 35% versus 17%; p=.000), the
relevance to their business or profession (by 10% versus 6%; p=.008), and personal
finances (by 60% versus 51%; p=.018). Not surprisingly, employed people were much
more likely (10% versus 3%, p=.000) to mention their job or profession as a reason for
wanting to keep informed about the economy. And differences by income class were
pervasive.17 Compared to lower-income people, higher-income people were more likely
to mention their personal finances (59% versus 48%, p=.005), their business or
profession (10% versus 4%, p=.001), and the relevance to politics and voting (26%

16

Since the mean and median ages in our sample are both approximately 45, we divided our sample into
“younger” and “older” subsamples at that age.
17
For these χ2 tests, we divided the sample at the $40,000 mark, which is close to the median; 45% of the
sample reported a family income of $40,000 or less. The next income bracket was $40,000-$60,000.

10

versus 18%, p=.025), but less likely to mention their general desire to be well-informed
(50% versus 62%, p=.004).
Political involvement: Respondents of different political ideologies differed only in
how often they mentioned politics or voting as a reason for keeping informed. However,
this difference appears to be more a matter of detachment than ideology: Non-politicals
were substantially less likely (8%) to cite politics than either liberals (27%),
conservatives (28%), or moderates (31%). Across these four categories, the χ2 test of
independence is highly significant (χ2 = 52.4). Consistent with this, self-described voters
were much more likely than non-voters to cite politics or voting as a reason to keep
informed (27% versus 12%, p=.000).

The sources of economic information
The lengthiest part of the questionnaire inquired about the sources of information
people use to inform themselves. As mentioned in the previous section, we asked
specifically about the frequency of use of each of eleven possible sources of information
about economic issues, and we coded the responses as either “regularly or often,”
“occasionally,” or “rarely or never.” Table 2 ranks the eleven sources from the most
frequently used (television) to the least (books). It is hardly surprising that television is
the most popular source of information—by a substantial margin.
We followed this question by asking respondents whether they “learn more about
economics from the networks, from cable, or about the same from both,” with the
following results:
Network stations
Cable stations
About the same

17%
28%
44%

Although it reaches many fewer viewers, cable has a noticeable edge.

11

It is also not surprising that newspapers rank second as a source of economic
information. But we would not have predicted that more people get their economic
information from local newspapers (54%) than from any of the six national newspapers
(23%) listed in the survey or from any other “big city” newspaper (19%).18 Remember,
we pre-conditioned this response by first asking questions about national issues like the
federal budget deficit and Social Security, not about the local school budget or personal
finance. Finally, we inquired about which sections of the newspaper people “turn to, to
learn about the economy or economic policy.” The business/financial (43%) and national
news (39%) sections received the most votes, while the editorial page (including op-eds)
lagged way behind (9%).
Once we peer below first and second place in Table 2, our priors on the rankings were
pretty diffuse. “Discussions with friends and relatives” ranked third, narrowly edging out
“statements by political leaders.” We were somewhat surprised to learn that radio is used
so little, and we were quite surprised by the minimal use of magazines. (This includes the
mass-circulation magazines like Time and Newsweek.) But we were gratified to find
“statements by economists” ranking right in the middle of the eleven sources,19 beating
out the Internet, business leaders, civic or religious leaders, magazines, and books.20
Finally, it is worth noting that Table 2 probably underestimates the dominance of
television since many people probably hear the views of political leaders, economists,
and business leaders on television.21
We concluded the section on sources of information by reading back to each
respondent the lists of sources he or she had reported using “regularly or often” and then
18

The six national publications were: the New York Times, Washington Post, Wall Street Journal, USA
Today, Financial Times, and Investors’ Business Daily. Examples of “other big city newspapers” were the
Boston Globe and the San Francisco Chronicle.
19
About one-sixth of the people who said they learn about the economy from economists “regularly” or
“occasionally” specifically mentioned Alan Greenspan as the economist. We did not prompt that response.
20
Where the rankings of the distributions shown in Table 2 were ambiguous, we broke the tie by assigning
point scores as follows: regularly=3, occasionally=2, rarely=1.
21
Some of this information also comes from radio, magazines, the Internet, and newspapers, of course.

12

asking: “which… is your most important source of information on economics or
economic policy.” By this alternative criterion, the rankings of sources are rather
different (see Table 3). Television and newspapers still rank first and second,
respectively; but the margin for TV is now enormous. After that, the rankings in Tables 3
differ noticeably from those in Table 2, with, e.g., the Internet ranking much higher and,
alas, economists ranking much lower. Overall, the rank correlation between Tables 2 and
3 is 0.76.
In a word, television tops the list of how Americans get their economic
information; everything else lags well behind. But not all people are alike. As we did
with the reasons for desiring to be informed, we next looked for statistically significant
(at the 5% level) differences in the frequency of use of the sources of information by
demographics, economic status, and political engagement. There were many, so we
summarize them briefly.
Demographics: χ2 tests show that older respondents made significantly greater use of
most, but not all, sources of information. But younger respondents used radio and the
Internet more. Men reported making greater use of radio, business leaders, economists,
and the Internet, while women reported greater use of civic or religious leaders. Racial
differences were less common. Whites used TV more, while nonwhites used magazines,
books, and civic and religious leaders more.
Economic status: We found significant differences in the usage of six of the eleven
sources (radio, newspapers, magazines, business leaders, economists, and the Internet) by
education. In each case, college-educated people reported using the information source
more. Similarly, higher-income respondents made significantly greater use of six sources:
newspapers, radio, the Internet, political leaders, business leaders, and economists. In
only one case did lower-income people use an information source more intensely:

13

statements by civic or religious leaders. Differences by employment status were less
common; non-employed people reported using books and the Internet more.
Political involvement: Although we found significant differences in information use
by “ideology” in eight of the eleven cases, the differences did not typically cut across
liberal/conservative lines. As a broad generalization, it was the non-political group that
stood apart from the rest by making less use of information. Similarly, self-described
voters were more likely to use eight of the eleven sources.
Although the types of media used by liberals and conservatives are similar, we do
find ideological differences in the particular newspapers that individuals choose to read.
Table 4 shows the proportion of people who obtain information about the economy from
each of the major newspapers, classified by self-identified ideological affiliation.22
Liberals are a stunning eight times more likely than conservatives to read The New York
Times, and conservatives are twice as likely as liberals to read The Wall Street Journal.
But we do not find any ideological divide in the use of cable stations versus network
TV.23
Finally, for use as empirical counterparts to the theoretical variable Q (quantity of
information) in equation (2), we constructed two measures of how intensively each
respondent used the various sources of information. Remember, each person was asked
how often he or she used each source. Let s1, s2, s3 be, respectively, the number of sources
used “regularly or often”, “occasionally,” or “rarely or never”; and let the total number of
sources, s, equal s1+s2+ s3. (Note that s can be less than eleven because of item
nonresponse.) Then define QH (“quantity high”) and QL (“quantity low”) respectively as
s1/s and s3/s. QH and QL thus measure intensity of information use and lack of intensity,
22

These numbers need not, and do not, mirror published circulation figures. For example, almost as many
people report learning about the economy from The New York Times (8.2%) as from The Wall Street
Journal (8.7%), even though the Journal’s (weekday) circulation is almost double that of the Times.
23
See Hamilton (2004) for an analysis of trends in “media bias” and the impact of competition on partisan
news reporting.

14

respectively. Because not all sources of information convey equal information, our
measures are undoubtedly crude proxies; but they are probably still correlated with the
extent to which individuals access information about the economy.
The distributions of these two variables in the overall sample are shown in Table 5.
Not surprisingly, the frequency distribution of QH (high intensity) is piled up at the low
end: Fewer than 15% of respondents have a QH greater than 0.4, while 32% have QH
below 0.1. Perhaps more surprisingly, the distribution of the variable QL (low intensity) is
not piled up at the high end: Under 14% of respondents have QL above 0.7 while 73%
have QL between 0.2 and 0.7.
Looking across personal characteristics, we found some of the empirical regularities
one might expect. College-educated people, high-income people, and self-professed
voters reported significantly more intensive use of information sources. Compared to
either liberals, conservatives, or moderates, the non-politicals had significantly lower QH
and significantly higher QL. All these differences are significant well beyond the 0.1%
level. The other personal characteristics—age, race, sex, and employment status—did not
seem to matter much.24
Knowledge about economic issues
In the context of asking a series of questions about the five economic policy issues, we
embedded nine “fact” questions whose purpose was to assess each respondent’s
knowledge. The questions inquired about:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

the share of income that a typical American family pays in taxes
whether most people pay more in payroll or income taxes
the size of the federal budget deficit
the level of the federal minimum wage
the size of the average Social Security benefit check
whether they knew that President Bush had proposed partial privatization of
Social Security

24

There were two minor exceptions. Whites had slightly higher average values of QL than non-whites, and
the employed had lower QL than the non-employed.

15

7. whether they knew that the Social Security System is projected to start running
deficits in about a decade
8. whether Medicare covered prescription drugs for outpatients (at the time of the
survey)
9. the percentage of Americans who do not have health insurance.
We were surprised to find, as a broad generalization and with exceptions to be noted
shortly, that the average responses to most of these questions were roughly correct
(although the standard deviations were often huge). With one big exception—the federal
budget deficit—there was also hardly any indication of skewness: Mean and median
responses were close. Table 6 below compares the actual facts with the survey results.
Several comments are in order.
The correct tax share is a difficult question conceptually. Most economists think first
of taxes as a share of GDP, which was 28.4% in 2002. But the denominator of this ratio
(GDP) is meaningless to most people, and the numerator includes many taxes that people
probably do not think of themselves as paying.25 So we posed a more user-friendly
version of the question in the survey:
•

About what percentage of the typical American family’s income do you think goes to
paying taxes—including all levels of government?

For the denominator of this ratio, we added the employee’s share of the payroll tax to
personal income as defined in the National Income and Product Accounts (NIPA). For
the numerator, we included personal income taxes, estate and gift taxes, the employee’s
share of the payroll tax, almost all sales and excise taxes, and property taxes on owneroccupied housing—all from the NIPA. But we excluded corporate income taxes, the
employer’s share of the payroll tax, property taxes on rental housing, customs duties, and
the excise tax on diesel fuel on the grounds that individuals are unlikely to think of

25

Two prominent examples are the corporate income tax and the employer’s share of the payroll tax. This
example illustrates a general and important point about public opinion polling. Economists often want to
see survey questions that make sense to them. Such questions may involve complicated concepts and
numerous provisos that leave ordinary people confused. Good poll questions need to be understandable by
ordinary people with limited attention spans and no training in economics.

16

themselves as paying those taxes. The resulting tax share in calendar year 2001 was
23.3%. Thus we were left with two alternative interpretations of the mean survey
response of 31.3%: It was either a small overestimate of the tax share of GDP or a
substantial overestimate of our constructed tax share. We favor the latter interpretation.
Note also that the standard deviation across respondents was very large—more than 15
percentage points.
About 83% of tax filers with wage income pay more in payroll taxes than they do in
income taxes.26 But our respondents thought the reverse was true, by a decisive margin of
52% to 35%.27
Estimates of the federal budget deficit—whether for fiscal year 2003 or 2004—were
rising sharply while our survey was in the field. We therefore decided to count any
number between $246 billion and $310 billion as correct; these were the official CBO
estimates published on March 10, 2003 and May 9, 2003, respectively. In fact, the mean
estimate in the survey ($334 billion) was amazingly accurate, especially since privatesector estimates at the time were running well above CBO’s estimates. However, the
variance across respondents was truly astounding—we received estimates of the federal
budget deficit as low as $1 billion and as high as $5 trillion. The median response—just
$90 billion—also showed that the “typical” response was far too low.28
The average (and median) estimate of the federal minimum wage was also quite
accurate, especially when you consider that some respondents may have given the higher
state minimum wage instead.29

26

See Gale and Rohaly (2003). The 83% figure includes both the employer and employee components of
the payroll tax. If just the employee tax is used, then 53% of wage earners pay more in payroll taxes than
income taxes.
27
The remaining 13% did not know or thought they were about the same. Bartels (2003, p. 19) reports
results from an NPR/Kaiser Foundation/Kennedy School survey that found that people are even more
inaccurate in assessing whether they themselves pay more in income or payroll taxes. To us, this suggests
that many people simply do not distinguish between income and payroll taxes.
28
Nonresponse was also quite high on this question—about 48%, suggesting that there was even less
knowledge than the reported estimates indicate.

17

Average Social Security benefits were also estimated quite accurately in the survey,
although the variance was again enormous and fully 18% of respondents were unable to
answer the question. Similarly, majorities of respondents said they were aware “that
President Bush has proposed that part of Social Security be replaced by personal
investment accounts” and “that the Social Security system is projected to start running
deficits about a decade from now.” In general, public knowledge of the Social Security
system seemed pretty high.
Not so for health insurance, however. A bare majority (54%) realized that Medicare
did not, at the time of the survey, cover prescription drugs “when people are not in the
hospital”—despite an avalanche of recent public attention to the issue.30 And perhaps the
greatest misconception in the survey was the belief that a stunning 37% “of Americans do
not have any health insurance today.” The actual number in 2002 was 15.2%.
Each of the nine “knowledge” questions above will be used in context later, when we
study public opinion on specific policy issues. But we also constructed a generic
knowledge score—the variable K in our model—as follows. Five of the questions
(numbered 1, 3, 4, 5, and 9 in the list above) have numerical answers. For each of these
questions, we computed the absolute error, and then assigned each respondent a
percentile rank based on accuracy, Pij, where i indexes individuals and j indexes
questions. We also assigned numerical scores to two qualitative questions (numbers 2 and
8 in the list above), setting the values for the various answers so that the mean score was
the 50th percentile (just like the numerical questions) and the standard deviation
approximated that of a uniform distribution (σ=28.9%). However, in computing our
composite knowledge score, we gave only 50% weight to these two questions because it

29

Some respondents explicitly said that they reported estimates of their state minimum wage. When we
compute errors below, we use the state minimum wage as the true value if a respondent mentioned that he
or she was reporting the state minimum wage.
30
The 54-46 split excludes the 11% of respondents who did not answer the question.

18

was easier to guess the correct answer. We excluded the two Social Security questions
that began “Are you aware that…” (numbers 6 and 7 in the list) on the grounds that the
phrasing probably often “led the witness” to the correct answers. We then summed these
ranks across all the (weighted) questions the respondent answered to obtain Ki = (1/6) Σj
Pij. Note that we always divide by six.31 The knowledge measure thus treats unanswered
questions exactly as they would be treated on an exam: They get zero points. Strikingly,
the distribution of our constructed knowledge variable across the population of
respondents closely resembles a normal distribution with a mean of 42.9 and a standard
deviation of 16.7; see Figure 1.
How does economic knowledge, thus measured, vary by personal characteristics, by
the desire to keep informed, by the main sources of information, and by the number of
information sources an individual uses?
Personal characteristics: There were no significant differences in mean knowledge
score by age, and only minor differences by sex and race. Larger and more highly
significant differences (all have p values below .001) emerged when we considered:
•

Economic status: Higher-income people outscored lower-income people on our
test by 8.6 points (0.51σ). The scores of college-educated respondents averaged
6.3 points (0.38σ) higher than the scores of non-college-educated respondents.
This is far smaller than the gap of 0.9σ units recorded on the 1994 U.S.
International Adult Literacy Survey; the difference is probably because our
assessment is based on just seven questions, and is therefore noisy.32

•

Political involvement: Once again, the non-political group stood out from the rest
with unusually low scores (about 6-7 points lower than liberals, conservatives or

31

About half the sample was not asked for their estimate of the budget deficit. For these people, we
summed the (weighted) ranks and divided by five instead.
32
As another point of comparison, Hansen, Heckman and Mullen (2004) find that scores on the Armed
Forces Qualifying Test rise by 0.17 standard deviation for each year of schooling. The difference in years
of schooling between college graduates and non-graduates is 4.5 years, so this amounts to a .77σ gap, or
twice what we find for our test.

19

moderates), and self-reported voters scored 8.5 points higher, on average, than
nonvoters.33
Differences by desire to keep informed: It seems almost axiomatic that individuals
who deem it more important to keep informed should actually be better informed. But
the knowledge scores do not really bear this out, except for the lowest category (see
Table 7). While the ordering is correct, the null hypothesis that all four means scores are
equal cannot be rejected at the 5% level (p=.07).
Differences by major source of information: Table 8 shows that the small number of
people who said that magazines are their primary source of information on economic
issues (readers of The Economist?) were the most knowledgeable group (mean K score
=52.7). The even smaller number of people whose most important source of information
was statements by economists ranked second (mean K=50.3). The least knowledgeable
people, by far, were the small group that relies most on statements by civic and religious
leaders (mean K=35.0). Those whose most important source was television—a plurality
of the sample—had a relatively low mean K score of 41.1.
Differences by quantity of information: Table 9 displays a positive, but by no means
high correlation between the knowledge score and the number of different sources that
the respondent reports using regularly. Thus, more information does improve knowledge,
albeit very imperfectly. The null hypothesis that all the K scores are equal in Table 9 is
rejected at beyond the 0.1% level, but the relationship is not monotonic.
Direction of Errors: Our test scores are based on absolute errors, without regard to
sign. But it has been suggested that conservatives and liberals may make systematically
different errors because the two groups seek out and utilize different sources of
information in order to see their beliefs confirmed.34 Although conservatives and liberals

33
34

This result is consistent with Palfrey and Poole’s (1987) results for political knowledge.
See Mullainathan and Shleifer (2003).

20

had similar average percentile scores on the knowledge test, we did find some differences
in the direction of their errors.
On average, conservatives thought that the federal budget deficit was much larger
($333 billion vs. $177 billion), that Social Security benefits were a bit more generous
($873 vs. $766 per month), and that a lower share of the U.S. population lacked health
insurance (32% vs. 40%)—all as compared to liberals. Conservatives were also more
likely than liberals to report being aware that the Social Security trust fund is projected to
run a deficit in about a decade (82% vs. 74%) and less likely to say that Medicare already
provided coverage for prescription drugs (23% vs. 34%). While each of these differences
is statistically significant, it is hard—for us at least—to see any clear pattern of
ideologically-based bias in these numbers. And on the other policy questions—regarding
the tax share, whether the payroll tax is larger than the income tax, the value of the
minimum wage and whether respondents were aware of the Bush Social Security
proposal—ideological differences were trivial and consistent with chance.

Opinions on economic policy issues
As stated earlier, the survey instrument began with a series of questions about
people’s opinions on a variety of economic policy issues.
The Tax Burden and the Bush Tax Cuts
The first such question was:
•

Do you think taxes in the United States are generally too high, too low, or about
right?

This question was asked, on a randomized basis, either before or after the fact question
about the tax share. The ordering of the two questions turned out not to affect the
responses appreciably, so we treated all the responses as a single sample. Some 61% of
respondents said that taxes are too high, 36% said they are about right, 3% said they are
too low, and 2% don’t know.
21

The overwhelming popular sentiment that taxes are too high can hardly come as a
shock to any sentient American. We have probably believed this since the 1770s. But the
cross-tabulations by subsets of the population did hold some surprises. First, selfdescribed conservatives were no more likely than the population as a whole to say that
taxes are too high. Liberals, however, were notably less likely—just 48%. The most antitax group turned out to be those disengaged non-politicals (70% of whom said taxes are
too high). Second, while racial differences were not terribly sharp, non-whites were more
likely than whites to say that taxes are too high (p=.036). Third, lower-income people
were more likely than higher-income people to say that taxes are too high (by 68% to
56%, p=.001).35 Two other breakdowns were statistically significant: college-educated
people were much less likely to say that taxes are too high (by 51% versus 65%, p=.000),
and employed people were more likely (by 65% versus 56%, p=.033).
While our survey was in the field, Congress was debating President Bush’s 2003 tax
proposal (which subsequently passed) to advance the timing of the phased-in tax-rate
reductions that had been enacted in 2001 and to establish a preferentially-low tax rate on
dividends. So we asked respondents whether they favored or opposed this proposal,
ordering this opinion question (on a randomized basis) either before or after the fact
question about whether the typical American pays more in payroll or income taxes.36 In
this case, the answers did depend a bit on the ordering: Asking the payroll tax question
first reduced support for the Bush tax cut by about five percentage points. But a chisquare test did not reject the null hypothesis of the independence of responses and
question order (p= 0.31).
Looking for differences by individual characteristics, we found that political ideology
mattered quite strongly (p=.000). This time, conservatives were far more supportive of
35

It has been suggested to us that, even though the rich pay higher average tax rates, the utility loss from
paying taxes may be proportionately greater for the poor.
36
Note, however, that this question always came after the question about the tax share.

22

the Bush proposal (64%) than other groups (36%)—even though, as we have just seen,
they were no more likely to deem taxes too high. Both the college-educated and selfreported voters were more likely to oppose the 2003 Bush tax cuts (p=.000 and p=.003,
respectively), and both whites and higher-income people were much more likely to favor
them (p=.000 in both cases). Finally, employed people favored the Bush tax cuts more
than non-employed people did. There were no significant differences by age or sex.
The Federal Budget Deficit
The next opinion question was:
•

How much of a problem do you think the federal budget deficit poses for the
economy? Would you say it is not a problem at all, a minor problem, or a serious
problem?

We posed this question in two variants. In one case, we asked it after first inquiring about
the size of the deficit. In the other case, we asked it after telling the respondent that “This
year’s federal budget deficit is approximately $300 billion. This works out to around
$3,000 per household.” Remember, the median estimate of those who were asked to
estimate the size of the deficit was only $90 billion. So giving the $300 billion figure
framed the deficit at a higher level for most respondent.
Telling respondents the actual size of the deficit did have a marked effect on their
responses, as Table 10 shows. But oddly, doing so reduced the fraction who thought the
deficit is a serious problem by about 9 percentage points. However, the χ2 test for
independence between order and response categories was only marginally significant (pvalue = .06).
We followed this question with two further queries about public policy toward the
deficit:
•

Do you think the federal budget deficit ought to be reduced?

•

Do you think the deficit should be reduced mostly by raising taxes, mostly by
cutting spending, or about equally by both means?
23

The second question was asked only of those who answered “yes” to the first, which was
87.5% of the sample. Our respondents divided approximately evenly between those who
favored “mostly by cutting spending” (45%) and those who favored “about equally by
both means” (47%)—with a tiny minority (3%) favoring “mostly by raising taxes.” (The
other 5% gave no coherent opinion.) Looking at population subgroups:
Demographics: Older people and women were far more likely than younger people
and men to rate the deficit “a serious problem”—by almost-identical 65%-to-50%
margins (p=.000). But ironically, and perhaps inconsistently, this belief did not make
them more likely to “think the federal budget deficit ought to be reduced.” Nor were there
significant gender or racial differences in the preferred cures for the deficit; but older
Americans favored expenditure cuts more than younger Americans did. Finally, while
whites worried less about the budget deficit than did nonwhites, they were nonetheless
slightly more likely to favor reducing the deficit.
Economic status: The opinions of college-educated and non-college-educated
respondents did not differ significantly on any of the three deficit-related questions. And
the same was true when we compared the employed to the non-employed. However,
lower-income people were considerably more likely than higher-income people to rate
the deficit a serious problem (by 65% versus 53%, p=.012). That said, income did not
significantly influence opinion on either of the other two deficit-related questions.
Political involvement: Unsurprisingly, political ideology mattered quite a bit (p=.000).
In a sign of these unusual times, liberals were far more likely to rate the budget deficit a
serious problem (72%) than either conservatives (44%) or non-politicals (56%).37 In this
37

By contrast, an NBC/Wall Street Journal poll of 1,003 adults conducted in January 1995 found that 40
percent of conservatives identified the federal budget deficit as the most important economic issue facing
the country, while only 23 percent of liberals did so. By a wide margin, the deficit was the most commonly
cited issue by conservatives, but not by liberals (38% of whom cited unemployment) See Roper Center,
Public Opinion Online Archive, University of Connecticut, Question ID USNBCWSJ.012095, R09A.

24

respect, moderates (at 67%) were closer to liberals. Yet, once again, there were no
significant differences by ideology in the fraction of people who “think the federal budget
deficit ought to be reduced.” (Almost everyone does.) Ideology showed through strongly
again (p=.000), however, when it came to selecting the preferred method for reducing the
deficit. For example, conservatives favored spending cuts over tax increases by a margin
of 50% to 2%; among liberals, the corresponding margin was “just” 39% to 12%.38
Finally, “voters” and nonvoters did not differ much on any of the three deficit-related
questions.
The Minimum Wage
Our next query was straightforward:
•

Do you think the federal minimum wage should be increased?

The answers overwhelmingly favored a higher minimum wage:
Yes
75%
No
21%
Don’t know/refused 4%
We posed this question either before or after asking people what the current minimum
age is, on a randomized basis. But the ordering made no difference. Disaggregating the
sample by personal characteristics, we found:
Demographics: There were no significant differences in the answers to this question
by age or employment status. But women and nonwhites were more likely to favor
raising the minimum wage than men and whites—by margins of 81% to 69% (p=.000)
for women and 93% to 74% (p=.000) for nonwhites.
Economic status: College-educated people were less likely to favor a higher minimum
wage than the not-college-educated (by 66% to 83%, p=.000). Perhaps they learned about

38

The disengaged non-political group were like the conservatives in this respect. Moderates were in
between.

25

the alleged disemployment effects of the minimum wage in a college economics course!39
And, as you would expect, lower-income people favored raising it more than higherincome people did (by a margin of 85% versus 73%, p=.001).
Political involvement: Not surprisingly, attitudes toward the minimum wage differed
significantly by political ideology (p=.000). Conservatives, though still supportive (at
60%), were far less likely to favor raising it than were all other groups (which were in the
85-89% approval range). Self-reported voters were also less likely to favor raising the
minimum wage (by 74% versus 87%, p=.000).
Social Security policy
In addition to the three fact questions mentioned above—pertaining to average Social
Security benefits, the actuarial deficit, and President Bush’s partial privatization plan—
we asked two policy questions about Social Security. First, immediately after asking,
“Are you aware that President Bush has proposed that part of Social Security be
replaced by personal investment accounts?,” we posed the policy question:
•

Do you favor or oppose this idea, or are you undecided?

Second, right after asking “Are you aware that the Social Security System is projected to
start running deficits about a decade from now?,” we inquired:
•

Do you think the government should try to reduce those deficits mainly by raising the
payroll tax, mainly by reducing Social Security benefits, or both?
Twenty percent of respondents favored partially replacing Social Security with

personal accounts, while 38 percent opposed the idea and 42 percent were undecided. As
for closing the future Social Security deficit, respondents were roughly evenly divided
between those who favored a mixture of both remedies (34%) and those who favored
relying mainly on the payroll tax (30%). Only 5% wanted to rely mainly on benefit
39

The argument can be found in most beginning economics texts. For contrary evidence, see Card and
Krueger (1995). A survey by Fuller and Geide-Stevenson (2003) in fall 2000 found that 46% of members
of the American Economic Association “mainly agreed” that, “Minimum wages increase unemployment
among young and unskilled workers.” Twenty-seven percent disagreed, and 28% agreed with provisos.

26

reductions, and a large 22% were undecided. Interestingly, this expressed preference for
higher taxes over lower expenditures is just the reverse of what we found earlier, when
we enquired about ways to reduce the overall budget deficit. Social Security, it appears,
really is different.
Looking across subgroups, we found:
Demographics: There were no significant racial differences on either Social Security
policy question. Men were much more likely to favor partial privatization than women
(by 28% versus 13%, p=.000), and they were also less likely to favor tax increases to
reduce the Social Security deficit (by 28% to 38%, p=.000). But the biggest differences,
as one would expect, came by age. Older people were much more likely to oppose the
privatization idea (by 46% versus 31%) and much less likely to be undecided (by 32%
versus 50%). The curious consequence is that the proportion favoring the idea was
roughly independent of age (about 20%). When it came to choosing between benefit cuts
and tax increases as alternative ways to reduce the Social Security deficit, older
Americans were more likely to choose “neither” (by 31% versus 18%)—even though that
option was not offered in the question! Younger American were more likely to opt for
“both” (by 45% versus 29%). Both sets of differences are highly significant.
Economic status: Higher income people were much more likely to favor privatization
(by 27% versus 12%, p=.000), as were the employed (by 24% versus 15%, p=.007), and
the college-educated (by 33% versus 16%, p=.000). Differences by education were
interesting. The percentages of college-educated and non-college-educated respondents
opposing the Bush privatization proposal were about the same (roughly 38%). But many
fewer of the college educated were undecided (28% versus 46%). There were no
significant differences on how best to reduce the looming Social Security deficit—no
group wanted to see benefits cut.

27

Political involvement: Ideology is pretty much a no-brainer on this issue:
Conservatives were vastly more likely to favor partial privatization (40%) than either
liberals (9%), moderates (18%), or non-politicals (8%). Those who claim to have voted in
the 2000 election were much more likely to favor privatization (by 25% versus 10%) and
much less likely to be undecided (by 35% versus 54%). These differences are highly
significant (p=.000). But again, the subgroups did not differ significantly in how they
want to reduce the Social Security deficit. Those who were aware of the President’s
proposal were more inclined to support it (by 31% versus 7%).

28

Medicare and health insurance
We asked people whether Medicare currently included an outpatient drug benefit. (It
did not at the time of the survey.) We followed that query by asking those who thought it
did not (74% of all respondents):
•

Would you favor or oppose adding a prescription drug benefit to Medicare for people
who are not in the hospital, bearing in mind that it would have to be paid for
somehow?

Despite the last clause, which we deemed important, the general view was
overwhelmingly supportive, with 80% in favor and only 12% opposed.40 And opinions on
this issue did not differ significantly by age (which we found surprising), sex, race,
employment status, income, or self-reported voting behavior. College-educated people
were a bit less likely to favor a Medicare drug benefit (by 82% versus 89%), but the
difference was barely significant (p=.033). The only highly-significant difference was by
political ideology, but the ordering here was somewhat counterintuitive: The proportion
favoring a Medicare drug benefit was 95% among liberals, 89% among non-politicals,
85% among conservatives, and 79% among moderates.
The other health policy question was:
•

Do you favor or oppose what is called “universal health insurance coverage,”
meaning that the government would make sure that every American is covered by a
health insurance policy?

Remember, asking about the number of uninsured Americans elicited a gross
overestimate of the extent of the problem. Such a misconception might be expected to
reduce support for universal coverage; but over 71% of our respondents favored it
anyway.41 On this policy issue, differences of opinion across subgroups were the rule
rather than the exception:

40

The rest did not know or gave no opinion. Of course, as was pointed out at the Brookings panel meeting,
we did not specify a particular way to pay for the drug benefit.
41
However, the ordering of the questions mattered significantly in this case. When the policy question was
asked before the inquiry about the number of uninsured, our respondents favored universal health insurance

29

Demographics:Women were substantially more likely to favor universal health
insurance than men (by 80% to 71%, p=.003), and nonwhites were much more likely to
favor it than whites (by 87% versus 72%, p=.001). But there were no significant
differences by age.
Economic status: Low-income people were much more supportive of universal
coverage than were high-income people (who were probably covered in any case), by a
margin of 80% to 70% (p=.000). And people without a college degree were significantly
more likely to favor universal coverage than college graduates (by 78% to 68%, p=.001).
But surprisingly, employment status did not matter.
Political involvement: The politically-disengaged nonvoters were much more likely to
favor universal health insurance than were “voters,” by a margin of 85% to 71%
(p=.000). Ideology mattered, too. Liberals strongly favored universal coverage (90%),
while conservatives barely favored it (just 52%). Moderates (79%) and non-politicals
(87%) fell in between, but much closer to the liberals (p=.000).

Econometric Models of Knowledge and Public Opinion
We return now to the five-equation model outlined earlier. Our primary interest is in
equations like (1), which explain people’s opinions on policy issues (OP) by their selfinterest (SI), ideology (ID), knowledge (K), education (ED), and other demographic
controls (X). Recall that we identify the models by assuming a recursive structure.
Readers unwilling to accept this assumption may be skeptical of our interpretation of the
regression results—which is why we have reported only descriptive cross-tabulations up
to now.

by a margin of 74%-22%. When the ordering of the question was reversed, the margin fell to 67%-25%. So
getting people to think about the magnitude of the problem did suppress support a bit.

30

Does information breed knowledge?
We begin with estimates of equation (2), which explains our admittedly imperfect
measure of knowledge by information sources (quantity and nature), the desire to be
informed, education, and other demographic variables. We tried measuring the
respondents’ sources of information in several ways: (a) by QH and QL, the two intensityof-use variables defined earlier; (b) by the primary source of information; and (c) by a set
of 22 dummy variables indicating, for each of the 11 sources, whether the respondent
uses that source “regularly” or “occasionally”. In the case of (c), we found that, once
demographics were controlled for, the 22 source dummies were jointly insignificant (at
the 10% level). So we eliminated option (c) and concentrated on the other two.
Table 11 begins with a linear regression with K on the left-hand side and only QH, QL ,
and demographics on the right-hand side (column 1). The fit is mediocre (R2 = 0.17), and
QH and QL are jointly insignificant—a result anticipated by Table 9. More educated
people, higher-income people, and married people are significantly more knowledgeable.
Column 2 adds a set of three dummies indicating (in descending order) the
respondent’s desire to be informed. All three are significant at the 5% level, and the
pattern of the coefficients means that people with more desire to be informed do obtain
higher knowledge scores. But the adjusted R2 barely increases.
In column 3, we add a set of political ideology and interest variables. Liberals,
conservatives, and moderates (the control group) are no different in terms of knowledge.
But people who haven’t thought about their ideology score significantly lower (though
only at the 10% level of significance). People who report themselves to have voted score
significantly higher.
Finally, in a fourth regression not displayed here, we added ten dummies for the most
important source of information. Three of the ten coefficients (for newspapers,
magazines, and economists) are significant at the 10% level, and each indicates higher
31

scores than the base group (which is television). The F-test for the ten dummies as a
group also indicates statistical significance (F=1.88, p=.045). The other results hardly
change.
Thus our overall conclusion is that both education and the desire to be informed affect
an individual’s knowledge positively, although the magnitude of the education effect is
modest.42 The nature of the respondent’s primary source of information does affect his or
her K score, but the general intensity of information use does not. To educators, these
results must be considered somewhat disheartening, although we acknowledge that the
brief test embedded in our survey assesses only a limited range of factual knowledge—
and that, even as such, the test is highly imperfect.

Who believes what? And why?
For each of the five policy areas mentioned above, we now seek to estimate the
relative roles of self-interest, ideology, and knowledge in forming public opinion—
equations (1) in the model. In some sense, this is the natural culmination of our enquiry,
since information usage and knowledge are, in this context, just way-stations on the road
to public opinion.
The Bush Tax Cuts
Because 31% of respondents offered intermediate responses (either a mixed opinion or
no opinion), we estimated ordered probit models for opinion on the 2003 Bush tax cut
proposals with three choices: oppose, mixed response, or favor—in ascending order.
Thus positive coefficients in Table 12 indicate more favorable attitudes toward the Bush
tax cuts. The magnitudes of the estimated coefficients in an ordered probit model are not
easy to interpret, but the relative magnitudes are. For example, we see in column 1 that

42

Four more years of education raise the test score by 4-5 points, or about one-quarter of a standard
deviation.

32

the coefficient of the dummy variable for being black is ten times as large as the
coefficient for years of education. That means that being black has the same effect on the
underlying probabilities as ten more years of education.
The estimates reported in Table 12 are interesting and, for the most part, indicative of
what we will learn later about opinion on other policy issues. Column 1 begins by trying
to explain attitudes toward the tax cut by purely demographic variables, plus (log)
income. Since the tax cut proposal was highly regressive, household income should be an
excellent measure of self-interest here.43 The model does not explain much—the pseudoR2 measure of goodness-of-fit is below 0.02. Furthermore, virtually none of the
demographic variables in column (1) matter. More educated people and blacks are more
opposed to the tax cuts. That’s about it.44 (Remember, when we looked at simple
correlations, several demographic variables were significant.) While household income
gets the correct sign in all three models in Table 12—that is, richer people do favor the
tax cuts more—the coefficient is never significant. Where have you gone, homo
economicus?45
Column 2 adds a host of ideology and knowledge variables. Many of them are
significant, and the pseudo-R2 jumps dramatically to 0.12.46 χ2 tests (reported in square
brackets in the table) clearly show that both ideology and knowledge are strongly
associated with opinions on the tax cuts.
Ideology is measured both by political ideology, as discussed above, and by opinions
on (a) whether the tax burden is too high or too low and (b) whether taxes should be

43

Unlike the case of the 2001 tax cut, the 2003 tax cut offered virtually no benefits to low- and moderateincome taxpayers.
44
Among our four controls for marital status (not shown in the table), one is significant (p-value=.01):
divorced and separated people are more likely to favor the Bush tax cuts.
45
Both Bartels (2003) and Slemrod (2003) emphasize the role of popular misconceptions in generating
public opinion on tax policy in general and on the Bush tax cuts in particular. Slemrod finds that more
educated people suffer somewhat less from these misconceptions.
46
This is not an entirely clean comparison since the sample size drops from 874 to 722 observations owing
to missing data.

33

progressive.47 Column 2 of Table 12 shows that ideology matters quite a lot.
Conservatives are much more favorably disposed toward the tax cuts, and liberals are
much more opposed (compared to the base group, which was moderates). Similarly,
those who think taxes are too high are vastly more likely to favor the Bush tax proposal
than are those who think taxes are too low.48 (In this case, the omitted group is: taxes are
about right.) Finally, those who believe taxes should be progressive are less likely to
favor the Bush proposal, though this coefficient becomes insignificant in the model in
column 3.
Knowledge is measured in two ways: general and specific to tax policy. Our
constructed K score measures general knowledge. Specific knowledge about taxes is
measured by (a) the estimated tax share and (b) whether the respondent knows that most
people pay more in payroll taxes than in income taxes. (Remember, these two indicators
of specific knowledge are also part of the general knowledge score.) While general
knowledge matters in the estimated model, specific knowledge about taxes does not—and
most of the coefficients appear to be incorrectly signed. (The finding about general
knowledge is the one result in Table 12 that is not typical of what is to come.) The a
priori “correct” sign on the coefficient of K is unclear, since the composite score
measures knowledge of facts, not of economic theory, labor supply elasticities, or
anything like that. But those with more factual knowledge about the economy apparently
are less supportive of the Bush tax cut proposal, ceteris paribus.
In column 3, we add a pair of dummy variables for whether the respondent believes
the budget deficit is a major problem or a minor problem (the omitted category is “no
problem at all”). It seems obvious that views on this question should influence support

47

The precise question is: “Do you agree or disagree with the statement that higher income households
should pay a larger share of their income in taxes than lower income households?”
48
Readers can decide for themselves whether they want to think of this as an “ideology” variable. But
remember, the regression already controls for the estimated tax share.

34

for the Bush tax cuts—and they do. However, the standard identification assumption may
be difficult to sustain in this case. It seems quite possible that, say, some unmeasured
influence (call it “liking George Bush”) that makes a respondent favor the Bush tax cut
also makes him downplay the importance of budget deficits. Hence, some readers may
prefer to ignore column 3. Fortunately, including or excluding these two variables does
not change the other coefficients much.
Reducing the Federal Budget Deficit
As just mentioned, we began this part of the questionnaire by asking all respondents
how much of a problem they think the federal budget deficit poses.49 We ordered the
three possible responses in ascending order of concern about the deficit: no problem at
all, a minor problem, or a serious problem. So positive coefficients in the ordered probit
estimates of Table 13 indicate greater concern.
As the reader may recall, about half the respondents were asked how large they think
the deficit is, but fewer than half answered the question. So, while it seems sensible to
use the estimated deficit as a regressor, doing so would shrink the sample by more than
three-quarters. For this reason, Table 13 presents only regressions that exclude the
estimated deficit variable. Suffice it to say that equations that included the estimated
deficit (a) showed that people who think the deficit is larger are more worried about it
and (b) including the estimated deficit does not change the signs of the other coefficients.
As before, we start with an initial model that includes only demographic variables plus
the only self-interest variable we could think of for the deficit issue: income—which
becomes insignificant once we control for ideology (see column 2). The fit is poor,
though better than in Table 12. Women, blacks, older people, and more-educated people
are more concerned about the deficit (the latter barely so).
49

There was a more direct policy question--whether the respondent thought the deficit should be
reduced—but the vast majority of respondents answered yes, making the answers rather uninteresting to
analyze.

35

The ideology variables, which are added in column 2, are more interesting—and
adding them more than doubles the pseudo-R2. Conservatives are less concerned about
the deficit than are liberals and moderates, and those with “other” ideologies look a lot
like conservatives in this respect. Similarly, people who favor progressive taxation—
another way to identify liberals?—are significantly more concerned. People who think
taxes are too high are more worried about the deficit, while people who think taxes are
too low are less worried. (Column 3 shows that the first of these coefficients is significant
at the 5% level, while the second is not.) This finding may indicate that many
respondents expect the eventual cure for the deficit problem to be higher taxes. When it
comes to knowledge, neither our composite score nor specific knowledge about taxes
affect opinion on the deficit significantly.
Opinions vary greatly on the methods that should be used to reduce the deficit. Here
we estimated two probit models, both shown in Table 14, running the model only on the
subset of respondents who said the deficit ought to be reduced. Since the choices were
“raising taxes”, “cutting spending”, or “both”, we created two binary variables:
Taxes = 1 if the respondent chose raising taxes or both
= 0 otherwise
Spending = 1 if the respondent chose cutting spending or both
= 0 otherwise
and estimated an ordinary probit model for each. The model for “Spending” is less
interesting, however, since almost everyone thinks spending cuts should be part of the
solution, while our respondents split almost 50-50 on whether higher taxes should be part
of the solution.
What do we find? Beginning with self-interest, higher-income people are slightly less
likely to favor raising taxes and slightly more likely to favor cutting spending. But neither
coefficient is generally significant. Thus, once again, self interest seems to matter little.
And in this case, ideology also matters rather less than might be expected: Liberals and
36

people of “other” ideologies are far less likely to favor cuts in spending. Naturally, people
who believe that taxes are already too high are far less likely to favor the tax-hike
alternative and far more likely to favor spending cuts; and those who think taxes are too
low hold the opposite views. Self-professed voters are less enthusiastic about cutting
spending and a bit more enthusiastic about raising taxes than are non-voters, but the
coefficients are not always significant. Respondents with higher levels of general
economic knowledge are marginally less likely to favor tax hikes. And those who
(wrongly) believe that income taxes are typically larger than payroll taxes are much less
enamored of tax hikes. Among the demographic variables, the only consistently
significant effect is that older people are less likely to favor raising taxes.
Raising the Minimum Wage
Table 15 displays a series of ordinary (binary) probit models to explain support for
raising the minimum wage. Separating self-interest from some of the demographic
determinants of opinion is tricky in this case because our survey offers no direct
information on respondents’ wage rates. We do, however, measure several obvious
correlates of wages such as income, race, sex, and education—all of which show up as
significant determinants of opinion in column 1. In each case, the sign of the coefficient
is consistent with the simple hypothesis that lower-wage people are more likely to favor
raising the minimum wage than higher-wage people. Apart from these potential wage
proxies, the demographic variables are insignificant.
Following the pattern of previous tables, columns 2 and 3 of Table 15 add ideology
and knowledge variables to the model. While ideology once again contributes notably to
explaining opinion, only conservatives stand out from the pack in being less favorably
disposed toward raising the minimum wage.
The knowledge variables are more interesting. General knowledge is irrelevant, but
people who believe the existing minimum wage is higher are decidedly less likely to
37

support raising it. Similarly, those who believe that a higher minimum wage would cause
the loss of either “a lot of” (6% of the sample) or “some” jobs (36%) are much less likely
to favor raising it than are those who believe that “hardly anyone” would lose their job
(57% of the sample). Comparing columns 2 and 3 shows that these three “specific
knowledge” variables contribute enormously to the goodness of fit.
The minimum wage is arguably the one policy that we have examined where a good
case can be made that self-interest—or, at least, group interest—and economic beliefs
and knowledge are as strong an influence on public opinion as ideology. For example,
when the estimated coefficients shown in column 3 are translated into marginal effects on
probabilities, we find that self-identified conservatives are 13 percentage points less
likely than liberals to support a minimum wage increase. Similarly, support for an
increase is 14 points higher for blacks than for whites, 16 points higher for those in the
poorest 15% of households than for those in the richest 15%, 10 points higher for women
than for men, and an impressive 58 points higher among those who believe that a lot of
workers will lose their jobs from an increase than among those who believe hardly
anyone will lose their job.
Social Security Policy
We asked two questions about Social Security policy: whether respondents support
President Bush’s plan for partial privatization, and how (if at all) the Social Security
deficit should be reduced.
Where Social Security was concerned, we included several novel self-interest
variables, in addition to income, in the survey. (See the upper portion of Table 16.)
Broadening the concept of self-interest just a bit, we asked whether the respondent’s
mother, father, or both were still alive. We also asked respondents whether they expected
Social Security to be a “major source” of retirement income, a “minor source”, or “not
much of a source at all”. Presumably, people in the first category have a much greater
38

stake in the outcome of the Social Security debate. And older workers should have more
of a stake in the current system.
When it comes to attitudes toward personal accounts, the subjective self-interest
measure of anticipated Social Security income “works,” while the more objective ones—
income, whether the parents are alive, and age—have inconsistent and weak effects,
although they are sometimes significant in the expected direction. The χ2 tests for the
entire group of self-interest variables show statistical significance beyond the 1% level in
columns 2 and 3, and the importance of Social Security benefits in retirement income is
significant in all specifications.
The knowledge variables—whether general or specific to Social Security—make little
contribution to explaining opinions on privatizing Social Security. As noted earlier,
respondents who are aware of President Bush’s proposal are more likely to support it; but
the difference is not significant (p-value = .19). More educated people are slightly more
likely to favor partial privatization.
Political ideology matters much more than knowledge. Not surprisingly,
conservatives are much more likely to back privatization and liberals are more likely to
oppose it.
In the questions about how to reduce the actuarial deficit, the choices were “mainly by
raising the payroll tax” (chosen by 30% of respondents), “mainly by reducing Social
Security benefits” (5%), or “both” (34%).50 We created two dummy variables analogous
to the two we created for deficit-reduction policy:
SS-Taxes

= 1 if the respondent chose raising payroll taxes or both
= 0 otherwise

SS-Spending = 1 if the respondent chose cutting benefits or both
= 0 otherwise,
and ran binary probit models for each. The results are displayed in Table 17.
50

We excluded those who did not answer (9% of the sample) and those who said “neither” (22%).

39

Our ability to explain people’s opinions on this important public policy issue is quite
modest (pseudo-R2s are in the .06-.07 range in both cases). Surprisingly, and in contrast
to the results in Table 16, the six self-interest variables are not significant determinants of
opinion, either individually or as a group, once political ideology variables are included.
Nor does ideology itself matter very much. (The χ2 statistics are insignificant in all cases.)
Knowledge does matter, however. Respondents with higher general knowledge are a bit
less likely to favor raising the payroll tax, and people with higher estimates of monthly
Social Security benefits are, surprisingly, less likely to want to cut them. (But the
coefficient is barely significant at the 10% level.) Interestingly, those who say they are
aware of President Bush’s privatization proposal, are significantly (at the 5% level) less
willing to cut Social Security benefits.
On the demographics, women and students are significantly less inclined to cut
benefits, while Hispanics are (barely) significantly more inclined. Unemployed people
are decidedly less enthusiastic than others about raising payroll taxes.
Health insurance policy
Our last two policy questions pertain to health insurance. As mentioned above, we
asked respondents whether they favored adding a prescription drug benefit to Medicare
and whether they favored universal coverage.
In addition to age and income, the survey included what we believed would be useful
self-interest variables tailored to these questions. We asked whether the respondent’s
parents are alive, and whether the respondent or anyone in his or her immediate family is
uninsured. We begin with Table 18, which displays the results for an ordinary probit
model of opinion on universal health insurance coverage.
Higher-income people are significantly more opposed to universal coverage (p=.000),
and uninsured respondents are more likely to favor it (p=.004 in column 1, but p=.108 in

40

column 2).51 However, neither age nor having an uninsured family member affects one’s
opinion. The coefficients on own insurance coverage imply that people who lack health
insurance are 12 points more likely to support universal coverage in column 1 and 8
points more likely in column 2. As usual, measures of political ideology are successful as
regressors. Liberals are far more likely to favor universal coverage, and conservatives are
much more likely to oppose it. Interestingly, those politically-engaged “voters” are less
likely to favor universal coverage. Knowledge appears to have a modest effect on
opinions on universal coverage. The general knowledge score is irrelevant, as usual. But
people with higher estimates of the uncovered population are a bit more likely to favor
universal coverage.52 Finally, demographic variables do not seem to matter—not even
age. Blacks are more likely (than whites) to favor universal coverage in column 1, but the
coefficient becomes insignificant once ideology and knowledge are added to the equation
(column 2).
In Table 19, we explore the determinants of public opinion on adding a prescription
drug benefit to Medicare, limiting our sample to respondents who, at the time of the
survey, knew that Medicare did not cover prescription drugs. Here, demographics matter
more than they do on most other policy issues. Blacks and more-educated people are far
less likely to support such a benefit, while students are much more likely to support it.
The results on self-interest, ideology, and knowledge are by now familiar: self-interest
and knowledge are not significant determinants of opinion, but political ideology is. In
particular, liberals and respondents with “other” (than liberal, conservative, or moderate)
ideology are substantially more likely to support a prescription drug benefit. So are selfprofessed voters, at least in two of the three specifications.
51

Our results indicate more of an impact of self-interest on support for universal health insurance than was
found in previous research. For example, Sears, et al. (1980) find that a respondent’s support for
government-funded national health insurance is unrelated to his own health insurance coverage.
52
The coefficient implies that a 10 percentage point increase in the presumed uncovered population is
associated with a 3 percentage point increase in support for universal health insurance.

41

Conclusion
Taken as a whole, our survey results hold little good news for those of us engaged in
economic education and/or economic policy—or for economic theorists who use homo
economicus as the backbone of their models of political economy.
On the positive side, a representative national sample of Americans does express a
strong desire to be well-informed about major economic policy issues. And their factual
knowledge is, on average, reasonable. From where does their information come? The
short answer is television, followed at a (long) distance by local (rather than national)
newspapers. Unfortunately, as a source of information, television does far better on
quantity than on quality. For example, it ranks eighth among the 11 possible sources of
information in its contribution to our constructed measure of economic knowledge,
although we recognize that one can question the direction of causality here. Perhaps more
disconcerting, economic knowledge is barely higher in people who (a) use more sources
of information, (b) use information more intensively, or (c) express a stronger desire to be
informed. On the other hand, people with more education and more income are more
knowledgeable.
As a broad generalization—to which many exceptions have been noted in this paper—
ideology seems to play a stronger role in shaping opinion on economic policy issues than
either self-interest or knowledge, although specific (as opposed to general) knowledge
does influence opinion on a number of matters.53 This finding is not terribly different
from the conclusion reached by Fuchs, Krueger, and Poterba (1998) in their survey of
professional economists: Left-right ideology seemed to shape opinion more than
parameter estimates did. The contrast with homo economicus—who is well-informed,

53

Of course, our K variable measures knowledge with considerable error, which probably biases its
coefficient downward.

42

non-ideological, and extremely self-interested—could hardly be more stark. Instead, our
findings seem more consistent with an idea expressed in the political science literature:
that people often use ideology as a short-cut heuristic for deciding what position to take,
when properly informing oneself is difficult.54
In closing, we offer two speculative explanations for this basic finding: confusion and
generosity of spirit. Both explanations start from the premise that people typically
develop conventional (“ideological”) beliefs about how the world works and about what
is good for them and for the commonweal. Thereafter, the two explanations diverge. The
confusion explanation emphasizes how misperceptions of their own self-interest can lead
people to act (or, in our case, to speak) against their best interests.55 The generosity
explanation emphasizes that, at least when it comes to national economic policy, people
are often more interested in what they perceive to be the common good than they are in
their own narrow self-interest.56 In both cases, there is at least room for hope that greater
knowledge will improve decisionmaking, even though it appears from our survey that
efforts in this dimension have shown less than impressive results to date.

54

See, for example, Lupia (1994).
Bartels (2003) and Slemrod (2003) fall squarely within this camp. Romer (2003) provides a start at
modeling political outcomes under the assumption that voters have systematic misperceptions.
56
See Caplan (2002) and the essays in Mansbridge (1990) for further discussion of how group interests
affect public opinion and voting.
55

43

Bibliography
Bartels, Larry M. 2003. “Homer Gets a Tax Cut: Inequality and Public Policy in the
American Mind.” Working Paper. Princeton University (August).
Black, Duncan. 1948. “On the Rationale of Group Decision-making.” Journal of Political
Economy 56(1): 23-34.
Blendon, Robert J., John M. Benson, Mollyann Brodie, Richard Morin, Drew E. Altman,
Daniel Gitterman, Mario Brossard, and Matt James. 1997. “Bridging the Gap between the
Public’s and Economists’ Views of the Economy.” Journal of Economic Perspectives
11(3): 105-118.
Blinder, Alan S. 1997. “Is Government Too Political?” Foreign Affairs
76 (November/December): 115-126.
Blinder, Alan S., and John Morgan. Forthcoming. “Are Two Heads Better than One?:
Monetary Policy by Committee.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.
Caplan, Bryan. 2002. “Sociotropes, Systematic Bias, and Political Failure: Reflections on
the Survey of Americans and Economists on the Economy.” Social Science Quarterly
83(2): 416-435.
Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of
the Minimum Wage. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Downs, Anthony. 1957. An Economic Theory of Democracy. New York: Harper and
Row.
Fuchs, Victor R., Alan B. Krueger, and James M. Poterba. 1998. “Economists’ Views
about Parameters, Values, and Policies: Survey Results in Labor and Public Economics.”
Journal of Economic Literature 36(3): 1387-1425.
Fuller, Dan, and Doris Geide-Stevenson. 2003. “Consensus Among Economists:
Revisited.” Journal of Economic Education (Fall): 369-387.
Gale, William G., and Jeffrey Rohaly. 2003. “Three-Quarters of Filers Pay More in
Payroll Taxes Than in Income Taxes.” Tax Notes January 6: 119.
Hamilton, James. 2004. All the News That’s Fit to Sell. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Hansen, Karsten T., James J. Heckman, and Kathleen J. Mullen. Forthcoming. “The
Effect of Schooling and Ability on Achievement Test Scores.” Journal of Econometrics.
Kahneman, Daniel. 1986. “Comments.” In Valuing Environmental Goods, edited by
Ronald G. Cummings, David S. Brookshire, and William D. Schulze. Totowa, New
Jersey: Rowman and Allanheld.
44

Keeter, Scott, Carolyn Miller, Andrew Kohut, Robert Groves, and Stanley Presser. 2000.
“Consequences of Reducing Nonresponse in a National Telephone Survey.” Public
Opinion Quarterly 64(2): 125-148.
Lupia, Arthur. 1994. “Shortcuts Versus Encyclopedias: Information and Voting Behavior
in California Insurance Reform Elections.” American Political Science Review 88(1): 6376.
Mansbridge, Jane, ed. 1990. Beyond Self-Interest. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Monroe, Alan. 1979. “Consistency between Public Preferences and National Policy
Decisions.” American Politics Quarterly 7: 3-19.
Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “The Market for News.” Working
Paper. Harvard University (December).
Page, Benjamin I., and Robert Y. Shapiro. 1983. “Effects of Public Opinion on Policy.”
American Political Science Review 77(1): 175-190.
Palfrey, Thomas R., and Keith T. Poole. 1987. “The Relationship between Information,
Ideology, and Voting Behavior.” American Journal of Political Science 31(3): 511-530.
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini. 2000. Political Economics: Explaining Economic
Policy. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Romer, David. 2003. “Misconceptions and Political Outcomes.” The Economic Journal
113(484): 1-20.
Sears, David O., Richard R. Lau, Tom R. Tyler, and Harris M. Allen, Jr. 1980. “SelfInterest vs. Symbolic Politics in Policy Attitudes and Presidential Voting.” American
Political Science Review 74(3): 670-684.
Slemrod, Joel. 2003. “The Roles of Misconceptions in Support for Regressive Tax
Reform.” Working Paper. University of Michigan (September).
Zaller, John. 1992. The Nature and Origins of Mass Opinion. Cambridge, England:
University of Cambridge Press.

45

Figure 1: Distribution of Knowledge Scores
Fraction
.1

.05

0
50

0

Knowledge Score

46

100

Table 1
Reasons for Wanting to be Informed
Reason
Percent saying yes
Affects personal finances
54%
Affects business or profession
7%
Relevant to stock market, investments
4%
22%
Economic issues are important politically;
might affect my vote
To be a responsible citizen;
55%
just like to keep informed
NOTE: Respondents could offer more than one answer.

Table 2
Frequency of use of alternative sources of information
Percent
Percent
Percent
Rank
Source
regularly
occasionally
rarely/never
1.
Television
61
30
9
2.
Newspapers
49
26
25
3.
Friends or relatives
35
42
22
4.
Political leaders
35
40
25
5.
Radio
26
23
50
6.
Economists
17
36
46
7.
Internet
21
18
61
8.
Business leaders
12
31
57
9.
Civic or religious leaders
10
27
62
10.
Magazines
12
21
67
11.
Books
7
14
79
Note: The three italicized sources of information are not themselves delivery channels;
information from these sources must presumably arrive via one or more of the eight
channels.

47

Table 3
Most important sources of information
Rank Source
Percent
1.
Television
46.7%
2.
Newspapers
18.6%
3.
Internet
10.0%
4.
Radio
8.9%
5.
Friends and relatives
6.6%
6.
Political leaders
2.3%
7.
Magazines
2.2%
8.
Civic or religious leaders
1.2%
9.
Business leaders
1.2%
10.
Economists
1.1%
11.
Books
0.5%
Note: The numbers indicate the percentage of respondents
selecting that source as most important.

Table 4
Proportion Reading Various Newspapers, by Ideology
Haven't
Newspaper
Liberal Conservative Moderate Thought
NY Times
.23
.03
.09
.02
Wall St. Jnl.
.05
.10
.09
.03
Wash. Post
.06
.01
.01
.00
USA Today
.08
.07
.12
.04
Other Big City
.25
.25
.18
.14
Local Newspaper .44
.55
.56
.56

P-value
.000
.001
.000
.013
.002
.066

Note: P-value is for a test of the hypothesis that a constant proportion of members
in all ideological groups use the particular source.

Table 5
Frequency Distributions of QH and QL
Range Frequency Frequency
for QH
for QL
0.0 to 0.1
.320
.055
0.1 to 0.2
.196
.076
0.2 to 0.3
.205
.114
0.3 to 0.4
.132
.165
0.4 to 0.5
.070
.179
0.5 to 0.6
.039
.151
0.6 to 0.7
.025
.124
0.7 to 0.8
.009
.075
0.8 to 0.9
.004
.042
0.9 to 1.0
.0003
.019
48

Table 6
Economic Knowledge: Actual versus Survey Estimates
Question
Actual
Survey
Survey
Mean
Std. Dev.
Tax share
23.3%
31.3%
15.6%
Payroll or income tax is larger?
payroll (83%) income (52%)
-Size of budget deficit
$246-$310b
$334b
$739b
Level of minimum wage
$5.15
$5.86
$1.27
Size of SS check
$898
$824
$493
Know Bush SS proposal?
Yes
yes (56%)
-Know SS deficits coming?
Yes
yes (69%)
-Medicare drug benefit?
No
no (54%)
-Percent without health
15%
37%
16.7%
insurance

Table 7
Knowledge Score, by Desire to Keep Well-Informed
How important is it to
Mean K score
% of sample
keep well-informed?
(percentile)
Extremely important
43.8
23.8%
Very important
43.3
50.2%
Somewhat important
42.5
23.4%
Not very important or
34.5
2.6%
not important at all

Table 8
Knowledge Score, Ranked by Most Important Source of Information
Rank Most important source
Mean K score
% of sample
1.
Magazines
52.7
2.2%
2.
Economists
50.3
1.1%
3.
Newspapers
46.8
18.6%
4.
Business leaders
46.1
1.2%
5.
Internet
45.9
10.1%
6.
Books
43.7
0.5%
7.
Radio
42.3
8.9%
8.
Television
41.1
46.6%
9.
Political leaders
40.9
2.3%
10.
Friends and relatives
39.9
6.6%
11.
Civic/religious leaders
35.0
1.2%

49

Survey
Median
30%
income
$90b
$5.65
$800
yes
yes
no
35%

Table 9
Knowledge Score, Ranked by Number of Sources Used Regularly
Number Mean K score
% of sample
5+
45.5
14.4%
4
43.5
13.0%
3
46.1
20.9%
2
44.4
19.4%
1
39.4
21.2%
0
37.1
11.2%

Table 10
Opinions on How Big a Problem the Deficit Poses
Opinion
Told the
Not told the
All
Number
number
A serious problem
50%
59%
54%
A minor problem
38%
33%
36%
Not a problem
5%
3%
4%
Don’t know
6%
5%
5%

50

Table 11
OLS Regressions for Economic Knowledge Scores (K)
Variable

1

Coefficient
(Standard Error)
2

3

Intensity of Use

[0.13]

[0.28]

[0.67]

QH

4.85

4.41

2.94

(3.80)

(3.84)

(3.87)

-2.11

-1.20

-0.13

(3.21)

(3.21)

(3.24)

[0.04]

[0.19]

QL
Desire to be Informed
Extremely important
Very important

---

10.05***

7.91**

(3.60)

(3.69)

8.44**
(3.50)

Somewhat important

--

8.04**

6.39*

(3.55)

(3.64)

Ideology/Political
Liberal

6.83*
(3.58)

[0.05]
--

--

-1.00
(1.78)

Conservative

--

--

-1.27
(1.55)

No thought

--

--

-3.06*
(1.61)

Other Ideology

--

--

2.33
(2.81)

Voted

--

--

2.65**
(1.31)

Demographics

[0.00]

[0.00]

[0.00]

Log income

1.96**

2.07**

2.01**

(0.82)

(0.82)

(0.82)

0.00

0.00

-0.01

(0.05)

(0.05)

(0.05)

1.25***

1.25***

1.01***

(0.24)

(0.24)

(0.26)

-1.75

-1.86*

-1.24

(1.09)

(1.09)

(1.10)

-2.33

-2.60

-2.87

Age
Years of education
Female
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
Student/other
Married
Number of observations
2

R

(1.70)

(1.70)

(1.74)

-6.40***

-6.32***

-5.86***

(2.01)

(2.01)

(2.03)

0.38

0.30

0.40

(2.05)

(2.05)

(2.06)

4.14*

3.87

3.88

(2.39)

(2.38)

(2.40)

-1.12

-1.06

-1.22

b

(1.93)

(1.93)

(1.95)

c

-1.50

-1.43

-1.10

(2.47)

(2.47)

(2.47)

-0.38

-0.18

0.06

(1.65)

(1.65)

(1.68)

4.70***

4.15***

3.64**

(1.53)

(1.54)

(1.55)

881

879

867

0.17

0.18

0.19

51

Notes: Coefficients with standard errors
in parentheses. P-value for test of joint
significance of variables in brackets.
a

Model also included demographic
controls for five categories of marital
status, not shown here.
Omitted category is moderate
Omitted category is neither
d
Omitted category is neither
e
Omitted category is white
f
Omitted category is employed
***
Denotes significantly different from
zero at the 1 % level.
**
Denotes significantly different from
zero at the 5 % level.
*
Denotes significantly different from
zero at the 10 % level

Table 12
Ordered probit model for favoring Bush tax cut
Variable
Self-interest
Log income

1
[.13]
0.09
(0.06)

Ideology/Political
Liberal

--

Conservative

--

No thought

-b

Other ideology

--

Voted

--

Taxes too high

--

Taxes too low

c

--

Likes progressivity

--

Knowledge
K score

--

Tax share

--

Income tax larger

--

Other opinions
Deficit major problem

--

Deficit minor problem

d

a

Demographics
Years of education
Age
Female
Black
e

Other race
Hispanic

Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
f

Student/other

Number of observations
Log Likelihood
2
Pseudo-R

-[.004]
-.037**
(.018)
-.001
(.004)
0.017
(0.082)
-.35***
(.12)
.004
(.156)
.20
(.16)
-.15
(.17)
-.004
(.146)
.13
(.19)
-.17
(.12)
874
-921
.018

See notes to Table 11.

52

Coefficient
(Standard Error)
2
3
[.160]
[.147]
0.10
(0.07)
[.000]
-0.41***
(0.15)
0.70***
(0.13)
0.03
(0.13)
-0.27
(0.23)
-0.11
(0.11)
0.57***
(0.10)
-0.70**
(0.30)
-0.16*
(0.09)
[.005]
-0.012***
(0.003)
-0.09
(0.30)
-0.12
(0.09)
----[.162]
0.017
(0.022)
0.0007
(0.0043)
-0.05
(0.09)
-0.26*
(0.15)
-0.11
(0.18)
0.38**
(0.18)
-0.002
(0.21)
0.01
(0.17)
0.27
(0.22)
-0.13
(0.14)
722
-680
0.12

0.11
(0.08)
[.000]
-0.43***
(0.15)
0.60***
(0.14)
-0.02
(0.14)
-0.45*
(0.24)
-0.06
(0.12)
0.63***
(0.10)
-0.78**
(0.31)
-0.08
(0.10)
[.006]
-0.011***
(0.003)
0.09
(0.31)
-0.13
(0.10)
[.000]
-0.70***
(0.24)
-0.24
(0.24)
[.239]
0.020
(0.023)
0.0031
(0.0045)
0.004
(0.098)
-0.22
(0.16)
-0.07
(0.18)
0.41**
(0.18)
0.09
(0.21)
-0.04
(0.18)
0.23
(0.23)
-0.05
(0.15)
697
-645
0.14

Table 13
Ordered probit model for view of deficit
Dep. Var.: 3=Serious Problem; 2=Minor Problem; 1=Not a Problem
Variable
Self-interest
Log income

Coefficient
(Standard Error)
1
2
3
[.01]
[.16]
[.30]
-.17**
-.11
-.08
(.07)
(.08)
(.08)

Ideology/Political
Liberal

--

Conservative

--

No thought

--

Other ideology

--

Voted

--

Taxes too high

--

[.00]
.01
(.16)
-.53***
(.13)
-.19
(.15)
-.46*
(.24)
.07
(.12)
--

Taxes too low

c

--

--

Likes progressivity

--

Knowledge
K score

--

Tax share

--

Income tax larger

--

Survey Design
d
Question Order

[.02]
.20**
(.09)

.30***
(.10)
[.81]
.001
(.004)
.003
(.003)
-.02
(.10)
[.07]
.18*
(.10)

[.00]
-.01
(.16)
-.62***
(.14)
-.24
(.15)
-.51**
(.25)
.10
(.13)
.20**
(.10)
-.31
(.26)
.34***
(.10)
[.84]
.002
(.004)
.003
(.003)
-.00
(.10)
[.08]
.17*
(.10)

[.00]

[.00]

.01
(.02)
.010**
(.005)
.37***
(.10)
.43**
(.18)
.16
(.19)
.16
(.19)
.36
(.24)
-.21
(.19)
-.40*
(.22)
.25
(.16)
716
-535
.09

.01
(.02)
.010**
(.005)
.34***
(.10)
.40**
(.18)
.15
(.19)
.12
(.19)
.33
(.24)
-.20
(.19)
-.26
(.23)
.30*
(.16)
701
-516
.10

b

a

Demographics
Years of education
Age
Female
Black
e

Other race
Hispanic

Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
f

Student/other

Number of observations
Log Likelihood
2
Pseudo-R

[.00]
.03*
(.02)
.009**
(.004)
.24***
(.09)
.35**
(.15)
.19
(.17)
.16
(.17)
.15
(.20)
-.24
(.16)
-.24
(.20)
.10
(.14)
842
-661
.04

See notes to Table 11.

53

Table 14
How to reduce the deficit: raise taxes, cut spending or both?
Model:
Self Interest
Log Income
Ideology/Political
Liberal
Conservative
No thought
Other ideology
Voted
Knowledge
K score
Tax Share
Income tax larger
Other Opinions
Likes Progressivity
Taxes too high
Taxes too low
Demographics
Years of Education
Age
Female
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
Married
Student/other
Number of observations
2
Pseudo-R

Taxes Part of Solution
1
2
3
[0.077]
[0.679]
[0.385]
-0.022
-0.031
-0.073
(0.073)
(0.074)
(0.085)
--[0.278]
[0.584]
---0.027
-0.072
(0.158)
(0.174)
---0.197
-0.104
(0.138)
(0.151)
---0.278
-0.217
(0.145)
(0.160)
---0.408**
-0.435
(0.264)
(0.282)
--0.022
0.050
(0.118)
(0.133)
--[0.095]
[0.007]
---0.005*
-0.008*
(0.003)
(0.004)
----0.000
(0.004)
-----0.340***
(0.108)
--[0.000]
----0.063
(0.110)
-----0.630***
(0.116)
----0.525
(0.330)
[0.005]
[0.026]
[0.062]
-0.012
-0.028
-0.049*
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.026)
-0.011** -0.010**
-0.010**
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.005)
-0.059
-0.096
-0.090
(0.097)
(0.099)
(0.109)
-0.143
-0.118
-0.167
(0.153)
(0.159)
(0.184)
0.167
0.164
0.108
(0.186)
(0.188)
(0.209)
0.093
0.041
-0.079
(0.188)
(0.190)
(0.213)
0.036
0.012
-0.344
(0.211)
(0.216)
(0.245)
0.256
0.246
0.092
(0.176)
(0.180)
(0.206)
0.155
0.172
0.090
(0.225)
(0.226)
(0.255)
-0.117
-0.092
-0.210
(0.136)
(0.138)
(0.156)
0.317**
0.300**
0.163
(0.148)
(0.152)
(0.174)
780
771
662
0.031
0.038
0.096

Spending Part of Solution
4
5
6
[0.130]
[0.082]
[0.112]
0.165
0.200*
0.220
(0.109)
(0.115)
(0.138)
--[0.000]
[0.001]
---0.612*** -0.685***
(0.224)
(0.257)
--0.237
0.061
(0.239)
(0.269)
--0.247
0.140
(0.258)
(0.299)
---0.624*
-0.818**
(0.324)
(0.368)
---0.347*
-0.501*
(0.213)
(0.258)
--[0.316]
[0.372]
---0.005
-0.005
(0.005)
(0.007)
----0.008
(0.007)
-----0.097
(0.184)
----[0.002]
-----0.004
(0.196)
----0.521***
(0.191)
-----0.668**
(0.338)
[0.135]
[0.886]
[0.841]
-0.098***
-0.047
-0.013
(0.032)
(0.037)
(0.043)
-0.006
-0.003
0.006
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.009)
0.076
0.048
0.130
(0.152)
(0.164)
(0.186)
-0.163
-0.061
-0.237
(0.227)
(0.249)
(0.297)
0.023
-0.111
-0.227
(0.280)
(0.295)
(0.323)
-0.091
0.002
-0.077
(0.275)
(0.297)
(0.312)
-0.278
-0.309
-0.449
(0.299)
(0.321)
(0.349)
0.204
0.091
0.119
(0.282)
(0.296)
(0.353)
-0.110
-0.143
-0.171
(0.359)
(0.378)
(0.444)
0.248
0.229
0.226
(0.196)
(0.211)
(0.239)
-0.239
-0.255
-0.041
(0.208)
(0.223)
(0.268)
780
771
662
0.056
0.135
0.199

Notes: See notes to Table 11. Also controls for order of deficit.
Probit estimates with standard errors in parentheses.

54

Table 15
Probit model for supporting minimum wage increase
Variable
1
[.03]
-.22***
(.08)

Self-interest
Log income
Ideology/Political
Liberal

--

Conservative

--

No thought

-b

Coefficient
(Standard Error)
2
[.08]
-.19**
(.09)
[.000]
.12
(.19)
-.48***
(.15)
.10
(.17)
-.09
(.29)
-.03
(.14)
[.34]
.004
(.004)
---

Other ideology

--

Voted

--

Knowledge
K score

--

Value of Min. Wage

--

Other opinions
A lot lose jobs

--

--

Some lose jobs

--

--

[.000]
-.08***
(.02)
-.002
(.005)
.42***
(.11)
1.18***
(.29)
.40*
(.22)
.23
(.23)
-.04
(.26)
-.17
(.20)
.09
(.26)
-.14
(.18)
838
-380
.13

[.000]
-.09***
(.03)
.001
(.005)
.39***
(.12)
1.05***
(.30)
.38
(.23)
.17
(.24)
-.14
(.26)
-.20
(.20)
.10
(.26)
-0.14
(0.18)
823
-364
.16

a

Demographics
Years of education
Age
Female
Black
e

Other race
Hispanic

Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
f

Student/other

Number of observations
Log Likelihood
2
Pseudo-R

See notes to Table 11.

55

3
[.011]
-.28***
(.10)
[.002]
.19
(.22)
-.39**
(.17)
.10
(.20)
-.06
(.32)
-.24
(.17)
[.006]
-.001
(.004)
-.18***
(.06)
[.002]
-1.73***
(.25)
-.95***
(.13)
[.000]
-.07**
(.03)
-.008
(.006)
.47***
(.13)
1.13**
(.46)
.34
(.26)
.34
(.27)
.41
(.31)
-.02
(.23)
.16
(.30)
-.37*
(.21)
761
-284
.29

Table 16
Ordered probit model for favoring personal investment accounts
1

Coefficient
(Standard Error)
2

3

[.06]

[.004]

[.003]

.15**
(.06)
.004
(.004)
.18
(.12)
.06
(.14)
.01
(.20)
-.22*
(.12)
-.17*
(.10)

.11
(.07)
-.008
(.005)
.05
(.13)
.03
(.15)
-.15
(.24)
-.40***
(.13)
-.31***
(.11)

.11
(.07)
-.009*
(.005)
-.04
(.13)
.05
(.15)
-.14
(.24)
-.36***
(.14)
-.30***
(.11)

[.000]

[.000]

Liberal

--

-.38***
(.15)

-.40***
(.15)

Conservative

--

.87***
(.13)

.87***
(.13)

No thought

--

.31**
(.14)

.34**
(.14)

Other ideologyb

--

-.12
(.23)

-.18
(.24)

Voted

--

.04
(.11)

.02
(.11)

[.35]

[.41]

K score

--

.003
(.003)

.002
(.003)

Monthly SS Benefit

--

.09
(.09)

.10
(.09)

Aware of Bush Proposal

--

---

.13
(.10)

Aware of Soc Sec Defecit

--

---

.05
(.11)

Variable
Self-interest
Log income
Age
Both Parents Alive
Mother Alive
Father Alive
SS Major Income Source
SS Minor Income Source
Ideology/Political

Knowledge

Other Knowledge

[.36]

Demographicsa
Years of education

[.19]

[.22]

[.38]

.03
(.02)

.05**
(.02)

.05**
(.02)

-.26***
(.08)

-.15
(.09)

-.11
(.10)

Black

-.16
(.13)

-.07
(.16)

-.06
(.16)

Other racee

-.04
(.15)

-.24
(.17)

-.25
(.17)

Hispanic

.15
(.15)

.34**
(.17)

.34**
(.17)

Unemployed

-.05
(.18)

.07
(.19)

.03
(.19)

Retired

-.10
(.15)

-.03
(.17)

-.02
(.17)

Homemaker

.18
(.18)

.14
(.20)

.12
(.20)

Student/other

-.06
(.13)

-.04
(.15)

-.06
(.15)

Number of observations
Log Likelihood
Pseudo-R2

862
-883
.03

736
-713
.10

731
-706
.10

Female

See notes to Table 11.

56

Table 17
How Should the Social Security Deficit Be Reduced?
Variable
Self Interest
Log income
Age
Both parents alive
Father alive
Mother alive
SS major income source
SS minor income source
Ideology/Political
Liberal
Conservative
No thought
Other
Voted
Knowledge
K score
Monthly benefits (/100)
Aware of Bush proposal
Aware of pending Social
Security deficit
Other Opinions
Taxes too high
Taxes too low
Demographics
Years of education
Female
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
Student/Other
Number of observations
2
Pseudo-R

Raising Taxes Part of Solution
1
2
3
[0.015]
[0.563]
[0.566]
-0.088
-0.143
-0.121
(0.078)
(0.088)
(0.090)
-0.007
-0.003
-0.002
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.093
0.071
0.107
(0.153)
(0.165)
(0.170)
-0.341
-0.027
0.088
(0.243)
(0.282)
(0.292)
0.167
0.117
0.125
(0.176)
(0.182)
(0.184)
0.477***
0.268
0.322*
(0.147)
(0.171)
(0.176)
0.214*
0.158
0.166
(0.119)
(0.133)
(0.135)
--[0.122]
[0.196]
--0.122
0.105
(0.183)
(0.187)
---0.106
-0.115
(0.155)
(0.159)
---0.001
0.001
(0.175)
(0.177)
---0.663** -0.652**
(0.281)
(0.294)
--0.121
0.102
(0.140)
(0.142)
--[0.066]
[0.054]
---0.008** -0.009**
(0.004)
(0.004)
--0.009
0.007
(0.010)
(0.011)
---0.204
-0.198
(0.130)
(0.132)
--0.210
0.233
(0.148)
(0.149)
----[0.100]
-----0.252**
(0.118)
-----0.149
(0.288)
[0.029]
[0.318]
[0.268]
0.036
0.007
0.003
(0.023)
(0.027)
(0.028)
0.269***
0.163
0.155
(0.105)
(0.118)
(0.120)
0.157
0.168
0.182
(0.169)
(0.211)
(0.212)
-0.038
-0.006
0.091
(0.194)
(0.211)
(0.220)
0.352*
0.277
0.200
(0.208)
(0.219)
(0.223)
0.602**
0.795**
0.821**
(0.280)
(0.318)
(0.323)
-0.289
-0.100
-0.167
(0.186)
(0.206)
(0.210)
-0.197
-0.247
-0.321
(0.229)
(0.240)
(0.244)
-0.075
-0.074
-0.089
(0.160)
(0.181)
(0.185)
793
676
664
0.063
0.069
0.075

Cutting Benefits Part of Solution
4
5
6
[0.005]
[0.222]
[0.282]
0.099
0.064
0.072
(0.073)
(0.082)
(0.083)
-0.009*
-0.007
-0.007
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.006)
0.229
0.140
0.108
(0.145)
(0.156)
(0.159)
-0.350
-0.315
-0.371
(0.251)
(0.276)
(0.280)
0.285*
0.208
0.162
(0.166)
(0.171)
(0.173)
0.100
-0.074
-0.063
(0.137)
(0.159)
(0.162)
-0.071
-0.086
-0.064
(0.115)
(0.127)
(0.128)
--[0.485]
[0.465]
--0.188
0.207
(0.173)
(0.175)
--0.142
0.128
(0.149)
(0.152)
--0.293
0.296*
(0.163)
(0.164)
---0.112
-0.102
(0.290)
(0.299)
--0.090
0.104
(0.131)
(0.132)
--[0.100]
[0.093]
--0.001
0.001
(0.004)
(0.004)
--0.017*
0.017*
(0.010)
(0.010)
---0.252**
-0.265**
(0.122)
(0.123)
---0.064
-0.057
(0.136)
(0.137)
----[0.278]
----0.171
--(0.110)
----0.191
--(0.277)
[0.005]
[0.021]
[0.049]
-0.062***
-0.041
-0.035
(0.022)
(0.027)
(0.027)
-0.238**
-0.368*** -0.369***
(0.099)
(0.113)
(0.115)
0.295*
0.173
0.148
(0.153)
(0.187)
(0.188)
-0.239
-0.267
-0.248
(0.185)
(0.200)
(0.203)
0.307*
0.367*
0.360*
(0.187)
(0.197)
(0.198)
-0.077
-0.009
-0.023
(0.216)
(0.226)
(0.227)
-0.167
-0.046
-0.037
(0.186)
(0.201)
(0.204)
-0.079
-0.117
-0.079
(0.221)
(0.235)
(0.239)
-0.345**
-0.375**
-0.342**
(0.151)
(0.174)
(0.176)
793
676
664
0.060
0.065
0.065

Notes: See notes to Table 11. Probit estimates with standard errors in parentheses. Equation also controls
for married, cohabitation, widowed, divorced or separated, and order of deficit questions.

57

Table 18
Probit model for favoring universal health insurance
Coefficient
(Standard Error)
1
2
[.000]
[.005]

Variable
Self-interest
Log income

-.42***
(.09)

-.30***
(.10)

Uninsured

.56***
(.20)

.35
(.22)

Family member uninsured

-.11
(.18)

-.15
(.20)

Ideology/Political

[.000]

Liberal

--

.58***
(.22)

Conservative

--

-.77***
(.17)

No thought

--

.15
(.20)

b

Other ideology

--

Voted

--

-40**
(.17)

K score

--

.002
(.005)

Percent uninsured

--

.009**
(.005)

[.03]
-.02
(.03)

[.17]

Knowledge

-.48
(.30)

[.12]

a

Demographics
Years of education
Age

.001
(.005)
.21*
(.11)

Female

-.01
(.03)
.004
(.006)
.08
(.13)

Black

.62***
(.23)

.28
(.25)

Other race

-.05
(.21)

-.21
(.24)

Hispanic

.38*
(.23)

.23
(.25)

Unemployed

-.08
(.23)

-.22
(.31)

Retired

-.15
(.21)

-.15
(.24)

Homemaker

.12
(.26)

.08
(.29)

Student/other

.24
(.19)

0.18
(0.22)

Number of observations
Likelihood ratio

761
-356

674
-287

.12

.21

Pseudo-R

2

See notes to Table 11.

58

Table 19
Support for Prescription Drug Insurance in Medicare
Variable
Self-Interest
Log income
Age
Both parents alive
Father alive
Mother alive
Ideology/Political
Liberal
Conservative
No thought
Other
Voted
Knowledge
K score
Believes partly
covered already
Demographics
Years of education
Female
Black
Other race
Hispanic
Student/Other
Unemployed
Retired
Homemaker
Married
Number of observations
2
Pseudo-R

1
[0.524]
0.100
(0.119)
-0.008
(0.007)
-0.010
(0.220)
0.297
(0.470)
-0.250
(0.236)
[0.002]
1.064***
(0.295)
0.143
(0.187)
0.312
(0.204)
1.068**
(0.544)
0.374**
(0.185)
----------[0.002]
-0.095***
(0.034)
0.197
(0.153)
-0.589**
(0.231)
-0.012
(0.295)
-0.100
(0.293)
1.056***
(0.386)
-0.130
(0.317)
0.009
(0.257)
-0.015
(0.342)
0.440**
(0.221)
629
0.128

2
[0.453]
0.100
(0.119)
-0.007
(0.008)
0.022
(0.221)
0.306
(0.465)
-0.284
(0.237)
[0.001]
1.069***
(0.294)
0.152
(0.186)
0.360*
(0.206)
1.069**
(0.542)
0.432**
(0.187)
[0.559]
0.003
(0.005)
----[0.001]
-0.099***
(0.035)
0.236
(0.155)
-0.594**
(0.232)
-0.138
(0.304)
-0.027
(0.301)
1.040***
(0.383)
-0.156
(0.317)
0.050
(0.260)
-0.028
(0.340)
0.398*
(0.220)
626
0.133

3
[0.240]
0.107
(0.128)
-0.016*
(0.008)
-0.111
(0.231)
0.083
(0.480)
-0.350
(0.245)
[0.023]
0.766**
(0.313)
-0.127
(0.209)
-0.182
(0.239)
0.640
(0.564)
0.192
(0.210)
[0.587]
0.005
(0.005)
0.079
(0.199)
[0.001]
-0.140***
(0.038)
0.086
(0.170)
-0.506
(0.261)
-0.260
(0.326)
-0.209
(0.322)
1.131**
(0.517)
-0.326
(0.336)
0.434
(0.286)
0.270
(0.377)
0.213
(0.243)
567
0.139

Notes: Sample is restricted to those who believe that Medicare did not already cover prescription
drugs outside of the hospital for Medicare patients.
Equations also control for order of questions, cohabitation, widowhood, and divorced or separated.
See notes to Table 11.

59

