                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             FISCAL DISCIPLINE AND THE COST OF PUBLIC DEBT SERVICE:
                      SOME ESTIMATES FOR OECD COUNTRIES

                                             Silvia Ardagna
                                            Francesco Caselli
                                             Timothy Lane

                                         Working Paper 10788
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10788


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We are grateful to Ignazio Angeloni, Pierluigi Balduzzi, Paolo Paesani, Fabio Schiantarelli, Ludger
Schuknecht, Rolf Strauch, an anonymous referee, and to participants to the seminar at the European Central
Bank Fiscal Policy Division for useful discussions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Silvia Ardagna, Francesco Caselli, and Timothy Lane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Fiscal Discipline and the Cost of Public Debt Service: Some Estimates for OECD Countries
Silvia Ardagna, Francesco Caselli, and Timothy Lane
NBER Working Paper No. 10788
September 2004
JEL No. H6

                                            ABSTRACT

We use a panel of 16 OECD countries over several decades to investigate the effects of government
debts and deficits on long-term interest rates. In simple static specifications, a one-percentage-point
increase in the primary deficit relative to GDP increases contemporaneous long-term interest rates
by about 10 basis points. In a vector autoregression (VAR), the same shock leads to a cumulative
increase of almost 150 basis points after 10 years. The effect of debt on interest rates is non-linear:
only for countries with above-average levels of debt does an increase in debt affect the interest rate.
World fiscal policy is also important: an increase in total OECD-government borrowing increases
each country's interest rates. However, domestic fiscal policy continues to affect domestic interest
rates even after controlling for worldwide debts and deficits.

Silvia Ardagna
Harvard University
sardagna@fas.harvard.edu

Francesco Caselli
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Building
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
caselli@harvard.edu

Timothy Lane
IMF
tlane@imf.org
1       Introduction
After years of Þscal consolidation in the 1990s, governments of many OECD countries have
again embarked on expansionary Þscal policies. In 2003, the US government deÞcit reached
4.5 percent of GDP, compared with 1.5 percent in 2000, and is projected to increase further
in the future. Over the same period, Germany’s deÞcit rose to 3.75 percent of GDP from 1
percent; France’s to 3.5 compared with 1.5, and Italy’s to 2.5 from 0.75 percent; as a result,
the Stability and Growth Pact has come under strain, possibly weakening the resistance to
larger deÞcits in Europe in the future.
        One of the main concerns raised by governments’ increased Þscal laxity is its eﬀect
on long-term interest rates. Undergraduate macroeconomic textbooks teach that budget
deÞcits push interest rates up, leading to decreased investment and growth in the long-run.
However, many economists and policymakers have argued that more sophisticated theorizing
leads to less dire predictions, if not to an outright reversal of the textbook story, or that the
quantitative signiÞcance of the eﬀect is likely to be small.1 Given that theory does not settle
the matter (as it rarely does) the focus now is on empirical evidence.
        The eﬀects of Þscal imbalances on interest rates have been the subject of an extensive
but hiterto inconclusive empirical literature.2 However, estimates of the impact of debts and
deÞcits on interest rates vary widely.3 Almost all of this work is based on time series evidence
from single countries, typically the US. This suggests that there may be signiÞcant beneÞts
    1
     See Barth et al. (1991) and Gale and Orszag (2002) for a comprehensive review of the literature.
    2
     An incomplete list includes Barro (1987), Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990), Blanchard and Summers
(1984), Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2002), Evans (1985) and (1987), Hoelscher (1986), Laubach (2003),
Miller and Russek (1991) and (1996), Orr et al. (1995), Paesani and Strauch (2003), Perotti (2002), Plosser
(1987), Reinhart and Sack (2000), and Tavares and Valkanov (2003).
   3
     Coeﬃcients of Þscal policy variables in interest rates regressions span from being positive and signiÞcant
to being insigniÞcant. For example, while Hoelscher (1986) Þnds that in the US each 100 billion dollars of
federal deÞcit increases the 10-year Treasury bonds interest rate by about 143 basis points, Evans (1987) Þnds
that eurocurrency rates are not sensitive to changes in the Þscal stance in Canada, France, Germany, Japan,
the UK and the US. More recently, Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2002) show that in the US an increase
in projected future deÞcit by one percentage point of GDP leads to an increase in long-term interest rates
relative to the short-term interest rate from 53 to 60 basis points. This result is also supported by Laubach
(2003) who Þnds that a one percentage point surge in the projected deÞcit-to-GDP ratio raises long-term
interest rates in the US by about 25 basis points. To the contrary, in a VAR framework, Mountford and
Uhlig (2000) do not Þnd a permanent eﬀect of deÞcit shocks on short-term interest rates, and Perotti (2002)
shows that increases in government spending lead to a small decrease in the real short-term interest rates in
the US.
                                                      1
from bringing cross-country evidence to bear on this question. This is the goal of the present
paper.
        We examine the eﬀects of Þscal policy on interest rates in a broad panel of 16 OECD
countries covering a maximum time span from 1960 to 2002. The results indicate statistically
and economically signiÞcant eﬀects of Þscal imbalances on long-term interest rates. In our
preferred speciÞcation, a one percentage point increase of the primary deÞcit-to-GDP ratio
is associated with a 10-basis-point rise in the nominal interest rate on 10-year government
bonds. The increase is larger when one also considers the eﬀect that a positive shock to the
primary deÞcit has on expected future Þscal policy and macro variables in the long-run: in
a dynamic VAR a one percentage point increase in the primary deÞcit-to-GDP ratio leads
to a cumulative increase of almost 150 basis points after 10 years.
        In addition to the current deÞcit, it is important to examine the implications of
changes in the stock of public debt. We Þnd that the eﬀect is non-linear and that the
response of long-term interest rates is positive and statistically signiÞcant only when the
stock of public debt is above a given threshold. While in a country with a debt-to GDP ratio
of 119 per cent (Italy in 2002) a one-standard-deviation increase in government debt leads
to an increase in the nominal interest rate on 10-year government bonds of about 36 basis
points, an increase by the same amount where the public debt-to-GDP ratio is 58 percent
(the US in 2002) leads to a 5 basis points decrease in the interest rate.4
        We also Þnd that a worsening of public Þnances abroad has an eﬀect on national
interest rates, which is evidence that OECD countries’ Þnancial markets are to some extent
internationally integrated. However, the degree of globalization is far from complete: con-
trolling for the average value of the primary deÞcit and public debt to GDP ratios across
OECD countries, a shock to each country’s primary balance still aﬀects national long-term
interest rates.5 In a similar vein, we investigate whether the impact of Þscal variables on in-
terest rates is more severe in Þnancially less developed countries, and we Þnd some evidence
to this eﬀect.
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and the
econometric technique used in the estimation. Section 3 investigates the relation between
   4
     Note, however, that the ratio of government debt to GDP has a standard deviation equal to 26 per cent,
hence a one-standard-deviation increase in the public debt is quite a substantial change. The response of
interest rates to a one percent change of the stock of public debt to GDP ratio would be really minimal,
even in countries with extreme low or high values of public debt.
   5
     Besides incomplete Þnancial-market integration, diﬀerential government default risks may also explain
this result.
                                                    2
Þscal policy and long-term interest rates in static models, tackles causality, expands the
empirical analysis of our benchmark speciÞcations and checks the robustness of the results.
Section 4 presents estimates from dynamic VAR models. The last section concludes.


2       Data and Method
In this section we describe the data we use in the empirical analysis, discuss the choice of
the variables of interest, and investigate the time-series properties of the variables.
        The paper uses yearly data on OECD countries covering a maximum time span from
1960 to 2002. The countries included in the sample are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Spain,
Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. All Þscal and macroeconomic data are from
the OECD Economic Outlook n.73, June 2003. Data on interest rates on 3-month Treasury
bills and on 10-year government bonds are from Global Financial Data; data on 10-year
interest rates on swap contracts are from Bloomberg. Data on Þnancial development are
from the World Bank database on Financial Development and Structure.6
        Since the objective is to isolate the eﬀects of Þscal policy on interest rates, we use
a long-term bond rate as the dependent variable. A long-term rate reßects market condi-
tions, including inßationary expectations, in contrast to short-term rates which are heavily
inßuenced by current monetary policy. We focus on the nominal interest rate on 10-year
government bonds (INT 10Y ) because OECD countries in the sample have been issuing
this type of long-term bond for many years and, hence, long time-series of this variable are
available.7
        Our key indicators of the Þscal stance refer to the general government and are the pri-
mary deÞcit as a share of GDP (P RDEF ) and the public debt as a share of GDP (GDEBT 1
or GDEBT 2). We use the primary deÞcit, rather than the total deÞcit, because it strips out
the direct eﬀect of interest rates on expenditure, thus better capturing autonomous changes
in Þscal policy. We use two measures of government debt, GDEBT 1 or GDEBT 2, which
    6
      The              database              is            available             on           line           at
http://www.worldbank.org/research/projects/Þnstructure/database.htm.
    7
      The results are robust if, instead, the long-term interest rate series from the OECD, which is an average
of the interest rates of long-term bonds of diﬀerent maturities, is used as the dependent variable. The results
also stand up if the spread between the 10-year government bonds interest rate and the 3-month Treasury
bills interest rate is taken as the dependent variable, and if both rates are entered in real terms.

                                                      3
diﬀer in the way in which the variable is deßated. GDEBT 1 is equal to the stock of public
debt measured at the end of period t-1 divided by the level of GDP in year t-1. GDEBT 2
is constructed following the approach in Levine et al (2002). It is a year-average debt stock
(i.e. the average of the stock of public debt in year t-1 and in year t divided by GDP in year
t) which insulates the debt ratio from within-year inßation.
        Relative to other contributions in the literature our speciÞcation is slightly unusual,
in that it includes both the deÞcit and the debt. Our reason for doing so is that in theory
the relationship between Þscal policy and interest rates may be mediated by either variable.
Textbook IS-LM accounts tend to emphasize the deÞcit, while microfounded general equi-
librium models tend to place more weight on the stock of debt. Furthermore, even if one
were speciÞcally interested in the eﬀects of only one of these variables, it would still make
sense to control for the other. For example, given the current stock of debt, including the
deÞcit may help controlling for the expected future path of the debt itself. Finally, including
both variables will allow us to study interactions among them. For example, some of our
speciÞcations are designed to assess whether the eﬀect of deÞcits depends on the level of
debt.
        To achieve identiÞcation we mainly follow the well-worn path of adding relevant con-
trol variables. The chief concern, of course, is to hold monetary policy constant. To this
end, in all our speciÞcations we include the nominal interest rate on 3-month Treasury
bills (INT 3M) and the inßation rate (INF L).8 We also control for the GDP growth rate
(GROW T H) and for global indicators of world Þscal imbalances. We typically also have a
full set of country and year dummies. Finally, we use instrumental variables to allow for the
possible endogeneity of Þscal policy associated with the government reaction function.


2.1     Time Series Properties and Estimation Technique
The stationarity properties of nominal interest rates (on 10-year government bonds and
3-month Treasury bills), the inßation rate, and the primary balance and public debt as
a share of GDP were examined using the unit root test for panel data proposed by Im,
   8
    In principle, this may lead us to underestimate the eﬀect of Þscal shocks on interest rates, if such
shocks impact the inßation rate and short-term rates directly or through the monetary authority’s reaction
function (see Canzoneri et al. (2002)). When we regress the three-month interest rate on our Þscal variables,
however, we Þnd no eﬀect. Also, we show below that in a VAR that includes both short and long-term rates
the impact eﬀect of Þscal shocks on long-term rates is similar in magnitude to the one implied by the simple
static regression that controls for short-term rates.
                                                     4
Pesaran and Shin (2002).9 Table 1, part I, shows the results. While the evidence is against
stationarity when we use the sample from 1960 till 2002 (Sample A, from now on), it is
in favor of stationarity if we consider data from 1975 onwards (Sample B). This holds for
all variables except for the two variables that measure the stock of public debt as a share
of GDP, GDEBT 1 and GDEBT 2. In fact, the test result does not allow us the reject the
null hypothesis that GDEBT 1 is I(1) in both samples, but it suggests that GDEBT 2 is
a stationary variable in Sample A and Sample B. This mixed evidence on the order of
integration of the series may well be due to the presence of structural breaks in the data
around the oil-shock and to the inability of the test used to distinguish it from the presence
of a unit-root. For this reason, we prefer not to choose any of the two types of results and
we will estimate our speciÞcations for both samples, using, in each case, the appropriate
econometric technique.
        For Sample A, we also test whether the nominal interest rate on 10-year government
bonds, the nominal interest rate on 3-month Treasury bills, the inßation rate, the primary
deÞcit to GDP ratio, and the public debt to GDP ratio, as measured by GDEBT 1, are
cointegrated using the tests suggested by Pedroni (1999) on the panel. The evidence allows
us to reject the null hypothesis that the variables are not cointegrated (see Table 1, part II).
        Hence, based on the results shown in Table 1, we estimate our models in levels. We
always include country Þxed eﬀects, and linear and quadratic trends or year Þxed eﬀects.
When Sample A is used, we estimate the relation among the long-term interest rate, the
short-term interest rate, the inßation rate and the Þscal policy variables by dynamic GLS,
because OLS standard errors are not valid when variables are cointegrated. More precisely,
in models using Sample A, we allow for heterosckedasticity and Þrst order autocorrelation
in the error term and include among the regressors the contemporaneous diﬀerences of the
right-hand side variables. Both the autocorrelation coeﬃcient and the coeﬃcients of the
contemporaneous diﬀerences of the right-hand side variables are allowed to be country-
speciÞc.10 When we use Sample B, models are estimated by OLS and standard errors are
   9
     When the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test was applied to data for each country, the results permit-
ted rejection of the presence of a unit root for many, but not all, countries in the sample. The Im, Pesaran,
and Shin test is preferred given the low power of the ADF in small samples and the desirability of adopting
the same dynamic speciÞcation for the entire panel.
  10
     Stock and Watson (1993), and Mark and Sul (2002) suggest including contemporaneous, leads and lags
values of the diﬀerences of the right-hand side variables among the regressors and to allow the coeﬃcients
of these variables to be country speciÞc. Due to the number of observations required to estimate many
country’s speciÞc coeﬃcients, we follow Schiantarelli et al. (1999) in including only the contemporaneous

                                                     5
corrected for heterosckedasticity. OLS estimation in levels with country Þxed eﬀects (in
addition to linear and quadratic trends or year Þxed eﬀects) yields consistent estimates since
we have a panel with large T.


3     Static Estimates
3.1     Linear SpeciÞcation
Table 2 columns 1-3 and 5-7 shows the results of multivariate regressions of the nominal
interest rate on 10-year government bonds, on the nominal interest rate on 3-month Treasury
bills, the inßation rate, and the primary balance and public debt as a share of GDP. In
columns 4 and 8 we also add the rate of growth of GDP among the rhs variables. The
table shows that there is a positive relationship between the primary deÞcit as a share of
GDP and the 10-year government bonds interest rate. Independently of the sample used
and the control variables included in the estimation, the coeﬃcient of the primary deÞcit
is positive and statistically signiÞcant at the 5% level. The size of the coeﬃcient, however,
varies across speciÞcations from 0.136 to 0.074, implying that a one percentage point increase
in the primary deÞcit to GDP ratio is associated with an increase of the 10-year government
bonds interest rate from a maximum of 13.6 basis points to a minimum of 7.4 basis points.
        On the other hand, in all but one speciÞcation (Table 2, column 4), we do not Þnd
a positive and statistically signiÞcant relationship between long-term interest rates and the
stock of public debt as a share of GDP. In one speciÞcation (Table 2, column 1) the coeﬃcient
of GDEBT 1 is even negative and statistically signiÞcant, suggesting that a one percentage
point increase in the stock of public debt as a share of GDP is associated with a decrease of
one basis point of the 10-year government bonds interest rate.


3.2     Non-linearities
We are not the Þrst ones to Þnd evidence of a negative relation between the stock of public
debt and long-term interest rates. Caporale and Williams (2002) interpret a negative coeﬃ-
cient as due to a portfolio eﬀect. When governments issue bonds and investors consider them
of high quality, they switch into them from bad quality debt. The price of such bonds goes
diﬀerences of the right-hand side variables and allow for an AR(1) error term. Results are, however, very
similar if one includes also one lag or one lead of the diﬀerences of the right-hand side variables among the
regressors.
                                                     6
up and the yield decreases. The opposite occurs when investors believe that governments’
bonds are risky and of low quality. What this suggests is that the relation between long-term
interest rates and the stock of public debt can be non-linear and depend, for example, on the
level of the debt. When the stock of debt is low, Þnancial markets consider it of high quality
and an increase in its level is associated with a fall in interest rates. However, when gov-
ernment debt reaches a given threshold, further increases are associated with higher interest
rates.
        Following this line of argument, we investigate the presence of nonlinearities in Table
3. Columns 1 and 5 of Table 3 introduce among the regressors of Table 2 the square terms of
the primary deÞcit and of the public debt to GDP ratios. We Þnd evidence of non-linearities
in the deÞcit in Sample A but not in Sample B. Given that we tend to consider estimates
from the latter sample more reliable because all variables included in the regression have the
same order of integration, we do not put too much emphasis on this result.11 On the other
hand, we Þnd strong evidence of non-linearity in the public debt in both samples. An increase
in the public debt-to-GDP ratio has a negative eﬀect on long-term interest rates if the ratio
is below 62.5% for the speciÞcation in column 1 and below 65.4% for the one in column
5. The eﬀect of becomes positive when the debt-to-GDP ratio is above these thresholds
values. Using the coeﬃcients in column 1, a one standard deviation increase in the ratio of
government debt to GDP (i.e. standard deviation of GDEBT = 0.26) is associated with
a decrease of the 10-year government bonds rate by 73 basis points when government debt
is at its minimum value in sample (i.e. GDEBT = 0.12) but with an increase by 94 basis
points if the government debt is at its maximum value in sample (i.e. GDEBT = 1.41).
        Columns 2-4 and 6-8 check for non-linear variants to the simple quadratic term in
columns 1 and 5. In particular, the idea is to see whether the relation between long-term
interest rates and Þscal variables changes above a threshold level of the Þscal variables. To
this end, we deÞne two dummy variables, D1 and D2, equal to one if the primary deÞcit-
to-GDP ratio and, respectively, the public debt-to-GDP ratio are above their median values
in the sample (and equal to zero otherwise).12 We then interact the dummy variables with
the square of the diﬀerence between the primary deÞcit and its median value in the sample
(P RDEF − P RDEF ∗ ), and the square of the diﬀerence between public debt and its median
  11
     Tests results presented in section 2.1 suggested that all variables included in the speciÞcations using
Sample A, except GROWTH, are I(1) and cointegrated. GROWTH is, however, I(0).
  12
     The median value of the primary deÞcit to GDP ratio is -0.001 in Sample A and 0.001 in Sample B.
The median value of the government debt to GDP ratio is 0.59 in Sample A and 0.61 in Sample B.

                                                     7
value in the sample (GDEBT − GDEBT ∗ ). These experiments conÞrm that there is a
clear nonlinearity in the size of the debt, while — at least in Sample B — the primary deÞcit
continues to enter only linearly. Finally, in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 we check whether the
eﬀect of deÞcits depends on the level of debt and vice-versa. Results suggest that increases
of the primary deÞcit to GDP ratio have a bigger and statistically signiÞcant eﬀect (at the
10% level or better) on long-term interest rates when the public debt to GDP ratio is above
its median value. Instead, we Þnd evidence that the eﬀect of public debt on interest rates
depends on the level of the primary deÞcit in Sample A, but not in Sample B.


3.3     Instrumental Variables
Table 4 addresses the potential endogeneity between long-term interest rates and the public
debt. A shock to the long-term interest rate can inßuence the stock of public debt by
increasing interest expenses.13 Both to address this speciÞc source of endogeneity, and to
assuage concerns about additional omitted variables, in this table we estimate the models
considering all the regressors as endogenous. For presentation reasons, we also show IV
estimates for Sample A, but we focus on estimates for Sample B. In fact, based on the
results in Table 1 on the time series properties of the data, IV estimates are correct only
when Sample B is used. Columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 present results for a just identiÞed model
where all variables are instrumented by their Þrst lag. In columns 3 and 7, we instrument
the rhs variables with their Þrst and second lag, while in columns 4 and 8 we use only the
second lag of the regressors and of the left-hand side variable as instruments. The estimates
of the coeﬃcients and their standard errors are very similar to the ones obtained when we
estimate models by DGLS or OLS.
  13
    In pricinciple, the 10-year interest rate can also aﬀect the primary deÞcit by inducing policy makers to
implement changes in their spending and tax revenues’ programs. Note, however, that the budget for the
current year is approved during the second half of the previous year and, even though additional measures
can be taken during the course of the year, they usually become eﬀective with some delay. Hence, the
primary deÞcit is much less likely to be an endogenous variable than the stock of public debt. Furthermore,
this type of endogeneity would likely bias our results towards Þnding lower coeﬃcients, as — if anything —
policymakers’ response to higher rates will be to tighten the budget.




                                                     8
3.4     “World” Þscal policy
Another important issue to be examined is the impact of Þscal policy at the world level.
If economies are open and fully integrated with no barriers to trade or capital mobility, if
governments borrow in a common currency, and if governments’ default risks are negligible,
the real interest rate in each country should depend only on measures of worldwide aggregate
Þscal policy, not on indicators of Þscal policy in an individual country. From the individual
country’s standpoint, Þscal expansion is reßected primarily in a widening of the external
current account deÞcit and possibly a change in the exchange rate. In the simplest case, an
individual country’s Þscal policy aﬀects the interest rates it faces only to the extent that it
is aﬀects the worldwide macroeconomic balance - i.e. it would be only the “world” primary
deÞcit and “world” debt that matter. However, this simple theoretical result could break
down for a number of reasons: for instance, if capital mobility is limited; if goods market
mobility is limited (e.g. in cases in which exchange rate movements are associated with
changes in the relative price of tradables); if current Þscal deÞcits are expected to be Þnanced
partly through domestic inßation; or if the risk of government default is non-negligible.
       It therefore seems desirable to examine empirically the hypothesis that an individual
country’s Þscal variables aﬀects the real interest rate only to the extent that they inßuence
“world” aggregate variables. To do this with the existing data set, we use average values
across OECD countries of the right-hand side variables as a proxy for “world” variables. An
obvious caveat is that the OECD is not, in fact, the world: it omits a sizable part of the
world economy which may have substantial aggregate savings. At the same time, OECD
aggregates do cover a substantial part of the world economy - and an even larger share of
global Þnancial markets.
       We construct “world” variables for each regressor and introduce these “world” indices
among the rhs variables. In columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 of Table 5, a “world” variable is equal to
the weighted average of the variable across all countries in the sample. Weights are based on
shares of real GDP measured in PPP terms.14 Note that the “world” variables constructed
in this way have a common value across all countries in the panel. For this reason, year
dummies cannot be included as controls in the empirical speciÞcations in columns 1, 2, 5,
and 6 of Table 5.
       We estimate the models of Table 5, columns 1, 2, 5, and 6, including a common linear
  14
    That is, we weight the value of the variable for country i in year t by the share of country i’s real GDP
in the aggregate real GDP of the countries in the sample.

                                                     9
and quadratic trend among the regressors. Results are quite interesting. First, contrary to
the evidence on short-term real interest rates in Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1990), we Þnd that
both “world” Þscal policy variables and an individual country’s Þscal variables matter for
long-term interest rates. The magnitude of the coeﬃcients of the “world” primary deÞcit and
“world” public debt are sizeable. An increase by one percentage point of W P RDEF leads
to an increase in the interest rate of 10-year government bonds from a minimum of 28 basis
points to a maximum of 66 basis points, and an increase by the same amount of W GDEBT
raises interest rates from a minimum of 3 basis points of a maximum of 21 basis points. The
coeﬃcients are statistically signiÞcant at conventional critical values. Importantly, however,
the size and the signiÞcance of the coeﬃcients of P RDEF , GDEBT , and GDEBT 2 are
virtually unchanged from the evidence in the previous tables. Note also that results in Table
5 columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 do not change when we allow the linear and quadratic trend to be
country speciÞc. This implies that little if any of the impact of domestic deÞcits estimated
in the panel regressions reported earlier is channelled via the world economy.15
        An alternative formulation is to construct a “rest of the world” (ROW) average vari-
ables that complement the individual country variables. This permits us to include year
Þxed eﬀects among the regressors and check that the evidence presented so far still holds.
Results with this formulation are reported in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8. Consistently with our
previous results, individual countries’ changes in the primary deÞcit to GDP ratio has always
a positive and statistically signiÞcant eﬀect on INT 10Y , while the eﬀect of public debt is
positive (negative) when public debt is above (below) a given threshold. As for the eﬀect
of the “world” policy indicators, the coeﬃcient of the average value of the primary deÞcit
  15
     We also investigated the existence of structural breaks for euro countries in 1999. In particular, for the
Euro-zone economies, one might expect that: (i) indicators of Þscal policy in individual countries inßuence
national interest rates before 1999 but not after, (ii) measures of aggregate Þscal policy are the only ones
that matter after 1999. To test (i) and (ii), we deÞned a dummy variable P EM U equal to 1 after 1999
for the countries in our panel that adopted the euro (Austria, Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Ireland,
Italy, the Netherlands) and equal to zero otherwise. We interacted the variable P EM U with the variables
P RDEF , GDEBT 1 or GDEBT 2 and their square and with W P RDEF and W GDEBT . We estimated
columns 1 and 5 of Table 5 including these additional variables among the regressors. We also estimated
these speciÞcations eliminating the square of the variables. We did not Þnd signiÞcant and robust evidence
that suggests the presence of a structural break in the relative importance of national and world Þscal policy
variables before and after 1999. However, we also think that our experiment is not conclusive. There are at
least two caveats that one has to consider. First, the set of countries of the European Union that potentially
could have adopted the euro is diﬀerent from the one that ended up adopting the euro. Second, 1999 cannot
be the right date to identify the break if, for example, Þnancial markets anticipated the adoption of the euro.
                                                      10
is no longer signiÞcant, while the one of public debt is still positive and signiÞcant and its
value ranges from 0.096 to 0.115. In conclusion, we read the results in Table 5 as evidence
in favor of the international Þnancial integration among OECD countries and the possibility
that Þscal shocks in one country inßuences interest rates in others. However, it seems that
either the degree of integration is far from perfect, or that there is a non-negligible risk that
deÞcits are reßected in expected inßation or default risk: changes in the domestic stance of
Þscal policy still matter for domestic long-term interest rates beyond their eﬀect on aggregate
variables.


3.5    Financial Development
In this section we bring into the picture indicators of Þnancial development. The rationale for
this extension is twofold. First, Þnancial development obviously potentially aﬀects the level of
interest rates, and if it is correlated with Þscal policy it may generate a bias in our coeﬃcients.
This suggests that it is worthwhile to include Þnancial development as an additional control.
Second, the degree of Þnancial development may aﬀect the responsiveness of interest rates
to Þscal shocks. This suggests that it may be interesting to include interactions among
the Þscal variables and Þnancial development. The range of Þnancial development in this
OECD sample is comparatively limited; but even within this set of developed countries,
diﬀerences in the Þnancial systems, and in the depth and liquidity of Þnancial markets, can
have important eﬀects on the behavior of long-term interest rates.
        We add among the regressors the variables used by Levine et al. (2000) to measure
Þnancial liberalization. SpeciÞcally, we use the variable LIQU ID LIABILIT IES equal
to the liquid liabilities of the Þnancial system as a share of GDP, the variable P RIV AT E
CREDIT , equal to the value of credits by Þnancial intermediaries to the private sector
divided by GDP, and the indicator COMMERCIAL − CENT RAL BANK, equal to the
ratio of commercial banks assets divided by commercial bank plus central bank assets. In
Table 6 we show the results obtained when we add the Þrst of the three variables. An increase
in Þnancial liberalization leads to a decrease in the long-term interest rate and the coeﬃcient
of LIQUID LIABILIT IES is statistically signiÞcant at the 5% level. More to the point
for our purposes, the eﬀect of changes in the primary deÞcit and public debt to GDP ratio
remains virtually unchanged. Results (not shown) are along the same line if we measure
Þnancial development with the variables P RIV AT E CREDIT and COMMERCIAL −
CENT RAL BANK.

                                                11
       More interesting results are obtained by adding interaction terms between the Þscal
variables and Þnancial development. Here, we Þnd that the degree of Þnancial development
aﬀects the responsiveness of interest rates to changes in the primary-deÞcit-to GDP ratio: in
more developed Þnancial markets, increases in the primary deÞcit-to-GDP ratio attenuate
the surge in long-term interest rates.


3.6     Alternative left-hand-side variables
We conclude this section by discussing the results we obtain by using a variety of alternative
left-hand-side variables.
        We have re-estimated the relation between interest rates, the inßation rate, Þscal
variables and GDP growth using real rather than nominal interest rates. Ideally, one would
like to measure the long term real interest rate as the diﬀerence between the 10-year nominal
interest rate and expectations of inßation of the next ten years. Inßation’s forecasts over
such a long-term time period are not available for our panel of countries. We follow Orr
et al. (1995) in proxying long-term inßation expectations by trend inßation.16 Our results
(shown in Table 7) are almost unchanged relatively to the ones in the speciÞcations using
nominal interest rates.
        Second, we use as the dependent variable the nominal yield spread of 10-year gov-
ernment bonds over 3-month Treasury bills. Once again, as Table 8 shows, our conclusions
on the eﬀect of Þscal policy on long-term interest rates are unaﬀected by this speciÞcation
change. Third, we use as our left-hand side variable the long-term interest rate series pub-
lished by the OECD, which is an average of the interest rates paid on long-term government
bonds. Fourth, we look at the spread between domestic 10 year interest rates and German
10 year interest rates. Again results (not shown but available upon request) still hold. One
popular left-hand-side variable in studies of the eﬀect of Þscal variables is the yield spread
of 10-year government bonds over swap contracts with the same maturity and currency de-
nomination. 17 The rationale for this choice of dependent variable is that it measures the
  16
     We compute trend inßation using the Hodrick-Prescott Þlter. We apply the Þlter to each country inßation
rate using quarterly data and a value of λ equal to 1600. We then take the average over each year of the trend
inßation generated with quarterly data and calculate the 10-year real interest rate at a yearly frequency by
subtracting the average of trend inßation to the nominal interest rate. We also start with quarterly data
to compute the real 3-month interest rate as the diﬀerence between the nominal interest rate of 3-month
Treasury bills and the ex-post inßation rate. We then average over the year the quarterly data.
  17
     Swap contracts are agreements to exchange a ßow of interest rates payments at a Þxed rate for one at

                                                     12
government’s default risk. In Table 9, we show that Þscal policy also aﬀects the 10-year
interest rate on swap contracts, which implies that Þscal policy shocks aﬀect interest rates
also on instruments not issued by the government. In fact, if we use as our left-hand side
variable the spread of the 10-year government bond interest rate over the swap interest rate
we Þnd that the coeﬃcients of P RDEF and GDEBT are not statistically signiÞcant. These
results may suggest that the impact of Þscal policy on interest rates is not likely to be via
default risk directly, but could be through expected inßation (which can also be triggered
by an increase in sovereign default risk), or through the demand for loanable funds, both of
which would be expected to aﬀect the swap market in a similar way to the long-term bond
market.18


4     Dynamic Estimates
So far, our analysis has not allowed for the fact that Þnancial markets are forward-looking
and, hence, react not only to Þscal shocks in the current period, but also to the expectation
of future Þscal policy. Moreover, coeﬃcients in tables shown so far do not capture the full
impact of changes in Þscal policy on long-term interest rates, because we have not accounted
for the eﬀects that Þscal variables have on long-term rates through their potential inßuence
on the short-term rate, the inßation rate and the rate of growth of GDP.
        In this section, we attempt to address these issues by estimating a vector autoregres-
sive system including the 10-year government bonds interest rate, the 3-month Treasury bills
interest rate, the inßation rate, the rate of growth of GDP, the primary deÞcit-to-GDP ratio
and the public debt-to-GDP ratio. We set the lag length of the system to 2 and, following
Alesina et al. (2002), we estimate the VAR on the entire panel.19 We then study the impulse
response function of the long-term interest rate to a shock to the primary deÞcit or public
debt at the time of the shock and in the following years.20
a ßoating rate. For papers that use the interest rate of swap contracts to measure governments’ default risk
see, for example, Afonso and Strauch (2003), Bernoth et al. (2003), Codogno et al. (2003), Favero et al.
(1997), and Lemmen and Goodhart (1999).
  18
     Data on swap contracts are not available before 1988 for countries in our sample. For this reason, we
present only estimates with Sample B in Table 9.
  19
     To estimate the VAR, we demean the data from country and year averages to control for country and
time Þxed eﬀects.
  20
     Gale and Orszag (2002) note that studies that do not take expectations into account are biased toward
Þnding no eﬀect because they do not account for the fact the Þnancial markets are forward-looking. Also,

                                                    13
        In order to obtain meaningful impulse responses of the long-term rate to the Þscal
shock, we need innovations that are mutually orthogonal. The reduced form innovations are
clearly correlated with each other and a shock to the primary deÞcit (public debt) is not
really a shock to this variable but a linear combination of its structural shock and shocks
of the other variables included in the system. To identify the structural primary deÞcit and
public debt shocks, we use the Cholesky decomposition, and we orthogonalize the innovations
in several ways to check that our results are not unduly sensitive to the order with which we
choose variables to enter the system.
        We consider two extreme cases. First, we assume that Þscal policy variables “come
Þrst”, followed by the inßation rate, the rate of growth of GDP, the 3-month Treasury
bills interest rate and the 10-year government bonds interest rate (Table 10, parts Ia and
Ib). Second, we consider the case in which INT 3M is ordered Þrst, followed by INF L,
GROW T H, P RDEF , GDEBT , and INT 10Y (Table 10, parts IIa and IIb). Within each
case, we consider both the sub-case with the primary deÞcit “coming before” public debt
(Table 10 parts Ia and IIa) and the sub-case with public debt “coming before” the primary
deÞcit (Table 10 parts Ib and IIb). We also checked (and conÞrm) that results are similar
to the ones in Table 10 when we exchange the order of INF L and GROW T H.21
        Table 10 displays the changes in the 10-year government bond interest rate following
a shock to the primary deÞcit and public debt by one percentage point, on impact and up
to ten years, and the cumulative change after the Þrst Þve and ten years.
        A positive shock to the ratio of primary deÞcit to GDP leads to an increase in INT 10Y
of 7 basis points on impact, and to a cumulative increase of 66 and 146 basis points after Þve
works based on time series evidence from the US that measures expectations through a vector autoregression
tend to Þnd smaller and less robust eﬀects than studies that include measures of forecasted Þscal variables
from the Congressional Budget Oﬃce (CBO) or the Oﬃce of Management and Budget (OMB). While
forecasts from a VAR are based only on past information on variables of the system, forecasts from the
CBO or the OMB also use other information as, for example, information on proposed changes in tax and
spending legislation.
   To the best of our knowledge, long-horizon forecasts of future Þscal policy variables are not available for
our large panels. Renhart and Sack (2000) use the budget surplus forecasted for the following year by the
OECD from 1981 onwards. But we Þnd no study using panel data on OECD countries that includes 5-year
ahead and/or 10-year ahead projections of the deÞcit and the public debt. Hence, we cannot follow the
literature on the US (see for example Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2002), and Laubach (2003)) and we can
only account for expectations estimating a VAR system.
   21
      The use of yearly data prevents us from adopting the identiÞcation assumptions in Blanchard and Perotti
(2002), and Perotti (2002).

                                                     14
and ten years, respectively (see Part I of Table 10). The impact eﬀect is very similar to the one
we obtain in the static models, but since the eﬀect persists over time, the cumulative response
of the long-term interest rate after Þve and ten years is quite sizeable. This provides evidence
in line with Feldstein (1986) who emphasizes the importance of considering expectations
about the stance of future Þscal policy in measuring the eﬀect of the government deÞcit on
interest rates. The coeﬃcients are statistically signiÞcant at the 5% level.
        Increases in public debt, in general, lead to lower interest rates on impact and in a few
years after the shock occurs. However, the eﬀect becomes positive as time goes by and the
cumulative response ten years after the shock is often positive and statistically signiÞcant.
In line with the results from the static models, the magnitude of the eﬀects is smaller than
the one due to a change in the primary deÞcit. Finally, note that, while the response of
INT 10Y to a shock to the primary deÞcit is not unduly sensitive to the orthogonalization
procedure, the coeﬃcients of GDEBT are quite diﬀerent in size according to the strategy
used to identify the structural shocks. This consideration calls for considerable caution in
interpreting these dynamic results.


5     Conclusions
This paper has used cross-country empirical analysis to establish that Þscal deÞcits and
the accumulated public debt aﬀect interest rates. The eﬀects are both statistically and
economically signiÞcant, and they are robust to a variety of speciÞcations. These eﬀects
are non-linear, becoming stronger as a country’s debt grows and its Þscal balance becomes
weaker. The dynamic analysis presented also shows that the long-run eﬀects of sustained
deÞcits are much larger than the immediate impact of a one-time deÞcit. These results imply
that the return to Þscal laxity that has taken place in several major industrial countries in
recent years is potentially worrisome.
       Fiscal policy has important eﬀects at the worldwide level, but it also has important
eﬀects at the level of the individual country. These results suggest that, while each country’s
Þscal imbalance has its greatest impact at home, it is also a legitimate concern at the level
of the world economy.




                                               15
References
 [1] Afonso A, and R. Strauch, (2003), “Fiscal Policy Events and Interest Rate Swaps
     Spreads: some Evidence from EU”, European Central Bank working paper.

 [2] Alesina A., M. de Broeck, A. Prati, and G. Tabellini, (1992), “Default Risk on Govern-
     ment Debt in OECD Countries”, Economic Policy, October, 15, pp.427-463.

 [3] Bandiera O., G. Caprio, P. Honohan, F. Schiantarelli, (1999), “Does Financial Reform
     Raise or Reduce Saving?” The Review of Economics and Statistics, May 2000, 82(2),
     pp. 239-263.

 [4] Barro R., and X. Sala-i-Martin, (1990), “World Real Interest Rates.” NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual, MIT Press, (Cambridge, MA), pp. 15-74.

 [5] Barro R., (1987), “Government Spending, Interest Rates, Prices, and Budget DeÞcits
     in the United Kingdom, 1701-1918”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 20, no. 2, pp.
     221-247.

 [6] Barth J., G. Iden, F. Russek, and M. Wohar, (1991), “The eﬀects of Federal budget
     DeÞcits on Interest Rates and the Composition of Domestic Output”, in The Great
     Fiscal Experiment, edited by Rudolph G. Penner. Washington: Urban Institute Press.

 [7] Bernoth K., J. Von Hagen, L. Schuknecht, (2003), “The Determinants of the Yield
     Diﬀerential in the EU Government Bond Market”, European Central Bank working
     paper.

 [8] Blanchard O, R. Perotti, (2002), “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic Ef-
     fects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output”, Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, vol. 117, n.4, pp. 1329-1368.

 [9] Blanchard O., and L. Summers, (1984), “Perspective on High World Real Interest
     Rates”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1984, n. 2, pp. 273-324.

[10] Canzoneri M., R. Cumby, and B. Diba, (2002), “ Should the European Central Bank
     and the Federal Reserve Be Concerned About Fiscal Policy”, in Rethinking Stabilization
     Policy”, A Symposium Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 333-
     389.

                                            16
[11] Caporale G., and G. Williams, (2002), “Long-term nominal Interest Rates and Domestic
     Fundamentals”, Review of Financial Economics, vol. 11, pp. 119-130.

[12] Codogno L., C. Favero, A. Missale, (2003), “Yield Spreads on EMU Government
     Bonds”, Economic Policy, October 2003, pp. 503-532.

[13] Evans P., (1985), “Do Large DeÞcits Produce High Interest Rates?” American Economic
     Review, vol. 75, n.1, pp. 68-87

[14] Evans P., (1987), “Do Budget DeÞcits Raise Nominal Interest Rates? Evidence From
     Six Countries”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 20, pp. 281-300.

[15] Favero C., F. Giavazzi, and L. Spaventa, (1997), “High Yields: The Spread on German
     Interest Rates”, Economic Journal, 107, July, pp. 956-985.

[16] Feldstein M, (1986), “Budget DeÞcits, Tax rules, and Real Interest Rates”, National
     Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 1970.

[17] Gale W., and P. Orszag, (2002), “The Economic Eﬀects of Long-Term Fiscal Discipline”,
     Brookings Institution.

[18] Hoelscher G, (1986), “New Evidence on DeÞcits and Interest Rates”, Journal of Money
     Credit, and Banking, vol. 18, n. 1, pp. 1-17.

[19] Im K., H. Pesaran, and Y. Shin, (2002), “Testing for Unit Roots in Heterogeneous
     Panels”.

[20] Laubach T., (2003), “New Evidence on the Interest Rate Eﬀects of Budget DeÞcits and
     Debt”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

[21] Lemmen J., and C. Goodhart, (1999), “Credit Risks and European Government Bond
     Markets: A Panel Data Econometric Analysis”, Eastern Economic Journal, vol. 25, n.1,
     Winter 1999.

[22] Levine R., Loayza N., and B. Thorsten, (2000), “Financial Intermediation and Growth”,
     Journal of Monetary Economics, n.46, pp. 31-77.

[23] Mark N., Sul D., (2002), “Cointegration Vector Estimation by Panel DOLS and Long-
     Run Money Demand”, National Bureau of Economic Research, technical working paper
     no. 287.
                                            17
[24] Miller S., and F. Russek, (1991), “The Temporal Casuality between Fiscal DeÞcits and
     Interest Rates”, Contemporary Policy Issues, vol. ix, July 1991, pp. 12-23.

[25] Miller S., and F. Russek, (1996), “Do Federal DeÞcits Aﬀect Interest Rates? Evidence
     from Three Econometric Methods”, Journal of Macroeconomics, Summer 1996, vol. 18,
     n.3, pp. 403-428.

[26] Mountford A., H. Uhlig, (2000), “What are the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy Shocks”, Centre
     for Economic Policy research, October.

[27] Paesani P., R. Strauch, (2003), “Public Finances and Long-term interest rates: Linkages
     between Europe and the USA”, European Central Bank.

[28] Pedroni P., (1999), “Critical Values for Cointegration Tests in heterogeneous Panels
     with Multiple Regressors”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, vol. 61, no. 4,
     pp 653-670.

[29] Perotti R., (2002),“Estimating the Eﬀects of Fiscal Policy in OECD Countries”, ISOM
     conference, Frankfurth, June 2002.

[30] Plosser C., (1987), “Fiscal Policy and the Term Structure”, Journal of Monetary Eco-
     nomics, 20, pp. 343-367.

[31] OECD Economic Outlook n.73, June 2003.

[32] Orr A., M. Edey, and M. Kennedy, (1995), “The Determinants of Real Long-Term
     Interest Rates: 17 Country Pooled-Time-Series Evidence” OECD working paper no.
     155.

[33] Reinhart V., B. Sack, (2000), “The Economic Consequence of Disappearing Government
     Debt”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 163-209.

[34] Stock J., and M. Watson, (1993), “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating Vectors in
     Higher Order Integrated Systems”, Econometrica, 91, pp. 783-820.

[35] Tavares J., and R. Valkanov, (2001), “The Neglected Eﬀect of Fiscal Policy on Stock
     and Bond Returns”.



                                            18
Table 1: Panel Integration and Cointegration Tests


Part I: Integration Tests1

                                              INT10Y                                INT3M                           INFL                         PRDEF                         GDEBT1                        GDEBT2



Sample 1960-2002                                 1.38                                 -0.32                         -1.63                          -1.60                          0.56                         -3.34*



Sample 1975-2002                               -3.13*                                -2.75*                         -3.13*                        -1.70*                          1.92                         -2.66*




Part II: Cointegration Tests2
                                            ADF t-test                           Panel ADF


Sample 1960-2002                               -3.67*                                -6.28*



Notes:
1. The panel integration tests are based are on Im, Pesaran and Shin (2000). The test is distributed N(0,1). The country-specific ADF test includes one-lag and a time trend. * indicates that the null-hypothesis that the time
series is I(1) is rejected at the 5% level.
2. The ADF t-test is based on Pedroni (1997). The Panel ADF is based on Im, Pesaran and Shin (2000). Both tests are distributed N(0,1) and are one-sided: a level a test of the null is rejected if the statistics in the table is
< za where za is the a standard normal quantile. * indicates that the null-hypothesis that variables are not cointegrated is rejected at the 5% level. Cointegrating vector: INT10Y, INT3M, INFL, PRDEF, GDEBT
3. INT10Y = nominal interest rate of 10-year government bonds; INT3M = nominal interest rate on 3-month Treasury bills; INFL = inflation rate; PRDEF = primary deficit as a share of GDP; GDEBT1 = stock of public
debt measured at the end of period t-1 divided by the level of GDP in year t-1; GDBET2 = average of the stock of public debt in year t-1 and in year t divided by GDP in year t.




                                                                                                               19
Table 2: Long-term interest rates and fiscal policy – Linear specification
                                                                                     Dep. var. INT10Y                                                                 Dep. var. INT10Y
                                                                                     Sample 1960-2002                                                                 Sample 1975-2002
                                                                 (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                  (5)                  (6)                 (7)                (8)

                                                               DGLS                DGLS                 DGLS                DGLS                  OLS                 OLS                  OLS                OLS



INT3M                                                          0.629                0.524               0.389                0.390               0.647                0.521               0.436               0.443

                                                             (29.48)**           (23.57)**            (13.34)**           (13.49)**            (25.03)**           (14.64)**            (11.74)**          (12.23)**

INFL                                                           0.127                0.120               0.128                0.141               0.146                0.149               0.160               0.168

                                                             (5.57)**             (7.96)**            (5.93)**             (6.77)**             (5.53)**            (5.06)**             (6.36)**           (6.71)**

PRDEF                                                          0.128                0.113               0.106                0.101               0.136                0.109               0.074               0.081

                                                             (4.79)**             (5.37)**            (5.05)**             (5.06)**             (5.90)**            (4.86)**             (3.79)**           (4.08)**

GDEBT                                                          -0.010              -0.005              -0.0001               0.006               0.0001               0.003                0.002              0.005

                                                             (-2.64)**             (-1.53)             (-0.04)              (1.79)*              (0.04)               (0.87)              (0.66)             (1.48)

GROWTH                                                                                                                       0.143                                                                            0.082

                                                                                                                           (5.42)**                                                                         (2.81)**

Country Dummies                                                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                Yes

Trend and Trend2                                                 No                  Yes                  No                  No                   No                  Yes                  No                 No

Year Dummies                                                     No                  No                  Yes                  Yes                  No                  No                   Yes                Yes

Adjusted R2                                                                                                                                       0.90                 0.92                0.94               0.94

N. of obs.                                                      413                  413                 413                  413                  373                 373                  373                373
Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. GROWTH = real GDP growth rate. T-statistic in parenthesis. Columns 1-4 estimated by dynamic GLS, allowing for heterosckedasticity and
country-specific first order autocorrelation coefficient in the error term, and including among the regressors country specific contemporaneous differences of the right-hand side variables. Columns 5-8 estimated by OLS
and T-statistics are corrected for heterosckedasticity. See also notes to Table 1.




                                                                                                           20
Table 3: Long-term interest rates and fiscal policy – Nonlinearities
                                                                                     Dep. var. INT10Y                                                                Dep. var. INT10Y
                                                                                     Sample 1960-2002                                                                Sample 1975-2002
                                                                (1)                  (2)           (3)                       (4)                  (5)                 (6)           (7)                      (8)
                                                              DGLS                DGLS                 DGLS                DGLS                  OLS                 OLS                 OLS                OLS
INT3M                                                          0.387               0.391               0.384                0.374               0.449               0.450                0.444              0.457
                                                            (14.55)**           (14.91)**            (14.29)**           (13.91)**            (12.58)**           (12.59)**           (12.43)**          (12.48)**
INFL                                                           0.156               0.168               0.161                0.189               0.173               0.171                0.174              0.168
                                                             (7.49)**            (8.49)**             (8.31)**            (9.59)**            (7.13)**             (6.92)**            (6.99)**           (6.74)**
PRDEF                                                          0.116               0.095               0.126                0.036               0.093               0.105                0.142              0.127
                                                             (5.54)**            (3.43)**             (3.94)**             (1.19)             (4.38)**             (3.73)**            (4.00)**           (3.64)**
GDEBT                                                         -0.030              -0.007               -0.009              -0.004               -0.017              -0.001              -0.004             -0.002
                                                            (-3.80)**             (-1.62)            (-2.15)**             (-1.07)             (-1.50)              (-0.29)             (-0.79)            (-0.33)
GROWTH                                                         0.124               0.139               0.127                0.156               0.087               0.086                0.088              0.087
                                                             (4.75)**            (5.48)**             (5.20)**            (6.14)**            (2.86)**             (2.84)**            (2.91)**           (2.87)**
          2
PRDEF                                                          0.813                                                                            -0.140
                                                             (2.55)**                                                                          (-0.37)
          2
GDEBT                                                          0.024                                                                            0.013
                                                             (5.62)**                                                                         (1.99)**
                       * 2
(PRDEF- PRDEF ) *D1                                                                0.950               -1.303               1.328                                   -0.454              -1.802             -0.615
                                                                                 (2.10)**              (1.62)             (2.90)**                                  (-0.79)             (-1.57)            (-1.05)
                        * 2
(GDEBT- GDEBT ) *D2                                                                0.030               0.029                0.019                                   0.013                0.015              0.019
                                                                                 (4.86)**             (5.31)**            (2.92)**                                 (1.65)*              (1.83)*           (2.18)**
                       * 2
(PRDEF- PRDEF ) *D2                                                                                    1.980                                                                             1.234
                                                                                                      (3.71)**                                                                          (1.65)*
                        * 2
(GDEBT- GDEBT ) *D1                                                                                                         0.029                                                                          -0.013
                                                                                                                          (3.43)**                                                                         (-1.29)
N. of obs.                                                      413                 413                 413                  413                 373                  373                 373                373
Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies and year dummies included. PREDEF*=Median PRDEF. GDEBT*=Median GDEBT. D1=1 if PRDEF>PRDEF*, 0
otherwise. D2=1 if GDEBT>GDEBT*, 0 otherwise. T-statistic in parenthesis. In columns 1 and 5, the values of the debt-to-GDP ratio above which an additional increase in the debt has a positive effect on interest rates
are 62.5% and 65.4% respectively. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.



                                                                                                          21
Table 4: Long-term interest rates and fiscal policy – Instrumental variables
                                                                                     Dep. var. INT10Y                                                                     Dep. var. INT10Y
                                                                                     Sample 1960-2002                                                                     Sample 1975-2002
                                                               (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)                 (5)                 (6)                  (7)                 (8)

                                                               IV                     IV                    IV                    IV                  IV                   IV                  IV                  IV



INT3M                                                        0.352                  0.391                 0.356                 0.621               0.349                0.387               0.327               0.539

                                                           (4.42)**               (4.92)**               (4.58)**             (3.62)**            (4.63)**             (4.89)**            (5.16)**            (3.72)**

INFL                                                         0.308                  0.310                 0.303                 0.288               0.320                0.321               0.279               0.292

                                                           (4.48)**               (4.80)**               (4.82)**             (2.22)**            (4.65)**             (4.87)**            (4.79)**            (2.46)**

PRDEF                                                        0.049                  0.107                 0.071                 0.158               0.070                0.108               0.068               0.161

                                                            (1.91)*               (3.68)**               (2.76)**             (2.87)**            (2.84)**             (3.86)**            (2.90)**            (2.87)**

GDEBT                                                        0.002                 -0.043                 -0.033               -0.070               0.002               -0.035              -0.020               -0.064

                                                             (0.41)              (-3.10)**              (-2.30)**             (-3.11)**             (0.45)            (-2.24)**             (-1.44)            (-2.61)**

GROWTH                                                      -0.119                 -0.048                 -0.025                0.101               -0.082              -0.043              -0.055               -0.229

                                                            (-1.07)                (-0.44)                (-0.25)               (0.41)             (-0.74)              (-0.38)             (-0.62)              (-0.86)

PRDEF2                                                                             -1.312                 -0.397               -3.120                                   -1.123               0.270               -3.261

                                                                                   (-1.50)                (-0.53)              (-1.55)                                  (-1.26)              (0.38)              (-1.30)

GDEBT2                                                                              0.030                 0.024                 0.049                                    0.023               0.013               0.040

                                                                                  (3.74)**               (2.94)**             (3.90)**                                  (2.56)*             (1.64)*            (2.96)**
N. of obs.                                                    413                    413                    399                  393                 367                  367                 360                  357
Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies and year dummies included. Instruments in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 are first lag of rhs variables. Instruments in columns 3
and 7 are first and second lag of rhs variables. Instruments in columns 4 and 8 are second lag of the rhs and lhs variables. T-statistic in parenthesis. The values of the debt-to-GDP ratio above which an additional increase
in the debt has a positive effect on interest rates are 71.7%, 68.7%, 71.4% in columns 2 – 4, and 76.1%, 76.9%, 80% in columns 6 – 8. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                             22
Table 5: World fiscal policy
                                                                                      Dep. var. INT10Y                                                                     Dep. var. INT10Y
                                                                                      Sample 1960-2002                                                                     Sample 1975-2002
                                                              (1)                     (2)            (3)                          (4)                 (5)                  (6)           (7)                        (8)
                                                             DGLS                     IV            DGLS                          IV                 OLS                   IV           OLS                         IV

INT3M                                                         0.364                  0.367                 0.354                 0.406               0.440                0.415               0.454               0.379
                                                           (12.23)**              (3.67)**              (11.86)**             (4.35)**            (11.16)**            (4.07)**            (10.22)**            (3.94)**
INFL                                                          0.176                  0.322                 0.166                 0.362               0.173                0.283               0.195               0.365
                                                            (7.03)**               (3.91)**              (6.99)**              (4.90)**            (6.58)**             (2.89)**            (6.58)**            (4.84)**
PRDEF                                                         0.134                  0.118                 0.127                 0.131               0.103                0.122               0.107               0.131
                                                            (4.99)**               (3.07)**              (5.50)**              (3.13)**            (4.36)**             (3.57)**            (3.69)**            (3.15)**
GDEBT                                                        -0.051                 -0.052                -0.018                -0.031              -0.014               -0.045              -0.016              -0.030
                                                           (-5.66)**              (-2.49)**             (-2.15)**             (-1.99)**             (-1.17)            (-2.34)**             (-1.35)            (-1.80)*
GROWTH                                                        0.105                 -0.050                 0.126                -0.042               0.094               -0.071               0.095              -0.046
                                                            (3.31)**                (-0.39)              (4.37)**               (-0.33)            (2.87)**              (-0.55)            (2.62)**             (-0.37)
PRDEF2                                                       -0.105                 -1.142                 0.068                -1.538              -0.290               -0.997              -0.188              -1.381
                                                             (-0.28)                (-1.05)               (0.23)                (-1.75)             (-0.68)              (-0.86)             (-0.49)             (-1.48)
GDEBT2                                                        0.036                  0.034                 0.025                 0.029               0.012                0.028               0.017               0.025
                                                            (6.74)**               (3.00)**              (5.41)**              (3.24)**             (1.68)*             (2.60)**            (2.42)**            (2.55)**
WINT3M                                                        0.597                  0.751                -0.429                 0.410               0.547                0.982               0.309               0.188
                                                           (12.21)**                 (1.63)              (-2.19)*               (0.76)             (7.80)**            (2.12)**              (1.13)              (0.33)
WINFL                                                         0.066                 -0.125                 0.145                 0.493              -0.157               -0.390               0.286               0.513
                                                             (1.19)                 (-0.58)               (0.86)                (1.19)              (-1.41)            (-2.47)**             (1.05)              (0.98)
WPRDEF                                                        0.282                  0.657                -0.040                 0.346               0.405                0.566               0.079               0.136
                                                            (3.68)**               (2.35)**               (-0.18)               (0.89)             (6.70)**            (2.60)**              (0.32)              (0.36)
WGDEBT                                                        0.031                  0.088                 0.096                 0.114               0.116                0.206               0.112               0.115
                                                             (1.46)                 (1.77)*              (4.27)**              (3.29)**            (3.96)**             (2.31)**            (3.62)**            (2.09)**
WGROWTH                                                       0.244                  0.554                -0.103                 0.046               0.118                0.543               0.074              -0.437
                                                            (3.30)**                 (0.81)               (-0.59)               (0.07)               (1.41)              (1.01)              (0.34)              (-0.55)
Trend and Trend2                                               Yes                    Yes                    No                   No                  Yes                  Yes                  No                 No
Year Dummies                                                    No                     No                   Yes                   Yes                  No                  No                  Yes                 Yes
N. of obs.                                                     413                    413                   413                   413                 373                  367                 373                 367
Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies included. T-statistic in parenthesis. In columns 1, 2, 5, and 6, a “W” variable is equal to the weighted average of the
variable across all countries in the sample. In columns 3, 4, 7, and 8, a “W” variable is equal to a weighted average of the variable across all countries in the sample except the value of the variable for country i. Weights
are based on real GDP. Instruments in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are first lag of rhs variables. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2 and section 3.4.




                                                                                                              23
Table 6: Financial development
                                                                           Dep. var. INT10Y                                                          Dep. var. INT10Y
                                                                           Sample 1960-2002                                                          Sample 1975-2002
                                                       (1)                 (2)            (3)                     (4)               (5)              (6)           (7)                   (8)
                                                     DGLS                  IV                DGLS                 IV               OLS                IV               OLS                IV


INT3M                                                 0.368              0.371               0.406              0.376             0.436             0.400             0.438             0.386
                                                   (13.00)**            (3.90)**           (15.01)**           (3.95)**         (10.89)**          (4.41)**         (11.63)**         (4.14)**

INFL                                                  0.162              0.297               0.135              0.275             0.169             0.332             0.163             0.365
                                                    (7.23)**            (3.64)**            (5.83)**           (3.30)**          (5.87)**          (3.70)**         (5.62)**          (3.92)**

PRDEF                                                 0.150              0.126               0.319              0.318             0.129             0.150             0.253             0.285
                                                    (6.35)**            (3.92)**            (5.87)**           (4.08)**          (5.36)**          (4.86)**         (4.02)**          (3.66)**

GDEBT                                                -0.024              -0.035              -0.039             -0.052            -0.025            -0.059            -0.039           -0.063
                                                    (-1.95)*            (-1.66)*           (-2.69)**          (-2.41)**           (-1.61)          (-1.95)*          (-2.12)*          (-1.85)*

GROWTH                                                0.147              -0.030              0.125              -0.058            0.064             0.009             0.054             0.006
                                                    (4.44)**             (-0.28)            (3.51)**            (-0.54)          (2.05)**           (0.07)           (1.83)*            (0.05)

PRDEF2                                                0.573              -1.232              0.248              -1.519            -0.344            -1.115            -0.433           -1.371
                                                     (1.70)*             (-1.30)             (0.81)            (-1.65)*           (-0.91)          (-1.21)           (-1.10)           (-1.46)

GDEBT2                                                0.022              0.024               0.020              0.026             0.015             0.036             0.020             0.046
                                                    (2.31)**             (1.87)*            (2.26)**           (1.94)*            (1.59)           (1.95)*           (1.84)*          (2.36)**

LIQUID LIABILITIES                                   -0.012              -0.022              -0.033             -0.037            -0.022            -0.028            -0.030           -0.018
                                                   (-3.11)**           (-3.51)**           (-3.30)**          (-3.05)**         (-5.44)**         (-4.79)**         (-3.27)**          (-1.50)

LIQUID LIABILITIES *PRDEFY                                                                   -0.230             -0.255                                                -0.170           -0.159
                                                                                            (3.08)**           (3.06)**                                             (2.61)**           (-1.90)*

LIQUID LIABILITIES *GDEBTY                                                                   0.021              0.017                                                 0.010            -0.008
                                                                                            (1.98)**            (1.50)                                                (1.16)            (0.74)

N. of obs.                                             317                 317                317                317               280               275               280               275

Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies and year dummies included. T-statistic in parenthesis. LIQUID LIABILITIES = (currency + demand and interest-bearing
liabilities of banks and nonbank financial)/GDP. Instruments in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are first lag of rhs variables. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                24
Table 7: Long-term real interest rates
                                                                          Dep. var. RINT10Y                                                          Dep. var. RINT10Y
                                                                          Sample 1960-2002                                                           Sample 1975-2002
                                                       (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)               (8)

                                                     DGLS                   IV               DGLS                  IV              OLS                 IV              OLS                 IV


                                                      0.404               0.554               0.387              0.488             0.450             0.489             0.427             0.463
RINT3M
                                                   (15.99)**            (10.69)**           (15.53)**          (9.38)**          (11.96)**         (10.20)**         (12.32)**         (9.52)**

                                                      0.104               0.089               0.110              0.091             0.073             0.084             0.075             0.087
PRDEF
                                                    (5.23)**            (3.15)**            (5.72)**           (3.34)**          (3.60)**          (3.24)**          (3.72)**          (3.42)**

                                                     -0.039              -0.038              -0.028             -0.045            -0.016            -0.018            -0.019            -0.027
GDEBT
                                                    (-5.32)**           (-3.66)**           (-4.00)**          (-4.53)**          (-1.44)           (-1.49)          (-1.87)*          (-2.44)*

                                                      0.085               0.074               0.080              0.001             0.057             0.040             0.057            -0.003
GROWTH
                                                    (3.54)**              (0.86)            (3.17)**             (0.01)           (2.23)*            (0.47)           (1.93)*           (-0.04)

                                                      1.109              -0.629               0.539             -1.194            -0.164            -0.318            -0.471            -0.996
PRDEF2
                                                    (3.73)**             (-0.84)             (1.92)*            (-1.35)           (-0.39)           (-0.43)           (-1.24)           (-1.05)

                                                      0.027               0.027               0.023              0.031             0.012             0.013             0.015             0.020
GDEBT2
                                                    (6.66)**            (4.19)**            (5.83)**           (4.78)**           (1.85)*           (1.82)*          (2.46)**          (2.62)**

                                                                                              0.405              0.581                                                 0.522             0.579
INFL
                                                                                            (5.66)**           (3.02)**                                              (5.14)**          (2.73)**

N. of obs.                                             413                 413                 413                413               373               367               373               367
Notes: RINT10Y = real interest rate of 10-year government bonds; RINT3M = real interest rate on 3-month Treasury bills. GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies and
year dummies included. T-statistic in parenthesis. Instruments in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are first lag of rhs variables. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                25
Table 8: The term-structure of interest rates
                                                                        Dep. var. (INT10Y-INT3M)                                                      Dep. var. (INT10Y-INT3M)
                                                                            Sample 1960-2002                                                              Sample 1975-2002
                                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)                 (4)                (5)                (6)               (7)                (8)

                                                       DGLS                    IV                DGLS                  IV                OLS                 IV               OLS                 IV


                                                        0.159                0.152                0.142               0.151             0.108              0.141              0.108             0.142
PRDEF
                                                      (4.29)**             (3.38)**             (3.78)**            (3.21)**           (3.33)**          (3.20)**           (3.28)**           (3.13)**

                                                        -0.068              -0.067               -0.068              -0.066             -0.029            -0.049             -0.029             -0.050
GDEBT
                                                      (-5.04)**            (-4.50)**            (-5.07)**          (-4.46)**           (-1.91)*          (-2.86)**          (-1.90)*          (-2.84)**

                                                        0.008               -0.045                0.001              -0.039             0.130             -0.028              0.129             -0.031
GROWTH
                                                        (0.20)              (-0.31)              (0.03)              (-0.30)           (2.60)**           (-0.19)           (2.48)**            (-0.22)

                                                        -1.027              -2.982               -0.536              -2.893             -1.164            -2.887             -1.156             -2.951
PRDEF2
                                                       (-1.90)*            (-2.50)**             (-0.97)           (-2.24)**           (-2.05)*           (-2.32)*          (-2.03)*           (-2.16)*

                                                        0.045                0.041                0.045               0.041             0.022              0.032              0.021             0.033
GDEBT2
                                                      (5.63)**             (4.72)**             (5.79)**            (4.41)**           (2.34)**          (3.08)**           (2.30)**           (2.84)**

                                                                                                 -0.047              -0.015                                                  -0.005             0.013
INFL
                                                                                                 (-1.51)             (-0.28)                                                 (-0.16)            (0.19)

N. of obs.                                               414                  414                  414                 414               373                368                373               368
Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies and year dummies included. T-statistic in parenthesis. Instruments in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are first lag of rhs variables.
See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                    26
Table 9: Alternative left-hand side variables

                                                                                                                  Sample 1975-2002

                                                                             Dep. var. SW10Y                                                        Dep. var. (INT10Y-SW10Y)

                                                                  OLS                                    IV                                  OLS                                   IV

                                                                   (1)                                  (2)                                   (3)                                  (4)



INT3M                                                             0.393                                0.292                                0.018                                0.074

                                                                (9.76)**                               (1.66)                               (1.23)                               (0.94)

INFL                                                              0.118                                0.325                                0.005                                -0.038

                                                                 (1.95)*                               (1.19)                               (0.20)                               (0.32)

PRDEF                                                             0.099                                0.129                                -0.004                               0.020

                                                                (4.49)**                              (2.33)**                             (-0.43)                               (0.93)

GDEBT                                                            -0.003                                0.015                                0.004                                0.002

                                                                 (0.24)                                (0.51)                               (0.66)                               (0.23)

GROWTH                                                            0.023                               -0.080                                0.027                                0.076

                                                                 (0.97)                                (0.58)                             (2.68)**                               (1.46)

PRDEF2                                                           -0.282                               -0.653                                -0.045                               -0.394

                                                                 (0.91)                                (0.73)                              (-0.26)                               (0.97)

GDEBT2                                                           -0.005                               -0.012                                0.001                                0.000

                                                                 (-0.78)                              (-1.04)                               (0.30)                               (0.06)
N. of obs.                                                         190                                  189                                  190                                  189
Notes: SW10Y = interest rate of 10-year swap contracts. GDEBT=GDEBT1 in columns 1-4, GDEBT=GDEBT2 in columns 5-8. Country dummies and year dummies included. T-statistic in parenthesis. Instruments in
columns 2, and 4 are first lag of rhs variables. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                 27
Table 10: Long-term interest rates and fiscal policy – Dynamic estimates

       Sample 1975-2002

                                               0 year                   1 year                  2 years                 5 years                 10 years           Sum 0 to 5 years   Sum 0 to 10 years

Part Ia



PRDEF                                         0.068**                  0.086**                 0.115**                  0.168**                 0.228**                     0.661**       1.456**

GDEBT                                         -0.038**                -0.091**                 -0.098**                -0.036**                  0.06**                 -0.364**          -0.151**



Part Ib



PRDEF                                         0.085**                  0.126**                 0.158**                  0.184**                 0.202**                     0.82**         1.52**

GDEBT                                         -0.024**                -0.071**                 -0.073**               -0.0073**                 0.092**                 -0.235**          0.089**



Part IIa



PRDEF                                          0.08**                  0.121**                 0.157**                  0.201**                 0.243**                     0.844**        1.69**

GDEBT                                         -0.006**                -0.012**                 -0.003**                 0.055**                  0.14**                 0.081**            0.57**



Part IIb



PRDEF                                         0.082**                  0.124**                 0.158**                  0.184**                 0.201**                     0.819**        1.52**

GDEBT                                         0.006**                  0.007**                 0.021**                  0.083**                  0.17**                     0.21**         0.80**


Notes: GDEBT=GDEBT2. Country dummies and year dummies included. ** indicates that coefficient is inside the 95 percent confidence band. See also notes to Tables 1 and 2.




                                                                                                       28
