                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        PUTTING THE BRAKES ON SUDDEN STOPS:
                       THE FINANCIAL FRICTIONS-MORAL HAZARD
                        TRADEOFF OF ASSET PRICE GUARANTEES

                                        Enrique G. Mendoza
                                        Ceyhun Bora Durdu

                                        Working Paper 10790
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10790


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2004




Work on this project began while Mendoza was a visiting scholar at the Research Department of the Inter-
American Development Bank. Comments and suggestions by Guillermo Calvo, Reuven Glick, Olivier
Jeanne, Urban Jermann, Alejandro Izquierdo, Katherine Smith, Linda Tesar and Diego Valderrama are
gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Enrique G. Mendoza and Ceyhun Bora Durdu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Subjective Mortality Risk and Bequests
Enrique G. Mendoza and Ceyhun Bora Durdu
NBER Working Paper No. 10790
September 2004
JEL No. F41, F32, E44, D52

                                           ABSTRACT

The hypothesis that Sudden Stops to capital inflows in emerging economies may be caused by global
capital market frictions, such as collateral constraints and trading costs, suggests that Sudden Stops
could be prevented by offering price guarantees on the emerging-markets asset class. Providing these
guarantees is a risky endeavor, however, because they introduce a moral-hazard-like incentive
similar to those that are also viewed as a cause of emerging markets crises. This paper studies this

financial frictions-moral hazard tradeoff using an equilibrium asset-pricing model in which margin

constraints, trading costs, and ex-ante price guarantees interact in the determination of asset prices

and macroeconomic dynamics. In the absence of guarantees, margin calls and trading costs create

distortions that produce Sudden Stops driven by occasionally binding credit constraints and Irving

Fisher's debt-deflation mechanism. Price guarantees contain the asset deflation by creating another

distortion that props up the foreign investors' demand for emerging markets assets. Quantitative

simulation analysis shows the strong interaction of these two distortions in driving the dynamics of

asset prices, consumption and the current account. Price guarantees are found to be effective for

containing Sudden Stops but at the cost of introducing potentially large distortions that could lead

to 'overvaluation' of emerging markets assets.

Enrique G. Mendoza                                    Ceyhun Bora Durdu
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
University of Maryland                                University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742                                College Park, MD 20742
and NBER                                              durdu@econ.bsos.umd.edu
mendozae@econ.umd.edu
                                                                                                               1


1. Introduction

        The Sudden Stop phenomenon of emerging markets crises is characterized by three stylized facts:

a sudden reversal of private capital inflows and current account deficits, a collapse in production and

private absorption, and large relative price corrections in domestic goods prices and asset prices. A large

fraction of the literature on this subject is based on the premise that world capital markets are inherently

imperfect, and hence prone to display contagion and overreaction in the determination of asset positions

and asset prices relative to levels consistent with “fundamentals” (see Arellano and Mendoza (2003) for a

short survey of this literature). The findings of some of this literature suggest that an international

financial organization (IFO) could help prevent Sudden Stops by providing ex ante price guarantees for

the emerging-markets asset class. Calvo (2002) put forward a formal proposal for setting up this facility.

        The goal of ex-ante price guarantees is to create a trading environment in which emerging-

markets asset prices can be credibly expected to remain above the crash levels that trigger Sudden Stops

driven by international capital market frictions. Calvo views this facility as keen to an open-markets

operation facility: it would commit to exchange a liquid, riskless asset (e.g., short-term U.S. T-bills) for

an index of emerging markets assets whenever the value of the index falls by a certain amount, and would

re-purchase the riskless asset when the index price recovers. The optimal response of market participants

would incorporate their expectations that these guarantees would be executed if a systemic fire-sale were

to crash emerging-markets asset prices, and hence a properly-designed system of price guarantees could

rule out rational expectations equilibria in which Sudden Stops driven by financial frictions can take

place. If these frictions are the only cause of Sudden Stops and the support of the probability distribution

of the events that can cause Sudden Stops is known (i.e., if there are no truly “unexpected” shocks), the

facility would rarely trade.

        A potentially important drawback of the above system of price guarantees is that it would

strengthen moral hazard incentives among global investors. Everything else the same, the introduction of

the guarantees would increase the foreign investors’ demand for emerging markets assets, since the

downside risk of holding these assets in bad states of nature is transferred to the IFO providing the
                                                                                                                 2


guarantees. This can be a serious drawback because the moral hazard argument itself has been forcefully

put forward as a competing explanation of Sudden Stops, and has been used to propose major reforms to

the international financial system (see the report of the Meltzer Commission and the article by Lerrick and

Meltzer (2001)).

        Proponents of the moral hazard view argue that Sudden Stops are induced by excessive

indebtedness of emerging economies driven by the expectation of private capital market participants that

IFOs will bail out countries in financial difficulties. Based on this premise, Lerrick and Meltzer (2001)

argue for the use of ex-post price guarantees to be offered by an IFO to anchor the orderly resolution of a

default once it has been announced and agreed to with the IFO. The IFO would determine the crash price

of the defaulted asset and would require the country to commit to re-purchase the asset at its crash price

(making the commitment credible by having the IFO commit itself to buy the asset at a negligible

discount below the crash price if the country were unable to buy it). If the only cause of Sudden Stops is

moral hazard, the announcement of this arrangement should remove the moral hazard distortion and

reduce debt levels, and in practice the arrangement itself would rarely be activated.

        The tension between the financial frictions and moral hazard approaches to explain Sudden Stops

and their alternative proposals for using price guarantees reflect an important tradeoff that ex ante price

guarantees create. On one hand, ex ante price guarantees could endow IFOs with an effective policy tool

to prevent and manage Sudden Stops driven by frictions affecting international capital markets. On the

other hand, ex-ante guarantees could end up making matters worse by strengthening moral hazard

incentives (even if it were true that capital market frictions were the only cause of the Sudden Stops of the

last decade).

        The financial frictions-moral hazard tradeoff implies that making the case for ex ante price

guarantees requires their advocates to show that it is possible to design a system of price guarantees such

that its benefits, in terms of undoing the distortions induced by financial frictions, outweighs its costs, in

terms of inducing moral hazard. The goal of this paper is to study this issue from the perspective of the

quantitative predictions of a dynamic, stochastic general equilibrium model of asset pricing and current
                                                                                                             3


account dynamics. The model is based on the setup proposed by Mendoza and Smith (2004), in which

margin constraints and asset trading costs produce outcomes consistent with some of the key features of a

Sudden Stop. This paper adds to their framework an IFO that offers ex ante guarantees to foreign

investors on the asset prices of an emerging economy. Quantitative simulation analysis is used to study

how these guarantees affect Sudden Stops and the financial frictions-moral hazard tradeoff. We are

interested in particular in studying how the guarantees affect asset positions, asset price volatility,

business cycle dynamics, and the magnitude and probability of Sudden Stops.

        Asset price guarantees have not been widely studied in quantitative equilibrium asset pricing

theory, with the notable exception of the work by Ljungqvist (2000), and they have yet to be introduced

into the research program dealing with quantitative models of Sudden Stops. The theoretical literature

and several policy documents on Sudden Stops have examined various aspects of the financial-frictions

and moral-hazard hypotheses separately. From this perspective, one contribution of this paper is that it

studies the interaction between these two hypotheses in a unified dynamic equilibrium framework from

which we can derive quantitative predictions.

        The Mendoza-Smith model that serves as the starting point for the model of this paper is a model

in which two financial frictions play a central role in causing Sudden Stops: a margin constraint on

foreign borrowing faced by the agents of an emerging economy, and trading costs incurred by foreign

securities firms specialized in trading the equity of the emerging economy. Margin constraints and

trading costs are intended to represent the collateral constraints and informational frictions that have been

widely studied as determinants of Sudden Stops (see, for example, Calvo (1998), Izquierdo (2000), Calvo

and Mendoza (2000), Caballero and Krishnamurty (2001), Mendoza (2004), Paasche (2001) and

Schneider and Tornell (1999)).

        This paper introduces asset price guarantees into the Mendoza-Smith model in the form of ex-

ante guarantees offered to foreign investors on the return (or equivalently, the liquidation price) of the

emerging economy’s assets. An IFO offers these guarantees and finances them with a lump-sum tax on

foreign investors. Both the agents in the emerging economy and foreign investors are aware of the IFO’s
                                                                                                              4


guarantees policy when formulating their optimal asset demands. Hence, forward-looking equity prices

reflect the effects of the margin constraints and trading costs as well as the effects of the ex-ante price

guarantees. The setup of the price guarantees is similar to the one proposed in Ljungqvist’s (2000)

closed-economy, representative-agent analysis, but framed in the context of what is effectively a two-

agent equilibrium asset pricing model and extended to incorporate margin constraints and trading costs.

        The price guarantees, which in the model are keen to a “put option” with minimum return, have

different implications depending on the level at which they are set. There are levels of the guarantees so

low that they never bind, thus making the model yield outcomes identical to those of the Mendoza-Smith

model. At the other extreme, there are levels of the guarantees so high that they would always bind and

would yield prices and asset allocations dominated by moral hazard incentives. The key region for the

study of the financial frictions-moral hazard tradeoff of price guarantees is therefore the region in which

the guarantees are “not too high and not too low.” In this region, there is a non-trivial tradeoff between

using the guarantees to undo the effects of the credit-market imperfections and strengthening the

incentives for foreign investors to over-invest in the small open economy (or for the emerging economy to

“over-borrow” from abroad).

        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and characterizes the

competitive equilibrium in the presence of margin constraints, trading costs and ex ante price guarantees.

Section 3 studies key properties of this equilibrium that illustrate the nature of the financial frictions-

moral hazard tradeoff of price guarantees. Section 4 represents the competitive equilibrium as a

recursive, rational expectations equilibrium and proposes a solution algorithm. Section 5 conducts the

quantitative analysis and Section 6 concludes.

2.      The Analytical Framework

        Consider a small open economy (i.e., the emerging economy) inhabited by a representative

household that rents out labor and a time-invariant stock of capital to a representative firm. Households

can trade the equity of this firm with a representative foreign securities firm specialized in trading the

emerging economy’s equity, and can also access a global credit market of one-period bonds. In addition,
                                                                                                            5


an IFO operates a facility that provides price guarantees to foreign traders on their holdings of the

emerging economy’s equity. When foreign traders wish to liquidate the emerging economy’s equity they

can do so at either the current market price or the IFO’s guaranteed price, whichever is higher. Dividend

payments on the emerging economy’s equity are stochastic and vary in response to exogenous

productivity shocks. Since the probability distribution of equilibrium dividend payments is public

knowledge, the IFO can setup price guarantees so as to effectively guarantee a minimum rate of return to

foreign traders investing in the emerging economy. Markets of contingent claims are incomplete

(because trading equity and bonds does not allow domestic households to fully hedge income

uncertainty), and the credit market is imperfect (because of margin constraints and trading costs).

2.1     The Emerging Economy

        The representative firm inside the small open economy produces a single tradable commodity by

combining labor (n) and a time-invariant stock of physical capital (k) using a Cobb-Douglas technology:

exp(εt)F(k,n), where ε is a Markov productivity shock. This firm participates in competitive factor and

goods markets taking the real wage (w) as given. Thus, the choice of labor input consistent with profit

maximization on the part of the firm yields standard marginal productivity conditions for labor demand

and the rate of dividend payments (d):

                                                  wt = exp(ε t ) Fn ( k , nt )                            (1)

                                                  d t = exp(ε t ) Fk ( k , nt )                           (2)

        The small open economy is inhabited by an infinitely-lived representative household. The

household chooses intertemporal sequences of consumption (c), labor supply (n), equity holdings (α), and

foreign bond holdings (b) so as to maximize Epstein’s (1983) stationary cardinal utility function:

                                             ∞             t −1
                                                                                     
                          U (c, n ) = E0 ∑ exp −∑ v (cτ − h( nτ ) )  u (ct − h( nt ) )                (3)
                                          t =0          τ =0                         


This utility function is a time-recursive, Von Neumann-Morgenstern intertemporal utility index with an

endogenous rate of time preference (it is the stochastic representation of the classic Uzawa utility function
                                                                                                                       6


with endogenous discounting). The period utility function u(.) is a standard, concave, twice-continuously

differentiable utility function. The function v(.) is the time preference function, which is also concave and

twice-continuously differentiable. The argument of both functions is a composite good defined by

consumption minus the disutility of labor c-h(n), where h(.) is an increasing, convex, continuously-

differentiable function. Greenwood, Hercowitz and Huffman (1988) introduced this composite good as a

way to eliminate the wealth effect on labor supply. As Mendoza and Smith (2004) showed, this property

of preferences plays an important role in separating the equilibrium dynamics of wages, dividends, labor

and output from those driving consumption, saving and portfolio choices.

         The intertemporal utility function with endogenous time preference has the property that a change

in date-t consumption has not only the standard effect on date-t marginal period utility, but also an

“impatience effect,” by which the change in date-t consumption alters the subjective discount rate at

which all future period utility flows are discounted. Epstein showed that the size of this impatience effect

is limited by the conditions required for these preferences to be consistent with consumption smoothing.

         Utility functions with endogenous impatience are commonly used in models of small open

economies to obtain well-defined long-run equilibria for holdings of foreign assets in which the

exogenous world real interest rate equals the long-run rate of time preference (see for example Obstfeld

(1981) or Mendoza (1991)).1 In models with credit constraints like the one studied here, these

preferences have the additional advantage that they can be used to support long-run equilibria in which

credit constraints can be binding (see Section 3 for details).

         The household maximizes lifetime utility subject to the following budget constraint:

                                   ct = α t kd t + wt nt + qt (α t − α t +1 )k − bt +1 + bt R                      (4)

where α t and α t +1 are beginning- and end-of-period shares of domestic capital owned by households, qt

is the price of equity, and R is the world real interest rate (which is kept constant for simplicity).


1
 Arellano and Mendoza (2003) describe other alternatives used with a similar purpose in the literature, such as the
Aiyagari-Hugget setup in which a constant rate of time preference is set lower than the world interest rate (so that
precautionary savings pins down a well-defined ergodic distribution of wealth), or formulations of asset markets
with ad-hoc world interest rate functions that depend on debt or long-run costs of adjustment in net foreign assets.
                                                                                                                 7


         International loan contracts incorporate a collateral constraint in the form of a margin clause by

which the stock of foreign debt of the small open economy cannot exceed the fraction κ of the market

value of the SOE’s equity holdings:

                                          bt +1 ≥ −κ qtα t +1k ,   0 ≤κ ≤1                                      (5)

         Margin clauses of this form are widely used in international capital markets. In some instances

they are imposed by regulators with the aim of limiting the exposure of financial intermediaries to

idiosyncratic risk in their lending portfolios, but they are also widely used by investment banks and other

lenders as a mechanism to manage default risk (they can take the form of explicit margin constraints

linked to the value of specific securities offered as collateral, or implicit margin requirements linked to

the volatility of returns of an asset class or subclass as those implied by value-at-risk collateralization).

Margin clauses are a particularly effective collateral constraint (compared to constraints like the well-

known Kiyotaki-Moore constraint that limits debt to the discounted liquidation value of assets one period

ahead) because: (a) custody of the securities that constitute the collateral is surrendered at the time the

credit contract is entered and (b) margin calls to make up for shortfalls in the market value of the

collateral are automatic once the value of the securities falls below the value at which they were marked.

         Households in the small open economy also face a short-selling constraint in the equity market:

α t +1 ≥ χ with −∞ < χ < 1 for all t. This constraint is necessary in order to make the margin constraint

have a non-trivial role. Otherwise, any borrowing limit in the bond market implied by a binding margin

constraint could always be undone by taking a sufficiently short equity position.

2.2      The Foreign Securities Firm, the IFO & the Price Guarantees

         The representative foreign securities firm obtains funds from international investors and

specializes in investing them in the small open economy’s equity. The securities firm maximizes its net

present value discounted at the stochastic discount factors relevant for its international clients (i.e., the

world interest rate). Thus, the foreign traders’ problem is to choose their sequence of equity holdings

α t+1*, for t = 1,..., ∞ , so as to maximize
                                                                                                                                               8


                                ∞
                                                                                              a
                                       
                                                                                                        (
                       D = E0  ∑ R − t  α t*k ( d t + max( qt , q t ) ) − qtα t*+1k − qt k   α t*+1 − α t* + θ   )               
                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                              − kTt *   .   (6)
                                  t =0                                                      2                                     


            The total net return paid by the foreign securities firm to its shareholders at each date t is the sum

of: (a) dividends collected on its share of the small open economy’s capital (α t*kdt ), plus (b) proceedings

from the sale of equity holdings (α t*k max(qt, q t )), which are executed at either the market price qt or the

guaranteed price q t , whichever is greater, minus (c) new equity purchases (qt α t+1*k), minus (d) total

trading costs, which include a cost that depends on the size of net trades (α t+1* - α t*) and a recurrent

trading cost (θ ), minus (e) lump sum taxes paid to the IFO (kTt*) . Trading costs are specified in

quadratic form, as is typical in the equilibrium asset pricing literature on trading costs, so a is a standard

adjustment-cost coefficient.

            The IFO buys equity from the foreign traders at the guaranteed price and sells it at the

equilibrium price. Thus, the IFO’s budget constraint is:

                                                                kTt* = max ( 0, ( q t − qt ) α t*k )                                         (7)

If the price guarantee is not executed, the tax is zero. If the guarantee is executed, the IFO sets the lump-

sum tax to match the value of the executed price guarantee (i.e., the extra income that foreign traders earn

by selling equity to the IFO instead of selling it in the equity market).

            Since the return on equity is Rtq ≡ [dt+qt ]/ qt-1, the IFO’s offer to guarantee the date-t price

implies a guaranteed minimum return on the emerging economy’s equity. The implied guaranteed rate of

return is R tq = [ qt + d t ] / qt −1 . Alternatively, the IFO could fix a guaranteed return and foreign traders

could then determine the schedule of price guarantees implicit in the guaranteed return.

2.3         Equilibrium

            A competitive equilibrium for this model economy is given by stochastic intertemporal sequences

                                                            ∞
                                                                   and prices [ wt , d t , qt ]t = 0 such that: (a) households maximize the
                                                                                             ∞
of allocations ct , nt , bt +1 ,α t +1 ,α t*+1 , Tt* 
                                                            t =0


utility function (3) subject to the constraints (4) and (5) and the short-selling constraint, taking prices,

wages and dividends as given, (b) domestic firms maximize profits by satisfying equations (1) and (2),
                                                                                                                      9


taking wages and dividends as given, (c) the foreign securities firm maximizes (6) taking the price of

equity, the price guarantees and lump-sum taxes as given, (d) the budget constraint of the IFO in equation

(7), holds and (e) the equity market clears (i.e., α t+α t*=1 for all t). Section 4 exploits the recursive

representation of this rational expectations equilibrium to design a numerical solution algorithm.

3.      Characterizing the Financial Frictions-Moral Hazard Tradeoff

        The tradeoff between the distortions introduced by margin constraints and trading costs and those

introduced by price guarantees can be illustrated by studying the conditions that determine the optimal

decisions of domestic households and foreign traders. Consider first the domestic households. The first-

order conditions of their maximization problem are:

                                                      U C t (c , n ) = λt                                        (8)

                                                         h′( nt ) = wt                                           (9)

                                      qt ( λt − ηtκ ) = Et [ λt +1 (d t +1 + qt +1 ) ] + υt                    (10)

                                                   λt − ηt = Et [ λt +1R ]                                     (11)

In these expressions, U ct (c, n ) is the derivative of the stationary cardinal utility function with respect to ct

(which includes the impatience effect), and λt, ηt and υt are the Lagrange multipliers on the budget

constraint, the margin constraint, and the short-selling constraint respectively.

        Condition (8) has the standard interpretation: at equilibrium, the marginal utility of wealth equals

the lifetime marginal utility of consumption. Condition (9) equates the marginal disutility of labor with

the real wage. This is the case because the Greenwood-Hercowitz-Huffman composite good implies that

the marginal rate of substitution between ct and nt is equal to the marginal disutility of labor h’(nt ), and

thus is independent of ct. It follows from this result that condition (9) together with (1) and (2) determine

the equilibrium values of nt, wt and dt as well as the equilibrium level of output. These “supply-side”

solutions are independent of the dynamics of consumption, saving, portfolio choices and equity prices,

and are therefore also independent of the distortions induced by financial frictions and price guarantees.
                                                                                                                      10


        The neutrality of the financial frictions with regard to the “supply side” of the domestic economy

follows from admittedly strong assumptions but it simplifies significantly the solution of the model by

separating the equilibrium path of dividends from the savings and portfolio decisions. Mendoza (2004)

studies the business cycle implications of margin constraints in a small-open-economy model with

endogenous investment in which financial frictions affect dividends, investment and the Tobin Q, but

abstracting from international equity trading.

        Conditions (10) and (11) are Euler equations for the accumulation of equity and bonds

respectively. Following Mendoza and Smith (2004), these conditions can be combined to derive

expressions for the forward solution of equity prices and the excess return on equity from the perspective

of the emerging economy. The forward solution for equity prices is:

                                                                                     −1
                                             ∞                                                             
                                                          i         ηt + j              
                                  qt = Et   
                                              ∑∏
                                             i =0
                                                     
                                                        j =0
                                                                1 −
                                                                    λt + j
                                                                              κ         M t +1+i d t +1+i 
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                     (12)
                                                                                                        


where Mt+1+i ≡ λ t+1+i / λ t , for i=0,...,∞, is the intertemporal marginal rate of substitution between ct+1+i

and ct. The excess return on domestic equity is:

                                                                          υt
                                                         ηt (1 − κ ) −           − COVt (λt +1 , Rtq+1 )
                                                                              qt
                                Et  Rtq+1  − R =                                                                 (13)
                                                                               Et [λt +1 ]

Given these results, the forward solution for equity prices can also be expressed as:

                                                    ∞                                        −1                
                                                                     (                    )
                                                               i                                  
                                     qt = Et  ∑ ∏ Et  Rtq+1+ j                                   d t +1+i    (14)
                                                i = 0      j =0                                            
                                                                                                               


        Expressions (12)-(14) show the direct and indirect effects that margin calls have on the demand

for equity of the small open economy, and thus on its valuation of equity and excess returns. The direct

effect of a date-t margin call is represented by the term ηt (1-κ) in (13), or the term ηtκ in (12): When a

margin call occurs, domestic agents “fire sale” equity in order to meet the call and satisfy the borrowing

constraint. Everything else the same, this effect lowers the date-t equity price and increases the expected

excess return for t+1. The indirect effect of the margin call is reflected in the fact that a binding
                                                                                                                                           11


borrowing limit makes “more negative” the co-variance between the marginal utility of consumption and

the rate of return on equity (since a binding borrowing limit hampers the households’ ability to smooth

consumption). The direct and indirect effects increase the rate at which future dividends are discounted in

the domestic agents’ valuation of asset prices, and thus reduce their demand for equity. Interestingly, the

date-t equity price along the domestic agents’ demand curve is reduced by a margin constraint that is

binding at date t or by any expected binding margin constraint in the future. As a result, equity prices and

the domestic demand for equity can be distorted by the margin requirements even in periods in which the

constraint does not bind.

         If domestic agents facing margin calls could trade assets in a frictionless, perfectly-competitive

market in which the world demand for the emerging economy’s assets is infinitely-elastic at the level of

the fundamentals price, the margin call would trigger a portfolio reallocation effect without any price

movement. However, if the world demand for the emerging economy’s assets is less than infinitely-

elastic, the equilibrium asset price would fall. Since households were already facing a binding margin

constraint at the initial price, the price decline would tighten further the margin constraint triggering a

new round of margin calls. This downward spiral in equity prices is a variant of Fisher’s debt-deflation

mechanism. The Fisherian deflation magnifies the direct and indirect effects of the margin constraint.

         The world demand for assets of the emerging economy is less than infinitely-elastic because of

the trading costs that foreign traders incur. Define the conditional expected value of the stream of

                                                                                                                                  ∞
                                                                                                                                     
dividends discounted at the world interest rate as the “fundamentals” price qt f ≡ Et  ∑ R − ( t +1+i )d t +1+i  .
                                                                                                                              i =0   


The first-order condition for the optimization problem of the foreign traders implies then the following

asset demand function:

                                                                        ∞
                                                                                                                    
                                                                Et ∑ R − ( t +i ) ( max( qt +i , q t +i ) − qt +i )  
                                                1  q tf
                       (α   *
                            t +1   − α t* ) =
                                                a  qt
                                                           −1+       i =1
                                                                                          qt
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                             −θ           (15)
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                           12


This expression states that the foreign traders’ demand for the emerging economy’s assets is an increasing

function of: (a) the percent deviation of qt f relative to qt (with an elasticity equal to 1/a) and (b) the

expected present discounted value of the “excess prices” induced by the price guarantees in units of

today’s equity price.2 The first effect reflects the influence of the per-trade trading costs. If trading were

costless and recurrent costs were zero, the foreign traders’ demand function would be infinitely-elastic at

the fundamentals price and, as explained earlier, margin calls could not affect asset prices. The second

effect represents the “moral hazard effect” of the price guarantees, which acts as a “demand shifter” in the

foreign traders’ demand function. Foreign traders that expect price guarantees to be executed at any time

in the future have a higher demand for the emerging economy’s assets at date t than they would in a

market without price guarantees. The recurrent trading costs are also a demand shifter (the foreign

trader’s demand function is lower the higher is θ ).

           Putting together the previous results, the tradeoff between the distortions created by the financial

frictions and those induced by the moral hazard effect can be summarized as follows. Suppose the date-t

asset price in a market without margin constraints and without price guarantees is determined at the

intersection of the domestic agents’ and foreign traders’ demand curves (HH and FF respectively) at point

A in Figure 1.




2
    The present value of excess prices has an equivalent representation in terms of the present value of guaranteed
             ∞

           
              i=1
                          (                )
returns Et ∑ R−(t+i ) st +i qt+i Rt +i − Rtq+i   , with st+i=1 if the guarantee is executed and st+i = 0 otherwise.
                                                   
                                                                                                                         13


         The demand function of foreign traders is simply the reduced form solved for in (15), shown as

an upward-slopping curve because the horizontal axis measures α, which is the complement of α*. There

is no closed-form solution for HH, so the depicted curve is intended only to facilitate intuition. We

follow Aiyagari and Gertler (1999) in plotting HH as an upward-slopping curve because domestic agents

respond to wealth, intertemporal-substitution and portfolio-composition effects in choosing their equity

holdings. Depending on which effect dominates, HH can be downward or upward slopping.

         Suppose that a margin call hits domestic agents because an adverse shock hits the economy when

their level of debt is “sufficiently high” relative to the value of their asset holdings. As a result, the HH

curve shifts to HH’. In Figure 1, HH’ represents the “final” demand function, including the magnification

effects of the Fisherian debt-deflation mechanism. Without price guarantees, the date-t equilibrium price

would fall to point B. This is the “Sudden Stop scenario,” in which margin calls result in a decline in

asset prices and adjustments in the current account and consumption.

         Enter now an IFO that sets a price guarantee higher than the market price at B. Since the

guarantee is triggered, the foreign traders’ demand curve shifts to FF’ and the new date-t price is

determined at point C, which yields the fundamentals price. The scenario depicted here is an ideal one in

which the IFO is assumed to know exactly at what level to set the guaranteed price so as to stabilize the

market price at the fundamentals level. If the guarantee is “too low” (i.e., below the price at B) it would

have no effect on the equilibrium price implied by the financial frictions, and thus price guarantees would

be irrelevant. If the guarantee is “too high” it could lead to a price higher than the fundamentals price

with the “overpricing” even larger than the “underpricing” that occurs at C.3 Hence, ex-ante price

guarantees do not necessarily reduce the volatility of asset prices (as the numerical analysis of Ljungqvist

(2000) also showed).

         Interestingly, Figure 1 illustrates an outcome in which, even tough the moral hazard effect props

up the foreign traders’ asset demand for any given price, at equilibrium domestic agents are the ones that


3
 This is under the assumption that the guarantees are used to stabilize asset prices. If the aim is to stabilize asset
holdings (i.e., portfolio flows) then the IFO would want to set price guarantees to yield prices higher than at C.
                                                                                                              14


end up owning more domestic assets relative to the equilibrium without price guarantees. Domestic

agents hold more equity at C (with binding margin constraints and price guarantees) than at B (with

binding margin constraints and no guarantees), or at D (with price guarantees and non-binding margin

constraints) than at A (without price guarantees and non-binding margin constraints). This is the case

because the demand function of domestic agents is upward-slopping and steeper than the foreign traders’

demand curve, so when foreign traders increase their demand for equity bidding up the price, domestic

agents have a lower demand elasticity and thus end up buying more equity. In this case, and if the margin

constraint binds, this higher level of domestic equity holdings also means that the domestic economy’s

foreign debt would be higher than in the absence of the guarantees. Thus, the model can predict that price

guarantees offered to foreign traders lead to excessive holdings of equity and excessive borrowing by

domestic agents.

        From the perspective of the full dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model, Figure 1 is just a

partial equilibrium snapshot of the date-t asset market. The forward-looking behavior of domestic

households and foreign traders implies that changes that affect the date-t asset market spillover into the

market outcomes at other dates and vice versa. For example, the price guarantee may not be in force at t

but the expectation of executing future price guarantees will shift upward the FF curve at t. Similarly, the

margin constraint may not bind at t, but the expectation of future margin calls is enough to shift the date-t

HH curve. Hence, determining the effects of the price guarantees on the dynamics of consumption, the

current account, bond holdings, equity holdings and equity prices is a difficult task. Given the lack of

closed-form solutions for the model’s equilibrium allocations and prices, the only way to deal with these

issues is by exploring the quantitative implications of the model via numerical simulation.

4.      Recursive Equilibrium and Solution Method

        In the recursive representation of the equilibrium, the state variables are the current holdings of

assets and bonds in the emerging economy, α and b, and the realizations of productivity shocks listed in

the vector ε. The state space of asset positions spans the discrete grid of NA nodes Α={α1<α2<…<αNA}
                                                                                                                          15


with α1=χ, and the state space of bonds spans the discrete grid of NB nodes Β={b1<b2<…<bNB}. The

endogenous state space is thus defined by the discrete set Z = Α × Β of NA×NB elements. Productivity

shocks follow an asymptotically-stationary, two-point Markov chain with realizations E={ε L < ε H}.

           Equilibrium wages, dividends, labor and output are determined by solving the supply-side system

given by equations (1), (2), (9) and the production function. The solutions can be represented as functions

of the state space that depend only on ε : w(ε), d(ε), n(ε) and F(ε).

           Assume a continuous, nonnegative asset pricing function that is taken as given by foreign traders

and agents in the emerging economy. This conjectured pricing function maps the state space into equity

prices qˆ(α , b, ε ) : E × Z → R + . Take as given also conjectured decision rules for assets and bonds:

αˆ ′(α , b, ε ), bˆ′(α , b, ε ) : E × Z → R + . For any initial state (α , b, ε), the conjectured pricing function must

satisfy qˆ(α , b, ε ) ∈  q min (α , b, ε ), q max (α , b, ε )  , where:


                              q min (α , b, ε ) =  q f (ε ) + G (α , b, ε )  1 + a (α − χ + I (α , b, ε )θ )    (16)


                            q max (α , b, ε ) =  q f (ε ) + G (α , b, ε )  1 + a (α − α NA + I (α , b, ε )θ )   (17)

and G(α,b,ε) represents the expected present discounted value of the “excess prices” induced by the price

guarantees (which can be computed recursively using αˆ ′(α , b, ε ) , bˆ′(α , b, ε ) , qˆ(α , b, ε ) and the Markov

process of productivity shocks). The prices in (16) and (7) are the maximum and minimum asset prices

along the foreign traders’ demand curve. These bounds of the pricing function follow from the fact that

when domestic agents hit either the short-selling constraint or the upper bound αNA, the foreign traders are

at the “short side” of the market.

           Given the above conjectured decision rules and pricing function, the recursive equilibrium can be

characterized in two ways. One approach is an extension of the setup of iterations on the asset pricing

function “outside” the optimization problem of the small open economy proposed by Mendoza and Smith

(2004). This approach uses the foreign trader’s demand function and the market-clearing condition in the

asset market to construct a conjectured law of motion of equity holdings, and solves a dynamic
                                                                                                                   16


programming problem only on bond holdings for the small open economy given the conjectured law of

motion and pricing function for equity. This dynamic programming problem yields optimal consumption

plans for domestic agents and these plans are used to compute an “actual” pricing function that can be

compared with the conjectured pricing function. The conjecture is then updated with a Gauss-Siedel rule

and the process repeated until the conjectured and actual pricing functions satisfy a convergence criterion.

        Iterations on the pricing function “outside” the optimization problem of the small open economy

have the disadvantage that they take several hours to compute and may not converge to small errors. This

is because the algorithm is solving for a fixed point by seeking stable convergence to equilibrium prices

that clear the equity market starting from an arbitrary initial pricing function. Hence, the second approach

to represent the equilibrium of the model in recursive form appeals to a “quasi-planning problem” that

yields a more efficient solution method in which asset prices are computed without error and the

contraction-mapping properties of the Bellman equation are exploited to speed convergence.

        The quasi-planning-problem approach starts with a conjecture for the function representing the

expected present value of “excess prices” induced by price guarantees, G(α,b,ε). Given this, the optimal

plans of domestic agents are represented as the solution to the following dynamic programming problem:


                                 α ′ ,b '
                                            {                        (                    )                   }
                 V (α , b, ε ) = max u (c − h ( n(ε ) ) ) + exp − v ( c − h ( n(ε ) ) ) E V (α ′, b′, ε ′ )   (18)

subject to:

                                                           q f (ε ) + G (α , b, ε )
                        c = α kd (ε ) + w (ε )n(ε ) +                               k (α − α ′) − b′ + bR         (19)
                                                           1 + aθ + a (α − α ′)

                                                          q f (ε ) + G (α , b, ε )
                                                b′ ≥ −κ                            α ′k                           (20)
                                                          1 + aθ + a (α − α ′)

In this formulation, domestic agents choose both equity and bond positions. Equity prices have been

displaced with the prices along the demand curve of foreign traders by imposing market clearing in the

equity market and solving for the equity prices implied by equation (15).

        Once the above dynamic programming problem is solved, the resulting optimal plans for equity

holdings are plugged into equation (15) to derive the “actual” asset pricing function for the given initial
                                                                                                                17


conjecture of G(.). The decision rules for bonds and equity and this “actual” asset pricing function are

then used to solve for the “actual” G(α,b,ε) function (i.e., the function that returns the expected present

discounted value of the excess of guaranteed over market prices conditional on any initial triple (α ,b,ε)).

The conjectured and actual G functions are then combined to create a new conjecture of G(α,b,ε) using a

Gauss-Siedel rule and the procedure starts again with the Bellman equation (18). The process is repeated

until the actual and conjectured G functions converge, so that the conjectured excess prices function

G(α,b,ε) that is taken as given in the dynamic programming problem is consistent with the actual excess

prices function implied by the asset price and policy functions that are endogenous outcomes of that

problem.

        The drawback of this quasi-planning-problem method is that in principle it represents the

equilibrium of a market in which the emerging economy is keen to a Stackelberg leader that internalizes

the demand function of foreign traders. Analysis of the Benveniste-Sheinkman equations of the dynamic

programming problem shows that, comparing the Euler equations for bonds and equity of the competitive

equilibrium with those of the quasi planning problem, this feature does not distort the Euler equation for

bonds but it does distort the one for equity. The distortion can be expressed as a multiple of the return on

equity that has an ambiguous sign and depends on how much the equity price along the foreign traders’

demand curve varies with α and α ′. We face therefore a tradeoff between a method that solves the

competitive equilibrium with error in the pricing function and a method that computes prices without

error but does so by deviating from the competitive equilibrium. For small values of a (i.e., when the

price elasticity of the foreign traders’ demand function is high), the quasi planning problem yields

negligible distortions.4 Since this method is also considerably faster, we chose to use the quasi-planning

problem method.

        The optimal decision rules obtained after the solution method converges constitute a recursive,

rational expectations equilibrium for the model. At this recursive equilibrium, the decision rules

4
 In the four sets of simulations reviewed in Section 5 the maximum absolute value of the distortion ranges between
0.08 and 0.2 percent of the return on equity.
                                                                                                                      18


determining asset holdings, bond holdings, consumption, labor, wages, dividends, the foreign traders’

asset holdings and the asset prices are such that: (a) given wages and dividends, the policy functions for c,

b′, α′ and n maximize household utility and firm profits in the small open economy subject to the relevant

constraints, (b) given asset prices and dividends, the choice for α′ * solves the maximization problem of

foreign traders, (c) the IFO’s budget constraint holds and (e) the market-clearing conditions for assets,

goods and labor markets hold.5

5.       Quantitative Analysis

         The functional forms that represent preferences and technology are standard isoelastic functions:

                                             F ( k , nt ) = k 1−γ nt γ ,         0 ≤γ ≤1                            (21)


                                                                − h ( nt ) 
                                                                               1−σ
                                                          ct                        −1
                                    (
                                   u ct − h ( nt ) =)    
                                                                      1−σ
                                                                                          ,   σ >1                  (22)


                               (
                             v ct − h ( nt   ) ) = β  Ln (1 + c − h ( n ) )  ,
                                                                       t        t               0< β ≤σ             (23)


                                                                 ntδ
                                                   h ( nt ) =              ,    δ >1                                (24)
                                                                  δ

( is the labor income share, F is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, $ is the elasticity of the rate of

time preference with respect to 1+ct - h(nt ), and * determines the wage elasticity of labor supply (which is

equal to 1/(* -1)). The condition 0<$#F comes from Epstein (1983).

5.1      Deterministic Steady State and Calibration to Mexican Data

         The calibration strategy differs from the one followed by Mendoza and Smith (2004). Their

calibration normalizes the capital stock to k=1 and lets the steady-state equity price adjust to the value

implied by the asset pricing condition given a set of parameter values that were directly inferred from the


5
  These properties are easy to prove noting that: (i) the Benveniste-Sheinkman equations of the Bellman equation in
(18) yield the Euler equation for bond holdings of the competitive equilibrium and ensure that the Euler equation for
asset holdings is satisfied up to the error implied by the distortion that depends on the price elasticity of the foreign
trader’s demand curve, (ii) the wage, dividend and labor functions reflect optimal decisions by households and
domestic firms, (iii) the optimality condition for the maximization problem of foreign traders holds (i.e., prices and
allocations satisfy the foreign trader’s demand curve), and (iv) the constraints (19) and (20) combined with results
(i)-(iii) ensure that the market-clearing conditions, the households’ budget constraint, and the margin constraint hold.
                                                                                                             19


data or set to enable the model to match ratios of national accounts statistics. Here, we normalize instead

the steady-state equity price so that the capital stock matches the deterministic, steady-state capital stock

of a typical RBC small open economy model calibrated to Mexican data (see Mendoza (2004)). The

details of this calibration procedure are provided below.

        The risk aversion parameter does not appear in the model’s deterministic steady-state conditions.

This parameter is set at σ =2 in line with values often used in RBC studies of small open economies.

        The parameter values that enter into the supply-side system are determined as follows. The labor

share is set at γ =0.65, which is in line with international evidence on labor income shares. The Mexican

average share of labor income in value added in an annual sample for 1988-2001 is 0.34, but values

around 0.65 are the norm in several countries and there is concern that the Mexican data may measure

inaccurately proprietors income and other forms of labor income (for further details on this controversy

see Mendoza (2004)). The real interest rate is set at 6.5 percent, which is the value widely used in the

RBC literature. Since the model is set to a quarterly frequency, this implies that the gross real interest

rate is R=1.0651/4. The labor disutility coefficient is set to the same value as in Mendoza and Smith

(2004), δ=2, which implies a unitary wage elasticity of labor supply.

        As in a typical RBC calibration exercise, the calibration is designed to yield a set of parameter

values such that the model’s deterministic steady state matches the time-series averages of the GDP

shares of consumption (sc), investment (si), government purchases (sg) and net exports (snx) from the

data. In the Mexican data, these shares are sc=0.684, si=0.19, sg=0.092, and snx=0.034. Since the model

does not have endogenous investment or government purchases, their combined share (0.282) is treated as

exogenous absorption of output equivalent to 28.2 percent of steady-state GDP. In the stochastic

simulations we keep the corresponding level of these exogenous expenditures constant at 28.2 percent of

the value obtained for the calibrated level of steady-state output.

        The typical RBC model of the small open economy features a standard steady-state optimality

condition that equates the marginal product of capital net of depreciation to the world interest rate, and a
                                                                                                               20


standard law of motion for the capital stock that relates the steady-state investment rate to the steady-state

capital-output ratio. Given the values of si, γ, δ and R, these two steady-state conditions can be combined

to yield implied values of the depreciation rate (dep) and the capital-output ratio (sk). On an annual basis,

the resulting depreciation rate is 7.75 percent and sk is about 2.5 (or 10.08 on a quarterly basis).

        In a deterministic steady state of the model of Section 2 in which the credit constraint does not

bind and there are no price guarantees, the steady-state equity price is q = q f = d/(R-1). Given the

calibration criterion that the steady-state marginal product of capital net of depreciation equals the net

world interest rate, q f can be re-written as Fk (k,n) / (Fk (k,n)-dep) . With the Cobb-Douglas form of the

production function this reduces to q f = (1-γ) / (1-γ - si). Thus, if the model is to be consistent with a

dividend rate that matches the long-run predictions of a typical RBC small open economy model, the

steady-state equity price must be determined by the values of the labor income share and the investment

rate. With the parameter values set above we obtain q f=2.19.

        Given the values of γ, δ, R, and q f the steady state solutions for n, w, k, and F(k,n) follow from

solving the supply-side system conformed by (1), (2), (9) and (21). In particular, the level of the capital

stock consistent with these supply-side conditions and the calibrated parameter values is k =79. By

construction, this capital stock is also consistent with the estimated capital-output ratio of 2.5 and the

observed Mexican investment rate of 0.19.

        The parameters that remain to be calibrated are the time-preference elasticity coefficient $ and

the financial frictions parameters a, θ and κ. The time-preference elasticity coefficient is derived from

the consumption Euler equation as follows. In a deterministic stationary state in which the margin

constraint does not bind, the endogenous rate of time preference equals the real interest rate:

                                                                               β
                                                                     nδ   
                                         1 +   ( sc ) F (k , n ) −               =R                         (25)
                                                                     δ    
                                                                                                              21


Given the values of R, δ, n, F(k,n) and sc, this condition can be solved for the required value of $. The

solution yields $ = 0.0118. The total stock of domestic savings at steady state follows then from the

resource constraint as s = [c-F(k,n)(si+sg)-wn] / (R-1).

        Mendoza and Smith (2004) showed that the above deterministic steady state with a non-binding

margin constraint has the unappealing feature that, while there is a well-defined, unique steady-state

equilibrium for savings, the allocation of the savings portfolio across bonds and equity is undetermined.

The steady-state equity price equals its fundamentals level q = q f = d/(R-1), as shown earlier, and

therefore the return on equity equals the world interest rate. But at this price and return, any portfolio of

equity and bonds is consistent with the steady state as long as it satisfies the accounting identity for

steady-state savings, α q fk + b = s, and the resulting (α, b) pair is such that b > -κα q f k and α ≥ χ.

Moreover, within this range of portfolios and given the value of q f implied by the calibration, it is

difficult to support portfolios in which the emerging economy is actually borrowing in the bond market

(i.e., portfolios with b<0). Portfolios with debt require α > 0.9. If domestic agents own less than 90

percent of the capital stock, their bond position is always positive and grows larger the smaller is α .

        The above result showing that there is a small range of debt positions in a deterministic steady

state with non-binding credit constraints, and that these debt positions require a high degree of “home

bias” in equity holdings, also implies that it will take relatively strong margin coefficients (i.e., low values

of κ ) to make the margin constraint bind. In particular, ruling out short positions by foreign traders, so

that the largest share of domestic equity holdings is 100 percent, it takes κ ≤ 0.10 for the margin

constraint to bind for at least some of the feasible steady-state pairs of (α , b). These low values of κ can

be justified by considering that the margin constraint is intended to represent the fraction of domestic

capital that is useful collateral for international debt contracts. Several studies in the literature on Sudden

Stops provide different arguments suggesting that this fraction may be far less than 1. The models

proposed by Caballero and Krishnamurty (2001), Paasche (2001), Mendoza (2002), Scheneider and

Tornell (2000) and others show how frictions like limited enforcement, default risk, “liability
                                                                                                              22


dollarization,” and low international liquidity of shares of domestic capital of different sectors are

frictions that can hamper the ability of domestic borrowers to leverage foreign debt on domestic assets.

        The stochastic economy with non-binding margin constraints has the additional unappealing

feature that it can lead to a degenerate long-run distribution of equity and bonds in which domestic agents

hold the smallest possible fraction of equity (χ) and use only bonds to engage in consumption smoothing

and precautionary savings. The reason is that, without credit constraints and zero recurrent asset-trading

costs, risk-averse domestic agents demand a risk premium to hold equity (for standard equity-premium

reasons) while the risk-neutral foreign traders do not. Hence, domestic agents end up selling all the

equity they can to foreign traders. This process takes time because the per-trade trading costs slow the

speed at which foreign traders adjust their equity holdings.

        To circumvent the above problems of indeterminacy of the portfolio composition in the

deterministic steady state and full downloading of domestic equity holdings in the stochastic steady state

of the economy with frictionless financial markets, the calibration sets the values of the financial frictions

parameters (a, θ and κ) so that the allocations and prices obtained for the deterministic steady with non-

binding margin constraints can also be supported as the deterministic steady state of an economy with

negligible (but positive) recurrent trading costs and a margin constraint that is just slightly binding. This

calibration scenario is labeled the “nearly frictionless economy” (NFE).

        The deterministic steady state of the NFE has well-defined, unique solutions for bond and equity

allocations. In particular, foreign traders hold a stationary equity position at the price q = q f /(1+aθ).

Since this price is less than q f , which is the price at which the return on domestic equity equals R, it

follows that at this lower price Rq > R at steady state. The ratio of the Lagrange multipliers of the margin

constraint and the budget constraint can then be found to be: µ /λ = (Rq-R)/(Rq -Rκ).

        With the domestic agent’s debt given by b = -κα q k, a unique stationary equity position can then

be obtained from the steady-state consumption Euler equation when the credit constraint binds. This is

the value of α that solves the following expression:
                                                                                                                23


                                                                              β
                                                                    nδ                  R
                              1 + α kd   + wn − κ qα k ( R − 1) −               =                           (26)
                                                                    δ               1− (µ / λ )

This expression illustrates the key role that the endogenous rate of time preference plays in supporting

stationary equilibria with binding credit limits: it allows the rate of time preference to adjust so as to make

the higher long-run level of consumption, implied by the fact that domestic agents are not allowed to

build as much debt as they desire in the transition to the steady state, to be consistent with the higher

effective long-run real interest rate, implied by the credit constraint. The recurrent trading cost is also

critical. With θ=0, the equity price equals the fundamentals price and the return on equity equals the real

interest rate, and the latter would imply that µ/λ=0, so the borrowing constraint could not bind.

        In this NFE scenario, the values of 6, a and θ are set to yield a deterministic stationary state with

a binding borrowing constraint in which the following conditions hold: (1) the debt-GDP ratio is in line

with the empirical evidence for Mexico, (2) the allocations, factor payment rates and the equity price are

nearly identical to those in the model without binding credit limit, and (3) the elasticity of the foreign

trader’s demand curve is relatively high. The values of the parameters are: κ = 0.03, θ = 0.001 and a =

0.2. These parameter values, and the values set earlier for γ, δ, β, and R, yield values of c, s, n, w, d, q,

and Rq nearly identical to those obtained without a binding debt constraint, and the unique steady-state

portfolio allocations are α = 0.931 and b = -4.825. The debt-GDP ratio is about 62 percent.

5.2     Stochastic Simulation Framework

        The stochastic simulations are solved over a discrete state space with 78 evenly-spaced nodes in

the equity grid and 120 evenly-spaced nodes in the bonds grid. The lower bound for domestic equity is

set at 84 percent of the capital stock (χ=0.84), so the equity grid spans the interval [0.84,1]. These

bounds for equity holdings, together with the “plausible” maximum equity price defined by equation (17)

and the margin constraint, set the lower bound of the bond grid as -κ qmaxk = -5.2. This is the largest

“feasible” debt that the domestic economy could leverage by holding the largest possible equity position

at the highest possible price for the given grid of equity holdings. The upper bound of bonds is found by
                                                                                                              24


solving the model repeatedly starting with an upper bound on bonds that supports the steady state stock of

savings with the equity position at its lowest, and then increasing the upper bound until the grid captures

the support of the ergodic distribution of bonds. The resulting grid spans the interval [-5.2,25.7]. The

segment of debt positions inside this interval is relatively small, reflecting the fact that, despite the

frictions induced by asset trading costs, domestic agents still have a preference for bonds as a vehicle to

smooth consumption and build a buffer stock of savings.

        A lower bound on domestic equity holdings of 84 percent seems much higher than the

conventional short-selling limit set at 0 but is consistent with the national aggregates targeted in the

calibration. In Mexico, the average ratio of stock market capitalization to output in the period 1988-2000

was 27.6 percent. Since the calibration yields an estimate of the capital-output ratio of about 2.5, the total

value of the shares of all Mexican publicly-traded firms constitutes just 11 percent of Mexico’s capital

stock. A large fraction of Mexico’s capital stock is owned by non-publicly-traded private and

government firms and by owners of residential property, and thus does not have a liquid market in which

shares are traded with foreign residents. In general, at the aggregate level of most emerging economies it

is hard to argue that a large fraction of the physical capital stock has a liquid international market.

Moreover, the result from the calibration exercise showing that bond positions become positive and

unrealistically large when the domestic economy owns less than 90 percent of its capital also argues for a

high value of χ.

        Stochastic productivity shocks are modeled as a two-point, symmetric Markov process that

follows the “simple persistence” rule. The two points of the Markov chain and the elements of the

Markov transition probability matrix are set so that they yield moments of the limiting distribution of

output that match the standard deviation and first-order autocorrelation of the quarterly cyclical

component of Mexico’s GDP reported in Mendoza (2004) -- 2.64 percent and 0.683 respectively. The

model matches these observations with a Markov process of productivity shocks that features a standard

deviation of 1.79 percent and the same first-order autocorrelation coefficient of 0.683.
                                                                                                                  25


        Four sets of stochastic simulation results are presented below. The first set is for the NFE case in

which the financial frictions have negligible effects. The second set is for the economy with binding

margin requirements (BMR), for which the margin coefficient is set at κ =0.005. This simulation aims to

illustrate the effects of the model’s financial frictions in the absence of price guarantees. The third set

introduces a simple price-guarantees policy that introduces a single, non-state-contingent guaranteed price

(NSCG) for all dates and states of nature. The fourth set introduces the same guaranteed price but as a

state-contingent guarantee (SCG) that applies only to those states of nature inside the “Sudden Stop

region” of the BMR economy.

5.3     Financial Frictions & Sudden Stops without Price Guarantees

        The comparison between the NFE and BMR economies yields results analogous to those in

Mendoza and Smith (2004). Hence, we focus the presentation of these results on the features of the

comparison between the two economies that are relevant for studying the effects of price guarantees.

        Figures 1a-1b show the ergodic distributions of equity and bonds in the NFE and BMR

economies. The effect of the binding borrowing constraints is clear in the bonds distribution. This

distribution has a marked bias to the left in the two economies but the distribution shifts markedly to the

right when margin constraints bind. The opposite occurs with the distribution of equity. The distribution

of equity is biased to the left in both economies, reflecting the inherent incentive that the risk-averse

domestic agents have to sell equity to the risk-neutral foreign lenders. However, the binding margin

constraints shift the equity distribution further to the left. This is the result of the equity “fire sales” in

which domestic agents engage to meet margin calls.

        The shifts in the ergodic distributions of equity and bonds also reflect the outcome of the

precautionary savings effect. Domestic agents, aware of the imperfections of financial markets and the

possibility of hitting binding borrowing limits, have an incentive to build up a buffer stock of savings in

order to minimize the risk of being forced to reduce consumption abruptly. Hence precautionary savings

leads agents to increase their average holdings of risk-free bonds. As Table 1 shows, the long-run
                                                                                                            26


average of the bonds-output ratio increases from 18 percent in the NFE economy to 50 percent in the

BMR economy.

        Precautionary savings behavior also implies that agents will accumulate enough savings in the

long run to lower the risk of facing states in which margin constraints actually bind. The long-run

distribution of the BMR economy clearly rules out the states with the largest debt positions (in which a

binding margin constraint would force the largest adjustments in consumption and the current account).

Still, Table 1 shows that the long-run probability of facing a state of nature in which the margin constraint

binds is about 4 percent. Thus, as Mendoza (2002) showed, the precautionary savings effect implies that

Sudden Stops driven by occasionally binding credit constraints are rare but non-zero probability events in

the long run. This also implies, however, that the effects of these constraints are hard to notice in the

long-run business cycle moments computed with the ergodic distributions, as reported in Table 1. Hence,

to analyze the model’s ability to explain Sudden Stops we should study the short-run dynamics in the

high-debt region of the state space in which the margin constraint binds. This region is referred to as the

“Sudden Stop region.”

        The three-dimensional plots in Figures 2-4 are useful for identifying the Sudden Stop region. The

plots show the responses of consumption, the current account-GDP ratio and equity prices on impact to a

1-standard-deviation negative shock to productivity for different combinations of the initial state of equity

and bond holdings. These impact effects are measured as percent deviations from the long-run mean of

each variable in the corresponding simulation. The Sudden Stop region of debt positions includes those

values of b that are low enough (i.e., high enough debt) for the margin constraint to be triggered. This

region is easy to identify by comparing the plots for the NFE and BMR economies of each Figure.

        Examining Figures 2-4, we observe that there are two key factors that determine the responses of

consumption, the current account and asset prices in the Sudden Stop region: First, the leverage ratio (i.e.

the ratio of debt to the market value of equity holdings). Second, the“liquidity” of the equity market (i.e.,

the difference between the initial equity position α at the time the margin calls begin and the lower bound

on equity holdings χ). As Mendoza and Smith (2004) showed, Sudden Stops with large consumption
                                                                                                              27


collapses and current account reversals occur when the leverage ratio is sufficiently high (see Figures 2

and 3). If the asset market is illiquid when the margin constraint binds (i.e., if the domestic agents’

holdings of equity are near χ), these Sudden Stops can feature negligible asset price declines because

domestic agents have little or no equity that they can sell, and thus the fire sales in which they can engage

are limited (see Figure 3). But if there is some liquidity in the asset market, Sudden Stops in consumption

and the current account can be accompanied by a fall in asset prices. In contrast, when the leverage ratio

is sufficiently low and domestic agents have highly liquid equity positions, the drop in consumption and

the current account reversal are small (nearly as small as in the NFE case) but the drop in asset prices is

relatively larger. In this case, domestic agents can liquidate more equity and thus trigger larger asset price

collapses, but they do so in order to swap their limited borrowing ability in the bond market for equity

sales so as to minimize the correction in consumption and the current account.

        Mendoza and Smith showed that this pattern of larger current account corrections coinciding with

smaller asset price collapses fits the observations of some emerging markets crises. In Mexico the current

account reversal in the first quarter of 1995 was 5.2 percentage points of GDP but the drop in real equity

prices was nearly 29 percent. By contrast, in Korea, the current account reversal in the first quarter of

1998 was twice as large, at 11 percentage points of GDP, but the asset price drop was just 10 percent.

        To examine in more detail the short-run dynamics of Sudden Stops, we study the conditional

forecasting functions of consumption, the current account-GDP ratio, and equity prices in response to a

negative, one-standard-deviation productivity shock. These forecasting functions trace the non-linear

impulse response functions of the variables conditional on initial positions of equity and bonds within the

Sudden Stop region. Figures 5-6 plot two sets of forecasting functions, one for a “high leverage” state at

which α = 0.938 and b = -4.68 (which imply a debt ratio of 60 percent of GDP and a leverage ratio of 3

percent of GDP), and one for a “low leverage” state with the same α but b = -3.38 (which imply a debt

ratio of 43 percent of GDP and a leverage ratio of 2 percent of GDP). The plots show the forecasting

functions for the four simulation scenarios (NFE, BMR, NSCG and SCG).
                                                                                                                28


         As the charts in Figures 5-6 show, the responses to adverse productivity shocks in the NFE case

are nearly identical in both the high and low leverage states. In contrast, the initial responses of the

variables in the BMR economy differ sharply across the high and low leverage states, and also differ

sharply from those of the NFE case. Figure 5 shows that, in the high leverage state of the BMR economy,

the negative productivity shock triggers a Sudden Stop driven by the mechanisms described in Section 3.

Domestic agents sell equity to meet margin calls and trigger a Fisherian deflation of equity prices that

reduces further their ability to borrow. The net result is that, on impact, consumption and asset prices

drop by about twice as much as in the NFE case and the current account deficit nearly vanishes, instead of

widening to about 1.3 percent of GDP. Figure 6 shows that, in contrast, in the low leverage state

domestic agents are better positioned to keep consumption smooth by substituting debt for equity as a

way to finance a current account deficit. As a result, consumption and the current account respond by

about the same magnitudes in both the NFE and BMR economies, but there is still a larger drop in equity

prices in the latter.

         Two important caveats about the data plotted in Figures 5 and 6. First, while the initial

conditions used to generate the Figures were chosen to obtain outcomes that illustrate Sudden Stops, the

universe of all the plausible impact effects that the model predicts for the Sudden Stop region (i.e., all the

date-1 points for the set of forecasting functions conditional on all initial pairs (α,b) in this region) are

shown in Figures 2-4. These Figures show that the Sudden Stop region includes scenarios with much

larger consumption and current-account collapses than those shown in Figures 5 and 6, as well as

scenarios in which the changes in the variables are virtually the same across the BMR and NFE cases.

Second, the upward-slopping paths of the forecasting functions reflect the fact that the data produced by

the model have not been filtered to remove low-frequency transitional dynamics. Since the bond and

equity positions set as initial conditions for Figures 5 and 6 are significantly lower than their means in the

ergodic distribution, the forecasting functions illustrate both the responses to the shock as well as the

long-run dynamics of bonds and equity holdings.
                                                                                                              29


        Figures 5-6 also show that Sudden Stops in this model are short-lived. The responses of

consumption, the current account and equity prices in the BMR economy converge to the path of the NFE

case in about 4 quarters. It may be possible to obtain stronger persistence effects by increasing the

trading costs faced by foreign traders, so that they adjust their demand for equity more slowly. Another

alternative not considered in the model could be to introduce endogenous capital accumulation. Mendoza

(2004) shows that margin constraints can generate persistence in an environment in which firms incur

adjustment costs in capital accumulation and margin constraints link the ability to borrow to the valuation

of capital determined by Tobin’s Q.

        Kocherlakota (2000) showed that in analyzing the business cycle effects of credit constraints it is

important to separate persistence from amplification. The forecasting functions can be misleading as a

measure of amplification because they show deviations from the mean that do not take into account the

second moments of the business cycle. Kocherlakota proposed to measure the amplification effect of a

once-and-for-all, unanticipated linear income shock that triggers a credit constraint as the difference in a

variable observed on impact as the shocks hits under the influence of the credit constraint relative to the

variable’s frictionless steady state in percent of the size of the shock. Here we take Mendoza’s (2004)

modification of this measure for a stochastic model in which the shocks follow a Markov process (and

hence, in contrast to Kocherlakota’s experiment, the shocks are “anticipated” and “recurrent”). The

modified measure is the difference in the level of a variable between the BMR and the NFE economies in

percent of the standard deviation of the variable in the NFE economy. For example, if the amplification

coefficient of consumption for a negative productivity shock is 50 percent, it indicates that the fall in

consumption in the BMR economy exceeds that of the frictionless economy by an amount equal to ½ the

magnitude of an “average” consumption cycle in the NFE case (i.e., the margin constraint amplifies

business cycles in consumption by 50 percent).

        The second and fourth columns of Table 2 report amplification effects for the high and low

leverage states used in Figures 5-6. These amplification effects display a similar pattern as the

forecasting functions. In the high leverage state, the amplification effects on consumption, the current
                                                                                                                  30


account-GDP ratio, and equity prices are very large, at 61, 70 and 342 percent respectively. In the low

leverage state the amplification effects on consumption and the current account are negligible, at less than

3 percent, and the amplification effect on equity prices is weaker than in the high-leverage case, at 274

percent. Note that while Figures 5-6 show that the asset price effects of the margin constraint in terms of

percent deviations from the mean are small, which is true by construction given the high elasticity of the

foreign traders’ demand function implied by the low value of a, the amplification effect is very large

because it is a measure of the drop in asset prices in the BMR economy relative to the NFE case.

5.4      Non-State-Contingent Price Guarantees

         Consider now the NSCG simulation with a non-state-contingent price guarantee. The guarantee

is set ½ of a percentage point above the “fundamentals” price in the low-productivity state of nature (i.e.,

the expected present value of dividends discounted at the world interest rate conditional on starting at date

0 with a negative shock to productivity).6 The fundamentals price is 2.185, so the guaranteed price is set

at 2.196 for all triples (α ,b,ε) in the state space.

         Figures 7a-7b show the ergodic distributions of equity and bonds for the NSCG and SCG

economies. Relative to the BMR economy, the non-state-contingent guarantee shifts the distribution of

equity markedly to the left and that of bonds to the right. The long-run average of the expected present

value of excess prices (i.e., the long-run average of the G(.) function) is 0.01, which is about ½ of a

percent above the mean equity price in the stochastic stationary state.

         Comparing Panels I, II and III of Table 1, the most notable change is the reduction in the

probability of hitting states with binding margin constraints. The price guarantee nearly rules out the

possibility of hitting these states, compared to the 4-percent probability obtained in the BMR economy.

The long-run moments of the model’s endogenous variables vary slightly as the non-state-contingent

price guarantee is added. The main changes are reduced consumption volatility and asset-price

6
  Setting a guaranteed price above the “fundamentals” price is not an awkward assumption because the
“fundamentals” price as defined in the model does not correspond to the standard notion of a price in a frictionless
environment. In the NFE case, asset markets are incomplete and risk-averse domestic agents trade equity with risk-
neutral foreign traders. Hence, equilibrium equity prices reflect the equity premium and the distortions induced by
incomplete markets, and thus differ from the “fundamentals” price that discounts dividends at the risk-free rate.
                                                                                                              31


fluctuations that display less variability, persistence and co-movement with output in the NSCG economy

relative to the NFE and BMR cases. The mean equity price increases by 0.053 percent, slightly more than

the percent difference between the guaranteed price and the fundamentals price of the low productivity

state. The coefficient of variation of consumption falls by about 1/5 of a percentage point, the variability

of the current account and the trade balance increase slightly and that of equity prices falls slightly.

Consumption and equity prices also become less correlated with GDP, and the first-order autocorrelation

of equity prices does fall markedly from about 0.61 to 0.38.

        The effects of the price guarantee on Sudden Stop dynamics and amplification effects for the high

and low leverage states are shown in Figures 5-6 and Table 2. These results show that the guarantee is an

effective policy for preventing Sudden Stops. Comparing the NSCG and BMR economies, the high

leverage state shown in Figure 5 shows that the guarantee reduces the initial drop in consumption and

current account reversal, and prevents the drop in equity prices (turning it into a small increase of about ¼

of a percentage point). Figure 6 shows that in the low leverage state the increase in equity prices is larger,

and we now obtain an initial increase in consumption and a widening of the current account deficit

slightly larger than in both the BMR and NFE cases. Comparing the NSCG and BMR economies, the

price guarantee increases the initial price of equity by 0.66% in both the high and low leverage states.

Yet, foreign traders still execute the price guarantee in both states because the guaranteed price at 2.196

exceeds these higher prices.

        Table 2 shows that amplification effects in the high leverage state of the NSCG economy fall

sharply relative to those of the BMR economy (61 to 39 percent for consumption, 70 to 44 percent for the

current account and 342 to 214 percent for asset prices). In the low leverage state, the coefficients of

amplification increase slightly. However, since these coefficients are reported in absolute value, the small

increase hides the fact that consumption, the current account deficit, and asset prices are actually

increasing, rather than falling, in the economy with the non-state contingent guarantee.

        Figure 8 plots the levels of equity prices in the low productivity state for the NFE, BMR and

NSCG economies in the entire state space of equity and bond positions. The plots show that the price
                                                                                                                32


guarantee not only results in higher prices in the Sudden Stop region, but it actually results in higher

prices in virtually all states. In fact, the guarantee has its largest effect on asset prices in states well

outside the Sudden Stop region. Asset prices in this region are significantly higher in the NSCG economy

than in either the NFE or BMR economies. This is a potentially important drawback of a policy that sets

non-state-contingent price guarantees: it leads to distortions on asset prices even when the economy is in

states in which it is very far from being exposed to the risk of Sudden Stops. In this situation, the tradeoff

between managing financial frictions v. fueling moral hazard may tilt toward the latter.

5.5     State-Contingent Price Guarantees

        One obvious alternative to remedy the drawbacks of a policy of non-state-contingent price

guarantees is to consider state-contingent guarantees. This last set of results study this option by

examining the results of the SCG economy. This economy features a price guarantee set at the same level

as in the NSCG case but applying it only to the states of nature inside the Sudden Stop region. In

particular, the guaranteed price of 2.196 is offered only in the states of nature that include all

combinations of the first 25 nodes of the bonds grid (i.e., the largest debt positions), the 72 points of the

equity grid and the two realizations of the Markov vector of productivity shocks.

        Figures 7a-7b show that the SCG economy yields a long-run distribution of equity holdings that

is less skewed to the left, while the opposite occurs with the long-run distribution of bonds. Table 1

shows that the changes in the long-run business cycle moments of the SCG economy relative to the NFE

and BMR cases are qualitatively similar to those noted for the NSCG economy, although the magnitude

of the changes is smaller. There is one important exception: the SCG economy still features near-zero

percent probability of observing states of nature in which the margin constraint binds. Hence, the state-

contingent guarantees are as effective as the non-state-contingent guarantee at eliminating the possibility

of hitting states with binding margin requirements in the long run.

        Figures 5 and 6 show that, in both the high and low leverage states, the SCG economy features

nearly-identical initial responses in consumption and the current account and a smaller recovery in asset

prices as the NSCG economy. The SCG economy converges faster to mimic the dynamic paths of the
                                                                                                            33


NFE economy. In line with these results, the amplification coefficients for the SCG economy show

qualitatively similar, but quantitatively smaller, changes when compared to those for the BMR economy

as those obtained when making the comparison between the NSCG and BMR economies.

        Finally, a comparison of the middle and bottom plots of Figure 8 shows that the SCG economy

yields higher asset prices mainly in the Sudden Stop region of the state space. Thus, the policy of state

contingent guarantees induces smaller distortions on asset demand and asset prices than the non-state-

contingent guarantees, particularly outside the Sudden Stop region, yet it seems to produce similar effects

in terms of its ability to prevent Sudden Stops.

6.      Conclusions

        The equilibrium asset pricing theory presented in this paper suggests that, if global capital

markets are distorted by collateral constraints and asset trading costs, an arrangement to provide ex ante

price guarantees on the emerging markets asset class could be an effective means to contain Sudden Stops

in emerging economies. The same theory predicts, however, that introducing these guarantees creates an

additional distortion that induces a moral hazard effect propping up the demand for emerging markets

assets of foreign investors. Hence, the provision of ex ante price guarantees creates a tradeoff between

the benefits that can be gained by undoing the distortions caused by imperfections in world capital

markets and the costs that result from the moral hazard effect. This cost-benefit analysis involves

quantitative comparisons of equilibrium outcomes across distorted economies with incomplete asset

markets that can only be performed via numerical simulation analysis.

        The model studied in this paper borrows from Mendoza and Smith (2004) the setup of a dynamic,

stochastic general equilibrium model of emerging-markets asset prices in which collateral constraints and

asset trading costs generate Sudden Stops, and thus justify the use price guarantees. Collateral constraints

are modeled in the form of a margin constraint that limits the ability of domestic agents to leverage

foreign debt on equity holdings. Asset trading costs are incurred by foreign traders and take the form of

per-trade costs and recurrent costs paid each period regardless of trading activity. In this environment,

adverse shocks that hit an economy with a sufficiently high stock of debt relative to the market value of
                                                                                                              34


equity trigger margin calls. These margin calls lead to a fire sale of equity by domestic agents and a

Fisherian deflation of asset prices. If domestic asset markets are relatively illiquid, the result is a Sudden

Stop with a collapse in consumption, a reversal in the current account and a fall in asset prices.

        The Mendoza-Smith model is modified in this paper to introduce an IFO that offers foreign

traders ex ante guarantees on the price of the equity of the emerging economy, financing the cost of any

realized guarantees by levying a lump sum tax on foreign traders. These guarantees introduce a distortion

that leads foreign traders to increase their demand for emerging markets assets. This distortion can be

interpreted as a valuation effect that adds to the “fundamentals price” the conditional expected present

discounted value of the excess of guaranteed prices over market prices that traders expect in the future

along the stochastic equilibrium path.

        The challenge to the IFO is to design the price guarantees so that they can deliver an outcome that

improves over the outcome obtained when there is no policy in place to contain Sudden Stops triggered

by financial frictions. Our quantitative analysis applied to the case of Mexico illustrates the complexity

of this task. Part of the challenge is that an effective system of ex ante price guarantees requires a good

model of asset prices (i.e., a model that can start by explaining the observed features of Sudden Stops

without price guarantees and that can then be used to assess the effects of the guarantees). The model we

proposed in this paper is consistent with the qualitative features of Sudden Stops but its ability to match

some of the quantitative features of the data, particularly the magnitude of the collapse in asset prices, is

limited. Yet, the quantitative results suggest that a system of price guarantees can go a long way in

containing the collapses in consumption and current account reversals of Sudden Stops. Non-state

contingent guarantees have the drawback that they induce strong moral-hazard-like distortions on asset

prices that can lead to significant “over-valuation” of an emerging economy’s assets (i.e., prices higher

than those that would prevail free of these distortions driven by financial frictions). We showed,

however, that state contingent guarantees can help reduce the moral hazard distortion and still be of help

at preventing Sudden Stops.
                                                                                                           35


        We focused the comparison of outcomes across economies with and without price guarantees on

the prices and allocations of the corresponding equilibria, and refrained from making comparisons in

terms of welfare effects. The reason is that in essence the model we examined is one in which access to

credit markets is used to smooth consumption, and it is well known that the cost of giving up access to

world credit markets in this class of models is negligible (see Mendoza (1991)). Our welfare calculations

do show that the economies with price guarantees dominate the economy without them, even if in

absolute terms the welfare gains are always small. For example, the last row of Table 2 shows that

lifetime utility in the high leverage state of an economy with non-state contingent guarantees dominates

that of the economy with binding margin requirements by the equivalent of a 0.023 percent increase in a

stationary consumption path.

        Non-trivial difficulties would remain in designing an ideal schedule of ex ante price guarantees

even if the model could mimic the observed quantitative features of Sudden Stops. The effects of price

guarantees are driven by forward looking elements that depend on agents’ expectations of the likelihood

of executing price guarantees and/or hitting Sudden Stops in the future (even if at present no price

guarantees are executed and the economy has access to foreign financing). Hence, to be effective at using

price guarantees to contain Sudden Stops without creating strong moral hazard effects, the IFO needs to

be able to determine the range of debt and equity values at which Sudden Stops occur and the crash prices

that Sudden Stops produce, as well as the “normal” levels of asset prices that would prevail in a

frictionless world without margin constraints and trading costs. This paper makes some progress in

reaching these objectives, but clearly there is a lot left for further research.
                                                                                                     36


                                              References

Arellano, Cristina and Enrique G. Mendoza (2003), “Credit Frictions and ‘Sudden Stops’ in Small Open
Economies: An Equilibrium Business Cycle Framework for Emerging Markets Crises,” in Dynamic
Macroeconomic Analysis” S. Altug, J. Chadha and C. Nolan eds., Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.

Aiyagari, S. Rao and Mark Gertler (1999), “Overreaction of Asset Prices in General Equilibrium,”
Review of Economic Dynamics.

Auenhaimer, Leonardo and Roberto Garcia-Saltos (2000), “International Debt and the Price of Domestic
Assets, ” IMF Working Paper 00/177

Caballero, Ricardo J. ad Arvind Krishnamurthy (2001), “International and Domestic Collateral
Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary Economics, v.48, 513-548.

Calvo, Guillermo A. (2002), “Globalization Hazard and Delayed Reform in Emerging Markets,” mimeo,
Center for International Economics, Department of Economics, University of Maryland.

_____ (2000), “Balance of Payments Crises in Emerging Markets: Large Capital Inflows and Sovereign
Governments.” In Currency Crises, Paul Krugman ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

_____ (1998), “Capital Flows and Capital-Market Crises: The Simple Economics of Sudden Stops,”
Journal of Applied Economics, v.1, pp 35-54.

_____, and Allan Drazen (1998), “Uncertain Duration of Reform: Dynamic Implications,”
Macroeconomic Dynamics.

_____, and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999), “When Capital Inflows come to a Sudden Stop: Consequences
and Policy Options,” mimeo, Center for International Economics, Department of Economics, University
of Maryland.

_____, and Enrique G. Mendoza (1996), “Mexico’s Balance of Payments Crises: A Chronicle of a Death
Foretold,” Journal of International Economics, v. 41, pp. 235-264.

_____, and Enrique G. Mendoza (2000a), “Capital-Market Crises and Economics Collapse in Emerging
Markets: An Informational-Frictions Approach,” American Ec. Review: Papers & Proceedings, May.

_____, and Enrique G. Mendoza (2000b), “Rational Contagion and the Globalization of Securities
Markets,” Journal of International Economics, v.51.

Epstein Larry G. (1983), “Stationary Cardinal Utility and Optimal Growth under Uncertainty,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 31, 133-152.

Frankel, Jeffrey and Sebastian Edwards (2002), Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. A
National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Report. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fisher, Irving (1993), “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica 1, 337-57.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz and Gregory W. Huffman (1988), “Investment, Capacity Utilization
and the Real Business Cycle”, American Economic Review, June.
                                                                                                       37


International Monetary Fund (1999), International Capital Markets, September, International Monetary
Fund, Washington:DC.

Izquierdo, Alejandro (2000) “Credit Constraints, and the Asymmetric Behavior of Asset Prices and
Output under External Shocks,” mimeo, The World Bank. June.

Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro and John Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, v.105, 211-
248.

Kocherlakota, Narayana (2000) “Creating Business Cycles Through Credit Constraints,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, v. 24, no. 3, Summer, 2-10.

Lerrick, Adam, and Allan H. Meltzer (2001), “Blueprint for and International Lender of Last Resort,”
mimeo, Carnegie Mellon University.

Ljungqvist, Lars (2000) “Government Guarantees on Assets and Volatility,” mimeo, Stockholm School of
Economics.

Ljungqvist, Lars , and Thomas J. Sargent (2000), Recursive Macroeconomic Theory, Boston: MIT Press.

Mendoza, Enrique G. (1991), “Capital Controls and the Dynamic Gains from Trade in a Business Cycle
Model of a Small Open Economy,” IMF Staff Papers, September.

       , (2002), “Credit, Prices, and Crashes: Business Cycles with a Sudden Stop.” In Preventing
Currency Crises in Emerging Markets, Frankel, Jeffrey and Sebastian Edwards eds. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

_____, and Katherine A. Smith (2004), “Margin Calls, Trading Costs and Asset Prices in Emerging
Markets: the Financial Mechanics of the ‘Sudden Stop’ Phenomenon,” mimeo, Department of
Economics, University of Maryland.

    _____ (2004), “‘Sudden Stops’ in an Equilibrium Business Cycle Model with Credit Constraints:
A Fisherian Deflation of Tobin’s q,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Maryland.

Milesi-Ferreti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin (2000), “Current Account Reversals and Currency
Crises:Empirical Regularities.” In Currency Crises, Paul Krugram ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.

Paasche, Bernhard (2001), “Credit Constraints and International Financial Crises,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, v.28, 623-650.

Schneider, Martin and Aron Tornell (1999), “Lending Booms, Asset Price Inflation and Soft Landings,”
mimeo, Department of Economics, University of California at Los Angeles.

Valderrama, Diego (2003), “The Impact of Financial Frictions on a Small Open Economy: When Current
Account Borrowing Hits a Limit,” mimeo, Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
                                 Table 1. Long Run Business Cycle Moments

                                                       standard        standard       correlation
                                                                                                      first-order
variable                                     mean      deviation       deviation         with
                                                                                                    autocorrelation
                                                     (in percent)   relative to GDP      GDP

I. Nearly Frictionless Economy
GDP                                          7.833     2.644            1.000           1.000           0.683
consumption                                  5.366     2.185            0.826           0.853           0.770
current account-GDP ratio                    0.000     1.347            0.509           0.979           0.660
trade balance-GDP ratio                      0.315     0.948            0.358           0.564           0.811
equity price                                 2.187     0.121            0.046           0.961           0.606
foreign debt-GDP ratio                       0.177     56.694          21.442           -0.076          0.997
debt-equity ratio                            0.010     2.888            1.092           0.000           0.001


II. Economy with Financial Frictions
GDP                                          7.833     2.644            1.000           1.000           0.683
consumption                                  5.365     2.186            0.827           0.856           0.771
current account-GDP ratio                    0.000     1.324            0.501           0.982           0.664
trade balance-GDP ratio                      0.315     0.940            0.355           0.565           0.823
equity price                                 2.187     0.121            0.046           0.962           0.609
foreign debt-GDP ratio                       0.499     37.964          14.358           -0.118          0.994
debt-equity ratio                            0.026     2.007            0.759           0.000           0.001
long run prob of binding mar. const (in %)   3.973

III. Economy with Financial Frictions &
Non-state Contingent Guarantees
GDP                                          7.833     2.644            1.000           1.000           0.683
consumption                                  5.362     2.052            0.776           0.790           0.724
current account-GDP ratio                    0.000     1.487            0.562           0.968           0.660
trade balance-GDP ratio                      0.315     1.111            0.420           0.631           0.750
equity price                                 2.198     0.099            0.037           0.891           0.384
foreign debt-GDP ratio                       1.336     41.053          15.526           0.001           0.992
debt-equity ratio                            0.071     2.186            0.827           0.000           0.006
long run prob of binding mar. const (in %)   0.001

IV. Economy with Financial Frictions &
State Contingent Guarantees
GDP                                          7.833     2.644            1.000           1.000           0.683
consumption                                  5.364     2.121            0.802           0.834           0.765
current account-GDP ratio                    0.000     1.380            0.522           0.974           0.660
trade balance-GDP ratio                      0.315     1.000            0.378           0.599           0.788
equity price                                 2.188     0.121            0.046           0.903           0.630
foreign debt-GDP ratio                       1.114     34.141          12.912           -0.067          0.991
debt-equity ratio                            0.059     1.810            0.685           0.000           0.004
long run prob of binding mar. const (in %)   0.001
                        Table 2. Initial Amplification of a Negative Productivity Shock and Welfare Effects



                              high leverage state* (alpha=0.938, b=-4.68)              low leverage state** (alpha=0.938, b= -3.38)

                                              fin. fric. &                                             fin. fric. &
                            financial                             fin. fric. &        financial                            fin. fric. &
Variable                                        non-s.c.                                                 non-s.c.
                            frictions                          s.c. guarantees        frictions                         s.c. guarantees
                                              guarantees                                               guarantees

amplification effects (in absolute value)

Consumption                   0.611              0.385              0.436               0.025             0.162             0.133

Current account-
                              0.697              0.439              0.497               0.029             0.184             0.152
GDP ratio

Equity price                  3.419              2.142              0.886               2.737             2.865             2.006

welfare effects (percent change in utility-equivalent stationary consumption level relative to
nearly frictionless economy)

Welfare                       -0.006             0.017              0.005               -0.003            0.019             0.006

*Debt-equity ratio of –2.9 percent and debt/GDP ratio of –59.7 percent.
 **Debt-equity ratio of –2.1 percent and debt/GDP ratio of -43.1 percent.
       Figure 1a. Ergodic Distributions of Domestic Equity Holdings

0.06



0.05



0.04



0.03



0.02



0.01



  0
   84
   85
   85
   86
   86
   87
   88
   88
   89
   90
   90
   91
   91
   92
   93
   93
   94
   95
   95
   96
   96
   97
   98
   98
   99
   00
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
0.
1.
                   frictionless economy   binding margin constraints
                                    Figure 1b. Ergodic Distributions of Bonds
0.08


0.07


0.06


0.05


0.04


0.03


0.02


0.01


   0
    2
          9
                6
                         3
                      0 .0
                             1 .3
                                    2 .6
                                           3 .9
                                                  5 .2
                                                         6 .5
                                                                7 .8
                                                                       9 .1

                                                                                .4
                                                                                .7
                                                                                .0
                                                                                       .3
                                                                                       .6
                                                                                       .9
                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                  .5
                                                                                                  .8
                                                                                                         .1
                                                                                                         .4
                                                                                                         .7
   -5.
         -3.
               -2.
                     -1.




                                                                              10
                                                                              11
                                                                              13
                                                                                     14
                                                                                     15
                                                                                     16
                                                                                                18
                                                                                                19
                                                                                                20
                                                                                                       22
                                                                                                       23
                                                                                                       24
-0.01

                                                  frictionless economy           margin constraints
Figure 2. Consumption Impact Effects of a Negative Productivity Shock for the Universe of Initial Equity & Bond Positions
                                      (percent deviations from long run average)




              a. Nearly Frictionless Economy                               b. Economy with Financial Frictions
Figure 3. Current Account-Output Ratio Impact Effects of a Negative Productivity Shock for the Universe of Initial Equity &
                               Bond Positions (percent deviations from long run average)




                                                                                   b. Economy with Financial Frictions
            a. Nearly Frictionless Economy
Figure 4. Equity Price Impact Effects of a Negative Productivity Shock for the Universe of Initial Equity & Bond Positions
                                        (percent deviations from long run average)




           a. Nearly Frictionless Economy                                     b. Economy with Financial Frictions
           Figure 5. Conditional Forecasting Functions in Response to Low Productivity Shock
                                         in High Leverage State
                                                            Consumption

   0.5


       0
             1      2      3     4      5   6     7     8     9           10   11    12    13       14    15     16    17    18
  -0.5


    -1


  -1.5


    -2                                                                `
  -2.5


    -3


  -3.5
                                                             Equity Price

 0.55

0.45

0.35

0.25

 0.15

0.05

-0.05         1      2     3     4      5   6     7     8         9       10    11    12    13       14    15     16    17    18

-0.15

-0.25

-0.35


                                                Current Account-GDP Ratio

0.6
0.4
0.2
  0
-0.2        1       2     3     4       5   6     7    8      9           10   11    12    13       14     15    16    17    18
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
  -1
-1.2
-1.4


                  nearly frictionless                                                            financial frictions

                  financial frictions & non-sc guarantees                                        financial frictions & sc guarantees




           Note: forecasting functions are conditional on initial states alpha=0.938, b=-4.68
                     Figure 6. Conditional Forecasting Functions in Response to Low Productivity Shock
                                                   in Low Leverage State

                                                                                Consumption

   1




  0.5




   0
             1          2       3       4       5       6       7       8         9       10        11        12           13        14        15            16        17        18



 -0.5




   -1




 -1.5


                                                                                 Equity Price

0.55
0.45
0.35
0.25
0.15
0.05
-0.05            1          2       3       4       5       6       7       8         9        10        11        12          13        14        15        16        17        18


-0.15
-0.25
-0.35

                                                                Current Account-GDP Ratio

   0.4
   0.2
        0
  -0.2           1          2       3   4       5       6       7       8         9       10        11        12          13        14        15        16        17        18
  -0.4
  -0.6
  -0.8
        -1
   - 1.2
   - 1.4
   - 1.6


                      nearly frictionless                                                                               financial frictions

                      financial frictions & non-sc guarantees                                                           financial frictions & sc guarantees



                     Note: forecasting functions are conditional on initial states alpha=0.938, b=-3.38
                            Figure 7a. Ergodic Distributions of Domestic Equity Holdings


0.25



 0.2



0.15



 0.1



0.05



  0
       0.84   0.85   0.85   0.86   0.86   0.87   0.88   0.88   0.89   0.90   0.90   0.91   0.91    0.92   0.93   0.93   0.94   0.95

                                             non-sc price guarantees         sc price guarantees
                                               Figure 7b. Ergodic Distributions of Bonds
0.06




0.05



0.04




0.03




0.02




0.01




  0
                                                                               .4
                                                                               .7
                                                                                       .0
                                                                                               .3
                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                                               .9

                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                                               .5
                                                                                                                                       .8

                                                                                                                                               .1
                                                                                                                                                       .4
                                                                                                                                                               .7
                                  0.0
                                        1.3
                                              2.6

                                                    3.9
                                                          5.2
                                                                6.5
                                                                      7.8

                                                                             9.1
      2
              9
                      6
                              3
  -5 .
          -3 .
                  -2 .
                          -1 .




                                                                            10
                                                                            11

                                                                                    13
                                                                                            14
                                                                                                    15
                                                                                                            16

                                                                                                                    18
                                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                            22
                                                                                                                                                    23
                                                                                                                                                            24
                                                     non-sc price guarantees                sc price guarantees
Figure 8. Equity Price in the Low Productivity State




                       a. Economy with Financial Frictions




 b. Economy with Financial Frictions & Non-State Contingent Price Guarantee




   c. Economy with Financial Frictions & State Contingent Price Guarantee
