                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE RISE OF THE FOURTH ESTATE:
        HOW NEWSPAPERS BECAME INFORMATIVE AND WHY IT MATTERED

                                           Matthew Gentzkow
                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                            Claudia Goldin

                                         Working Paper 10791
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10791


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




Presented at the NBER Conference on Corruption and Reform held in Salem MA July 30, 31, 2004. We are
indebted to many people. Magali Fassiotto compiled almost all of the data sets described in Appendixes A
and B and was ably helped by Neil Mehta and Tazeen Chaudhry. Li Han began the data work. Katharine
Kaplan helped with various details. We thank Jesse Shapiro for suggestions and Paul Rhode for his
comments at the conference. Jay Hamilton provided portions of the data described in Appendix A. In our
search for ways of demonstrating the relationship between newspapers and corruption James E. Rauch and
Tomas Nonnenmacher offered us their data. Although these paths were not taken, we are grateful to them
nonetheless. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Matthew Gentzkow, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Rise of the Fourth Estate: How Newspapers Became Informative and Why It Mattered
Matthew Gentzkow, Edward L. Glaeser, and Claudia Goldin
NBER Working Paper No. 10791
September 2004
JEL No. H1, N4, O1

                                           ABSTRACT

       A free and informative press is widely agreed to be crucial to the democratic process today.

But throughout much of the nineteenth century U.S. newspapers were often public relations tools

funded by politicians, and newspaper independence was a rarity. The newspaper industry underwent

fundamental changes between 1870 and 1920 as the press became more informative and less

partisan. Whereas 11 percent of urban dailies were “independent” in 1870, 62 percent were in 1920.

The rise of the informative press was the result of increased scale and competitiveness in the

newspaper industry caused by technological progress in the newsprint and newspaper industries. We

examine the press coverage surrounding two major political scandals – Crédit Mobilier in the early

1870s and Teapot Dome in the 1920s. The analysis demonstrates a sharp reduction in bias and

charged language in the half century after 1870.

       From 1870 to 1920, when corruption appears to have declined significantly within the United

States, the press became more informative, less partisan, and expanded its circulation considerably.

It seems a reasonable hypothesis that the rise of the informative press was one of the reasons why

the corruption of the Gilded Age was sharply reduced during the subsequent Progressive Era.



Matthew Gentzkow                 Edward L. Glaeser                 Claudia Goldin
Graduate School of Business      Department of Economics           Department of Economics
University of Chicago            Harvard University                Harvard University
Chicago, IL 60637                Cambridge, MA 02138               Cambridge, MA 02138
mgentzko@gsb.chicago.edu         and NBER                          and NBER
                                 eglaeser@harvard.edu              cgoldin@harvard.edu
“Burke said there were Three Estates in Parliament; but, in the Reporters’ Gallery yonder, there sat a
Fourth Estate more important far than they all. It is not a figure of speech, or a witty saying; it is a literal
fact … Printing … is equivalent to Democracy … Whoever can speak, speaking now to the whole nation,
becomes a power, a branch of government, with inalienable weight in law-making, in all acts of authority.
It matters not what rank he has, what revenues or garnitures: the requisite thing is that he have a tongue
which others will listen to; this and nothing more is requisite.”

                                     Thomas Carlyle, On Heroes, Hero Worship, and the Heroic in History
                                                             (1993 [1841], p. 141, emphasis in original)


I. Introduction


        At the start of the twenty-first century, a free and informative press is widely agreed to be
crucial to the democratic process. Now-legendary episodes, such as the press’ exposure of the
Watergate break-ins, buttress the view that the press can make a difference. When allegations of
distortion or political bias in media are made (e.g., Goldberg 2001), they are greeted with hand-
wringing and are viewed as a threat to government, even to society as a whole.


        But from a historical perspective, the remarkable thing is not that the media remains
somewhat biased, but rather that there is now an expectation that the press will provide unbiased
information. At the start of the Republic, newspapers such as the Aurora were little more than
public relations tools funded by politicians. In the nineteenth century, independence was a rarity.
As late as 1870, 89 percent of urban dailies that covered political events proudly acknowledged
their affiliation to one of the political parties.1 Information hostile to a newspaper’s political
viewpoint was either ignored or dismissed as sophistry. Indeed, typical nineteenth century news
items seem more partisan than even the most rabid modern editorials. Today’s media retain
biases, but they are modest relative to the advocacy that was the norm of the nineteenth century.


        This paper concerns the causes and consequences of the rise of the informative press, a
potent check on corruption. In Section II we document the evolution of media bias using three
types of evidence. First, we construct a basic measure of bias: stated party affiliation.2 While
stated political independence is no guarantee of independence, stated party affiliation is surely a

1
  The earliest data on newspaper party affiliation come from the 1850 Population Census of Social
Statistics. About 85 percent had an affiliation, not much different from data on urban dailies in 1870.
2
  The use of party affiliation as a measure of bias is similar to that in Hamilton (2004).


                                                                          The Rise of the Fourth Estate       1
guarantee of bias. The share of political newspapers that claimed to be independent rose from 11
percent in 1870 to 62 percent in 1920.3 Another measure of bias is the use of charged language
by the press. Negative words such as “slander,” “liar,” and “villainous” are used by papers to
dismiss undesirable statements; words such as “honest,” “honorable,” and “irreproachable” are
used to defend political heroes. Using textual analysis, we find a substantial drop in partisan and
charged language across the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.


        Because these aggregate measures are inevitably coarse, we also examine the press
coverage of two major scandals in depth: the Crédit Mobilier scandal of the early 1870s and the
Teapot Dome scandal of the 1920s. Our findings here clearly support the results of the textual
analysis: “spin,” as measured by charged language and editorializing in news stories, was
common in the coverage of Crédit Mobilier but was negligible during Teapot Dome. We also
find subtler differences in media behavior between the two scandals. During the earlier scandal,
many Republican papers omitted the critical early news that might have cast aspersions on their
own party. When these papers eventually did print or acknowledge the stories, they were
coupled with violent derogation of Democratic sources. By the 1920s Republican papers no
longer coupled allegations of the corruption of their party members with condemnation of the
character of the person making the charge. Although stories were still suppressed even during
the 1920s, the growth of independent newspapers meant that most urban residents had access to
the story.


        After documenting the rise of the informative press, we turn to the causes of this change.
In Section III we follow Besley and Prat (2004) and present a supply-side model suggesting that
newspapers weigh the rewards of bias—politicians’ bribes or personal pleasure—against the cost
of bias—lost circulation from providing faulty news. The key predictions of the model are that,
as the size of the market for newspapers rises, and as the marginal cost of producing a paper
falls, newspapers will become less biased and invest more in gathering information. The model
also suggests that increased competition may further reduce bias.



3
 The 62 percent figure uses an inclusive measure of independence which includes papers that were listed
as Independent-Republican or Independent-Democrat. The less inclusive measure is 40 percent.


                                                                    The Rise of the Fourth Estate     2
       In Section IV, we present evidence suggesting that the rise of the informative press was
the result of increased scale and competitiveness in the newspaper industry and that
technological progress was the cause of these changes. We document the great increase in
circulation, the rise in scale, and the overall rise in competition. We also provide evidence
showing a link between these trends and the cost of newsprint and newspaper production.
Finally, we provide some evidence linking the rise in the independents to growing news markets.
We focus on the share of newspaper circulation that claimed to be independent and find that this
share increased most rapidly in cities that had the largest increases in population.


II. The Rise of the Informative Press


       The informative press emerged sometime between the 1870s and the early 1900s. We
present information on the transition using three sources on bias and factual content of
newspapers. The first is the number of newspapers that claimed to be independent, rather than
being politically affiliated. The second is a time series of words in newspaper articles that
suggest a decline in argumentative hyperbole, as opposed to reasoned presentation of facts.
Finally we study newspaper reporting of two of the biggest national scandals in American
history: Crédit Mobilier in the 1870s and Teapot Dome in the 1920s.


   A. The Growth of the Independent Press


       Although the assertion of “independence” by a press does not imply unbiased reporting,
an outright declaration of party affiliation does seem to assure a political slant to the news.
Throughout the mid-nineteenth century, the vast majority of newspapers were explicitly
affiliated with one of the major political parties. Some were directly supported by a party,
whereas others were supported by patronage positions, such as postmaster, and contracts with the
government to print materials.


       Few newspapers before 1830 did not have some financial connection to a political party




                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate   3
or a political office holder or office seeker.4 Many of the pre-Civil War presses were bully-
pulpits for political bosses. Take Thurlow Weed for example. He apprenticed as a printer,
worked for the Rochester Telegraph, and then bought the newspaper, which he used to support
his candidates. He soon set his sights higher and took charge of the Albany Evening Journal, a
Whig party paper backed by the Anti-Masonic party. He used the paper to support Seward for
New York State governor in 1838. Together with another well-known editor, Horace Greeley, he
successfully worked to elect President Harrison in 1840 (Emery and Emery 1992, p. 104).


        Newspapers today vehemently deny that they deliver anything but fair and balanced
reporting. Such arguments were rarely heard during much of the nineteenth century, for
newspapers never claimed to deliver the unvarnished truth. To the contrary, they proclaimed
their close affiliation with one of the two major political parties.


        In 1870, 89 percent of all dailies in the larger American cities had an explicit party
affiliation.5 Only 11 percent were identified as independent.6 The independents were among the
larger papers and they accounted for 26 percent of circulation in 1870. Still, the overwhelming
majority of news was delivered by papers that were openly partisan.


        To explore these and other changes in more detail, we have collected data on newspapers
in the largest American cities between 1870 and 1920.7 The data include any city that was
among the largest 100 in any decennial census year during the period, for a total of 152 cities.
Table 1, part B shows that the share of dailies that were independent increased from 11 percent

4
  Political parties before the 1830s, according to Cook (1998), financed the press through direct patronage
(e.g., printing contracts). Although the government was initially a “sponsor” of the press, it later
“subsidized” it through low postal rates. On political subsidies and when the independent press emerged,
see also Kaplan (1993). Schudson (1978) contains a history of the informative content of the press and
Summers (1994) discusses the transition from a partisan to an independent press.
5
  Throughout the paper, we exclude dailies that had a primary focus other than general-interest news (e.g,,
financial, fashion, theater, gardening periodicals). We also exclude in the Table 1 tabulations the minor
political parties.
6
  In the newspaper directories from which our data are drawn, newspapers were listed by party affiliation,
including Independent, and after 1870 were also classified as Independent-Republican or Independent-
Democrat. We have constructed two definitions of independent: a broad one that includes all three and a
narrow one that includes only the Independent.
7
  Our data set expands Hamilton’s (2004), which he kindly gave us. The details of the construction of this
dataset are given in Appendix A.


                                                                       The Rise of the Fourth Estate     4
in 1870 to 62 percent in 1920 (or to 40 percent using the narrower definition of independent).
The share of circulation accounted for by independents rose from 26 percent in 1870 to 73
percent a half-century later (line 6). The largest increase occurred during the first and the last
decades of the period—the 1870s and the 1910s. Independent papers were anomalies in 1870
but 50 years later they had become the norm. The change occurred for several reasons:
previously affiliated papers became independent and new newspapers chose independence rather
that political affiliation.


          The switch to independence does not necessarily imply a lack of bias, and many
nominally independent papers revealed extreme political bias on occasion. Still, the fact remains
that in 1870 papers trumpeted their bias and by 1920 they at least pretended to be unbiased. The
image of independence had become a valued asset.


      B. The Decline of Partisan Content


          We now turn to the content and rhetoric of the news to determine whether the rise in
declared independence was matched by comparable changes in reporting. Certain words are far
more likely to appear in factually vacuous articles than in those that soberly report a fact. For
papers on the defensive side of the issue these words include “lie” and its many synonyms.8 The
rhetoric on the offensive side uses the editorializing first person plural. A healthy intrusion of
“we” into the text indicates that the newspaper is editorializing in the main body of the news.


          Newspaper coverage of the famed Crédit Mobilier scandal of the 1870s, one of our case
studies, provides illustrations of both types of bias. According to the Republican (thus on the
defensive), Albany Evening Journal:


      “The Credit Mobilier libel is the latest but not probably the last lie which the ‘truck and dicker’
      gentry will issue during the campaign. The libel was invented by knaves but it is retailed by fools.”
      (September 16, 1872)
      “The answer of Vice-President Colfax to the Credit Mobilier slander is manly and dignified. There


8
    See Appendix B for a list of the synonyms we have found in the 1870s.


                                                                          The Rise of the Fourth Estate       5
    was no need, however of any reply to this infamous calumny from him or from the others … It is one
    of the infamies of this campaign that the supporters of Greeley stop at no outrage, however atrocious,
    at no falsehood, however monstrous, at no stab at character, however, dastardly …”
    (September 26, 1872)


The first instance of the story as reported by the Republican Philadelphia Evening Bulletin
contains six sub-headlines including: “Political Slanders,” “How Leading Republicans are
Vilified,” and “The Whole Thing Proven to be False,” and the story began with: “The attempt to
fasten the charge of bribery … has already been shown to be utterly untrue” (September 14,
1872). This heavily rhetorical style of writing was the norm, not the exception, during most of
the nineteenth century.


        At the other end of the political spectrum were the anti-Grant papers, which spun their
stories with the editorial “we.” “At last we have one more utterance on the Crédit Mobilier
scandal … Mr. Wilson denies … But … we know what his word is worth,” wrote the New York
Tribune (September 16, 1872, italics added) a Republican, anti-Grant newspaper. Some of the
independents, such as the Baltimore Sun, wrote factual stories with little spin. But the New York
Sun, also an independent, broke the story to the American public using six sub-headlines
including: “THE KING OF FRAUDS,” “COLOSSAL BRIBERY,” “Congressmen who Have Robbed the
People, and who now Support the National Robber,” and “HOW SOME MEN GET FORTUNES.”


        By using a search engine capable of searching across several hundred electronically
scanned newspapers, we are able to explore a wide range of newspapers for particular words to
see if their use rose or fell over the period.9 To deflate for the general amount of reporting we
divide the number of instances that a word appears by the same for the neutral word “January.”10


        Among the various synonyms for “lie,” we have chosen “slander” to use in the search and
9
  We use Ancestry.com. Although several hundred newspapers are stored at this site, the number in the
years we use ranges from about 10 in the 1840s to 50 for most of the period after the 1880s. The
newspapers, furthermore, are almost all from small towns and only occasionally include a big-city
newspaper. The search engine counts a “hit” if a word is found at least once on a page. Other search
engines, such as Proquest, count a “hit” if a word is found at least once in an article.
10
   To deflate for reporting that is political, we have also use the number of all words beginning with
“politic.” We do not report those time series in Figure 1 because they reveal similar time trends.


                                                                      The Rise of the Fourth Estate      6
at the opposite extreme in rhetoric we have used the word “honest.”11 Figure 1 shows the time
path of “slander” and “honest” (using a 3-year centered moving average) from 1850 to 1950
deflated by the word “January” The use of the word “slander” indicates editorial intervention
and the aim of discrediting an opposing view whereas “honest” is used to build respect.


           Allegations of “slander” abounded in the 1850s, the start of the period depicted in Figure
1, when the word appeared about 1/12 as often as the word January. By the 1880s, however, the
relative usage of “slander” had begun to decline, and by the 1920s “slander” appeared just 1/30
as often as our deflator word. Similarly, the word “honest” declined in usage by about one-half
from the late nineteenth century to the 1920s. The highly opinionated style of reporting that was
common in the 1870s had became uncommon by the early twentieth century.


           As interesting and suggestive as are these facts, they report broad trends with many
possible interpretations. To assess the degree to which the bias and information content of the
news media changed, we turn to detailed case studies of the Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome
affairs.


      C. Case Studies of Political Scandal Reporting


           In the pantheon of national political scandals in the United States a few stand out as
momentous. Of these, we have chosen two that are separated by exactly 50 years and span the
period of greatest expansion in national daily newspaper circulation per capita and in the number
of daily newspapers (see Figure 2). The first of these scandals has become known as Crédit
Mobilier and was exposed to the public in September 1872. The second has been called the
Teapot Dome affair and was initially revealed in April 1922.


           To understand how corruption scandals were reported by different types of newspapers
and how their reporting changed over time, we have chosen 19 daily newspapers. Of these, 17
existed during the Crédit Mobilier scandal and 17 existed during the Teapot Dome affair. The
newspapers selected include most of the major presses in America, but we have also made an

11
     We traced all words beginning with “slander” (e.g., slanderous) and all words beginning with “honest.”


                                                                        The Rise of the Fourth Estate     7
effort to obtain papers from cities that were small, distant from the center of national political
activity and that had only one daily (see Appendix B, Table B3).


       We have obtained every article covering the events during two critical periods in their
history and have coded them to establish: (1) whether particular “facts” were reported; (2) the
size, in column inches, of the stories printed; (3) the degree of “spin”; and (4) the timeliness of
reporting the facts. “Spin” is measured in two ways. The first counts the number of times the
word “lie” and its various synonyms appeared in the first two paragraphs of each article (scaled
by the number of articles). The second counts the number of times the first person plural (in any
form; as in “we believe”) was used in the first two paragraphs (also scaled by the number of
articles). The first form of “spin” is anticipated to have been used more by the papers on the
“defensive,” whereas the second form of “spin” would be expected to be used by those on the
offensive. In both cases, “spin” is an editorial ploy and departs from factual reporting.


       Because both of the scandals lasted for years—the Teapot Dome affair was not finalized
until 1928—we have chosen two relatively brief periods for each scandal. The first period is
several weeks around the “breaking news” of the story. The second is an equally brief period
when an important detail or decision was announced. We call this the “resolution” period.


       Both the Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome scandals were complex events and, to this
day, have unresolved or undisclosed aspects. We have compiled various indisputable facts
concerning the cases and study how these facts were reported by the various presses.


       Crédit Mobilier


       Crédit Mobilier was an independent corporate entity, set up as the construction arm of the
Union Pacific Railroad, part of the great transcontinental railroad. Since stock in the Union
Pacific Railroad was widely held, skimming off contracts by the Union Pacific would not greatly
benefit particular individuals. But Crédit Mobilier was neither widely held nor traded. The
Crédit Mobilier scandal concerned a Congressman, Oakes Ames, whose financial stake in Crédit
Mobilier led him to use stock of that company to bribe (or reward) other government officials.



                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate      8
          The Crédit Mobilier scandal was broken by the New York Sun on September 4, 1872 with
the publication of a letter, dated January 28, 1868, purportedly written by Congressman Oakes
Ames of Massachusetts to one Colonel Henry McComb. The letter contained a list of names,
including current Vice President Schuyler Colfax who had been a Congressman in 1868, ten
Representatives, and four Senators, to whom Ames had sold stock in Crédit Mobilier, placing the
Crédit Mobilier stock “where it will produce the most good.”12 Among the list was James Blaine
(Congress, R-ME), current Speaker of the House, James Garfield (Congress, R-OH), later to
become President, George Boutwell (Congress, R-MA), current Secretary of the Treasury, Henry
Wilson (Senate, R-MA), the current Vice Presidential candidate on the Grant ticket, and the
chairs of most of the important House committees, including Ways and Means. Although the
historical record established that Ames actually “sold” the stock, rather than gave it, to at least
some of the individuals mentioned, the share price was approximately equal to the dividends
paid out in just one year. Of great importance is that all but one was a Republican and a
supporter of President Grant.


          Oakes Ames and his brother had been major investors in the Union Pacific and were part
of a group that held stock in Crédit Mobilier. Because the Union Pacific had received large
grants and loans from the federal government and in 1868 appeared to need more, the letter from
Ames to McComb in January 1868 suggested that Ames was shoring up further support, or was
rewarding his friends for past deeds.


          McComb had revealed the letter to the Sun after a protracted legal and financial battle
with Ames over the disposition of some Union Pacific stock. The timing of the revelation was of
immense national importance since the 1872 presidential campaign between incumbent Grant
and his challenger Horace Greeley had just begun to heat up. Greeley, moreover, was the
founder of both the New Yorker and the New York Tribune, which he had once edited.


          Sometime after the revelation of the letter, the House and Senate appointed committees to
investigate the charges. That in the House was chaired by Representative Luke Poland (R-VT),

12
     The quotation is from the letter, as reported in the New York Sun and many other newspapers.


                                                                       The Rise of the Fourth Estate   9
whereas that in the Senate was chaired by Senator Justin Morrill (R-VT). The Senate also
appointed a committee, chaired by Senator Henry Wilson (one of those implicated in the Crédit
Mobilier affair), to investigate the financial activities of the Union Pacific and Crédit Mobilier.
In February 1873 the Poland and Morrill committees reported. The Poland Committee
recommended that two representatives (Ames and Brooks, the only Democrat involved) be
censured and expelled. The House censured but did not expel both, and the Senate voted to
expel Paterson.


       We have compiled a group of nine “facts” for the “breaking news” period of September
4-30, 1872 (see Appendix B, Table B1). The first fact is the letter from Ames to McComb. The
remaining eight facts are denials from the various officials named in the letter. The “resolution”
period, from February 14-28, 1873, contains eleven “facts” concerning the Congressional
committee hearings and final reports.


       Teapot Dome


       The scandal that became known as “Teapot Dome” was innocuously broken by the Wall
Street News (now the Wall Street Journal) which reported on April 7, 1922 that the U.S.
government had leased lands near a place called Teapot Dome in Wyoming, one of the naval oil
reserves, to Harry F. Sinclair of Mammoth Oil. Another naval reserve, in Elk Hills, CA, was
also leased for oil exploration. The odd aspect of the leases was that naval oil reserves were
under the jurisdiction of the Navy Secretary, Edwin Denby, yet the Interior Secretary, Albert
Fall, approved the leases (both were Harding appointees). A week later the Senate called for
hearings on the Sinclair lease.


       Evidence suggesting an actual scandal erupted in late January 1924 when Edward
Doheny, the head of the oil company that had received the Elk Hills lease, revealed that he had
given Albert Fall an unsecured loan of $100,000 just prior to the oil deal. Harry Sinclair, the
head of Mammoth Oil, also revealed, through his lawyer, that he had given Fall a loan just after
the Teapot Dome lease. The resolution of the Teapot Dome affair took until 1928 when Albert
Fall was found guilty of accepting a bribe. Fall had already resigned from office in March 1923



                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 10
and Edwin Denby, the Secretary of the Navy, was forced to leave his position in March 1924.


        We have compiled a list of eight facts for the “breaking news” period, April 7-30, 1922.
These facts mainly concern the existence of the oil lease, its terms, the justification by the Navy
and Interior Secretaries for the lease, and Senate action on oil leases. The resolution period,
January 21-28, 1924, contains nine facts concerning the revelation about the loans from Doheny
and Sinclair to Albert Fall. See Appendix B, Table B2 for a list of the facts for both periods.


        Coverage of Crédit Mobilier by the press


        For the three-week “breaking news” period of Crédit Mobilier we have identified 224
articles in the 17 newspapers, and in the two-week “resolution” phase we have found 543 articles
among the same group of newspapers.13 We have coded the articles with respect to the four
characteristics: (1) size, (2) facts, (3) “spin,” and (4) timeliness (see Appendix B on the coding).
The results are summarized by affiliation of the newspaper in Figure 3. Of the 17 papers, eight
were aligned with President Grant and the Republican Party, five were either aligned with the
Democrats or were anti-Grant Republican papers, and four were listed as Independent.14


        In the “breaking news” period of the scandal the relative size of articles was considerably
smaller in the pro-Grant (or “Republican but not anti-Grant”) papers than in the others and the
number of facts was somewhat smaller (see Figure 3A, 1872).15 The “spin” was extremely
different between the two types of papers. The pro-Grant papers made use of the word “lie” and
its synonyms with far greater frequency in the “breaking news” period, whereas the Democratic


13
   These articles were “found” by our extraordinary research assistants, especially Magali Fassiotto, who
scanned the microfilm. Only the New York Times and the Wall Street News could be used electronically
with optical character recognition software.
14
   Affiliations are from newspaper directories (see Appendix A) and newspaper histories. The two
Republican, anti-Grant newspapers are the New York Tribune and the Chicago Tribune.
15
   The mean number of column inches devoted to the story (expressed as a fraction of the total size of the
newspaper and multiplied by 10) was .110 for Republican papers, .425 for Democratic and anti-Grant
papers, and .992 for Independent papers. The mean percentage of key facts reported was .542 for
Republican papers, .689 for Democratic and anti-Grant papers, and .667 for Independent papers. The
Democratic papers of the two lower South cities, Galveston and New Orleans, were exceptions to this
pattern as they provided relatively less coverage of the scandal.


                                                                      The Rise of the Fourth Estate 11
and anti-Grant papers used the editorial “we” with greater regularity (see Figure 3B, 1872).16


        When the letter from Ames to McComb was revealed by the New York Sun on September
4, 1872 it was viewed by many as mere political chicanery on the part of the Greeley campaign.
For the entire period considered (September 4-30, 1872), fully five papers, all Republican, never
reported the existence of the letter but simply alluded to it. The remaining four Republican
papers were about two weeks late in reporting (see Figure 3C, 1872). In contrast, the
Democratic and nonaligned papers reported the Sun’s publication of the letter more rapidly. The
rest of the “facts” for the “breaking news” period were reported with about equal speed by all
types of presses, but with different “spin,” since they were denials by various officials. Thus, the
timeliness of the first fact differed greatly between the two groups of papers even though the
fraction of “breaking news” facts reported was about equal by political affiliation.


        Differences in factual coverage among the various types of papers during the “resolution”
phase of the story were not as great as in the “breaking news” period. The pro-Grant papers
reported the facts with the same frequency as did the other papers. But other differences
remained. The Republican papers gave considerably less room to the complete story and printed
less of the Congressional testimony (Figure 3A, 1873).17 The “spin” of the papers switched. In
the “resolution” phase the pro-Grant papers used the editorial “we” whereas the others
proclaimed more “lies” (Figure 3B, 1873).


        In sum, newspapers in the 1870s had just begun their transition from being highly
politicized organs, as they were in the ante-bellum era, to being more independent of political
parties. When the Crédit Mobilier scandal broke, Americans in some parts of the country did not
hear about it for weeks, and even when they were told the news, the “facts” were distorted for
many. Distortions came about for several reasons, among them is that many papers were


16
   The average frequency with which “lie” occurred (expressed as number of occurrences in the first two
paragraphs per article) was 1.591 for Republican papers, 0.288 for Democratic and anti-Grant papers, and
0.463 for Independent papers. The frequency of “we” was 0.424 for Republican papers, 0.715 for
Democratic and anti-Grant papers, and 0.419 for Independent papers.
17
   The average space devoted to the scandal (expressed as a fraction of the total size of the newspaper
multiplied by 10) was 0.688 for Republican papers, 0.919 for Democratic and anti-Grant papers, and
2.584 for Independent papers.


                                                                     The Rise of the Fourth Estate 12
geographically removed from the nation’s political and commercial centers and facts were still
expensive to gather. The telegraph and wire services had cheapened the cost of gathering news,
yet it was still an expensive proposition. Most of the distortion, however, came about because of
the political alignment of the press.


       Coverage of Teapot Dome by the press


       For the two-week “breaking news” period of Teapot Dome we have identified 104
articles in the 17 newspapers, and in the week-long “resolution” phase we found 381 articles
among the same list of newspapers (see Appendix B, Table B2). We have coded these articles,
as we did the others, with respect to (1) size, (2) facts, (3) “spin,” and (4) timeliness. The results
are summarized by affiliation of the newspaper in Figure 4. In the 1920s there were eight
Republican newspapers, five Democratic papers, and four independent ones (including the one
financial press—the Wall Street News, which broke the story).


       By the 1920s American newspaper writing had come to look very much like the fact-
based reporting of major newspapers we read today. As opposed to the 1870s, stories in the
1920s were factually reported when they were printed. “Spin” was not evident. In fact, we
could not code “spin” by newspaper for the 1920s since we found practically no use of the word
“lie” and of the editorializing “we.” We did, however, find other ways in which reporting
differed by type of newspaper.


       During the “breaking news” period of the Teapot Dome scandal in 1922, all but one of
the non-Republican newspapers printed more than one-half of the facts (the DC Star is the lone
exception; see Figure 4, part A). Four of these papers printed three-quarters or more of the facts.
Not only did these papers print the stories, but they also did so in a relatively timely fashion and
devoted considerable space to the stories. By contrast, the Republican newspapers failed to print
many of the stories. Albany, Philadelphia, and Waterbury, for example, printed no stories on the
subject of oil leases during the more than two-week period after the Wall Street News published
the story on the Teapot Dome lease. Three Republican papers published only one of the eight
facts. By the 1920s these stories were available to all papers and could have been reported in a



                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 13
timely fashion. The absence of publication of the stories represents a degree of oversight than
can fairly be called suppression of the news.


       During the “resolution” phase in 1924 (see Figure 4, part B), the papers were less
distinguishable from each other with one exception, which mirrors our findings in the Crédit
Mobilier case. The non-Republican papers, especially some aligned with the Democratic party,
gave considerably more (relative) space to the stories they printed.


       The lesson from these case studies is that although reporting style greatly changed from
the 1870s to the 1920s, the aligned papers in the 1920s still suppressed stories and gave far less
room to the stories they had to print and that damaged their candidates. Because both of our
scandals involved Republican administrations, we do not know from this investigation whether
the Democrat newspapers did the same, but we would hazard a guess that they did. The aligned
press was often a biased and non-informative press. But the aligned press had become a far
smaller fraction of all dailies and an even smaller fraction of circulation. Furthermore, even in
cities that had aligned dailies, the existence of competition with the independent dailies would
have fostered the informative press.


III. Understanding the Rise of the Independent Press


       In documenting the rise of the informative press, we found both a reduction in overt bias
and a substantial increase in the information content of newspapers. We now seek to explain the
transformation, building on the growing literature that explores the economic forces that act to
determine the degree of bias and the amount of information in news articles.


       The information content of the news will reflect a tradeoff between the demands of
customers who seek knowledge and entertainment, and the incentives of suppliers who seek to
earn profit and advance their ideological views. A growing theory literature, including
Mullainathan and Shleifer (2004), Gentzkow and Shapiro (2004), and Besley and Prat (2004),
explores how these forces can lead firms to report biased news in equilibrium.




                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 14
        In this section, we follow Besley and Prat (2004) in modeling suppliers’ incentives as a
tradeoff between: (i) profits from consumers who are willing to pay for informative news and (ii)
direct payoffs from printing information favorable to one political side or the other. Although
such direct payoffs to suppliers are not the only possible source of bias, they seem most
consistent with historical evidence on the incentives faced by nineteenth and early twentieth
century newspapers.18


        The most obvious source of such direct payoffs from the political slant of information
would be the individual political preferences of newspaper owners themselves. We previously
cited Thurlow Weed’s Albany Evening Journal and Horace Greely’s New York Tribune as
nineteenth century examples of newspapers run by politically interested parties. Other examples
include Colonel McCormick of the Chicago Tribune and Harrison Gray Otis and his descendants
at the Los Angeles Times (prior to 1960) who had strong right-wing views and ensured that their
papers supported those positions.19


        An additional source of payoffs to firms would be outside influence from politicians or
parties. This could take the form of direct bribes or kickbacks, as in the model of Besley and
Prat (2004). Perhaps the most famous example of this kind of incentive is Secretary of State
Thomas Jefferson’s use of State Department funds to pay Philip Freneau to run the radically
partisan pro-Jefferson, anti-Federalist, National Gazette. Outside influence could also come
from interest groups that provide biased information at low cost, or politicians who are able to
use the threat of curtailing reporters’ access to information to thwart unfavorable stories.



18
   A model which locates the source of bias on the supply-side seems most consistent with the central
empirical fact we document below: that the drop in bias in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries coincided with falling costs and increasing advertising revenue. Intuitively, if suppliers trade
off direct gains from skewing news against market profits, any changes that increase the magnitude of
market returns should reduce the degree of skewing. Models that locate the source of bias on the
demand-side do not necessarily imply such a link.
19
   It is interesting to note that whereas through the early twentieth century the usual complaint was that
newspapers were biased toward the right, allegations of bias today emphasize the liberal views of
reporters who supposedly slant their stories to the left. One explanation for this switch, if indeed it
occurred, could be rising reporters’ incomes. If the chance to proselytize is a luxury good, then we should
increasingly see reporters willing to accept lower wages for the chance to push their own bias, as reporters
become generally wealthier.


                                                                       The Rise of the Fourth Estate 15
        To develop the model formally, we assume that a newspaper first decides a level of
investment that determines the probability, q, that the paper will acquire a “story.” The
investment includes, for example, the number of reporters, reporter quality, and investment in
infrastructure. The investment cost is denoted K(q), where K(0) = 0, K(1)= ∞ , K' > 0, K'' > 0.
We assume that stories cannot be fabricated and that stories do not have “spin.” Instead, the
primary ideological question that the newspaper faces is whether or not to suppress a story
hostile to its viewpoint. The newspaper determines how much to spend to uncover new stories.


        A story has ideological content, ω , where ω ∈ {−∞, ∞} . The ideological content reflects
the extent to which the story either helps or hurts politicians of different political hues.
Conditional on having observed ω , the paper can either print the story x= ω or suppress it.
Suppressing the story could be interpreted to mean not referring to the event at all, or engaging in
political editorializing that conveys no real information.


        To capture the political bias of the newspaper, we assume that when the paper prints a
story with ideological value ω the paper receives payoff rω . As just mentioned, this could
reflect the political preferences of owners or outside influence from politically interested
parties.20 We assume, for simplicity, r > 0.


        We assume that there are P consumers who always buy the paper, and an additional C
consumers who buy the paper if it contains a new story. The newspaper receives advertising
revenue a per reader. The marginal cost of printing a newspaper is c. Firm profits are thus
(C + P )(a − c) + rω − K ( q ) if they print an informative story with content ω and
P ( a − c ) − K ( q ) otherwise. We assume for simplicity that a > c. The model immediately yields
the following proposition.




20
   An important assumption built into this specification is that the direct political returns to suppressing or
printing a story do not depend on the number of readers (i.e., C and P). This assumption seems an
accurate description of some situations (i.e., payoffs from a politician who has a fixed value of winning an
election), while for other situations (i.e., an editor who values the political views of each swayed reader) it
is clearly a simplification. In the latter case, our results would require that political payoffs increase more
slowly in C and P than market returns.


                                                                         The Rise of the Fourth Estate 16
Proposition 1: There exists an ideological value ω * at which the newspaper is indifferent
between publishing or not publishing the story. For values of ω greater than ω * , the newspaper
strictly prefers publishing the story; for values of ω less than ω * , the firm strictly prefers
suppressing the story. The value of ω * equals − C ( a − c) / r and therefore rises with c and r, and
falls with a and C.


Proof: The gains from including the story in the newspaper equal C ( a − c ) + rω , and therefore
when ω = −C ( a − c ) / r , the firm is indifferent between publishing or not publishing a story.
Since C ( a − c ) + rω is monotonically increasing in ω , the firm strictly prefers publishing when
ω > −C (a − c) / r , and strictly prefers not publishing when ω < −C (a − c) / r . The comparative
statics follow from differentiating − C ( a − c) / r .


        The value of ω * denotes the degree of bias that has been introduced into the newspaper
because of its desire to publish stories that favor a particular political side. As ω * rises, more
stories are suppressed and the degree of bias increases. The comparative statics therefore
suggest that the degree of bias is falling with net revenues per consumer (a – c), falling with C
(the marginal consumers that will be produced by a more informative paper), and rising with r
(the degree of supply-side bias).


        Although these comparative static results are not surprising, they illustrate a fundamental
tradeoff in newspaper bias. The possible benefits from selling more papers are weighed against
the private gains from suppressing politically charged information. In this model, as the size of
the market increases (causing C to rise) or as the gap between advertising revenues and costs
rises, leading (a – c) to rise, newspapers will become less biased. The variable C can also be
interpreted to reflect competition among papers. Suppose, for example, that most consumers
prefer to read some newspaper regardless of its information content, but would prefer an
informative one over a non-informative one. Then a monopoly firm will sell to all readers
regardless of information content, whereas a duopoly firm will strictly increase demand by




                                                                    The Rise of the Fourth Estate 17
providing information.21


         We now turn to the equilibrium investment in information—the choice of q. Expected
                                                                     ∞
                                      [                        ]
newspaper profits equal: (a − c) P + Cq (1 − F (ω * )) + qr ∫ ωf (ω )dω − K (q ) . Thus the first order
                                                                    ω*

                                                        ∞
                        [             ]
condition is: K ' (q ) = 1 − F (ω ) C (a − c) + r ∫ ωf (ω )dω .
                                  *

                                                        ω*




Proposition 2: Investment in information by the newspaper rises with C and a and falls with c
and r.


Proof of Proposition 2: Since K''(q) > 0, the sign of the effect of any variable “x” on q will be
the same as the sign of the effect of that variable on
                                            ∞
[1 − F (−C (a − c) / r )] C (a − c) + r ∫ ωf (ω )dω .        Differentiation then reveals that q is rising with
                                      −C ( a −c ) / r


C and a, and falling with c and r.


         Proposition 2 echoes Proposition 1 and shows that as markets expand, we should observe
more informative, as well as less biased, presses. Decreases in costs, c, will also increase the
incentive to acquire information since the net returns from each reader is higher. If C rises with
the level of competition, then information acquisition will also rise with competition. Lower
levels of supply-side bias will also increase the tendency to acquire information. Because bias
involves the suppression of information, a higher level of bias reduces the value of getting new
information in the first place.


         The framework has suggested that we look at (1) production costs, (2) market scale, (3)


21
  Besley and Prat (2004) show formally that in a model where firms receive payoffs from politicians to
suppress harmful information, increased competition should reduce the degree of bias. In their model, if
N firms are all suppressing information in equilibrium, a single deviator who prints the information gets
the same payoff as a monopolist. The bribe that must be paid to each firm is thus independent of N, and
the total bribe is increasing in N. In more competitive markets, politicians find it more difficult to
suppress information.


                                                                             The Rise of the Fourth Estate 18
market competition, and (4) advertising revenues as forces that should determine the amount of
information and bias in newspapers. We now turn to evidence on the news media in the
nineteenth century to see which of these forces can help us to understand the rise of the
informative press.


IV. Evidence on the Causes of the Rise of the Informative Press


       We turn now to the factors that the model predicts should impact the degree of bias and
the amount of information in the press, such as production costs, market size, and advertising
revenues. We will highlight the remarkable changes that occurred in each of these variables
across the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, although we acknowledge that these
variables are interrelated and that we are treating each as a separate factor.


   A. Production Costs


        Perhaps the most important change in the production costs of newspapers in the
nineteenth century was the reduction in the price of newsprint. The real price of newsprint fell
by one-fifth from 1870, when the cost was $25/pound, to 1910, when it was $5 (see Figure 5).
Up through the mid-nineteenth century virtually all newspapers were printed on relatively
expensive newsprint made from cotton or linen rags. Although the price of rag paper began to
decline in the 1830s with the invention of the Fourdrinier process, the price plummeted with the
introduction, in 1867, of the process for making paper from wood pulp (Emery and Emery 1992,
p. 188). With the exception of a sharp spike during the Civil War, prices declined rapidly and
continuously from then to the 1910s.


       Newsprint was the single largest component of costs. In the first year after the New York
Times was founded in 1851 newsprint accounted for fully half of its operating costs (Mott 1962).
Furthermore, the fraction of newsprint in marginal cost was considerably larger (the only other
per-copy costs were ink and the pressmen’s labor). A rough calculation suggests that the cost of
the newsprint in a single four-page issue of the 1851 New York Times was approximately 1 cent,
which was the same as the paper’s cover price (the price was increased to 2 cents in 1852).



                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 19
       Changes in the price of newsprint, and the accompanying increase in circulation, made it
profitable to invent and invest in high-speed printing technologies. These new technologies,
similar to those in textiles a century before, widened “bottle necks.” Once the price of newsprint
declined (similarly for yarn), it was profitable to increase the speed of printing (weaving). And
once printing speeds were faster, it paid to invest in producing even cheaper paper.


       The most important innovations in nineteenth century printing technology include steam-
driven presses and presses using a cylindrical rather than a flat-bed printing surface. Both
innovations were introduced in the mid-1800s and diffused rapidly after the Civil War. Hoe’s
famed “lightning press,” the first of the cylindrical presses, was unveiled in the mid-1840s. The
Linotype typesetting machine, which allowed type to be set automatically from a keyboard, was
first used in 1886 and was still in use as late as the 1950s. Other innovations of the period
include stereotyped plates that could be easily reproduced for simultaneous printing on multiple
presses, automatic folders, and the half-toning process for printing photographs (see, e.g., Emery
and Emery 1992, chap. 9, and Mott 1962, chap. 30). The typewriter, invented in the 1860s by
C.L. Sholes, once an editor of the Milwaukee Sentinel, diffused rapidly in the editorial and
reporting offices during the 1880s when its price fell (Current 1954).


       As the “throughput” of printing machines increased, average fixed costs of operation
plummeted. Although we have not located a time series on average fixed costs, we can
approximate the change in costs by assuming that the lifetime of capital and its depreciation rate
did not differ by type of machine.


       In 1850 a six-cylinder type-revolving press could print 12,000 impressions an hour and it
cost (in current dollars) between $20,000 and $25,000. By the 1890s almost all printers owned
“web” presses, which used a continuous roll of newsprint, printed on both sides of the page
simultaneously, and automatically folded the paper. These presses were capable of doing from
24,000 to 48,000 12-page papers in an hour and cost from $40,000 to $80,000 (in current
dollars). Expressing the capital cost in constant dollars and assuming no difference in the
depreciation rate and lifetime by type of machine, average (per page) fixed costs in 1890 were



                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 20
only 1/15 of what they were in 1870 (a decline of about 7 percent average annually).22


        The maintenance cost of “web” presses was probably greater than that of earlier
machines. But the newer presses automatically folded the paper, saving on labor costs, and were
probably run for more days per year and more hours per day. We do not know the magnitude of
these refinements but it is unlikely that the enormous decrease in our estimate of average fixed
costs would be substantially altered.23 Printing technology, moreover, did not stand still. In
1895 Hoe introduced the “octuple press,” which did 48,000 16-page papers per hour and in ten
years the “double octuple” commenced operation producing 144,000 16-page papers per hour.


        Of course, the best evidence that the expansion of newspapers was driven by cost-side
changes is the actual sales price of newspapers. Although there is scant evidence on newspaper
prices for the antebellum period, what does exist suggests a yearly subscription rate of from $87
to $110 (in 1982-84 dollars).24 Price, circulation, and size of newspaper data are available in our
data beginning with 1880 (see Table 1, part D). In 1880 the average annual (unweighted)
subscription price was $57.41 (in 1982-84 dollars) and the price fell to $35.74 in 1920, although
there was little change from 1880 to 1910. The price data weighted by circulation display a more
extreme and continuous trend downwards. Whereas the 1880 annual subscription price (in 1982-
84 dollars) was $71.76, it was $55.90 in 1890, and $33.33 in 1920. Initially newspapers with the
greatest circulations were the most costly but became the least expensive by the end of the
period. From 1880 to 1920, therefore, newspaper prices for the average reader decreased 1.92
percent average annually.


        The decrease in price is even steeper when scaled by the physical size of newspapers.
Larger newspapers, not surprisingly, cost more. In the 1890 to 1910 period, during which we
can obtain data on the number of pages and the size for each page, the price decline per unit area
22
   The means of the ranges given were used and the CPI deflator was applied (Carter, Sutch et al. 2004).
The presses are assumed to run for the same number of days and maintenance is assumed to be a fixed
function of the initial cost. Most of the information on press output and prices is from Mott (1962).
23
   Typesetting also decreased in cost with the implementation of Linotype machines. In 1890 Linotype
was 3 times faster than by hand and typesetters received $4 for a 9-hour day (Emery 1872, p. 338).
Information on typesetting machines is too variable to estimate cost savings since the Paige machine cost
$12,000 but the Thorne/Simplex machine cost just $2,000 (Mott 1962, p. 500).
24
   Subscription rates are from Mott (1962, p. 203).


                                                                      The Rise of the Fourth Estate 21
was 3.37 percent average annually (weighted and scaled) while the un-scaled, but weighted,
decline was 1.54 percent. Although scaling by size provides a reasonable quality adjustment, it
is likely that the decrease we measure is on the high side relative to one that considered the
marginal valuation by consumers of square inches of newspapers and that the decrease in cost
per unit quality is somewhere between the weighted measure and the size-adjusted (and
weighted) measure.


       A third crucial set of innovations concerns communications. The constraints faced by
early nineteenth-century newspapers in their quest to obtain timely information on events in the
United States or across the Atlantic are hard to overstate. Virtually all news was transmitted by
the exchange of local newspapers or letters from correspondents through the mails—carried
either overland by horse or by sea. If these were delayed, as they often were by bad weather,
newsmen could find themselves in the embarrassed position of the editor of the 1805 Orleans
Gazette who wrote: “No mail yesterday—we hardly know what we shall fill our paper with that
will have the appearance of news” (quoted in Mott 1962). A paper in Boston in these years
could expect to wait almost a week for news from New York or Washington, a month for news
from New Orleans, and several months for news from England (Mott 1962).


       The situation was alleviated somewhat by transportation and communications advances
such as the improved pony expresses, steamships, railroads, and even carrier pigeons. The key
innovation, however, was the telegraph, first used in 1844. Telegraph wires soon connected all
the major cities of the United States. With the completion of the transatlantic cable in 1866
instantaneous news was brought from Europe as well. The telegraph gave rise to the wire news
services, among which the most important was the Associated Press, founded in 1848 as a joint
venture by major New York City papers to share the cost of obtaining news by telegraph.


       Also of great importance to the rise of the informative press was the employment of
reporters and various types of editors. Up until the 1840s papers rarely employed reporters on a
full-time basis. But by the 1850s, and more so after the Civil War when correspondents were
employed to send in reports from the front, newspapers hired reporters in large numbers. By the
1870s, according to Emery and Emery (1992, p. 179), the average big city daily employed a



                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 22
chief editor, a managing editor in charge of news, a city editor who supervised perhaps two-
dozen reporters, a telegraph editor who sorted through wire stories, as well as a host of specialty
editors and editorial writers. In the context of the model, the increase in staff should be seen as
an increase in the amount of investment in information acquisition, or q.


     B. Market Scale, Circulation, and Advertising Revenues


        The substantial decrease in the cost of newspapers, together with an increase in average
city populations and income meant that the period from the end of the Civil War to the beginning
of World War I saw enormous growth in the scale of newspaper markets. The number of
subscriptions for the entire United States increased twelve-fold between 1870 and 1920, from 2.6
to 33 millions (see Figure 2). This represents an increase from about one paper per day for every
20 inhabitants in 1870 to one per day for every 4 inhabitants in 1920. In America’s larger cities
the level of circulation per capita was higher but the increase was about the same. There was
about one daily per 5 urban residents in 1870 but one per 1.7 residents in 1920.25 The average
urban adult, therefore, was purchasing more than one newspaper per day, and likely reading even
more.


        While much of the increase in circulation was directly due to falling costs, lower prices,
and higher incomes, some of the increase in scale was due to other demand-related factors. The
population of America’s cities grew rapidly during this period and rising levels of education also
may have increased demand for daily news.


        The increase in total circulation can be separated into increasing circulation per capita
and increasing population levels using a simple decomposition.26 Focusing on our sample of
large cities, total circulation rose from 1.37 million dailies in 1870 to 20.5 million in 1920.
Circulation of dailies per capita increased from 0.194 in 1870 to 0.419 in 1890 to 0.606 by the



25
   See Table 1, part B “circulation per capita,” inverted to be expressed here as one paper per “x”
residents.
26
   ∆ Total Circulation = ∆ Per Capita Circulation · Initial Population +
∆ Population · Initial Per Capita Circulation + ∆ Per Capita Circulation · ∆ Population


                                                                       The Rise of the Fourth Estate 23
1920 (see Table 1, part B).27 Based on the decomposition, total circulation would have risen
from 1.37 million to 4.27 million if only circulation per capita had changed and not population,
meaning 15 percent of the rise in total circulation can be explained by increased per capita
circulation holding population constant at 1870 levels. But if circulation per capita had stayed
constant and population had grown, total circulation would have risen from 1.37 to 6.593
million. Thus 27 percent of the share of the change in total circulation can be explained by the
increase in population between 1870 and 1920. The remaining share of the increase—fully 58
percent—is due to the fact that both per capita circulation and population levels increased in
tandem. Soaring circulation levels are largely explained by these concurrent effects.


        The rise in readership was accompanied, not surprisingly, by a substantial increase in
advertising revenue. Newspaper income became less dependent on sales to consumers and more
dependent on advertising. Although a time series on advertising revenue does not exist, we have
information on advertising rates for urban dailies in 1880. It is clear from the cross-section data
that newspaper circulation was a primary determinant of advertising revenues. An increase in
circulation by 10,000 papers was associated with a 28 percent increase in the advertising rate.28
As such, it is reasonable to think that advertising revenue continued to rise as total circulation
soared. Advertising revenues, according to one source, accounted for 50 percent of newspaper
income in 1880, rising to 64 percent in 1910 (Emery and Emery 1988). This increase does not
correspond exactly to the parameter a in the model, which represents advertising revenues per
reader, but it does confirm the view that attracting a large audience was the key to financial
success for late nineteenth century newspapers.


     C. Market Competition


27
   These figures, and all of Table 1, apply to daily newspapers in the 100 largest U.S. cities in all years
from 1870 to 1920 (see Appendix A). By “political” newspapers we mean all daily papers except those
that had special coverage, such as financial and theater.
28
   The regression is (with absolute values of t-statistics in parentheses; R2 = 0.813):
AdRate = 4.039 + 4.55 Circulation · 10-3 + 0.205 City population · 10-3 – 0.839 Evening + 2.066 Morning
          (2.82) (17.6)                    (14.1)                           (0.56)           (1.39)
where AdRate is dollars per ten lines of advertising, and evening and morning indicate the time of
publication (the omitted category is another time of the day). The regression is run over 325 political
(non-foreign language) dailies that were aligned with a major political party or were independent.
Sources: Ayer (various years); see Appendix A.


                                                                       The Rise of the Fourth Estate 24
          The rise in market size was accompanied by an enormous increase in the number of
newspapers, as well as the number within each urban market. The magnitude of the national
transformation is illustrated by Figure 2, which shows the total number of daily papers printed in
the United States. The number climbed steadily through the middle years of the nineteenth
century, and then exploded after 1870, from 500 to a peak of more than 2,500 around 1910.


          Our data on urban dailies includes the top 100 cities by population in each of the census
years, 1870 to 1920 for a total of 152 cities (see Table 1, part A for the number of cities in each
year). In 1870 our sample contains140 cities and of these 25.7 percent (or 36) had no daily
newspaper, 12.9 percent (or 18) had 1 daily paper, 30.7 percent (or 43) had 2, and 30.7 percent
(or 43) had 3 or more (Table 1, part A). In 1920 of the 150 cities included in the sample, just 3.3
percent (or 5) were left with no daily newspapers, 10.0 percent (or 15) had just one paper, while
83 had three or more. Competition among newspapers of any political stripes had clearly
increased. But perhaps more importantly, there were more competing newspapers among the
parties and the independents.


          The rise in competition is important for several reasons. Competition appears to have
had the effect of inducing newspapers to provide more information relative to “spin.” Even
when the behavior of newspapers did not change, more newspapers meant a greater supply of
information for the population. As long as one major newspaper in a city exposed corruption,
the story would get out.


          In 1870 25 percent of cities with a daily had just a Democrat (D) or Republican (R)
newspaper (only 4 percent had just an independent paper) and an additional 53 percent had
competing D and R papers but no independent paper (see Table 1, part C).29 Thus 78 percent of
the 140 large cities in 1870 probably had largely biased, uninformative reporting of events such
as Crédit Mobilier. By 1920, however, just 7 percent of cities with a daily had only a D or R (32
percent had just an independent) and 8 percent had competing D and R papers but no
independent paper. In contrast, 54 percent (40.7 + 13.1) had an independent paper and at least

29
     We categorize the ID and IR papers as independents.


                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 25
one D or R paper.


       Changes in local competition can also be seen through the use of the Herfindahl index.
Using the Appendix A data, we have calculated the average Herfindahl index in each city across
the 1870 to 1920 period. The index is defined in its usual manner as the sum of the squared
market shares times 10,000 and thus bounded by (0, 10,000], where a lower number indicates
greater competition. The average Herfindahl index across cities is 6,916 in 1870, 6,531 in 1880,
6,410 in 1890, 6,215 in 1900, 6,295 in 1910 and 5,833 in 1920. As these numbers indicate, local
news was never very competitive. These numbers are higher, in each year, than they would be if
every market were split equally between two competitors. The cost of providing newspaper
content (reporters’ salaries) is a fixed cost and together with physical capital creates significant
returns to scale (as in Berry and Waldfogel 2001). Nonetheless, the index declines in almost
every decade. The decline is even more remarkable because the rapid decrease in the price of
newsprint meant that the ratio of fixed to variable costs most likely rose over the period.


       The rise in newspaper competition is, of course, not a puzzle. Declining costs and rising
demand made it inevitable that there would be new entrants into the market. The presence of a
robust market competing for consumers appears to have coincided with an increase in the
amount of information contained in newspapers and a replacement of fact for vitriolic argument.


   D. Cross-City Evidence


       In the previous section, we documented a remarkable concurrence of different economic
factors: declining costs and increasing scale, competition and advertising revenues, all of which
should (according to the model) have increased information and reduced bias. Given the
interdependence of these variables, we cannot identify which of these variables is more
important. We turn to cross sectional evidence to examine the relationship among market size,
information content, and political independence.


       We provide two different forms of cross-city evidence. First, using the data from the
Crédit Mobilier episode, we can examine the correlation between newspaper circulation and the



                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 26
various measures of information we extracted from newspaper coverage of the scandal. As
mentioned above, we have four different potential measures of news quality: the percentage of
facts recorded, the total number of stories, the relative size of the stories, and the timeliness of
the reporting of the stories. We have these measures for both 1872 and 1873 and the circulation
of the newspaper as of 1880. While we obviously cannot interpret the relationship among these
variables as causal, our model would clearly suggest that circulation and informational content
should be positively correlated.


       In 1872, the relationships between all four of these variables and our measure of
circulation are indeed positive.30 If the New York Herald is excluded from the regression (it was
a remarkably uninformative paper with an astonishingly high circulation) then all of these
correlations are statistically significant (with the Herald two are and two achieve borderline
significance). Specifically, the correlation coefficient between circulation and the percentage of
facts is 0.335 (0.415 without the Herald). The correlation coefficient between the number of
stories and circulation is 0.529 (0.729 without the Herald). The correlation coefficient between
the timeliness of the stories and circulation is 0.382 (0.557 without the Herald). The correlation
between the relative size of the stories and circulation is 0.788 (0.946 without the Herald).
Overall, newspapers with more circulation produced more facts and stories of importance, did so
in a timelier manner and devoted, relative to the size of the paper, more space to them.


       As mentioned above, there is less heterogeneity across newspapers in 1873, when the
reporting of the facts of the case became more complete. The relationship between circulation
and the number of stories as well as their relative size remains positive. The relationship
between circulation and facts and the relationship between circulation and timeliness are both
negative and insignificant.


       During the Teapot Dome episode, there is a generally positive connection between
circulation and both coverage and timeliness (but not at conventional levels of significance).
Newspapers with greater readership publish more facts. However, because coverage was


30
  If instead of circulation we used a more plausibly exogenous measure—city population—we obtain
correlations that are larger in size with the exception of the relative size of the stories.


                                                                    The Rise of the Fourth Estate 27
generally more complete, the relationships are much weaker than in the 1873 era. Still, the
Teapot Dome evidence continues to show that newspapers with more readers did a better job of
providing more complete coverage of the events. Great coverage, however, was available to far
more Americans.


        A second form of evidence concerns newspaper independence across cities. If falling
bias is the result of increasing newspaper scale and circulation, then the number and circulation
of independent newspapers should be increasing with city population levels and with the level of
total readership by city. Hamilton (2004) has shown that in his sample (a subset of ours,
including the 50 largest cities for each year from 1870 to 1900) the share of independent
circulation was increasing in city population. We perform a similar analysis with our expanded
data set, examining the relationship between city size, city circulation, and independent
newspapers’ share of circulation by city. In what follows, we report only the results using city
population although those using city daily circulation are similar.


        We report results in Table 2 for a pooled cross-section time-series on 148 cities across six
decadal years (1870 to 1920). The results show the relationship between the logarithm of city
population and the share of the city’s circulation that is independent.31 In the pooled regression,
we find that a 1 log point increase in population (roughly a 100 percent increase in population) is
associated with a 7.1 percentage point increase in the share of circulation from the independent
papers. The result holds in every decade and using either definition of independent (only I or the
inclusive one that includes IR and ID): bigger cities had a greater fraction of their circulation that
was independent.


        To check the robustness of these results, we also use city fixed effects. By doing so, we
are identifying the effect using within-city variation. The results should be seen as testing
whether cities that grew more rapidly had a greater increase in the share of circulation that was
from independent newspapers. The estimated coefficient of 0.098, somewhat larger than from

31
  In these regressions, we use the more inclusive measure of independence (I + IR + ID). The results are
similar using the less inclusive measure (only I papers). The coefficient on log of city population is
somewhat lower (although the mean of the dependent variable is as well) and the significance of the
coefficient in the city fixed effects model is lower.


                                                                     The Rise of the Fourth Estate 28
the pooled ordinary least squares regression, should be viewed as confirmation that increases in
market size are associated with increases in the relative size of the independent press.


        If these coefficients are accepted as reflecting the impact that population (or circulation)
has on the relative circulation of Independents, then we can determine how much of the rise in
the Independents resulted from rising population (or circulation). In our sample of large cities,
population increased from 7.1 to 34.4 million between 1870 and 1920. If the coefficient relating
the share of independent newspapers to the logarithm of population is 0.098, then the increase in
population would predict a 15.5 percentage point increase in the share of circulation that is
independent. This predicted rise is about one-third of the total increase of 46.8 percentage points
during the entire 1870 to 1920 period. Other factors we have identified above—falling costs,
increasing advertising revenue, and so on—presumably accounted for much of the rest.


V. Summary: The Implications of the Informative Press for Corruption and Reform


        We have documented significant changes in the news media during the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries. Newspapers dropped their party affiliations and became far less
likely to use partisan language in their reporting. By comparing the coverage of the Crédit
Mobilier scandal with the Teapot Dome affair, some fifty years later, we found that reporting
became more complete, timely, and generally less dominated by spin.


        We also have argued and presented evidence suggesting that this transformation was the
result of the rising scale and competitiveness in the newspaper industry. Declining costs and
increased city populations caused a huge increase in scale. In 1870, a newspaperman might
make more money pleasing a local politician than in selling papers and advertisements. By 1920
newspapers had become big business, and they increased readership and revenue by presenting
factual and informative news. Following these financial incentives, newspapers changed from
being political tools to at least trying to present a façade of impartial reporting.


        We have not directly confronted whether these changes made a difference to political




                                                                    The Rise of the Fourth Estate 29
outcomes.32 Gathering systematic evidence on this relationship remains a challenge for future
work. Nevertheless, a range of anecdotal evidence suggests that growing press independence did
have a significant impact on political outcomes, in particular on the incidence of corruption.


        First, there are many notorious examples of the rooting out of corruption by the press.
Both the Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome scandals were exposed by the press; the New York
Times and Harper’s Weekly successfully brought down Boss Tweed and Tammany Hall in 1871;
and various papers, such as Pulitzer’s St. Louis Post-Dispatch, were legendary for their
campaigns against corrupt politicians.


        Despite the spin and bias of individual papers in 1872, it is hard to doubt that the
denizens of New York City were exposed to a steady stream of facts about the Crédit Mobilier
scandal. By contrast, residents of smaller towns often had no opportunity to learn about major
national events. While the rise of the informative press may not have mattered much in large
cities, it most likely did in most smaller cities and towns.


        The prevalence of political investment in the press also provides indirect evidence that
politicians thought the press was important. It seems unlikely that Alexander Hamilton would
have been such a prolific polemicist if he did not see it as a tool for political success or that
Thomas Jefferson would have put Freneau on the State Department payroll if Jefferson did not
see Freneau’s Gazette as an important tool in battling the Federalists. Whenever politicians used
resources, such as government contracts or outright bribes, to influence papers, they affirmed the
fact that press coverage was thought to be significant.


        For many nineteenth and even twentieth century politicians, newspaper publishing was an
important stop on the path to political eminence. Consider the political careers of one-time
newspapermen like Horace Greeley, Whitelaw Reid (New York Tribune publisher and
unsuccessful Vice Presidential candidate in 1892) and Thurlow Weed. James Cox, who owned
several papers and was governor of Ohio, ran unsuccessfully for president in 1920 losing to


32
 On the role of the free press in controlling corruption in a cross-country analysis, see Brunetti and
Weder (2003).


                                                                       The Rise of the Fourth Estate 30
Warren Harding, a fellow newspaperman (the Harding family owned the Marion Star).33


        Press exposure of major scandals often appears to coincide with electoral losses for
incumbents connected to the scandal. Every significant Tammany Hall defeat coincided with a
press campaign against municipal corruption. The meager Republican showing in the 1876
election (the only election between 1860 and 1884 when the Democratic candidate won the
national popular vote) may have been due to the exposure of the Grant-era scandals such as
Crédit Mobilier. Progressive politicians succeeded in ousting incumbents when muckrakers,
such as Lincoln Steffens, were regularly exposing corruption. While we cannot prove that a
more informative press helped diminish corruption, it does appear that campaigns against
corruption succeeded when they were supported by news coverage.


        During the decades from 1870 to 1920 when corruption appears to have declined
significantly within the United States, the press became more informative, less partisan, and
expanded its circulation considerably.34 It seems a reasonable hypothesis that the rise of the
informative press was one of the reasons why the corruption of the Gilded Age was reduced
during the subsequent Progressive Era.




33
   The Merion Star gave some coverage of the Teapot Dome affair for which Harding was implicitly
involved. On April 21, 1922 (p. 2) it printed a small article on the questioning the Teapot Dome oil leases
by Senator Kendrick (fact #3, see Appendix B).
34
   On the time-path of corruption, see Glaeser and Goldin (this volume).


                                                                      The Rise of the Fourth Estate 31
                                            References

Ayer, N.W. [various years] American Newspaper Annual. Philadelphia: N.W. Ayer and Son.

Berry, Steven, and Joel Waldfogel. 2003 “Product Quality and Market Size,” Yale University,
   xerox.

Besley, Timothy, and Andrea Prat. 2004. “Handcuffs for the Grabbing Hand: Media Capture and
   Government Accountability.” London School of Economics, xerox.

Brunetti, Aymo, and Beatrice Weder. 2003. “A Free Press is Bad News for Corruption,” Journal
   of Public Economics 87 (August): 1801-24.

Carter, Susan, Richard Sutch, et al. 2004, forthcoming. Historical Statistics of the United States:
   Millennial Edition. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Cook, Timothy E. 1998. Governing with the News: The News Media as a Political Institution.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Current, Richard N. 1954. The Typewriter and the Men Who Made It. Urbana, IL: University of
   Illinois Press.

Dill, William A. 1928. Growth of Newspapers in the United States. Lawrence KS: University of
    Kansas Department of Journalism.

Editor and Publisher. [various years] Editor and Publisher International Yearbook. Editor and
   Publisher Company.

Emery, Edwin. 1972 [orig. pub. 1954], 3rd edition. The Press and America: An Interpretative
  History of the Mass Media. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Emery, Edwin, and Michael Emery. 1992 [orig. pub. 1954], 7th edition. The Press and America:
  An Interpretative History of the Mass Media. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Gentzkow, Matthew, and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2004. “Media Bias and Reputation.” Harvard
   University, xerox.

Goldberg, Bernard. 2001. Bias: A CBS Insider Exposes How the Media Distorts the News.
   New York, NY: Regnery.

Hamilton, James T. 2004. All the News That’s Fit to Sell: How the Market Transforms
  Information into News. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kaplan, Richard. 1993. “The Economics and Politics of Nineteenth Century Newspapers:
   Market Segmentation and Partisanship in the Detroit Press, 1865-1900,” American
   Journalism Winter-Spring: 84-101.



                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 32
Lee, Alfred M. 1937. The Daily Newspaper in America: The Evolution of a Social Instrument.
   New York: The Macmillan Company.

Mott, Frank Luther. 1962. American Journalism: A History, 1690 to 1960. Third Edition. New
  York: The Macmillan Company.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Andrei Shleifer. 2004. “The Market for News,” Harvard University,
  xerox.

NBER Macro History Data Base. Wholesale Price of Newsprint Paper, series m04093a, b.
  http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/chapter04.html

Rowell, George P. [various years] American Newspaper Directory. New York: Geo. P. Rowell
  and Company.

Schudson, Michael. 1978. Discovering the News: A Social History of American Newspapers.
   New York: Basic Books, Inc., Publishers.

Summers, Mark Wahlgren. 1994. The Press Gang: Newspapers and Politics, 1865-1878.
   Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1975. Historical Statistics of the United States from Colonial Times
   to the Present. Washington, D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. Population Division. 1998. Population of the 100 Largest Cities and
   Other Urban Places in the United States: 1790 to 1990. Working Paper no. 27 by Campbell
   Gibson. http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentation/twps0027.html




                                                                The Rise of the Fourth Estate 33
                                           Figure 1
                                Indicators of Biased Reporting


                                                                                           0.12
           Honest*/January                                              Slander*/January
     1.0
                                                                                           0.10

     0.8
                                                                                           0.08
                                                             Honest*/January
     0.6
                                                                                           0.06


     0.4
                                                                                           0.04
                                   Slander*/January


     0.2                                                                                   0.02



     0.0                                                                                   0.00
           1850         1870          1890            1910           1930          1950



Source: Ancestry.com scanned newspapers using optical character recognition software. See
“Corruption and Reform: An Introduction” (this volume) for more information on Ancestry.com
and its newspapers.

Notes: All words beginning with “slander” and “honest,” and “January” were searched. A “hit”
occurs when at least one word is found on a newspaper page (this search routine is done by page
not by article). The newspapers covered vary by year and each year contains anywhere from 10
to 50 newspapers. Most of the newspapers are from small cities and towns.




                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 34
                                                              Figure 2
                                       Daily Newspapers and Circulation per Capita: 1790 to 1998



                              3000                                                                        0.4


                              2500
                                                      Dailies                                             0.3
 Number of Daily Newspapers




                              2000




                                                                                                                Circulation per Capita
                              1500
                                                                                                          0.2
                                                                          Circulation per capita
                              1000


                              500                                                                         0.1


                                0
                                                                                                          0.0
                                1780 1800 1820 1840 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
                                                             Year


Sources: Dailies, 1790-1925: Dill (1928), table V, p. 28; 1929-1998 Editor and Publisher
(various years)

Notes: Daily circulation for 1850 to 1921 is imputed by converting newspaper subscriptions into
circulation using the ratio of the two for 1921. That for 1921 to 1928 is interpolated. United
States population is imputed from decennial censuses. These data are for the entire United States
and are, therefore, different from those in Table 1 which are for large U.S. cities.




                                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 35
                                            Figure 3
                Reporting of Crédit Mobilier: Size, Facts, Timeliness, and “Spin”

A. Crédit Mobilier, 1872 and 1873: Size and Facts


                                                                                   Size
        Credit Mobilier, 1872                                                      Facts


                         Republican Papers           Democrat,            Ind.
                                                     Anti-Grant Papers    Papers

    3




    2




    1




    0
          Alb         Hart       NYT       SC       Chic      NO     NYW      DCS     NYS
                Cin          Minn    P hil    W ater     Galv    NYT r   Balt     NYH




                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 36
                                                                                Size
                                                                                Facts
    Credit Mobilier, 1873
                  Republican Papers                Democrat,            Ind. Papers
                                                   Anti-Grant
4
                                                   Papers



3




2




1




0
      Alb         Hart       NYT       SC       Chic      NO     NYW      DCS     NYS
            Cin          Minn    P hil    W ater     Galv    NYT r   Balt     NYH




                                                                The Rise of the Fourth Estate 37
B. Crédit Mobilier, 1872 and 1873: “Spin”


                                                                                    "Lie"
          Credit Mobilier, 1872                                                     "We"

                           Republican Papers          Democrat,            Ind.
    2.5                                               Anti-Grant Papers    Papers



    2.0



    1.5



    1.0



    0.5



    0.0
             Alb         Hart       NYT       SC      Chic      NO    NYW      DCS    NYS
                   Cin          Minn    P hil    W ater    Galv    NYT r  Balt    NYH




                                                                     The Rise of the Fourth Estate 38
                                                                                   "Lie"
                                                                                   "We"
      Credit Mobilier, 1873
                    Republican Papers                 Democrat,            Ind. Papers
0.6                                                   Anti-Grant
                                                      Papers




0.4




0.2




0.0
        Alb         Hart       NYT       SC       Chic      NO     NYW      DCS     NYS
              Cin          Minn    P hil    W ater     Galv    NYT r   Balt     NYH




                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 39
C. Crédit Mobilier, 1872: Timeliness


                                                                         Fact 1 Timeliness
          Credit Mobilier, 1872                                          Total Timeliness

                           Republican Papers                Democrat,        Ind.
    1.0                                                     Anti-Grant       Papers
                                                            Papers

    0.8



    0.6



    0.4



    0.2



    0.0
             Alb         Hart       NYT       SC      Chic      NO    NYW      DCS    NYS
                   Cin          Minn    P hil    W ater    Galv    NYT r  Balt    NYH


Sources for Figure 3: See Figure 4.

Note for Figure 3C: There are almost no differences in “timeliness” among the newspapers in the
sample in total and for the most important facts during the “resolution” period of February 1873.




                                                                     The Rise of the Fourth Estate 40
                                               Figure 4
                         Reporting of Teapot Dome: Size, Facts, and Timeliness

A. “Breaking news” period:
                                                                               Size
                                                                               Facts
          Teapot Dome, 1922                                                    Timeliness

                     Republican Papers                 Democrat             Ind. & Fin.
                                                       Papers               Papers
    0.8




    0.6




    0.4




    0.2




    0.0
            Alb          Hart       NYS       SC       Balt      NO    NYW    DCS    W SJ
                  Chic          Minn    P hil    W ater     Galv    NYT   DCP    NYH




                                                                     The Rise of the Fourth Estate 41
B. Resolution period
                                                                                          Size
                                                                                          Facts
           Teapot Dome, 1924                                                              Timeliness

                         Republican Papers                         Democrat           Ind. & Fin.
                                                                   Papers              Papers
     2.5



     2.0



     1.5



     1.0



     0.5



     0.0
            Alb          Hart          NYS           SC         Balt      NO    NYW    DCS    W SJ
                  Chic          Minn         P hil        W ater     Galv    NYT   DCP    NYH




                                                                              The Rise of the Fourth Estate 42
Sources and Methods: See Appendix B.

Notes: Newspaper abbreviations are:
Alb =     Albany Evening Journal
Balt =    Baltimore Sun
Chic =    Chicago Daily Tribune
Cin =     Cincinnati Daily Gazette (not in 1920s)
DCS =     DC Evening Star
DCP =     DC Washington Post (only in 1920s)
Galv =    Galveston Daily News
Hart =    Hartford Courant
Minn =    Minneapolis Tribune
NO =      New Orleans (Times-) Picayune
NYH =     New York Herald
NYS =     New York Sun
NYT =     New York Times
NYTr =    New York Tribune (not in 1920s)
NYW =     New York World
Phil =    Philadelphia (Evening) Bulletin
SC =      Sioux City (Daily) Journal
WSJ =     Wall Street News (later the Wall Street Journal; only in 1920s)
Water =   Waterbury Daily American

     Newspapers are divided into groups by their stated political affiliations (in the Ayer
directories). Supplementary information on the Republican Anti-Grant papers (Chic, NYTr) has
also been used. The sole financial newspaper (the Wall Street News) is included with the latter
papers in the 1920s because it broke the Teapot Dome story and would probably have been
considered an a-political newspaper at the time.
     “Size” is the column length of the articles divided by the total size of the newspaper times 10.
Thus, size is “relative size,” adjusted for the fact that some newspapers were larger than others.
Total size is length times width times the number of pages.
     “Facts” is the fraction of the facts reported (see Appendix B for the important facts) during
the demarcated periods.
     “Spin” is measured in two ways. In both cases a count of particular words is done for the
first two paragraphs of all articles during the periods. In the first, the word “lie” and its various
synonyms are counted. In the second, the words “we” and “us” are counted. The use of “lie” is
generally used to spin the fact in the opposite direction. The use of “we” and “us” is generally
used to put greater emphasis (that is, editorialize) on the fact. The total counts are scaled by the
number of articles in the period for each newspaper.
     “Timeliness” is measured by scoring the “facts,” dividing by the maximum score, and then
subtracting from 1. If a fact is reported on the first day that it could have been reported, the
newspaper gets a 0 score and thus a 1 in “timeliness.” If the fact is reported a day late, it gets a
score of 1, if two days late, it gets a 2, and so on. The maximum days late is (1 + the full length
of the period considered). The total score received by the newspaper is then divided by the
maximum possible score and subtracted from 1. A zero means that the newspaper never reported
the fact during the period considered.



                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 43
                                                                                 Figure 4
                                                                     Newsprint Prices, 1790 to 1930
                                                         (cents/pound, deflated by the WPI 1967 = 100, log scale)
 Newsprint Price in Cents/Pound (log scale)




                                              54.6




                                              20.1




                                               7.4




                                               2.7

                                                1780   1800    1820      1840     1860      1880     1900      1920    1940




Sources:
1790 to 1890. Lee (1937), pp. 742-43.
1890 to 1929. NBER Historical Macro Data Base series m04093a, b, quarterly data on newsprint
prices. http://www.nber.org/databases/macrohistory/contents/
Wholesale Price Deflator. 1790 to 1889. U.S. Bureau of the Census (1975), series E-52 (Warren
and Person). 1890 to 1929. NBER Historical Macro Data Base, quarterly WPI. On an
annualized basis, the NBER series from 1890 to 1915 is the same as U.S. Bureau of the Census
(1975), series E-40. That for 1913 to 1929 is approximately series E-23 (BLS).

Notes: The NBER data are monthly, whereas the Lee data are at various intervals until 1860
when they are annual. The Lee and NBER series are linked at 1890. The overlap numbers are
nearly identical. The Lee data for 1860 to 1890 are those paid by the New York Tribune. Before
1860, he pieced them together from several sources. The two series of newsprint data from the
NBER Macro History Data Base are linked at 1914. The deflators are linked at 1890 by
multiplying by 0.6854 (= 56.2/82) and again at 1913. The final deflator is constructed for 1967
= 100.



                                                                                                    The Rise of the Fourth Estate 44
    Table 1: The Growth of Dailies, Circulation, and Independent Newspapers: 1870 to 1920

                                                           All Cities in Sample
                                            1870    1880      1890      1900    1910        1920
                                        A. Newspapers by City
Number of cities                             140     149      150        150    150          150

Fraction cities with
   Dailies                                  0.743     0.866     0.947     0.967    0.973    0.967
   Independent1 dailies                     0.164     0.517     0.647     0.633    0.753    0.827
   Independent2 dailies                     0.164     0.436     0.527     0.527    0.627    0.653

Dailies by city
  None                                      0.257     0.134     0.053     0.033    0.027    0.033
  One                                       0.129     0.148     0.060     0.047    0.073    0.100
  Two                                       0.307     0.248     0.240     0.293    0.287    0.313
  Three or more                             0.307     0.470     0.647     0.627    0.613    0.553

                                 B. Political Affiliation of Newspapers
Fraction of dailies by party a
   Republican                               0.527     0.386     0.336     0.360    0.332    0.219
   Democratic                               0.360     0.316     0.319     0.302    0.216    0.164
   Independent1                             0.114     0.298     0.345     0.337    0.452    0.618
   Independent2                             0.114     0.257     0.263     0.261    0.340    0.404

Circulation per capita
   All dailies                              0.194     0.253     0.419     0.450    0.577    0.606
   Independent1dailies                      0.051     0.135     0.215     0.217    0.300    0.441
   Independent2 dailies                     0.051     0.128     0.192     0.175    0.237    0.265

Independent fraction of circulation b
   Independent1                             0.263     0.534     0.513     0.424    0.520    0.728
   Independent2                             0.263     0.506     0.458     0.389    0.411    0.437

 C. Newspaper Competition: Fraction of cities containing newspapers of the following types c
  Only D or R or I                   0.289       0.279     0.162   0.145      0.205     0.386
  (Only I)                          (0.039) (0.070) (0.049) (0.055) (0.110) (0.317)
  [D or R] and I                     0.058       0.171     0.232   0.269      0.411     0.407
  D and R [not I]                    0.529       0.194     0.204   0.255      0.130     0.076
  D and R and I                      0.125       0.357     0.401   0.331      0.253     0.131

                  D. Newspaper Prices (real):Annual cost in 1982-84 dollars
   Unweighted                           n.a.    57.41     64.34    62.23    53.02           35.74
   Weighted by circulation              n.a.    71.76     60.90    55.90    44.76           33.33
   Per square inch × 100, weighted      n.a.     n.a.     1.657    1.383    0.844            n.a.


                                                                    The Rise of the Fourth Estate 45
a
  Republican, Democratic, and Independent1 sum to 1. The omitted categories using
Independent2 are the IR and ID papers.
b
  Circulation per capita for the independents divided by the circulation for all dailies.
c
  Independent is defined here as Independent1.

Sources: Ayer (various years), Rowell (various years). See Appendix A. City population data
from U.S. Bureau of the Census, Population Division (1998). Deflator (see line 8) from Carter,
Sutch, et al. (2004).

Notes: The universe of cities is the union of the top 100 by population in every year. “All cities”
includes every city that contained a population in the year given. Brooklyn and New York City
are treated as separate cities after they merged. The cities of Charlestown MA and Allegheny
PA exit the sample due to mergers. Results from a balanced panel of cities (those in the sample
every year even if they do not include a daily in some year) are nearly identical. Daily
newspapers include both aligned and independent papers but exclude specialized periodicals
(e.g. financial, music, fashion, garden). We have also excluded minor political party newspapers
(e.g., Socialist, Labor, Populist) and the foreign language press. We use two definitions of
“independent.” “Independent1” includes Independent-Republican (IR) and Independent-
Democratic (ID), as well as Independent. “Independent2” includes only Independent. The
deflator is the CPI, 1982-84 = 100: 1880, 10.2; 1890, 9.1; 1900, 8.4; 1910, 9.5; 1920, 20.0. The
“square inch” calculations divide by the size of the page times the number of pages in the
newspaper. There are no data available for 1870 and 1880; that for 1920 is not in square inches.




                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 46
                                               Table 2
             City Population and the Circulation Share of Independent Daily Newspapers

Dependent variable: Fraction of city daily newspaper circulation that was independent
(I + IR + ID)
                                       Pooled                      City Fixed Effects
Variable                                      Standard                         Standard
                            Coefficient        error a        Coefficient       error a
Log city population            0.0710          0.0168           0.0937          0.0418
1880                            0.166          0.0362             0.159         0.0422
1890                            0.181          0.0396             0.161         0.0479
1900                            0.164          0.0388             0.140         0.0557
1910                            0.247          0.0440             0.211         0.0667
1920                            0.395          0.0476             0.357         0.0760
Constant                       -0.624          0.172             -0.852         0.428
  2
R                               0.206                             0.600
Number of observations           803                               803
a
    Robust standard errors, clustered at the city level (148 cities).

Sources: See Appendix A.

Notes: Independent newspapers are the Independent1 group (see notes to Table 1). That is,
independent newspapers include those that were strictly Independent as well as those that were
Independent-Republican and Independent-Democrat.




                                                                        The Rise of the Fourth Estate 47
                           Appendix A: Newspaper Data, 1870 to 1920

         We created balanced and unbalanced panels of cities and daily newspapers at decade
intervals from 1870 to 1920. The cities were selected in the following manner. The top 100
cities by population in each year were compiled. We then increased the size of the balanced
panel by adding information to the earlier years for cities that entered the sample later and also
for cities that were in the top 100 earlier but not later. Some cities merged or were non-existent
in the earlier years. Thus our total sample contains 152 cities, although the number of cities with
population is: 140 in 1870, 149 in 1880, and then 150 for the remaining years. The balanced
panel for all five years contains 138 cities.

        We collected various types of information on all daily newspapers in these cities for the
year closest to which we could obtain a copy of a national newspaper directory, such as N.W.
Ayer and Son’s American Newspaper Annual or George P. Rowell and Company’s American
Newspaper Directory. In most cases we were able to use the precise year. The information
available for the newspapers is: city, state, paper name, whether foreign-language press, type of
paper, party affiliation, establishment date, subscription rate, advertising rate (for some years),
size of paper in pages and square inches, circulation, and the accuracy of the circulation number
(e.g., whether it was certified). By “type of paper” we mean whether the paper was non-
political, such as the financial and theater press, or whether it was political, either aligned with a
party or independent or some mixture. Thus, by “political” we mean the regular, non-specialty,
press. We generally grouped cities that later merged, for example Brooklyn and New York City.
We added data from the census on population and county name.

       The full list of 152 cities (including those that later merged) is:

AL     Birmingham                                      IA      Burlington
AL     Mobile                                          IA      Davenport
AR     Little Rock                                     IA      Des Moines
CA     Los Angeles                                     IA      Dubuque
CA     Oakland                                         IA      Sioux City
CA     Sacramento                                      IL      Chicago
CA     San Diego                                       IL      East St. Louis
CA     San Francisco                                   IL      Peoria
CO     Denver                                          IL      Quincy
CT     Bridgeport                                      IL      Springfield
CT     Hartford                                        IN      Evansville
CT     New Haven                                       IN      Fort Wayne
CT     Norwich                                         IN      Indianapolis
CT     Waterbury                                       IN      New Albany
DC     Washington                                      IN      South Bend
DE     Wilmington                                      IN      Terre Haute
FL     Jacksonville                                    KS      Kansas City
GA     Atlanta                                         KS      Leavenworth
GA     Augusta                                         KS      Topeka
GA     Savannah                                        KS      Wichita



                                                                   The Rise of the Fourth Estate 48
KY   Covington       NJ   Paterson
KY   Louisville      NJ   Trenton
KY   Newport         NY   Albany
LA   New Orleans     NY   Auburn
MA   Boston          NY   Binghamton
MA   Brockton        NY   Brooklyn
MA   Cambridge       NY   Buffalo
MA   Charleston      NY   Cohoes
MA   Chelsea         NY   Elmira
MA   Fall River      NY   New York
MA   Gloucester      NY   Newburgh
MA   Holyoke         NY   Oswego
MA   Lawrence        NY   Poughkeepsie
MA   Lowell          NY   Rochester
MA   Lynn            NY   Schenectady
MA   New Bedford     NY   Syracuse
MA   Salem           NY   Troy
MA   Somerville      NY   Utica
MA   Springfield     NY   Yonkers
MA   Taunton         OH   Akron
MA   Worcester       OH   Canton
MD   Baltimore       OH   Cincinnati
ME   Bangor          OH   Cleveland
ME   Portland        OH   Columbus
MI   Bay City        OH   Dayton
MI   Detroit         OH   Springfield
MI   Flint           OH   Toledo
MI   Grand Rapids    OH   Youngstown
MI   Saginaw         OK   Oklahoma
MN   Duluth          OK   Tulsa
MN   Minneapolis     OR   Portland
MN   St. Paul        PA   Allegheny
MO   Kansas City     PA   Allentown
MO   St. Joseph      PA   Altoona
MO   St. Louis       PA   Erie
NE   Lincoln         PA   Harrisburg
NE   Omaha           PA   Johnstown
NH   Manchester      PA   Lancaster
NJ   Bayonne         PA   Philadelphia
NJ   Camden          PA   Pittsburg
NJ   Elizabeth       PA   Reading
NJ   Hoboken         PA   Scranton
NJ   Jersey City     PA   Wilkes-Barre
NJ   New Brunswick   PA   Williamsport
NJ   Newark          RI   North Providence
NJ   Passaic         RI   Pawtucket



                             The Rise of the Fourth Estate 49
RI   Providence   TX   San Antonio
SC   Charleston   UT   Salt Lake City
TN   Knoxville    VA   Norfolk
TN   Memphis      VA   Petersburg
TN   Nashville    VA   Richmond
TX   Dallas       WA   Seattle
TX   El Paso      WA   Spokane
TX   Fort Worth   WA   Tacoma
TX   Galveston    WI   Milwaukee
TX   Houston      WV   Wheeling




                           The Rise of the Fourth Estate 50
     Appendix B: Coding Newspaper Stories Concerning Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome

1. The Historical Events and Facts

       We have chosen two major historical events, known as Crédit Mobilier and Teapot
Dome. Two relatively brief periods within each event were selected. The first period begins
with the “breaking story,” whereas the second includes an incident that coalesced opinion, such
as a Congressional investigation or an admission of guilt. The periods span from one to almost
four weeks. Their lengths by event were determined by to equalize the frequency of newspaper
coverage between them. The dates used for each period per major event are as follows.

Crédit Mobilier Period 1: September 4 to September 30, 1872
       The period begins with the release by the NY Sun of a letter from Rep. Oakes Ames to
Henry McComb, once Ames’ associate in Crédit Mobilier, (written 1/28/1868) stating that Crédit
Mobilier shares were placed “where [they] will produce most good to us.” The names of
Congressmen, Senators, and the Vice President were written on the reverse side by McComb,
supposedly from a list shown to him by Ames. The letter was given to the NY Sun by McComb.
The remainder of the period is taken up with denials by those on the list.

Crédit Mobilier Period 2: February 14 to February 28, 1873
       The events of this period include the conclusion of the House and Senate committees on
the Crédit Mobilier scandal and the action of Congress regarding implicated sitting members.

Table B1: Crédit Mobilier Facts during Two Periods
Crédit Mobilier Period 1: Sept. 4 to Sept. 30, 1872
1) Sept. 4, 1872    NY Sun publishes letter (originally written 1/28/1868) from Rep. Oakes
                    Ames (MA) to Henry McComb stating that shares were placed “where [they]
                    will produce most good to us.” Names of Congressmen, Senators, and the
                    Vice President were written on the reverse side by McComb, supposedly
                    from a list shown to him by Ames.
2) Sept. 5, 1872    Sen. Blaine (ME), in the Kennebec Journal, denied ownership of CM stock.
3) Sept. 7, 1872    NY Sun revealed a second letter (written 1/25/1868) from Ames to McComb
                    also with list of names of those receiving shares.
4) Sept. 11, 1872 Rep. Dawes, in a letter, thanks the editor of the Syracuse Journal for
                    denouncing the Sun charges.
5) Sept. 13, 1872 Sen. Henry Wilson (MA), in a letter to the Troy Whig, denies speculating.
6) Sept. 15, 1872 General Garfield (Rep., OH) denied NY Sun charge and stated that held no
                    stock in CM or UP.
7) Sept. 17, 1872 Ames, in a letter to his constituency, denied NY Sun charge.
8) Sept. 20, 1872 Rep. Scofield (PA) claimed he never received CM stock.
9) Sept. 25, 1872 Vice President Colfax, in South Bend, Indiana speech, denied wrongdoing.
Crédit Mobilier Period 2: Feb. 14 to Feb. 28, 1873
1) Feb. 14, 1873 Senate Committee chaired by Sen. Morrill heard testimony from McComb,
                    Sen. Conkling (NY), and Sen. Patterson (NH).
2) Feb, 15, 1873 Senate Committee heard from Harlan regarding $10,000 from T. Durant
                    (Union Pacific) to Harlan’s campaign; testimony from Sen. Wilson (MA)


                                                               The Rise of the Fourth Estate 51
3) Feb. 17, 1873     Washington D.C. Sunday Herald published the purported transcript of the
                     Ames memorandum book.
4) Feb. 18, 1873     Poland Committee (House) recommended the expulsion of Oakes Ames
                     and James Brooks (D, NY). Oakes found guilty of a misdemeanor.
5) Feb. 19, 1873     Senate Committee heard from Ames about Harlan.
6) Feb. 19, 1873     Poland Committee (House) heard from Vice President Colfax and Joseph
                     Fowler (ex-Senator, TN).
7) Feb. 20, 1873     Wilson Special Committee (Senate) on the Union Pacific reported on
                     relations between the UP and CM.
8) Feb. 20, 1873     House referred to the Judiciary Committee the issue of impeaching the Vice
                     President.
9) Feb. 22, 1873     Morrill Committee (Senate) heard from Sen. Paterson; Sen. Harlan recalled.
10) Feb. 27, 1873    House voted to issue severe condemnations of Brooks and Ames but not to
                     expel them.
11) Feb. 27, 1873    Morrill Committee (Senate) recommended expulsion of Sen. Paterson.

Teapot Dome Period 1: Apr. 7 to Apr. 30, 1922
       The period begins with a seemingly innocuous release by the Wall Street News that the
government, through the Secretary of the Interior Albert Fall, had leased oil lands including one
known as Teapot Dome in Wyoming to Harry Sinclair owner of Mammoth Oil Company. The
remainder of the period concerns Senate demands for more information on the leases.

Teapot Dome Period 2: Jan. 21 to Jan. 28, 1924
       The main event of this period is the admission by Edward Doheny, whose company had
received the Elk Hills oil leases, that he lent Albert Fall $100,000. Sinclair’s lawyer also
admitted to a loan to Fall by Sinclair.

Table B2: Teapot Dome Facts during Two Periods
Teapot Dome Period 1: April 7 to April 30, 1922
1) Apr. 7, 1922     The Wall Street Journal reported that the U.S. government leased Teapot
                    Dome, one of the naval reserves, to Harry F. Sinclair of Mammoth Oil.
2) Apr. 14, 1922    Announcement of a Dept. of the Interior policy to store oil above ground.
3) Apr. 15, 1922    Senate passed Sen. Kendrick’s (WY) resolution calling for detailed
                    information on the Sinclair lease.
4) Apr. 17, 1922    Acting Interior Secretary Finney announced the terms of the lease, viz.
                    graduated royalties ranging from 12.5 to 50 percent.
5) Apr. 21, 1922    Sen. La Follette (WI) introduced a resolution calling for an inquiry into the
                    leasing of oil areas to influential companies.
6) Apr. 22, 1922    A joint letter transmitted by Navy Secr. Denby and Finney that in leasing
                    the oil reserves, they were acting under the authority of Congress.
7) Apr. 28, 1922    Sen. La Follette charged that speculators on the NYSE netted $30 million
                    from advance information.
8) Apr. 29, 1922    Senate passes resolution directing the Committee on Public Lands and
                    Surveys to investigate the leases.
Teapot Dome Period 2: January 21 to January 28, 1924
1) Jan. 21, 1924    Archie Roosevelt (son of President) stated he severed ties to Sinclair.


                                                                 The Rise of the Fourth Estate 52
2) Jan. 22, 1924         Subpoena issued for Fall and Zevely (lawyer to Sinclair) to testify before
                         Senate. Sinclair requested to attend.
3) Jan. 23, 1924         Sen. Caraway (AR) called for immediate action on his resolution to cancel
                         the Teapot Dome lease.
4) Jan. 24, 1924         Edward Doheny admitted that he had lent Fall $100,000 [“without security
                         … eventuating in the contract awarded to Doheny on Apr. 25, following,
                         through which he secured, without competition, a contract giving him a
                         preference right to a lease of a large part of Naval Reserve No. 1”]
5) Jan. 25, 1924         Zevely testified about an additional $25,000 loan from Sinclair to Fall
                         after the Teapot Dome Lease.
6) Jan. 25, 1924         Senate ordered an investigation on Indian Land Lease entered into by Fall.
7) Jan. 27, 1924         President Coolidge stated he would appoint a special counsel.
8) Jan. 28, 1924         House recommended resolution granting $100,000 for Coolidge to
                         investigate the leases.
9) Jan. 28, 1924         Sen. Robinson (AR) submits resolution calling on the President to request
                         Navy Secr. Denby’s resignation.

2. The Coding

        Every article concerning the two events in the time periods listed was read and coded in
the following manner to ascertain coverage, factual reporting, timeliness, and “spin.”

     a. Size of article in column inches (excluding headlines).
     b. Whether each fact given above was covered and on which day.
     c. Spin is captured in two ways. We read the first two complete paragraphs of each article
        and coded the number of times the first person plural was used (“we,” “us”). The use of
        the first person plural indicates editorializing. We also use the same paragraphs to count
        the number of times words such as lie and false were used (there were more than 30
        different words in the 1870s articles that are synonyms for lie).35

3. The Newspapers

        We coded daily newspapers and included those that were instrumental in breaking the
story (such as the New York Sun in the case of Crédit Mobilier). Where possible we included
newspapers from smaller cities (such as Sioux City), those geographically distant from the East
Coast (such as Galveston), and those in the nation’s capital. We attempted to incorporate a mix
of political parties, although Republican newspapers dominated in general.
        The full list of papers is given below together with the approximate number of separate
articles published on the topic during the stated period:




35
   The full list of words is: baseless, calumny, canard, charlatan, cheat, deception, deceitful, dishonest,
dishonesty, fabrication, fake, false, falsehood, fib, fiction, fraud, groundless, hoax, humbug, hypocrisy,
imposture, insincere, libel, meretricious, misrepresentation, myth, perjury, prevarication, quack, slander,
specious, and untruth. All parts of speech were counted (e.g., noun, adjective, verb).


                                                                        The Rise of the Fourth Estate 53
        Table B3: Newspapers Used for Coding Crédit Mobilier and Teapot Dome Articles
                                                          Number of Articles for Each Period
                                                       Crédit Mobilier            Teapot Dome
                                   Affiliation      9/9/1872 2/14/1873       4/14/1922 1/22/1924
    Newspaper                     1880a 1920        9/30/1872 2/28/1873      4/30/1922 1/29/1924

    Albany Evening Journal              R     IR            12          52               0           20
    Baltimore Sun                       I     ID            8           32               5           47
    Chicago Daily Tribune               R     IR            31          54               9           15
    Cincinnati Daily Gazette            R      -            12          29              ne           ne
    DC Evening Star                     I      I            4           27              4            25
    DC Washington Post                 D       I            ne          ne              4            19
    Galveston Daily News               D      ID             3           6               4           13
    Hartford Courant                    R      R            11          28               1           21
    Minneapolis Tribune                 R      R             2          14               9           15
    New Orleans (Times-) Picayune      D      ID             6          24               4           18
    New York Herald                     I      I            4           46              8            25
    New York Sunb                       I     IR            40          42               4           18
    New York Times                      R     ID            24          42              11           40
    New York Tribune                    R      -            30          33              ne           ne
    New York Worldb                    D      ID            26          45               6           38
    Philadelphia (Evening) Bulletin     R     IR             4          30               0           15
    Sioux City (Daily) Journal          R      R             3          21               2           20
    Wall Street News (later Journal)    -     Fin           ne          ne              32           18
    Waterbury Daily American           IR     IR             4          18               1           14

    All listed newspapers, articles    -       -           224          543            104           381


Notes: ne = nonexistent for the period given. All newspapers were read from microfilm except
the New York Times and the Wall Street News, which are on-line newspapers with OCR (optical
character recognition) technology.
a
  1880 is used for political affiliation because many affiliations are missing for 1870. Note that
the DC Washington Post began publication in 1877 and is not in the 1872, 1873 sample.
b
  There was both a morning and an evening paper in the 1920s. The micro-films used were for
the morning paper.




                                                                  The Rise of the Fourth Estate 54
