NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE CHANGING ASSOCIATION BETWEEN
PRENATAL PARTICIPATION IN WIC
AND BIRTH OUTCOMES IN NEW YORK CITY
Ted Joyce
Diane Gibson
Silvie Colman
Working Paper 10796
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10796
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Ted Joyce, Diane Gibson, and Silvie Colman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Changing Association Between Prenatal Participation in WIC and Birth Outcomes in New
York City
Ted Joyce, Diane Gibson, and Silvie Colman
NBER Working Paper No. 10796
September 2004
JEL No. I12
ABSTRACT
We analyze the relationship between prenatal WIC participation and birth outcomes in New York
City from 1988-2001. The analysis is unique for several reasons. First, we restrict the analysis to
women on Medicaid and or WIC who have no previous live births and who initiate prenatal care
within the first four months of pregnancy. Our goal is to lessen heterogeneity between WIC and nonWIC participants by limiting the sample to women who initiate prenatal care early and who have no
experience with WIC from a previous pregnancy. Second, we focus on measures of fetal growth
distinct from preterm birth, since there is little clinical support for a link between nutritional
supplementation and premature delivery. Third, we analyze a large sub-sample of twin deliveries.
Multifetal pregnancies increase the risk of anemia and fetal growth retardation and thus, may benefit
more than singletons from nutritional supplementation. We find no relationship between prenatal
WIC participation and measures of fetal growth except among a sub-sample of US-born Blacks
between 1990-1992. A similarly sporadic pattern of association exists among US-born Black twins.
Our finding that the modest association between WIC and fetal growth is limited to a specific racial
and ethnic group during specific years and even specific ages suggests that the protective effect of
prenatal WIC on adverse birth outcomes in New York City has been minimal.
Ted Joyce
Baruch Colege, CUNY and
NBER
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016-4309
ted_joyce@baruc.cuny.edu

Diane Gibson
School of Public Affairs
Baruch College, CUNY
One Bernard Baruch Way
New York, NY 10010

Silvie Colman
Department of Economics
Graduate Center, CUNY
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016

Introduction
Over seven million women, infants and children participated in the Special Supplemental
Nutrition Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC) in 1999, up from 4.1 million in
1989. Over the same period expenditures in 1999 dollars grew from 2.6 to 4.0 billion dollars
(U.S. House of Representatives 2000). A large body of published research suggests that
prenatal participation in WIC increases birth weight and lowers the incidence of low and very
low birth weight births. Based on the results from these studies, the General Accounting Office
concluded that every federal dollar spent on prenatal WIC participants returned an estimated
$3.50 in savings in primarily reduced health care costs (General Accounting Office 1992).
Since then, the general conclusion among policy makers has been that “WIC works.”
In a recent review of previous research, however, Douglas Besharov and Peter Germanis
(2001) challenge the widely held belief that WIC is a highly successful program. They contend
that research on the association between WIC participation and improved birth outcomes suffers
from outdated estimates and poor designs. Moreover, the results pertain to only 12 percent of
WIC participants. At best, they conclude, WIC may have a small positive effect on birth
outcomes of pregnant women at high risk for nutritional deficiencies.
In this study we use New York City birth certificates from 1988 to 2001 to address
several of the concerns raised by Besharov and Germanis (2000; 2001). For example, Besharov
and Germanis argue that the composition of WIC participants has changed significantly over the
past decade, which in turn may make earlier estimates of the effect of WIC on birth outcomes
less relevant. The growth in WIC coincides with the expansion in Medicaid eligibility
thresholds that occurred in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Women on Medical Assistance are
automatically eligible for WIC, even if the income thresholds for Medicaid exceed those for

1

WIC (Lewis and Ellwood 2000). As a result, the growth in WIC among pregnant women is
likely to include proportionately fewer women at risk for adverse birth outcomes. With 14
years of data and almost 900,000 births to women on Medicaid in New York City, we examine
the composition of women on Medicaid and WIC from the period before the Medicaid eligibility
expansions through the most recent expansions for pregnant women under State Children’s
Health Insurance Program (SCHIP). We also test whether the association between WIC and
birth outcomes has changed over time, and if so, whether the changing composition of
participants can explain the difference.
The second contribution of our study is the focus on measures of fetal growth as
outcomes by which to assess the effectiveness of WIC. Many previous studies have found large
and statistically significant associations between WIC participation and very low birth weight
births (VLBW < 1,500 grams (3.3 lbs)). Indeed, approximately two-thirds of the savings
associated with WIC in the report by the General Accounting Office (GAO) resulted from a
decrease in VLBW (GAO 1992). But such an association is highly implausible. Nationally,
ninety-five percent of all VLBW births are preterm (< 37 weeks gestation) but only 10 percent of
VLBW births are also small for gestational age. However, interventions to prevent preterm
births remain elusive. An editorial in the New England Journal of Medicine summarizes
clinicians’ frustration,
“Trials measuring the effect of interventions at eliminating a single risk factor are
numerous; uterine contractions have been suppressed, cervixes have been sewn shut,
microorganisms have been eliminated, and social support, better nutrition, and prenatal
care have been provided. When these factors have been studied in isolation, not one has
resulted in a decline in preterm birth” (Iams, J. 1998, p. 54).

2

If WIC is unlikely to affect the probability of a preterm birth, then the often-reported relationship
between WIC and VLBW is highly suspect. We contend that measures of fetal growth are more
appropriate outcomes by which to evaluate WIC.
Third, many studies report that improvements in birth outcomes associated with WIC are
greater among women at medical risk such as smokers, teenagers and those with a previous
premature delivery. Such results are interpreted as evidence that WIC is more beneficial for
women in need of nutritional assistance. Even Besharov and Germanis (2000; 2001) concede the
possibility of such heterogeneous effects. However, these risk factors tend to be correlated with
other hard to measure determinants of birth outcomes such as substance abuse, sexually
transmitted disease, and stressful home environments. Thus, effects associated with WIC among
a sample of women that smoke, for instance, may reflect greater unobserved heterogeneity
between WIC and non-WIC participants than is found among lower-risk groups such as nonsmokers.

As a cleaner test of whether the association between WIC and birth outcomes is

greater among women at nutritional risk, we compare outcomes between WIC and non-WIC
participants who deliver twins. Multiple gestations represent a random health shock that
increases the risk of anemia, inadequate weight gain and adverse birth outcomes, but should be
orthogonal to other risky behaviors.1
Finally, a universal concern among analysts of WIC has been selection bias. Do women
that participate in WIC differ from non-participants in ways that are hard to measure but that are
also correlated with the outcomes of interest? We take several approaches. In the first, we
exploit our large sample size and stratify the analysis into more homogenous groupings. For

1

An exception would be multiple gestations that resulted from assisted reproductive technology (ART). However,
eighty-nine percent of women that receive ART are 30 years of age or older and 77 percent have no previous live
births (Schieve et al. 2002). Women that receive such treatment are likely to be older, better educated and of zero or
low parity---a group with a low probability of WIC participation.
3

example, we analyze the association between WIC and fetal growth among foreign-born
Hispanics on Medicaid, with no previous live births, all of whom who initiate prenatal care early.
As an additional refinement, we use propensity score matching within strata and we drop cases in
which there is not a common support between WIC to non-WIC participants. Propensity score
matching does not solve the problem of selection on unobservable factors, but it may further
improve the quality of our comparison group. Lastly, we estimate, but do not emphasize,
estimates based on instrumental variables. We use New York State’s Medicaid eligibility
expansion in 1990 as an instrument for prenatal WIC participation.

Background
The conclusion that “WIC works” became conventional wisdom after the widely cited
report by the GAO (GAO,1992). Based on 17 studies, the GAO concluded that prenatal WIC
participation lowered the rate of low birth weight (LBW < 2,500 grams (5.5 lbs)) by 25 percent
and the rate of very low birth weight by 44 percent. These improvements in newborn health
generated immediate savings of $2.89 per dollar invested in WIC in the first year of life and
$3.50 in savings if estimated over 18 years. Five of the 17 studies were based on the influential
analysis conducted by researchers at the Mathematica Policy Research, Inc. In that study,
researchers linked birth certificates to WIC administrative files in 1987 and 1988 in five states:
Florida, Minnesota, North Carolina, South Carolina and Texas (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore
1992). Researchers reported that mean birth weight was 87 grams greater and the incidence of
low birth weight was 3.8 percentage points less among WIC relative to non-WIC participants.
Similar results based on equivalent methods were obtained from a national sample of
births in1988 from the National Maternal and Infant Health Survey (NMIHS). The NMIHS is a

4

national sample drawn from natality files with more extensive information on maternal
characteristics and behaviors than was available from state-specific linkages of administrative
data to birth certificates (Gordon and Nelson 1995). The national sample increased the
generalizability of the findings and the additional covariates lessened the potential of omitted
variable bias.

Appropriate Outcomes
An important consideration when evaluating the findings of the previous research on
WIC is whether there is a plausible mechanism for the relationship between WIC and the
outcome of interest. Most studies have emphasized the association between WIC and the
probability of a low birth weight birth. However, low birth weight can be broadly divided
between preterm births—those that occur before the 37th week of gestation—and those that are
small for gestation age (SGA). The latter is an indication of fetal growth retardation. As noted
above, the causes of preterm birth are largely unknown and few interventions, if any, appear
effective. Thus, the incidence of very low birth weight, 95 percent of which are preterm, would
seem an inappropriate outcome with which to assess the effectiveness of nutritional education or
supplementation.2 A stronger case can be made for an association between fetal growth
retardation and prenatal supplementation, since the latter is more closely linked to nutritional
intake and maternal weight gain (Institute of Medicine 1990).
There is little doubt, for instance, that extreme nutritional deprivation in the prenatal
period affects fetal growth. The Dutch Famine of 1944-45, for example, was associated with a
300 gram decrease in mean birth weight (Stein and Susser 1975). However, the association

2

Indeed, in the Dutch Famine study, severe nutritional deprivation had a major effect on birth weight but was
unassociated with gestational age.
5

between nutritional supplementation and birth weight in developed countries is less clear. In a
randomized trial of poor women in New York City, there was some evidence that prenatal
supplementation increased maternal weight gain, but supplementation was unrelated to birth
weight (Rush, Stein and Susser 1980). Similarly, in the National WIC Evaluation researchers
found no association between WIC participation and birth weight, despite significant increases in
the intakes of 4 out of the 5 nutrients that were analyzed (Rush et al. 1998). And in the only
randomized trial of WIC participation, researchers found no effect of WIC participation on birth
weight except for among a subset of maternal smokers (Metcoff et al. 1985).
Importantly, studies that show an association between WIC and low birth weight or mean
birth weight report statistically insignificant associations or small effects of WIC on proxies for
fetal growth. In the Mathematica study, differences in mean birth weight fall from 87 grams
averaged across the five states to 25 grams when gestational age is included in the birth weight
specification (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore 1992 ). The same is true in a detailed assessment
of WIC based on the NMIHS. A statistically significant mean difference in birth weight of 68
grams falls to a statistically insignificant difference of 25 grams when adjusted for gestational
age (Gordon and Nelson 1996). Kotelchuck et al. (1984) find that participation in WIC in
Massachusetts is associated with a 1.8 percentage point decline in low birth weight, but WIC is
not associated with infants that are small for gestational age (SGA), a standard indicator of fetal
growth retardation. Stockbauer (1987) and Buescher and Horton (2000) obtain similar results in
Missouri and North Carolina respectively. In none of these analyses, however, do the authors
interpret the lack of a substantive association between WIC and fetal growth as inconsistent with
the inference that WIC improves infant health. Instead, researchers conclude that WIC has a
strong indirect effect on birth weight or low birth weight through prolonged gestation.

6

The recent paper by Bitler and Currie (2003) is a case in point. The authors use the
Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS) to analyze the association between
prenatal WIC participation and a host of birth outcomes. PRAMS links a postpartum survey of
recent mothers with information from the birth certificate. The authors use an unbalanced panel
of 19 states from 1992 to 1999. The sample contains information on over 60,000 birth outcomes
to women on Medicaid, 49,000 of which participated in WIC. They find that WIC is associated
with a 54 percent decrease in the odds of a very low birth weight birth and a 53 percent decrease
in the odds of very premature infants (< 32 weeks gestation). Effects for teens are substantially
larger. Since both outcomes are rare the coefficients can be interpreted as changes in the relative
risk, which suggests that WIC lowers the probability of extreme prematurity by more than half
for all women on WIC and by two-thirds for teens. Such effects are implausible given that
prenatal interventions reported in the clinical literature have not been effective at preventing
preterm birth (Goldenberg and Rouse 1998).3
Significantly, Bitler and Currie (forthcoming) also find that WIC is associated with only a
13 percent decline in the odds that a newborn is small for gestational age (SGA); moreover, the
coefficient is statistically insignificant in two of the three high-risk subgroups that they analyze
separately. They also report that WIC is associated with an increase of slightly over a pound in
maternal weight gain during pregnancy, which provides some corroboration for the modest
increase in fetal growth.

3

See also Dyson et al. 1998 and the Collaborative Group on Preterm Birth Prevention (1993) for trials to prevent
preterm birth.
7

Selection Bias
An additional concern with previous research on WIC is that the estimates of the effect of
WIC are subject to selection bias. A number of approaches such as the use of statistical controls,
matched samples or instrumental variables have been used to attempt to minimize this bias, but
none of them are ideal. Selection bias occurs if women that participate in WIC are more
motivated to deliver a healthy baby or more risk averse than their counterparts who choose not to
participate. If motivation or risk aversion is negatively correlated with other hard to measure
factors that increase the risk of preterm delivery or fetal growth retardation (i.e, the intensity of
smoking, illegal drug use, vaginal infection), then omitted variable bias will cause the estimated
effect of WIC to be overstated. There has been only one randomized trial involving WIC and
results were equivocal (Metcoff et al. 1985).
In most observational studies researchers use statistical controls or matched samples to
lessen contamination from selection bias. One criticism is that the set of covariates from
administrative data and birth certificates is limited, which makes inferences vulnerable to
omitted variable bias (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore 1992; Schramm 1985; 1986; Stockbauer
1986; Stockbauer 1987; Kotelchuck et al. 1984). Studies with much more detailed information
on maternal behavior and socio-economic status have obtained similar findings to studies with
many fewer covariates (Gordon and Nelson 1996; Bitler and Currie forthcoming). However,
even the use of detailed covariates may not be adequate to deal with selection bias.
Studies that match pregnant women on WIC to eligible pregnant women on waiting lists
for WIC or to women in counties without WIC programs have reported mixed results. Women
who applied for WIC in Massachusetts, but who were not certified due to a lack of openings, had
infants with lower mean birth weights than infants of women enrolled in WIC (Kennedy et al.

8

1982). An alternative matching strategy has been to use two births to the same woman. During
one pregnancy the mother participated in WIC and in the other she did not (Kowaleski-Jones and
Duncan 2002). The advantage of models with “individual fixed effects” is that they remove
confounding from time-invariant characteristics of the mother. Yet, at the same time they raise
the question of why a woman participated in WIC once and not again. If she became ineligible
because of an increase in income, or was not at nutritional risk, then potential problems of
selection bias are re-introduced if these other changes are not adequately controlled. Finally,
sample sizes tend to be small and arguably unrepresentative. In the study by Kowaleski-Jones
and Duncan (2002), the estimated effects of WIC on birth weight are very large, but are based on
the experience of only 71 women whose experience with WIC varied between pregnancies.
Econometric approaches to selection bias have yielded highly unstable results due to the
lack of a credible identification strategy (Fraker et al. 1995; Brien and Swann 1999).
Researchers have yet to find a variable that predicts WIC participation, but that has no direct
effect on birth outcomes. Brien and Swann (1999), for instance, use indicators of WIC clinics,
AFDC guarantees and Medicaid expenditures per family to predict WIC participation.
However, they do not include state fixed effects and thus rely on between-state variation in social
policies to identify WIC participation. The exogeneity of the instruments is not convincing
since differences in social policy across states may reflect unmeasured state-level factors that
affect infant health.
Selection or omitted variable bias may also be exacerbated by the common practice of
obtaining separate estimates of the effect of WIC on infant health for women with elevated risks
of adverse birth outcomes (Kennedy and Kotelchuck 1984; Stockbauer 1986,1987; Schramm
1985, 1986; Buescher et al. 1993). The empirical strategy is based on WIC eligibility criteria

9

that use characteristics such as smoking, teen pregnancy, short birth spacing and high parity as
markers for nutritional risk (Institute of Medicine 1996). Many researchers have reported, for
example, that differences in mean birth weight between WIC and non-WIC smokers are greater
than between nonsmokers or between WIC and non-WIC women more generally (Metcoff et al.
1985; Schramm 1985,1986; Stockbauer 1986). This is interpreted as evidence that women with
greater “nutritional” need benefit more from WIC than women with less need. But differences
between WIC and non-WIC participants that smoke may simply reflect differences in actual
smoking intensity or differences in other unobserved behaviors that are correlated with smoking
and not heterogeneous treatment effects.
In summary, there are many concerns with the previous research on WIC. With few
exceptions, studies pertain to women who gave birth in the 1970s and 1980s, but a doubling of
WIC enrollment over the past 12 years undermines the relevancy of these earlier studies. In
addition, some of the outcomes used to evaluate WIC lack a clinical link to nutritional
supplementation. Finally, selection bias remains a threat to the validity of received work and the
conclusion that WIC is more effective among women at elevated risks of adverse birth outcomes
may be a further manifestation of omitted variables bias. In this study we present the first
attempt to look at the average treatment effect of WIC over time. We use proxies for fetal
growth and maternal weight gain as outcomes and we take two approaches to limit
contamination from selection bias. Finally, we present results from an analysis of WIC and fetal
growth among 11,000 twins as a test of whether WIC has a greater association among infants of
women with exogenous increases in the risk of anemia, inadequate weight gain and intrauterine
growth retardation.

10

Data
We analyze the relationship between prenatal WIC participation and birth outcomes in
New York City from 1988-2001 women on Medicaid and/or WIC as recorded on birth
certificates. New York City is a separate vital registration area. Its birth certificate is arguably
the most detailed in the country. Since 1988 it has included the method of finance (Medicaid,
other third party, HMO, and self pay) and whether the mother was enrolled in WIC during
pregnancy. There are also indicators of smoking, illicit drug use, as well as the standard set of
socio-demographic characteristics of the mother available from all birth certificates.
The indication of WIC participation is a dichotomous variable. Thus, we lack information
on how long the mother has been enrolled or when she enrolled during pregnancy. We are also
concerned about accuracy of the indicator given that it is largely self-reported. To investigate the
quality of the data, we compare the proportion of women on WIC in New York City as obtained
from birth certificates to other sources with similar information. We summarize the results in
Table 1. The most significant and convincing comparison comes from a 1990 analysis conducted
by the New York State Department of Health (1990). Researchers for the State linked the WIC
History File to New York State birth certificates in 1988. The match rate was 96 percent. This
matched file was then linked to the state hospital discharge data set (SPARCS). Summary
statistics are presented for New York City and Upstate New York. As shown in Table 1, the
State reported that 21.3 percent of births to New York City residents in 1988 were enrolled in
WIC during pregnancy. The figure from the New York City birth certificate was 21.0 percent.
As an additional check we compared data from two other sources: the 1988 National Maternal
and Infant Health Survey or NMIHS
(http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/elec_prods/subject/mihs.htm) and 1993 Pregnancy Risk

11

Assessment Monitoring System or PRAMS (http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/drh/srv_prams.htm).
NMIHS does not identify the state of residence on the public use file and thus we compared New
York City to the northeast region. Similarly, the PRAMS data from New York does not include
births to women from New York City. Although PRAMS does not include births for New York
City, we used the City and Upstate distribution of WIC participation in 1988 and the total figure
for upstate New York State in 1993 to approximate participation in New York City. As is
evident from Table 1, WIC participation based on New York City birth certificates is consistent
with other surveys.
Finally, WIC is not an entitlement program. If demand for WIC exceeds the allocated
funds, then eligible candidates may not receive benefits. Pregnant women, however, are among
the eligible groups with the highest priority for WIC services and the prenatal WIC program has
been fully funded in New York State over the study period.4
Outcomes
We present results for birth weight and low birth weight so that our results can be
compared to previous work. We use the standard definition of low birth weight, which is infants
born less than 2500 grams. We use three measures of fetal growth. The first is birth weight
adjusted for gestational age. The second measure is a dichotomous indicator of infants below
the 10th percentile in weight for gestation based on all singleton births to US residents in 1995
(Alexander et al. 1998). They are referred to as small for gestational age (SGA). Our final
measure of fetal growth is an indicator of infants that are term, low birth weight (> 36 weeks
gestation and < 2500 grams).
4

Personal communication: Roberta Hayward, Division of Nutrition, Bureau of Supplemental Food Programs, New
York State Department of Health. It is more difficult to determine whether nutritional counseling has changed over
time. Moreover, the only change in New York State in the availability of food that we were able to establish was the

12

We use maternal weight and net maternal weight gain during pregnancy as intermediate
outcomes that may be related to nutritional supplementation. Net maternal weight gain is total
weight gain less the weight of the newborn. Net maternal weight gain removes spurious
association related to what epidemiologists refer to as part-whole correlation (Institute of
Medicine 1996). However, weight gain is not reported consistently over time in our data. In
1988-90, for example, weight gain was unknown for 27 percent of WIC participants but 67
percent of non-WIC participants with no previous live births and who initiated prenatal care in
the first four months of pregnancy (see Table 2). By 1999-2001, the percent unknown had fallen
to approximately six and nine percent, respectively. Thus, for maternal weight gain during
pregnancy, we limit the analysis to 1999-2001.
Analysis of twins
A novel aspect of this study is a subset of analyses based on the outcomes of multifetal
pregnancies that result in twins. There were over 40,000 deliveries to twins in New York City
between 1988 to 2001, of which approximately 11,000 were to women on Medicaid and/or WIC.
Thus, we analyze the association between WIC participation and birth outcomes to women on
Medicaid or on WIC without Medicaid who delivered twins over the study period. Although
twin deliveries represent less than two percent of all live births, the rate of low birth weight is
over 50 percent among twins in the United States as compared to 6 percent for singletons.
Women pregnant with twins have 2.4 times the risk of anemia and the American College of
Obstetrics and Gynecology (ACOG) recommends that women carrying twins consume 300 Kcal
per day above that recommended for singletons (Gall 1996; ACOG 1999). WIC programs in all

1989 Farmers’ Market Nutrition Program (FMNP). The program provided coupons for fresh fruits and vegetables to
WIC participants.
13

51 states consider multifetal gestations a marker for women at nutritional risk (Institute of
Medicine 1996).

Empirical Methods
Analysis of singleton births
The composition of women that gave birth in New York City has changed significantly
over the 14 years of our study period. In 1988, for example, 39.0 percent of all births in the City
were financed by Medicaid as compared to 55.8 percent in 2001. Similarly, the percent of births
to foreign-born women increased from 40.1 in 1988 to but 53.0 percent in 2001. To adjust for
such shifts in the distribution of births by maternal characteristics, we estimate regressions of the
form:

(1)

G it = α 0 + α1 WICit + x' it β + ∑ yrt + e it

Let Git be the fetal growth in grams adjusted for gestational age of infant i in year t; let
WICit be one if the mother participated in WIC during pregnancy in year t, let xit be a vector of
maternal characteristics and let yrt be an indicator of the year. The coefficient on WIC, α1,
estimates the average treatment effect of WIC on fetal growth under two assumptions: first, that
the decision to participate in WIC, conditional on X, is uncorrelated with fetal growth in the
absence of participation; and second, that the expected gains to participation are constant across
individuals (Heckman 1997; Wooldridge 2002). Both assumptions are clearly strong. To
illustrate, Figures 1 and 2 show the rate of low birth weight births and mean birth weight,
respectively, for singleton births to women on Medicaid by WIC and non-WIC participants in
New York City from 1988 to 2001. In 1988, the difference in the rate of low birth weight

14

between WIC and non-WIC participants was 3.5 percentage points and differences in mean birth
weight was 95 grams. Both estimates are quite consistent with much of the literature of the
1980s. As is apparent in both Figures, however, mean differences diminish overtime. There are
also large differences by race, ethnicity and nativity, as we show below. Consequently, we
interact WIC with the year dummies and we estimate separate models by race, ethnicity and
nativity. With these specifications the assumption of constant average treatment effects may be
less problematic, since it pertains to more homogenous groups at a specific point in time.
The other key assumption is that WIC participation is uncorrelated with fetal growth in
the absence of participation. In other words, do women select into WIC because they have
strong preferences for health and are highly risk averse (favorable selection); or, is the opposite
true: women that participate in WIC have underlying health problems that are not observed by
researchers (adverse selection). We take two approaches to mitigate selection bias. First, we
estimate models that are limited to women of zero parity who initiate prenatal care in the first
four months of pregnancy, a standard definition of early prenatal care (Kotelchuck 1994). The
idea is to compare outcomes among a sample of women whose preferences, motivation, and
experience with pregnancy are similar. For example, data from the NMIHS indicate that in
1988, 67 percent of prenatal WIC participants who had at least one previous live birth had been
enrolled in WIC during a preceding pregnancy (Gordon and Nelson 1995). Women previously
enrolled in WIC may be more likely to register for early prenatal care. They may be better
informed about nutrition and other risk factors and have stronger preferences for healthy
behavior. By restricting the sample to women with no previous live births, we eliminate the
possibility of differential experience with WIC between current participants and nonparticipants. Similarly, early prenatal care may be another marker for favorable selection. The

15

first prenatal care visit is initiated by the woman. Subsequent visits may be in response to the
prenatal protocol. Thus, the timing of the first visit as opposed to an index of prenatal care may
better reflect a mother’s attitude and access to prenatal care.
To illustrate the difference in risk factors by the timing of prenatal care in our sample, we
display the percent of births exposed to cocaine or heroin from 1988 to 2001. We also display
these differences by race, ethnicity and nativity. Figure 3 pertains to women on Medicaid and or
WIC who initiated prenatal care in the first-four months of pregnancy. Figure 4 shows the same
series but for women who initiated prenatal care late. We stratify the four series in each figure
by WIC and non-WIC participants. Two observations are salient. First, differences in exposure
by nativity are huge. Foreign-born women, and in particular Hispanics, have very low rates of
exposure to illicit drugs regardless of when they begin prenatal care.5 Second, differences in
exposure vary by year, WIC participation, and the timing of prenatal care among U.S. born
blacks. Exposure is greatest between 1988-90, roughly the peak years of the crack/cocaine
epidemic in New York City, and it declines substantially by 2001. Given these patterns, we hope
to lessen heterogeneity between WIC and non-WIC participants by estimating separate models
by race, ethnicity, nativity, parity and the timing of prenatal care.
An important limitation of our identification strategy is that our results will only
generalize to primaparas who initiate prenatal care early. We consider this an acceptable
tradeoff. The danger of omitted variable bias in program evaluation with observational data is
clearly profound. The strength of our analysis is the large number of observations over a 14-year
period. This allows us to define relatively homogenous groups and to test whether treatment
effects vary over time. If the composition of our samples is constant over the study period

5

This is not specific to New York City. Vega et al. (1993) analyzed the urine of over 29,000 women who delivered
in California in 1992 and found similar differences by race and ethnicity.
16

(based on observables), then time-varying treatment effects would be consistent with some form
of selection into WIC.
We take two other approaches to estimate the association between WIC and birth
outcomes. We use propensity score matching with the selected sample of first births to women
who begin care early. We use nearest neighbor matching after balancing characteristics between
WIC and non-WIC participants by blocks of propensity scores. We also drop observations that
lack a common region of support (Becker and Ichino 2002). We appreciate that neither
stratification nor matching guarantees that selection bias is minimized. Thus, we also obtain
estimates based on instrumental variables (IV). The results from propensity score matching and
IV models are presented in Appendix II. The estimates obtained by propensity score matching
differed little from those obtained by OLS. The IV estimates of the relationship between WIC
and fetal growth outcomes are not significant. However, we choose not to focus on these results
because the variables we use as instruments are not ideal. We present a fuller discussion of these
results in Appendix II.

Analysis of Twins
As noted above, researchers often estimate equation (1) separately for groups at greater
“nutritional” risk, such as smokers and teens. The objective is to allow for interactions between
need and participation. To illustrate, we re-write equation (1) and drop the vector of covariates

17

and time dummies to simplify notation.

(2)

G it = α 0 + α1 WIC it + α 2 δ it + α 3 (WIC * δ it ) + π it + e it

let δit be a measure of nutritional risk. Common measures of nutritional risk (δit) include
smoking, teen pregnancy and high parity. Let πit be unobserved behaviors related to adverse
birth outcomes such as heavy smoking, illicit drugs and risky sex that increases exposure to
sexually transmitted disease. Estimates based on equation (2) are likely to exacerbate problems
of omitted variables since characteristics of nutritional risk (δit) are likely correlated with πit.
The use of twins as a measure of δit offers two advantages to previous measures of
nutritional risk. First, multifetal pregnancies increase the risk of anemia and fetal growth
retardation, conditions that should be more sensitive to nutritional supplementation than preterm
birth. Second, twinning is randomly assigned and thus unlike smoking, for example, twinning
should be orthogonal to other risky behaviors (πit). Thus, a comparison of outcomes between
WIC and non-WIC participants all of whom delivered twins should be a more legitimate test of
whether WIC has a greater effect among women at increased nutritional risk.
One potential weakness in this design is that some women may enroll in WIC after the
diagnosis of multiple pregnancies. Thus, even if twinning is orthogonal to πit prior to diagnosis,
women with stronger preferences for health, higher motivation, or who are more knowledgeable
may seek out WIC in response to their condition, a form of favorable selection. In an attempt to
lessen such selection, we limit the sample to women who initiate prenatal care in the first four
months of pregnancy. As with the analysis of singleton births, the idea is to restrict the analysis
to a sub-sample of women with similar motivation and access as reflected in their prompt

18

initiation of prenatal care. We do not stratify initially by previous live births because of possible
recording errors in the measure of parity among twin deliveries.6
Another concern is that the exogeneity of twinning will be compromised if multifetal
conceptions resulted from assisted reproductive technologies (ART).

Women who use ART are

likely to be highly motivated about achieving a healthy birth outcome and may self select into
WIC. Age and year of birth, however, are important correlates of ART and twinning (Ventura
et al. 1999). Eighty-nine percent of women that receive ART in 1996-1997 were 30 years of age
or older and the number of infertility clinics and the use of ART have also grown rapidly over
time (Schieve et al. 2002; Jain, Missmer and Hornstein 2004). To lessen the potential bias from
women who use ART, we re-estimate the models for twins and limited the sample to women less
than 30. We also allow the effect of WIC to vary by year since the impact of ART should be
less in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

Results
Singleton births
Summary statistics for WIC and non-WIC participants are displayed in Table 2 at three
points in time: 1988-90, the period roughly prior to the Medicaid expansion in New York State,
the years 1994-1996, the years prior to welfare reform and then 1999-2001. Our sample in Table
2 includes only singleton first births to women on Medicaid or on WIC without Medicaid
participation who initiate prenatal care in the first four months of pregnancy.

6

Differences in

The birth certificate indicates which twin is the first. If a woman had no previous live births, then parity for the
first twin should be zero and the second twin should have a parity of one. This appears correct for approximately
80 percent of twin deliveries, except in 1994 and 1995 in which it is only true for 20 percent of deliveries. In our
sensitivity analysis we do the following: we assume all twins with the same parity of zero, regardless of which twin
was delivered first, are parity zero. We then combine these with the consistent indications of parity zero and reestimate the models for twins whose mothers initiate care early and who have no previous live births.
19

birth outcomes by WIC participation are qualitatively consistent with the literature between
1988-1990, but of a smaller magnitude. There are statistically significant differences in mean
birth weight (28 grams), low birth weight (1.3 percentage points), preterm birth (1.8 percentage
points) and infants that are small for gestational age (0.7 percentage points). The characteristics
of women in WIC between 1988-90 are marginally more favorable with respect to education,
prenatal care visits and illicit drug use than their non-WIC counterparts. By 1994-1996 there are
no meaningful differences in birth outcomes and women in WIC are now more disadvantaged,
albeit modestly, than their non-WIC counterparts with respect to education, marital status and
teen motherhood. These modest disadvantages increase slightly by 1999-2001.
However, the racial and ethnic distribution of WIC and non-WIC participants change
more substantially over the study period. For instance, the proportion of births to Asians on
Medicaid but not on WIC rises from 3.6 percent in 1988-1990 to 25.8 percent in 1999-2001
while the proportion of Puerto Ricans and Black non-Hispanics falls 9.5 and 17.8 percentage
points respectively. The racial and ethnic composition among WIC participants changes
similarly, but not as dramatically. These shifts would appear responsible in part for the
narrowing of birth outcomes between WIC and non-WIC participants as displayed in Figure 1,
since Asians and other Hispanics have lower rates of adverse birth outcomes than do Puerto
Ricans and non-Hispanic Blacks. Thus Besharov and Germanis were correct that the Medicaid
eligibility expansions altered the distribution of characteristics among WIC and non-WIC
participants in New York City. Yet dichotomous controls for race and ethnicity might not
adequately control for the myriad of differences among these groups and their possible
interactions with observed characteristics.

This is a major reason why we stratify our analyses

by race, ethnicity and nativity.

20

Multivariate analysis
In order to provide a point of comparison with previous research, we start our analysis
with a consideration of the relationship between WIC and birth weight. We also explore how the
use of one of our main sub-samples of interest (first time mothers with singleton births who
initiated prenatal care early) may influence these results.
The first column of Table 3 presents mean differences in birth weight between WIC and
non-WIC Medicaid participants with singleton births unadjusted for any covariates as shown in
Table 3. We then show the estimates of α1 in equation (1) followed by estimates of the
interaction between WIC and the year dummies. The last two columns in Table 3 display
estimates for the sub-sample of women who initiate prenatal care early and who have no
previous live births. The unadjusted difference in mean birth weight between WIC and non-WIC
participants is 46 grams over the 14 years of the sample. After adjustment, mean differences fall
by 44 percent to 25.9 grams. However, among women who initiate care early, mean differences
are smaller still at 18.0 grams, and if we restrict the analysis to those who begin care early and
who have had no previous live births, and thus no experience with WIC, adjusted mean
differences fall to 10.5 grams.
The same pattern persists across specifications when we allow average treatment effects
to vary by year. The adjusted estimate for 1988 among all women, 55 grams, is broadly
consistent with the literature (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore 1992). Other researchers have
also found that average treatment effects are smaller for women who enrolled in WIC earlier in
pregnancy (Devaney, Bilheimer and Schore 1992; Gordon and Nelson 1996).
One interpretation of the results in Table 3 is that the treatment effects associated with
WIC are small or inconsequential among men who begin care early and who have no previous

21

live births. These women are arguably the most homogenous group available from these data
and thus, provide the least contaminated test of WIC. An alternative interpretation is that women
who present for prenatal care early in pregnancy are the least likely to need nutritional
supplementation and thus the gains to WIC are expected to be less. The diminution of effects
over time, however, regardless of the sample, suggests that problems of omitted variables persist.
As demonstrated in Table 2 there has been a significant change in the composition of women
both on Medicaid and WIC. And despite the inclusion of controls for race and ethnicity, there
could be important interaction effects for which we do not account. We turn, therefore, to the
next set of analyses in which we stratify by race, ethnicity and nativity.
Table 4 presents regression estimates of equation (1 ) for all women on WIC or Medicaid,
who initiated prenatal care early and who had no previous live births. There are six birth
outcomes. The first three pertain to various measures of birth weight; the second set contains
proxies for fetal growth, outcomes that we contend are more appropriate for assessing the effect
of nutritional supplementation and counseling. As before, we first show estimates for all years
and then estimates from the interaction of WIC and year.
There is modest evidence at best of an association between WIC and measures related to
birth weight. Moreover, the statistically significant results that do exist are limited to the late
1980s and early 1990s. There is little association between WIC and measures of fetal growth.
For instance, the coefficients on WIC in the regression of birth weight adjusted for gestational
age are either small and statistically insignificant or they have the wrong sign. In other words,
the positive association between WIC and birth weight reflects prolonged gestation. The same
point is made if we compare estimates from the regression of low birth weight on WIC with the
regression estimates from term low birth weight on WIC. In the few years in which there is a

22

significant association between WIC and low birth weight, there is no equivalent relationship for
term low birth weight. The association between WIC and low birth weight, therefore, is driven
by the correlation between WIC and preterm birth, an association for which there is little clinical
support. The third measure of fetal growth pertains to infants born small for gestational age
(SGA). The coefficient on WIC averaged across all years has the wrong sign (0.003) and is
statistically insignificant.
To further explore the question of omitted variables bias, we re-run the regressions in
Table 4 for two subgroups: US-born non-Hispanic blacks and foreign-born Hispanics. One
objective is to lessen heterogeneity due to the changing composition of WIC participants over
time. In addition, the two groups had very different exposure to crack cocaine. Numerous
studies of prenatal cocaine use have documented much higher prevalence among blacks than
Hispanics and among US-born as compared to foreign-born women.7 Figure 3 shows a similar
pattern. If differential exposure to cocaine in the early years of our study period is driving the
results, we would expect to see larger differences in birth outcomes by WIC for US-born Blacks
than for all women. The opposite should occur among foreign-born Hispanics.
Regression estimates for US-born Blacks and foreign-born Hispanics are shown in Tables
5 and 6, respectively. Again the sample pertains to only Medicaid or WIC recipients who initiate
prenatal care in the first four months of pregnancy and who have no previous live births. For
US-born Blacks there are large and statistically significant differences in rates of low birth
weight in 1988-1991 by WIC (Table 5). On average, WIC participants are 2.7 percentage points
less likely to experience a low birth weight birth over this period. After 1991, the average
7

In the largest prevalence study of prenatal exposure to illicit substances ever undertaken, researchers in California
tested the urine of almost 30,000 mothers at delivery in 1992. Seven and a half percent of all blacks tested positive
for cocaine whereas only 0.5 percent of Hispanics. Important differences by nativity have also been demonstrated.

23

difference falls and in only three of the 10 subsequent years are differences statistically
significant. Importantly, however, there are few statistically significant differences in fetal
growth between WIC and non-WIC participants. A comparison of the treatment effects between
WIC and low birth weight with those of WIC and term low birth weight again suggests that the
association between WIC and low birth weight reflects primarily an association between WIC
and preterm birth.
The results for foreign-born Hispanics provide an important point of contrast to those of
US-born Blacks. As shown in Table 6 there is only one statistically significant coefficient with
the expected sign out of a possible set of 84. Nor is the result due to a lack of power. Few of
the coefficients are of a clinically meaningful magnitude.
We draw two tentative conclusions from this exercise. First, if we lessen confounding
from compositional changes in WIC participants by looking within race, ethnicity and nativity,
we find little evidence of any substantive association between prenatal WIC participation and
fetal growth over the study period. Second, there are relatively large differences in low birth
weight between WIC and non-WIC participants among US-born Blacks but not among foreignborn Hispanics.

Moreover, the differences are largely concentrated between 1988-1992. The

pattern of results is consistent with the interpretation that unobserved heterogeneity related to
crack-cocaine epidemic, and not treatment effects associated with WIC, is the most plausible
explanation for the association between WIC and low birth weight. This is difficult to prove,
since information on exposure is undoubtedly underreported on birth certificates. Nevertheless,
relative differences in exposure to cocaine and heroin by race, ethnicity and nativity as shown in

In a prevalence study in New York in 1988, 24 percent of US-born Blacks but only 4 percent of foreign-born blacks
tested positive for cocaine at delivery (authors’ calculations based on figures in McCalla et al. 1991).
24

Figures 3 and 4 and from rigorous studies of prenatal exposure (Vega et al. 1993) are consistent
with this interpretation.

Analysis of Twins
The notion that WIC should have a greater impact among women at greater nutritional
risk remains an important rationale for the existence of supplemental nutrition and nutritional
counseling. In this section we present results of the association between WIC and birth
outcomes for a sample of twins. As before, the sample is limited to all women on WIC and or
Medicaid who initiated prenatal care in the first four months of pregnancy. Summary statistics
by WIC are presented in Appendix I, Table IA. As is immediately apparent, the rate of adverse
birth outcomes is much greater among twins than singletons. Fifty-seven percent of twins not on
WIC are low birth weight as compared to 52 percent for those on WIC in 1988-90.
01, differences in low birth by WIC have reversed.

The same is true for SGA.

By 1999-

Note that we

include two measures of SGA. The first uses a singleton norm (SGA-S) and the other uses
norms for all US born twins (SAG-T) in 1995 (Alexander et al. 1998).8
As with singletons, the composition of women on Medicaid and or WIC who delivered
twins changed over the sample period. By 1999-2001 WIC and non-WIC participants have more
education, more prenatal care visits, smoke less and are more likely to be foreign-born than their
counterparts in 1988-1990. However, the improvements are relatively greater among non-WIC
participants.
In Table 7 we show adjusted mean differences in birth outcomes by WIC for the sample
of twins obtained from the estimation of equation (1).

25

We present estimates for the entire 14-

year period and then separately by various years. As before, we analyze three samples: all
women, US-born Blacks and foreign-born Hispanics. The pattern of results for all women and
foreign-born Hispanics largely reflects those of singletons. We show a modest association
between WIC participation and infants that are small for gestational age among all women, but
no association with birth weight adjusted for gestation or term low birth weight.
association between WIC and fetal growth among foreign-born Hispanics.

There is no

For US-born

Blacks, we find that WIC is associated with an increase of 55 grams in birth weight adjusted for
gestation and a decline of 3.9 percentage points in the rate of SGA (p<.01). The effects are
concentrated in the 1993-1997 period.
We next allow estimates to vary by the age of the mother (Table 8). We are concerned
that estimates for older women may be contaminated by self-selection associated with assisted
reproductive technologies. A notable finding is that WIC participation is related to birth weight
adjusted for gestational age and term low birth weight among US-born Blacks 24 years of age or
less. For US-born Blacks 30 years of age or older, the pattern of results across the fetal growth
outcomes is less consistent with an effect of WIC. There is little evidence that WIC is effective
among all women and the subgroup of foreign-born Hispanics. As a further check of the results,
we limited the sample to first birth twins based on our algorithm described earlier and reestimated the results in Tables 7 and 8. The results for young black women become somewhat
stronger (available upon request). Overall, the exercise based on twins suggests that the
association between WIC and fetal growth is limited to US-born black women less than 25 years
of age.

8

SGA-T classifies a birth as small for gestational age if the infant is below the 10 percentile of weight for gestation
based on all twin deliveries in the US in 1995. The rationale for a separate standard for twins is based on their

26

Specification checks
We have included in our analyses the sub-sample of women who participated in WIC but
who were not on Medicaid. We are concerned that women on WIC but not on Medicaid may
differ in unobserved ways that are associated with birth outcomes, especially before 1990 when
income eligibility thresholds for WIC were higher than Medicaid. We dropped these women,
and re-estimated the models in Table 4-6. The results changed inconsequentially (available
upon request).
Another limitation of the analysis to this point has been the omission of information on
pre-pregnancy weight and maternal weight gain during pregnancy.

As noted previously, there

is a large proportion of missing data for these variables in the early and middle years of the study
period. Reporting improves significantly after 1998 (see Table 2). Thus, we re-estimated
equation (1) the years 1999-2001 with pre-pregnancy weight included. We continue to find no
association between WIC and fetal growth for all women including US-born Blacks with and
without pre-pregnancy weight included. We also regressed maternal weight gain during
pregnancy and net weight gain on WIC and pregnancy weight. The coefficient on WIC
generally had the wrong sign (negative) and was relatively small in magnitude (less than half a
pound). The results for weight gain are consistent with the lack of any meaningful association
between WIC and fetal growth among singletons.9

greater rates of birth-weight specific survival.
9
Results are available upon request.
27

Conclusion
We use New York City birth certificates from 1988 to 2001 to analyze the association
between prenatal participation in WIC and birth outcomes. If we limit the analysis to the years
1988-1990, our results are consistent with much of the literature. We find that WIC participants
have lower rates of low birth weight and greater mean birth weights than non-participants.
However, upon further analysis we find that differences in birth outcomes between WIC and
non-WIC participants are not uniform across race and ethnicity, pertained primarily to
differences in preterm birth and not fetal growth, and become inconsequential and statistically
insignificant over time. Moreover, with the exception of US-born Blacks less than 25 years of
age, we find no meaningful association between WIC and fetal growth among twins despite their
elevated risk of anemia and adverse birth outcomes. We conclude that participation in WIC has
had a minimal impact on infant health in the City over the past 14 years.
We speculate that the association found between 1988 and 1990, especially for US-born
Blacks, resulted from unobserved heterogeneity related to differential rates of exposure to crack
cocaine between WIC and non-WIC participants. As evidence, we show that exposure to
cocaine and heroin was much greater among US-born Blacks than foreign-born Hispanics as
recorded on New York City birth certificates. Although the birth certificate likely underreports
exposure, relative differences by race and ethnicity are consistent with more rigorous studies of
prenatal cocaine use. Moreover, differences in low birth weight by WIC among blacks
diminished overtime as did reports of exposure to cocaine and heroin. Second, there are no birth
weight differences by WIC between 1988 and 1991 among foreign-born Hispanics, a result
consistent with their minimum exposure. Third, the convergence in rates of low birth weight

28

between WIC and non-WIC participants results from a substantial decline among non-WIC
participants, which is again consistent with the declining prenatal exposure to cocaine.
We anticipate that many will question the generalizability of our results, since they
pertain to one city, albeit the most populous in the nation and one with an exceedingly large
caseload of WIC participants. However, our results are quite consistent with the literature with
respect to the generally weak association between WIC and fetal growth. This includes the
recent study by Bitler and Currie (forthcoming) based on PRAMS in 19 states, as well as
Gordon and Nelson’s (1995) national analysis of WIC using the NMIHS. We emphasize the
results for fetal growth because the link between nutritional supplementation and preterm birth in
a developed country such as the US appears implausible given the lack of any effective
interventions for preterm birth. Indeed, the seminal work on the Dutch famine is instructive.
Despite dramatic nutritional deprivation relative to that which exists in the US today, there was
no increase in preterm birth, but a large decrease in birth weight adjusted for gestation.
Our analysis was unique in that we had sufficient observations to stratify analyses by
race, ethnicity, nativity, parity as well as the timing of prenatal care initiation. We believe this
goes a long way towards lessening unobserved heterogeneity, which may explain differences
between our results and those of others. However, by limiting the analysis to women with no
previous live births and who initiate prenatal care early, we may have eliminated participants
who were at greater nutritional risk and who might have benefited from WIC. Our response was
to undertake a separate analysis of twins, since multifetal pregnancies are at greater nutritional
risk than single gestations and yet twinning is more plausibly exogenous than are other risk
factors such as late prenatal care, smoking and teen pregnancy. We believe that the analysis of
twins is a meaningful contribution to the literature on WIC.

29

Finally, we want to emphasize that women and infants represent roughly half of all WIC
participants and that birth outcomes are only one outcome of interest. The fact that many
women participate in WIC over multiple pregnancies implies a continuity that may have
important pediatric benefits. Moreover, the lack of an association between prenatal WIC
participation and adverse birth outcomes should be seen as a challenge to find more effective
interventions such as smoking cessation programs, than as a reason to withdraw from the
struggle to understand and ameliorate the high rate of low birth weight among poor and nearpoor women in the US.

30

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a grant from the Institute for Research on Poverty and the
United States Department of Agriculture (IRP-USDA) Small Grants program to the Research
Foundation of the City University of New York. We are grateful to Janet Currie and Marianne
Bitler for comments and to John Karl Scholz and other participants at the USDA-IRP Small
Grants workshop. We thank the New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
(NYCDOHMH) for the public use birth files. The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not the IRP, the USDA or the NYCDOHMH.

31

References:
Ahluwalia, I. B., Hogan, V. K., Grummer-Strawn, L., Colville, W. R. and A. Peterson. (1998)
“The Effect of WIC Participation on Small-for-Gestational-Age Births: Michigan, 1992.”
American Journal of Public Health 88(9): 1374-1377.
Alexander, G. et al. (1998). “What are the Fetal Growth Patterns of Singleton, Twins and
Triplets in the United States.” Clinical Obstetrics and Gynecology 41 (1): 115-125.
Alexander, G. and K. Korenbrot (1995). “The Role of Prenatal Care in Preventing Low Birth
Weight.” The Future of Children 5, 103-120.
American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. (1999). “Special Problems of Multiple
Gestations.” International Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics 64:323-333.
Angrist, J., Imbens, G., and D. Rubin. (1996) "Identification of Causal Effects Using
Instrumental Variables. Journal of the American Statistical Association 91:444-454.
Avruch, S. and A. P. Cackley. (1995). “Savings Achieved by Giving WIC Benefits to Women
Prenatally.” Public Health Reports 110(1): 27-34.
Becker, Sascha O. and A. Ichino. (2002) “Estimation of Average Treatment Effects based on
Propensity Scores.” Stata Journal 2(4):358-377.
Besharov, D. J. and P. Germanis, P. (2000). “Evaluating WIC.” Evaluation Review 24(2):123190.
Besharov, D. J. and P. Germanis. (2001). Rethinking WIC. An Evaluation of the Women,
Infants, and Children Program. Washington, DC:American Enterprise Institute.
Bitler, Marianne and Janet Currie. Forthcoming. “Does WIC Work? The Effects of WIC on
Pregnancy and Birth Outcomes.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management
Bitler, Marianne, Currie, Janet and John Karl Scholz. (2003). “ WIC Eligibility and
Participation.” The Journal of Human Resources 38(Supplement): 1139-1179.
Brien, M. J. and C. A. Swann. (1999). “Prenatal Participation and Infant Health: Selection and
Maternal Fixed Effects.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Virginia.
Bound, J., Jaeger, D. and R. Baker. (1995) "The Cure Can Be Worse than the Disease: A
Cautionary Tale Regarding Instrumental Variables." Journal of the American Statistical
Association 90:443-450.
Buescher, P. et al. (1993). “Prenatal WIC Participation Can Reduce Low Birth Weight and
Newborn Medical Costs: a Cost-Benefit Analysis of WIC Participation in North
Carolina.” Journal of the American Dietetic Association 93(2):163-167.

Buescher, Paul A. and Stephanie J. Horton. (2000). “Prenatal WIC Participation in Relation to
Low Birth Weight and Medicaid Infant Costs in North Carolina—a 1997 Update.” Center
for Health Information and Statistics, North Carolina Department of Health and Human
Services.
Collaborative Group on Preterm Birth Prevention. (1993). “Multicenter Randomized, Controlled
Trial of a Preterm Birth Prevention Program.” American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 169: 352-366.
Devaney, B., Bilheimer, L. and J. Schore. (1992). “Medicaid Costs and Birth Outcomes: The
Effects of Prenatal WIC Participation and the Use of Prenatal Care.” Journal of Policy
Analysis and Management 11(4): 573-592.
Dyson, D. et al. (1998). “Monitoring Women at Risk for Preterm Labor.” New England Journal
of Medicine 338(1):15-19.
Fraker, T., Gordon, A. and B. Devaney. (1995). “The Use of Selection-Bias Models to Evaluate
Food and Nutrition Programs.” Washington, D.C.: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
Gall, S. A. 1996. Multiple Pregnancy and Delivery. St Louis, MO: Mosby.
General Accounting Office 1992. “Early Intervention: Federal Investments Like WIC Can
Produce Savings” (GAO/HRD-92-18). Washington DC: United States General
Accounting Office.
Goldenberg, R. L. and Rouse, D. J. (1998). “Prevention of Premature Birth.” The New England
Journal of Medicine 339(5): 313-320.
Gordon, Anne and Lyle Nelson. (1995) “Characteristics and Outcomes of WIC Participants and
Nonparticipants: Analysis of the 1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey.”
Princeton: Mathematica Policy Institute.
Heckman, J. (1997). “Instrumental Variables.” Journal of Human Resources 32(3):441-462.
Iams, J. (1998). “Prevention of Preterm Birth.” New England Journal of Medicine 338(1):54-56.
Institute of Medicine. (1990). Nutrition During Pregnancy. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine. (1996). WIC Nutrition and Risk Criteria. Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
Jain, T., Missmer, S.A. and M.D. Hornstein. (2004). “Trends in Embryo-Transfer Practice and in
Outcomes of the Use of Assisted Reproductive Technology in the United States.” The
New England Journal of Medicine 350(16):1639-1645.
Joyce, T. (1999) “Impact of Augmented Prenatal Care on Birth Outcomes of Medicaid
Recipients in New York City.” Journal of Health Economics 18(1): 31-67.

Joyce, et al. (1995). “The Impact of Prenatal Exposure to Cocaine on Newborn Costs and Length
of Stay.” Health Services Research 30:341-358.
Kennedy, E.T. et al. (1982). “Evaluation of the Effect of WIC Supplemental Feeding on Birth
Weight” Journal of the American Dietetic Association. 80:220-227.
Kennedy, E.T. and M. Kotelchuck. (1984). “The Effect of WIC-Supplemented Feeding on Birth
Weight: A Case-control Analysis” The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 40:579585.
Kotelchuck, M. (1994). “An Evaluation of the Kessner Adequacy of Prenatal Care Index and a
Proposed Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization Index.” American Journal of Public
Health 84(10), 1414-1420.
Kotelchuck, M. et al. (1984). “WIC Participation and Pregnancy Outcomes: Massachusetts
Statewide Evaluation Project.” American Journal of Public Health 74(10):1086-1092.
Kowaleski-Jones, L. and G. J. Duncan. (2002) “Effects of Participation in the WIC Program on
Birthweight: Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth.” American
Journal of Public Health 92(5): 799-804.
Lewis, K. and M. Ellwood. (2000). “Medicaid Policies and Eligibility for WIC.” Cambridge,
MA: Mathematica Policy Research, Inc.
McCalla, S. et al. (1991). “The Biologic and Social Consequences of Perinatal Cocaine Use in
an Inner-City Population: Results of An Anonymous Cross-Sectional Study.” American
Journal of Obstetrics & Gynecology 164, 625-30.
Metcoff, J. et al. (1985). “Effect of Food Supplementation (WIC) During Pregnancy on Birth
Weight.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 41:933-947.
Moss, N. E. and Carver, K. (1998) “The Effect of WIC and Medicaid on Infant Mortality in the
United States.” American Journal of Public Health 88(9): 1354-1361.
New York State Department of Health, Bureau of Nutrition (1990). "The New York State WIC
Evaluation: The Association Between Prenatal WIC Participation and Birth Outcomes."
Phibbs, C. et al. (1991). “The Neonatal Costs of Maternal Cocaine Use.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 266(11): 1521-1526.
Rush, David et al. (1988) “Longitudinal Study of Pregnant Women.” American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition 48: P. 439-438.
Rush, David, Stein, Zena and Mervyn Susser. (1980). Diet in Pregnancy: A Randomized
Controlled Trial of Nutritional Supplements. New York: Alan R. Liss, Inc.

Schieve, L. A. et al. (2002). “Low and Very Low Birth Weight in Infants Conceived with Use of
Assisted Reproductive Technology.” New England Journal of Medicine 346(10):731737.
Schramm, W. F. (1985). “WIC Prenatal Participation and Its Relationship to Newborn
Medicaid Costs in Missouri: A Cost/Benefit Analysis.” American Journal of Public
Health 75(8): 851-857.
Schramm, W. F. (1986). “Prenatal Participation in WIC Related to Medicaid Costs for Missouri
Newborns: 1982 Update.” Public Health Reports 101(6): 607-615.
Stein, Zena and Mervyn Susser. (1975). “The Dutch Famine, 1944-1945, and the Reproductive
Process. I. Effects on the Six Indices at Birth.” Pediatric Research 9:70-76.
Stockbauer, J. (1986). “Evaluation of the Missouri WIC Program: Prenatal Components.”
Journal of the American Dietetic Association 86: 61-67.
Stockbauer, J. W. (1987). “WIC Prenatal Participation and Its Relation to Pregnancy Outcomes
in Missouri: A Second Look.” American Journal of Public Health 77(7): 813-818.
U.S. House of Representatives: Committee on Ways and Means. (2000). 2000 Green Book
Washington D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Vega, W. A. et al. (1997). “Perinatal Drug Use among Immigrant and Native-Born Latinas.”
Substance Use & Misuse 32: 43-62.
Vega, W. A. et al. (1993). “Prevalence and Magnitude of Perinatal Substance Exposures in
California.” New England Journal of Medicine 329: 850-4.
Ventura, S. J. and S. M. Taffel. (1985). Childbearing Characteristics of U.S.- and Foreign-born
Hispanic Mothers. Public Health Reports 100: 647-652.
Ventura, S.J., et al. (1999). “Births: Final Data for 1997.” National Vital Statistics Report 47(18).
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr49/nvsr49_01.pdf
Weeks, J. R., Rumbaut, R. G., (1991). Infant Mortality Among Ethnic Immigrant Groups. 327334. Social Science & Medicine 33:327-34.
Wooldridge, J. M. (2002). Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
MA: M.I.T. Press.

Figure 1. Percent of Singleton Births with Weight less than 2500g to
Women on Medicaid or WIC, by Participation in WIC, NYC 1988-2001
0.14
0.13
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06

0.13

0.12
0.11 0.11

0.10

0.10 0.10

0.09

0.09 0.09
0.08 0.08

0.08 0.07 0.08
0.07

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

Non-WIC

97

98

99

0

1

WIC

Figure 2. Mean Birth Weight (in grams) for Singleton Births to Women
on Medicaid or WIC, by Participation in WIC, NYC 1988-2001
3300
3250

3270
3226
3258

3200
3150
3100

3138

3050
88

89

90

91

92

93

Non-WIC

94

95

96

97

98
WIC

99

00

01

0.16

Figure 3. Percent of Singleton Births Exposed to Cocaine or Heroin
among Women on Medicaid and/or WIC who Initiated Prenatal Care in
the First Four Months of Pregnancy, by Nativity and Participation in
WIC, NYC 1988-2001

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
88

0.16

89 90 91 92 93 94
U.S.-born Blacks: Non-WIC
Foreign-born Hispanics: Non-WIC

95

96 97 98 99 00 01
U.S.-born Blacks: WIC
Foreign-born Hispanics: WIC

Figure 4. Percent of Singleton Births Exposed to Cocaine or Heroin
among Women on Medicaid and/or WIC who did not Initiate Prenatal
Care in the First Four Months of Pregnancy, by Nativity and
Participation in WIC, NYC 1988-2001

0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
88 89 90 91 92 93 94
U.S.-born Blacks: Non-WIC
Foreign-born Hispanics: Non-WIC

95

96 97 98 99 00 01
U.S.-born Blacks: WIC
Foreign-born Hispanics: WIC

Table 1. Percent of Births to Women on WIC in New York City, by Source and Year

1988

1993

a

NMIHS a

NY Department of
Health b

NYC Birth
Certificates

28.0%

21.3%

21.0%

(N=1,735)

(N=71,628)*

(N=74,294)*

PRAMS c

34.8%

33.7%

(N=124,010)

(N=1,087)

1988 National Maternal and Infant Health Survey, live birth sample, North East Region.
"The New York State WIC Evaluation: The Association Between Prenatal WIC Participation and Birth
Outcomes" New York State Department of Health, Bureau of Nutrition, December 1990, p.18-20.
c
Percent of births on WIC in New York State was estimated using the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring
System; percent of WIC participants that reside in New York City was obtained from the 1988 New York State
WIC evaluation; number of live births in NY was obtained from the Statistical Abstract of the United States;
number of live births in NYC was obtained from the Summary of Vital Statistics, NYC.
*
Based on sample of births from June to December of 1988.
b

Table 2. Characteristics of Singleton Births on WIC and/or Medicaid for Women with No Previous Live Births, who Initiated
Prenatal Care in the First Four Months of Pregnancy, New York City 1988-2001

N
Measure of birth weight:
Mean
% LBW (<2500g)
% VLBW (<1500g)
Weeks of gestation:
Mean
% Unknown
Premature
Measure of fetal growth:
LBW, >36wks gest
Small-for-GA
% Unknown
Mother's weight-gain:
Mean
% Unknown
Net weight
Mother’s education:
<12 years
12 years
13-16 years
≥17 years
Unknown
Mother’s age:
10-19
20-34
35-50
Unknown

Non-WIC

1988-1990
WIC

Non-WIC

1994-1996
WIC

16745

18670

14630

36029

3188
0.098
0.017

3216
0.085
0.013

28.53***
-0.013***
-0.004***

3219
0.082
0.015

3215
0.080
0.015

38.90
0.000
0.101

39.07
0.000
0.083

0.176***
0.000
-0.018***

38.93
0.000
0.088

38.97
0.000
0.081

0.042
0.167
0.001

0.039
0.159
0.001

-0.004*
-0.007*
-0.001*

0.032
0.143
0.001

0.033
0.144
0.001

29.24
0.676
22.19

30.62
0.265
23.51

1.382***
-0.412***
1.324***

31.32
0.279
24.20

31.91
0.182
24.81

0.397
0.447
0.126
0.010
0.019

0.397
0.404
0.171
0.012
0.016

0.000
-0.043***
0.045***
0.002
-0.003**

0.310
0.424
0.209
0.026
0.031

0.260
0.687
0.050
0.003

0.299
0.665
0.034
0.002

0.039***
-0.022***
-0.017***
0.000

0.234
0.712
0.054
0.001

Diff.

Non-WIC

1999-2001
WIC

13561

39047

-3.858
-0.003
0.000

3238
0.073
0.014

3216
0.080
0.014

-21.688***
0.007**
0.000

0.040*
0.000
-0.006**

38.89
0.002
0.078

38.91
0.000
0.081

0.018
-0.002***
0.003

0.029
0.123
0.003

0.032
0.139
0.001

0.002
0.016***
-0.003***

0.582***
-0.097***
0.611***

32.64
0.086
25.51

32.93
0.059
25.83

0.284**
-0.027***
0.328**

0.363
0.390
0.200
0.020
0.027

0.053***
-0.034***
-0.008**
-0.006***
-0.004***

0.308
0.388
0.241
0.040
0.022

0.375
0.371
0.217
0.027
0.011

0.067***
-0.018***
-0.024***
-0.014***
-0.011***

0.295
0.666
0.038
0.001

0.061***
-0.046***
-0.016***
-0.000

0.201
0.742
0.058
0.000

0.276
0.684
0.040
0.000

0.076***
-0.058***
-0.017***
0.000

Diff.

0.001
0.001
0.000

Diff.

Table 2. Continued

Mother’s race:
Puerto Rican
Other-Hispanic
Asian
White-NonHispanic
Black-NonHispanic
Other
Unknown
Marital status:
Single
Unknown
Mother’s birth place:
Foreign born
% Unknown
PrePregnancy Weight:
Mean
% Unknown
Prenatal doctor visits:
Mean
% Unknown
Drug use d. pregnancy:
Heroin/cocaine
% Unknown
Cigarettes

Non-WIC

1988-1990
WIC

Non-WIC

1994-1996
WIC

Non-WIC

1999-2001
WIC

0.197
0.234
0.036
0.117
0.404
0.000
0.013

0.224
0.263
0.019
0.066
0.424
0.000
0.003

0.124
0.255
0.177
0.174
0.257
0.009
0.004

0.153
0.353
0.049
0.082
0.351
0.007
0.005

0.030***
0.098***
-0.128***
-0.092***
0.093***
-0.002***
0.001*

0.103
0.251
0.258
0.158
0.226
0.002
0.003

0.117
0.378
0.087
0.071
0.342
0.004
0.001

0.015***
0.128***
-0.172***
-0.087***
0.116***
0.002***
-0.002***

0.684
0.000

0.684
0.000

0.000
0.000

0.667
0.000

0.766
0.000

0.099***
0.000

0.617
0.000

0.745
0.000

0.128***
0.000

0.404
0.003

0.435
0.003

0.030***
0.001

0.579
0.008

0.545
0.008

-0.034***
0.000

0.628
0.009

0.585
0.004

-0.043***
-0.005***

137.2
0.662

139.1
0.235

1.883***
-0.427***

134.6
0.256

140.8
0.157

6.189***
-0.100***

134.0
0.078

138.1
0.048

4.124***
-0.030***

9.456
0.035

10.202
0.020

0.745***
-0.015***

10.331
0.027

10.414
0.024

0.083**
-0.003*

10.361
0.022

10.666
0.008

0.305***
-0.014***

0.013
0.024
0.049

0.009
0.020
0.057

-0.004***
-0.004**
0.008***

0.003
0.021
0.042

0.003
0.018
0.037

-0.001
-0.003**
-0.005**

0.001
0.001
0.019

0.002
0.000
0.027

0.000
0.000*
0.008***

Diff.
0.027***
0.029***
-0.017***
-0.051***
0.020***
-0.000**
-0.009***

Diff.

Diff.

Table 3. Differences in Birth Weight between WIC and Non-WIC Participants for Singleton Births in New York
City 1988-2001 for Women on WIC and/or Medicaid by Timing of Prenatal Care and Parity
Adjusted Mean Difference
Unadjusted Mean
Difference

All Women

Early Prenatal
Care

Early Care,
First Birth

All years

46.01 **

25.92 **

18.02 **

10.53 **

1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

88.17 **
86.44 **
61.35 **
76.62 **
50.99 **
43.22 **
40.29 **
24.73 **
31.40 **
10.99 *
2.74
-3.88
-2.19
11.73 *

55.16 **
51.72 **
40.27 **
51.01 **
24.21 **
20.13 **
25.79 **
22.12 **
23.98 **
11.44 *
10.15
5.48
-2.15
12.98 *

36.69 **
40.16 **
32.28 **
39.09 **
10.07
12.45
30.97 **
14.06 *
13.33 *
1.53
21.63 **
6.47
-2.17
5.43

33.13 **
35.82 **
21.89 *
24.02 *
15.14
-2.21
21.90 *
3.57
2.80
-0.99
17.56
2.33
-20.20 *
0.70

N

870444

485921

211138

All models include dummy variables for race/ethnicity (6), marital status (1), parity (2), mother’s education (4), mother’s age (3), heroin or cocaine
use (2), smoking (1), health center districts (29) and years (13). The six birth outcomes are mean birth weight, a dichotomous indicator of birth
weight less than 2500 grams (LBW) or less than 1500 grams (VLBW), mean birth weight adjusted for gestational age, a dichotomous indicator for
infants that are small for gestational age (SGA), and a dichotomous indicator for low birth weight births born after 36 weeks gestation (Term
LBW). All estimates are obtained by ordinary least squares with robust standard errors.

Table 4. Differences in Birth Outcomes between WIC and Non-WIC Participants for Singleton Births in New
York City 1988-2001 for Women on WIC and/or Medicaid, Who Have No Previous Live Births and Who
Initiated Prenatal Care in the First Four Months of Pregnancy
Measure of Birth Weight
Mean

All years
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
N

<2500g

Measure of Fetal Growth
<1500g

Weight |
Gestation

SGA

Term LBW

10.532 **

-0.006 **

-0.003 **

-5.888 **

0.003

0.000

33.127 **
35.821 **
21.886 *
24.019 *
15.138
-2.206
21.899 *
3.566
2.799
-0.990
17.555
2.332
-20.204 *
0.702
211138

-0.008
-0.018 **
-0.011 *
-0.008
-0.006
0.004
-0.022 **
-0.005
0.000
0.002
-0.009
-0.007
0.002
0.002
211138

-0.004
-0.004
-0.003
-0.002
0.000
-0.002
-0.006 **
-0.001
-0.002
0.000
-0.006 **
-0.003
-0.004
-0.002
211138

1.899
4.213
-5.327
13.706
15.509
-3.503
-0.613
-9.256
-14.506
-15.015
-4.116
-25.782 **
-34.064 **
-2.693
211093

-0.008
-0.004
0.003
-0.003
-0.007
0.002
-0.005
-0.007
0.013 *
0.006
0.011
0.021 **
0.010
0.005
210375

0.000
-0.006
-0.001
-0.010 **
0.000
0.008 *
-0.005
-0.003
0.007 *
0.005
-0.002
-0.002
0.003
0.001
211093

All models include dummy variables for race/ethnicity (6), nativity (2), marital status (1), parity (2), mother’s education (4), mother’s age
(3), heroin or cocaine use (2) and smoking (1), health center district (29) and years (13). The six birth outcomes are mean birth weight, a
dichotomous indicator of birth weight less than 2500 grams (LBW) or less than 1500 grams (VLBW), mean birth weight adjusted for
gestational age, a dichotomous indicator for infants that are small for gestational age (SGA), and a dichotomous indicator for low birth
weight births born after 36 weeks gestation (Term LBW). All estimates are obtained by ordinary least squares with robust standard errors.

Table 5. Differences in Birth Outcomes between WIC and Non-WIC Participants for Singleton Births in New
York City 1988-2001 for U.S.-born Non-Hispanic Blacks on WIC and/or Medicaid, Who Have No Previous
Live Births and Who Initiated Prenatal Care in the First Four Months of Pregnancy
Measure of Birth Weight
Mean

All years
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
N
See note for Table 4.

<2500g

Measure of Fetal Growth
<1500g

Weight |
Gestation

SGA

Term LBW

-0.003

41.295 **

-0.020 **

-0.007 **

4.772

0.000

61.457 **
59.205 **
36.759
73.049 **
51.467 *
25.168
69.624 **
19.761
29.623
3.506
40.184
62.013
-16.877
41.592
43463

-0.021
-0.037 **
-0.026 *
-0.025 *
-0.019
0.004
-0.047 **
-0.002
-0.027 *
-0.010
-0.015
-0.016
0.002
-0.026 *
43463

-0.003
-0.010
-0.009
-0.013 *
0.004
-0.010
-0.012 *
0.003
-0.007
0.003
-0.017 *
-0.014
-0.005
-0.018 **
43463

20.546
-9.110
-38.505 *
38.113 *
44.961 *
20.087
27.334
8.045
-9.629
-16.252
-4.966
-21.624
-24.199
16.285
43460

-0.004
0.017
0.017
-0.031 *
-0.008
-0.012
-0.006
-0.003
0.018
0.014
0.005
0.010
-0.002
-0.008
43460

-0.007
-0.003
0.004
-0.016 *
-0.005
0.003
-0.015
0.001
-0.004
0.010
-0.008
0.010
0.002
-0.009
43460

Table 6. Differences in Birth Outcomes between WIC and Non-WIC Participants for Singleton Births in New
York City 1988-2001 for Foreign-born Hispanic Women on WIC and/or Medicaid, Who Have No Previous
Live Births and Who Initiated Prenatal Care in the First Four Months of Pregnancy
Measure of Birth Weight

All years
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
N
See note for Table 4.

Measure of Fetal Growth

Mean

<2500g

<1500g

Weight |
Gestation

SGA

Term LBW

8.274

-0.004

0.001

-1.733

-0.004

0.000

28.136
19.270
-2.612
15.945
-6.333
-1.095
-0.785
-11.652
30.101
16.021
-2.178
33.378
-28.462
32.745
55896

0.001
0.000
0.003
-0.006
-0.006
0.008
-0.017
-0.007
-0.007
-0.009
-0.012
-0.017
0.011
0.000
55896

-0.003
-0.007
0.002
0.003
0.004
-0.001
0.000
0.004
0.001
0.000
0.002
-0.001
0.006
-0.001
55896

-11.659
2.556
9.506
10.461
-3.333
-4.193
-10.853
-10.198
4.405
0.593
-4.989
14.761
-36.773 *
15.328
55888

-0.014
0.010
-0.008
-0.005
-0.004
-0.006
-0.009
-0.015
-0.018
-0.004
0.013
0.004
0.010
-0.008
55888

0.012
0.008
0.002
-0.012 *
0.000
0.007
-0.006
-0.007
0.005
0.003
-0.008
-0.005
0.006
-0.004
55888

Table 7. Differences in Birth Outcomes between WIC and Non-WIC Participants for Twin Deliveries in New
York City 1988-2001 for Women on WIC and/or Medicaid who Initiated Prenatal Care in the First Four Months
of Pregnancy
Measure of Birth Weight
Mean

<2500g

Measure of Fetal Growth
<1500g

Weight |
gestation

SGA

Term LBW

Panel A: All Women (N = 11,091)
All years
1988-1992
1993-1997
1998-2001

28.646 *
91.586 **
11.087
-21.347

-0.021
-0.037 *
-0.020
-0.003

-0.013
-0.052 **
0.006
0.009

13.520
28.228
16.303
-5.761

-0.020 **
-0.028 *
-0.028 *
-0.001

-0.001
0.001
-0.006
0.000

Panel B: U.S.-Born Blacks (N = 2,964)
25.298
-0.030
All years
1988-1992
104.102 *
-0.040
1993-1997
-14.755
-0.047
1998-2001
-51.522
0.005

-0.008
-0.060 **
0.047
0.007

55.505 **
38.563
91.457 **
38.985

-0.039 **
-0.022
-0.067 **
-0.032

-0.027
-0.015
-0.087 **
0.026

Panel C: Foreign-Born Hispanics (N = 2,491)
All years
22.137
0.005
1988-1992
46.994
-0.004
1993-1997
-59.296
0.083 *
1998-2001
75.947
-0.061

-0.030 *
-0.048 *
-0.008
-0.032

-0.006
0.025
-0.020
-0.023

-0.026
-0.008
0.016
-0.084 **

8.427
2.254
-39.784
61.566

Panel A includes dummy variables for race/ethnicity (6), nativity (2), marital status (1), mother’s education (4), mother’s age (3), heroin or
cocaine use (2) and smoking (1), health center district (29) and years (13). The six birth outcomes are mean birth weight, a dichotomous
indicator of birth weight less than 2500 grams (LBW) or less than 1500 grams (VLBW), mean birth weight adjusted for gestational age, a
dichotomous indicator for infants that are small for gestational age (SGA), and a dichotomous indicator for low birth weight births born after
36 weeks gestation (Term LBW). All estimates are obtained by ordinary least squares with robust standard errors.

Table 8. Differences in Birth Outcomes between WIC and non-WIC Participants by Age for Twin Deliveries in
New York City 1988-2001 for Women on WIC and/or Medicaid who Initiated Prenatal Care in the First Four
Months of Pregnancy
Measure of Birth Weight
Mean

<2500g

Measure of Fetal Growth
<1500g

Weight |
Gestation

SGA

Term LBW

25.315
-8.998
50.973 **
-36.349

-0.017
-0.020
-0.027
-0.017

-0.006
0.000
-0.006
0.018

69.699 **
42.013
62.416
7.239

-0.024
-0.052
-0.043
-0.076

-0.056 *
-0.014
0.005
0.019

-0.001
-0.006
0.018
-0.047

-0.047
0.011
-0.061
-0.007

Panel A: All Women (N = 11,089)
<=24
25-29
30-34
35-50

57.513 *
-19.601
68.519 *
-16.025

-0.051 **
0.011
-0.028
0.007

-0.022 *
-0.001
-0.013
-0.013

Panel B: U.S.-Born Blacks (N = 2,964)
<=24
45.941
-0.053
25-29
-64.655
0.020
30-34
67.323
-0.039
35-50
122.554
-0.069

-0.033
0.053
-0.026
-0.035

Panel C: Foreign-Born Hispanics (N = 2,491)
<=24
19.368
-0.048
25-29
34.497
0.030
30-34
-3.378
0.039
35-50
45.530
-0.013

-0.024
-0.051 *
0.012
-0.063

See note to Table 7

-28.320
-16.243
48.696
49.130

Appendix I
Table 1A. Characteristics of Twin Births to Women on WIC and/or Medicaid Who Initiated Prenatal Care in the First Four
Months of Pregnancy, New York City 1988-2001

N
Measure of birth weight:
Mean
% LBW (<2500g)
% VLBW (<1500g)
Weeks of gestation:
Mean
% Unknown
Premature
Measure of fetal growth:
LBW, >36 wks gest
Small-for-G-A (s)
% Unknown
Small-for-G-A (t)
% Unknown
Mother's weight-gain:
Mean
% Unknown
Net weight
Mother’s education:
<12 years
12 years
13-16 years
≥17 years
Unknown

Non-WIC

1988-1990
WIC

782

1040

2270.7
0.565
0.162

2394.0
0.517
0.099

35.624
0.000
0.494

36.246
0.000
0.412

0.450
0.003
0.150
0.005

0.431
0.004
0.120
0.004

31.874
0.593
26.774

34.231
0.292
29.045

0.381
0.458
0.141
0.005
0.015

0.400
0.404
0.169
0.006
0.021

Non-WIC

1994-1996
WIC

614

1896

123.3***
-0.048**
-0.062***

2365.5
0.551
0.102

2354.4
0.536
0.123

0.622***
0.000
-0.082***

35.756
0.000
0.502

35.626
0.000
0.501

0.379
0.007
0.132
0.007

0.358
0.002
0.098
0.002

2.357**
-0.301***
2.271**

34.017
0.254
28.937

0.019
-0.054**
0.029*
0.001
0.006

0.329
0.391
0.235
0.023
0.023

Diff.

-0.019
0.001
-0.029*
-0.001

Non-WIC

1999-2001
WIC

760

2204

-11.11
-0.015
0.022

2363.1
0.556
0.102

2326.8
0.571
0.107

-36.29
0.015
0.005

-0.130
0.000
-0.001

35.531
0.008
0.529

35.451
0.001
0.554

-0.080
-0.007***
0.025

-0.022
-0.004*
-0.034**
-0.004*

0.351
0.013
0.080
0.013

0.362
0.003
0.093
0.003

0.011
-0.010***
0.013
-0.010***

35.601
0.191
30.395

1.584**
-0.063***
1.458*

38.304
0.092
33.160

36.892
0.071
31.786

-1.413**
-0.021*
-1.375*

0.348
0.430
0.186
0.015
0.021

0.019
0.040*
-0.049***
-0.008
-0.002

0.300
0.387
0.258
0.024
0.032

0.350
0.389
0.224
0.029
0.007

0.050**
0.002
-0.034*
0.005
-0.024***

Diff.

Diff.

Table 1A. Continued

Mother’s age:
10-19
20-34
35-50
Mother’s race:
Puerto Rican
Other-Hispanic
Asian
White-Non-Hispanic
Black- Non-Hispanic
Other
Unknown
Marital status:
Single
Unknown
Parity:
First birth
% Unknown
Mother’s birth place:
Foreign born
% Unknown
Pre-Pregnancy Weight:
Mean
% Unknown
Prenatal doctor visits:
Mean
% Unknown
Drug use d. pregnancy:
Heroin/cocaine
% Unknown
Cigarettes

Non-WIC

1988-1990
WIC

Diff.

Non-WIC

1994-1996
WIC

Non-WIC

1999-2001
WIC

Diff.

0.095
0.806
0.100

0.100
0.779
0.119

0.005
-0.027
0.019

0.101
0.762
0.137

0.091
0.808
0.101

-0.010
0.046**
-0.036**

0.074
0.779
0.147

0.088
0.753
0.159

0.014
-0.026
0.011

0.217
0.199
0.003
0.097
0.478
0.000
0.005

0.208
0.200
0.010
0.077
0.506
0.000
0.000

-0.010
0.001
0.007*
-0.020
0.028
0.000
-0.005**

0.137
0.221
0.098
0.189
0.345
0.007
0.003

0.170
0.276
0.024
0.081
0.439
0.006
0.003

0.033*
0.055***
-0.073***
-0.108***
0.094***
0.000
0.000

0.108
0.258
0.150
0.184
0.295
0.000
0.005

0.122
0.303
0.060
0.077
0.433
0.004
0.002

0.014
0.045**
-0.090***
-0.107***
0.138***
0.004*
-0.003

0.696
0.000

0.654
0.000

-0.042*
0.000

0.635
0.000

0.700
0.000

0.065***
0.000

0.566
0.000

0.680
0.000

0.114***
0.000

0.425
0.038

0.315
0.033

-0.109***
-0.006

0.352
0.016

0.315
0.036

-0.036*
0.020**

0.387
0.121

0.319
0.054

-0.067***
-0.067***

0.348
0.005

0.390
0.006

0.502
0.003

0.474
0.003

-0.028
0.000

0.524
0.013

0.548
0.005

0.024
-0.009**

146.006
0.583

149.742
0.262

3.736
-0.322***

145.957
0.238

155.339
0.162

9.382***
-0.075***

148.317
0.079

152.994
0.055

4.677***
-0.024**

9.399
0.020

10.029
0.012

0.630***
-0.009

10.602
0.010

10.559
0.036

-0.043
0.026***

10.716
0.026

10.412
0.010

-0.304**
-0.016***

0.026
0.005
0.064

0.021
0.019
0.088

-0.004
0.014***
0.024*

0.010
0.016
0.030

0.014
0.033
0.030

0.004
0.016**
0.000

0.005
0.003
0.011

0.007
0.000
0.019

0.002
-0.003**
0.009

0.043*
0.001

Diff.

Appendix II – Instrumental Variables and Propensity Score Estimates
We can write our IV model as follows:

(1a)

ˆ
G ijt = α 0 + α1 WˆIC ijt + x' ijt β + ∑ yrt + ∑ HD j +e jit

(2a)

WIC ijt = θ 0 + x' ijt γ + ∑ yrt + ∑ HD j + ϕWIˆC ijt +v jit

(3a)

WICijt = φ 0 + x' ijt λ + ∑ yrt + ∑ HD j + ∑ ( yrt * HD j ) +v jit

Continue with the same notation from equation (1) in the text. The new variables, HDj, are
indicators of the woman’s health district of residence. New York City is divided into 30 health
districts. Our instruments are interactions of year and district (equation 3a). The year dummy
pertains to New York State’s Medicaid eligibility expansion, which became effective on January
1, 1990. The expansion increased the income eligibility threshold for pregnant women from
approximately 100 to 185 percent of the federal poverty level (FPL). Importantly, there was no
change in the eligibility criteria for WIC. The income eligibility threshold for WIC was 185
percent of the FPL before and after the Medicaid expansions.10 However, as more pregnant
women received Medicaid, more were made aware of complementary social services (Joyce
1999). As a result, the expansion in Medicaid appears to have generated a large increase in
WIC enrollment. Figure 1A (below) shows the percent of births to women on Medicaid and
WIC as well as the percent of births to women on WIC but not Medicaid. As is evident, almost

10

Although income eligibility thresholds are similar, Medicaid’s is actually more generous since it refers to net
income whereas WIC eligibility is based on gross income.

all the increase in WIC has occurred among women on Medicaid. The percent of births to
women on WIC but not Medicaid has remained relatively flat over the entire period.
The second assumption underlying our instrument is that take-up in Medicaid varied with
the social service infrastructure of the district. We lack data on the social service infrastructure
by health district. As an alternative, we use health district dummies to proxy time-invariant
differences between districts. What is clear, however, is that uptake in WIC varied directly with
the uptake in Medicaid. As evidence, we regressed the change in the proportion of births on WIC
(∆%WIC) by health district on the change in the proportion of births on Medicaid (∆%MED)
between 1988-89 and 1991-92 (n=30). The coefficient on ∆%MED was 0.85 with a t-ratio of
3.62. Thus, every one-percentage-point increase in the proportion of women on Medicaid in a
health district is associated with a .85 percentage point increase in WIC participation. Thus,
New York State’s Medicaid eligibility expansion for pregnant women appears to have resulted in
a plausibly exogenous increase in prenatal WIC enrollment.
The other less typical aspect of the model in equation (1a)-(3a) is that we use a generated
instrument to predict WIC participation instead of the actual instruments. Specifically, we
estimate equation (3a) by a probit, predict WIC participation for each individual, and use the
predicted values as an instrument for actual participation in equation (2a). The advantage is that
the asymptotic properties with the generated instrument are arguably more robust and equation
(4) allows for the binary nature of the endogenous variable (Wooldridge 2002).11
Finally, we restrict the instrumental variables analysis to births to women on Medicaid
between 1988 and 1992. Our purpose is to limit the uptake in WIC to the years in which the
change in Medicaid enrollment is arguably more exogenous. We drop women in WIC but not
11

Loosely, we can ignore the fact that predicted WIC in equation (1a) is based on estimated parameters in equation
(2a). Moreover, we also do not need the correct functional form for equation (3a) for consistency.

Medicaid because we don’t want to confound the two changes. We interpret the instrumental
variables estimate as a local average treatment effect (LATE). As such, the estimated gains
pertain only to women whose participation in WIC was a result of the Medicaid expansions
(Angrist, Imbens and Rubin 1996).

Instrumental Variable Estimates and Propensity Score Matching
Results from the estimation of equations (1a)-(3a) are displayed in Table 3A. The
sample is limited to the years 1988-1992. The first-stage estimates are displayed in Appendix
2A. In Table 3A, we show estimates of average treatment effects obtained by OLS, propensity
score matching, and IV for all first births to women on Medicaid or WIC who initiated prenatal
care in the first four months of pregnancy. We show the same for the sub-samples of US-born
Blacks and foreign-born Hispanics. Regardless of the estimating method, we find no association
between WIC participation and fetal growth. In all but a few cases, estimates of average
treatment effects obtained by propensity score matching are smaller in absolute value than
estimates obtained by OLS, but the differences are not meaningful. The other noteworthy
finding is the strikingly different results for birth weight and very low birth weight between USborn Blacks and foreign-born Hispanics. Among US-born Blacks, average treatment effects
more than double when estimated by IV, although only one of the four estimates is statistically
significant (marginally). Nevertheless, a LATE interpretation of the IV estimates suggests that
WIC has a substantial protective effect on birth outcomes among the participants who enrolled as
a result of the Medicaid expansions. The opposite occurs among foreign-born Hispanics: the
IV estimates reverse sign and are relatively large. Indeed, among foreign-born Hispanics, the

IV estimates imply that participation in WIC worsens birth outcomes among those who
participated as a result of the changes in Medicaid.
We are skeptical that the IV estimates represent causal effects. First, it is unclear why
average treatment effects should vary drastically by race, ethnicity and nativity. All the women
in our sample are relatively poor, few have any education beyond high school and most are
unmarried. Second, the size of the effects among US-born Blacks are an order of magnitude
greater than their OLS counterparts, which is not credible given the literature on prenatal
nutrition and birth outcomes. One interpretation, therefore, is that the IV exacerbates as opposed
to corrects the omitted variable problem. It is not inconceivable that the uptake in Medicaid and
WIC is greatest in the health districts in which the decline in crack-cocaine use is the greatest.
Second, it is difficult to isolate the effect of WIC in the context of the Medicaid eligibility
expansions. Other changes occurred at this time. The State rolled its prenatal care assistance
program (PCAP) into Medicaid. PCAP paid greater reimbursement to providers that offered
augmented prenatal care services. One such service was nutritional counseling in which WIC
enrollment was a measure of compliance. Other services included referrals for substance abuse.
Joyce (1999) presents a more detailed analysis of PCAP in New York City. The upshot is that
there are potentially several initiatives that may be driving the variation in WIC, which renders
interpretation difficult and which undermines exogeneity.

Appendix II Figure 1. Percent of Births to Women Enrolled in WIC by
Medicaid Coverage
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

29

32

34

38

37

39

39

39

39

38

39

24
17

19

1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
WIC only

WIC and Medicaid

Table 2A. Estimates of First-Stage Probit and OLS with Generated Instrument for all
Women.
Dependent variable: WIC participation
Model: Probit
Predicted WIC

Model: OLS
1.007 ***

Mother’s education:
12 years
13-16 years
≥17 years
Unknown

-0.026
0.126 ***
0.119 **
-0.314 ***

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

Mother’s age:
20-34
35-50
Unknown

-0.112 ***
-0.283 ***
-0.173

0.000
0.001
-0.005

Mother’s race:
Puerto Rican
Other-Hispanic
Asian
Black-Non Hispanic
Other
Unknown

0.445 ***
0.426 ***
-0.120
0.422 ***
1.367 ***
-0.058

0.000
-0.001
0.000
0.000
-0.006
0.002

0.156 ***
0.118

0.000
-0.002

Mother’s birth place:
Foreign born
Unknown
Marital status:
Single
Drug use during pregnancy:
Heroin/cocaine
Cigarettes
Unknown
Year indicator
Health District
Medicaid Health District

χ(29) Medicaid x Health District#

-0.015

0.000

-0.249 ***
0.203 ***
-0.108 **

0.000
0.000
0.001

Yes
Yes
Yes
406.78

Yes
Yes
No

# The relevant Chi-square (27) for U.S.-born Non-Hispanic Blacks is = 469.35 and for Foreign-born Hispanics : )
= 1138.36. * p<.1; ** p<.05; *** p<.01

Table 3A. OLS and IV Estimates of Differences in Birth Outcomes between WIC
and non-WIC Participants for Singleton Births in New York City 1988-1992 for
Women on WIC and/or Medicaid, Who Have No Previous Live Births and Who
Initiated Prenatal Care in the first four months of Pregnancy +
Measure of Birth Weight
Mean

<2500g

Measure of Fetal Growth
Weight |
Gestation

SGA

Panel A: All women
OLS

26.71**
(6.92)

-0.010**
(0.003)

6.82
(4.78)

-0.002
(0.005)

PSCORE+

22.43**
(5.03)

-0.009**
(0.003)

1.36
(5.10)

-0.006
(0.003)

IV

56.93
(43.08)

-0.030**
(0.011)

46.43
(62.69)

-0.025
(0.034)

Panel B:US-born Blacks
OLS

57.59**
(17.88)

-0.024**
(0.009)

13.89
(13.75)

0.002
(0.009)

PSCORE

50.25**
(10.15)

-0.024**
(0.006)

12.72
(10.34)

-0.005
(0.006)

IV

163.14*
(76.13)

-0.070*
(0.028)

112.09
(115.13)

-0.053
(0.061)

Panel C: Foreign-born Hispanics
OLS

11.98
(6.58)

-0.002
(0.004)

5.79
(5.22)

-0.004
(0.006)

PSCORE

1.19
(9.65)

0.000
(0.004)

-7.62
(9.76)

-0.003
(0.006)

IV

-58.60
(39.28)

0.041
(0.026)

-19.62
(45.80)

0.034
(0.037)

+

The sample is limited to women on Medicaid and or WIC who delivered a live birth between 1988 and
1992. PSCORE refers to estimates obtained by propensity score matching based on the nearest neighbor
algorithm (see Becker and Ichino 2002). Note that the following variables are not balanced in the analysis
of all women (Panel A): marital status, high school education, black non-Hispanic See equations (2)-(4)
in the text for a description of the IV model. The list of covariates is described in the footnote to Table 4.
Standard errors in OLS and IV regressions have been adjusted for cluster at the health district level.

