                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           ANATOMY OF THE RISE AND FALL OF
                              A PRICE-FIXING CONSPIRACY:
                         AUCTIONS AT SOTHEBY’S AND CHRISTIE’S

                                           Orley Ashenfelter
                                           Kathryn Graddy

                                         Working Paper 10795
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10795


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Orley Ashenfelter and Kathryn Graddy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Anatomy of the Rise and Fall of a Price-Fixing Conspiracy: Auctions at Sotheby’s and Christie’s
Orley Ashenfelter and Kathryn Graddy
NBER Working Paper No. 10795
September 2004
JEL No. D44, K21, L41

                                          ABSTRACT

The Sotheby's/Christie's price-fixing scandal that ended in the public trial of Alfred Taubman

provides a unique window on a number of key economic and antitrust policy issues related to the use

of the auction system. The trial provided detailed evidence as to how the price fixing worked, and

the economic conditions under which it was started and began to fall apart. The outcome of the case

also provides evidence on the novel auction process used to choose the lead counsel for the civil

settlement. Finally, though buyers received the bulk of the damages, a straightforward application

of the economic theory of auctions shows that it is unlikely that successful buyers as a group were

injured.

Orley Ashenfelter
Industrial Relations Section
Firestone Library
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
c6789@princeton.edu

Kathryn Graddy
University of Oxford
1.0 Introduction

         Prior to 1995, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, the world’s largest auction houses,

were in fierce competition for consignments from sellers. At times, they would

drastically cut commission rates paid by sellers, make donations to sellers’ favourite

charities, and even extend financial guarantees to sellers. In March of 1995, this

competition abruptly ended. Christie’s announced that it would charge sellers a fixed,

nonnegotiable commission on the sales price, and a month later Sotheby’s announced

the same policies. Detailed documents kept by Christopher Davidge, Christie’s

former chief executive, show that the abrupt change was due to a price-fixing

conspiracy. Christie’s cooperated with the US Department of Justice in their

investigation, and Sotheby’s ultimately pleaded guilty to fixing sellers’ commissions

but maintained innocence with respect to fixing buyers’ premiums.1 Because it

ended in a public, criminal trial, this lawsuit provides an extraordinary window for

viewing the operation of successful price conspirators.

         In September of 2001, a civil suit was also settled when Sotheby’s and

Christie’s agreed to each pay two hundred and fifty-six million dollars to the

plaintiffs. The lead counsel for the civil suit, Boies, Schiller and Flexner, was chosen

by an extraordinary auction process engineered by Judge Louis A. Kaplan. This civil

suit alleged that in addition to fixing sellers commissions, Christie’s had also

conspired since 1993 to fix buyer’s commissions. Thus, this class-action suit

comprised anyone who had bought items in the United States from Christie’s or



1
 Auctioneers earn revenues by collecting fees from buyers and sellers for their market making
services. Fees are typically expressed as a percentage of the “hammer price” at which an item is sold.
The hammer price corresponds to the figure the auctioneer announces as the winning bid. A fee paid
by a buyer is called a “buyer’s premium,” while a fee paid by a seller is called a “seller’s (or vendor’s)
commission.” The hammer price plus the buyer’s premium is called the “buyer’s price,” while the
hammer price less the seller’s commission is called the “seller’s price.”


                                                    4
Sotheby’s between January 1, 1993 and February 7, 2000, and anyone who had sold

items between September 1, 1995 and February 7, 2000.

       Both the criminal trial and the civil settlement provide a unique window on a

number of key economic and antitrust policy issues, and they demonstrate the

important role that the theory and empirical analysis of auctions can have for these

issues. First, because of the public trial, the defendants provided detailed evidence as

to how the price fixing actually worked, when it was started, and when it began to fall

apart. Some models of cartel formation predict dissolution to be more likely in

downturns (Green and Porter (1984)), while others (Rotemburg and Saloner (1986))

predict the reverse, while the empirical evidence on this issue is mixed. The direct

evidence available here provides credible evidence that establishment of the price-

fixing agreement was, in part, the result of a downturn in the auction market for art

and that the agreement began to fall apart in the subsequent upturn.

       Second, the direct evidence also permits us to examine how and why the

conspiracy was revealed. The justice department’s policy of granting amnesty to co-

conspirators in exchange for supplying the state’s evidence appears to have been

important to obtaining a conviction in this case.

       Thirdly, we detail the auction mechanism that was used in choosing the lead

counsel and discuss the incentives and outcome of that auction. The auction process

appears to have resulted in a resounding success for the class action participants as a

group. The damages were estimated to total between $50 and $75 million for each

plaintiff over the 5 years of the conspiracy. Even after tripling these damages, as the

US statute requires, the plaintiffs were very well rewarded given that they did not

even have to risk a trial. Furthermore, a relatively low proportion of the damages

went to the lead attorneys.



                                           5
        Finally, we show that the civil settlement was, in general, misguided. A very

straightforward application of the economic theory of auctions shows that successful

buyers, as a group, are unlikely to have suffered any injury from the collusion.

However, they received the bulk of the damages. This mismatch between harm and

the award of damages fails, therefore, to provide the proper incentive to private parties

who seek the enforcement of the antitrust laws against price fixing.

        We begin the paper in Section 2 by describing the details of the price fixing

scheme, how it worked, and why the behaviour of Christie’s and Sotheby’s was

eventually discovered. In section 3, we discuss who was injured by the price-fixing,

showing how the incidence of commissions in auction sales falls primarily on the

seller. In section 4 we discuss some potential policy implications, and in section 5 we

conclude our discussion.

2.0 Price Fixing at Christie’s and Sotheby’s2

         Allegations of price fixing between Christie’s and Sotheby’s have a long

history. When buyers’ premiums of 10% were first implemented in 1975 by

Christie’s, Sotheby’s immediately followed suit. As described in Mason (2004) The

Society of London Art Dealers and the British Antique Dealers Association hired

legal counsel to try to stop Christie’s and Sotheby’s from imposing these premiums

on the grounds that they had illegally colluded over the premiums. By 1981, the

dealers’ legal expenses had risen to £150,000. As the maximum penalty that

Sotheby’s and Christie’s would have to pay under British Competition law was only

£2000, the dealers stopped their campaign and settled with Christies for only £75,000.

        The late 1980s were a boom period for the auction houses. However, in late

1990, the market collapsed. The early 1990s were very difficult periods for the

2
 Much of the discussion that follows is based on Mason (2004). Other references used in the
discussion are In Re Auction Houses Antitrust Litigation (2001) and Stewart (2001).


                                                 6
auction houses. Not only were fewer items being brought to auction, but fierce

competition was taking place between Sotheby’s and Christie’s over consignments.

The competition took the form of drastically cutting commission rates paid by sellers,

in many cases to zero, extending non-recourse loans that amounted to financial

guarantees to sellers, and also making donations to a seller’s favourite charity if an

item sold over a specified amount. While Sotheby’s net profit in 1989 was $113

million, by 1991 it had fallen to only $3.9 million.

       In March of 1995, this competition abruptly ended. Detailed documents kept

by Christopher Davidge, Christie’s former chief executive, show that the abrupt

change was due to a price-fixing conspiracy. By admission, the conspiracy involved

at least Christopher Davidge and Diana (also known as Dede) Brooks, Sotheby’s chief

executive, and it was alleged to have involved Sir Anthony Tennant and A. Alfred

Taubman, the chairmen of Christie’s and Sotheby’s, respectively. In fact, after a

lengthy criminal trial, Taubman, a US citizen, was convicted of price fixing, which is

a felony in the US. Although Tennant, a UK citizen, was also indicted in the US,

price fixing is a civil offence in the United Kingdom and, as there are no provisions

for extradition in such a case, he was not tried. Christopher Davidge (and in some

cases Sir Anthony Tennant) had kept detailed records describing the conspiracy.

       The venue where the price fixing took place is interesting in itself. Beginning

in 1993, Sir Anthony and Mr.Taubman had breakfast meetings at Taubman’s London

flat in St. James and in Taubman’s residence in New York. Evidence from the trial

showed that they met on twelve occasions. Davidge and Brooks also met secretly on

several occasions. On one important occasion, in which the exact details of the price

fixing agreement were agreed between the two, Davidge took the Concorde from

London to New York, arriving at 9:25 a.m., where Brooks met him in her private car.



                                            7
They then sat in the parking lot for two hours in Brooks’s car, until Davidge caught

the 12:30 p.m. Concord back to London.

         How exactly did the conspiracy work? After having had several meetings

with Davidge, Sotheby’s abandoned the practice in 1994 of offering interest-free

advances and abandoned the practice of donating to charities in order to win business.

Then, in March of 1995, Christie’s issued a press release announcing that as of

September 1st, it would charge sellers a fixed nonnegotiable sliding-scale commission

on the sales price (see Table 1 below).

                                 Table 1
               CHRISTIE'S COMMISSION CHARGES FOR SELLERS

                            Effective September 1, 1995

         ANNUAL SALES ACHIEVED                         COMMISSION
                                                       (% of final bid price)

         Up to $99,999                                 As now*
         $100,000-$249,999                             9%
         $250,000-$499,999                             8%
         $500,000-$999,999                             6%
         $1,000,000-$2,499,999                         5%
         $2,500,000-$4,999,999                         4%
         $5,000,000 and above                          2%


         *That is, 10% for most consignments, but retaining existing higher
         rates for lots selling for less than $75,000.

         Source: Mason (2004) The Art of the Steal

         Sotheby’s did not respond immediately, and in the meantime, as is predictable,

because of the difference in commission rates, Sotheby’s won a very significant

jewellery consignment worth nearly $10 million. Allegedly, Davidge at one point

feared that Brooks had double-crossed him (Mason (2004), p. 167).

However, on April 13, 1995, Sotheby’s also announced its own new sellers’

commission rates, which were very similar to Christie’s, as presented in Table 2

below.




                                              8
                                   Table 2
                  SOTHEBY'S COMMISSION CHARGES FOR SELLERS

                               Effective September 5, 1995

DOLLAR AMOUNT                                    PRIVATE       DEALER          MUSEUM

0- $99,999                                             Current commission rates
$100,000-$249,999                                  9%             6%                5%
$250,000-$499,999                                  8%             6%                5%
$500,000-$999,999                                  6%             6%                5%
$1,000,000-$2,499,999                              5%             5%                3%
$2,500,000-$4,999,999                              4%             4%                2%
$5,000,000-$9,999,999                              2%             2%                2%
$10,000,000-$24,999,999                      lower of 2% or 50% of expenses
$25,000,000+                                 lower of 2% up to $25 million and 1%
                                             on any amount of $25 million or 50%
                                             of expenses

Consignment-related expenses, such as those for insurance and illustrations,
will continue to be charged to sellers at the current rates.

Source: Mason (2004) The Art of the Steal

After publication of Sotheby’s commission charges, Christie’s revised their charges

for museums.

       Christie’s and Sotheby’s adhered to these commission charges and did not

negotiate with sellers until early in 1997. At that time, the art market had recovered

and several major collections of art were being auctioned. Sotheby’s had offered to

waive its commission on a sale of Impressionist pictures from the estate of John

Langeloth Loeb, and his wife, Francis Lehman Loeb. Representatives of the Loeb

estate inquired of Christie’s whether they would match this offer, and hence Christie’s

became aware of Sotheby’s digression from the cartel agreement. Rather than

waiving the seller’s commission, Christie’s agreed to make a large donation to the

Loeb family foundation, thus restarting the practice of charitable donations, which

Sotheby’s and Christie’s had earlier agreed to stop (Mason, pps. 205-207)

       Soon after the publication of the commission tables, in June of 1996, the UK

Office of Fair Trading announced that informal inquiries were being made into




                                             9
possible anti-competitive practices at Sotheby’s and Christie’s that were in violation

of Britain’s Fair Trading Act of 1973 and the Competition Act of 1980. The

authorities were concerned with the identical and non-negotiable commission rates.

Then, in May of 1997, the U.S. Justice department issued subpoenas to Sotheby’s,

Christie’s, and a number of art dealers that demanded all documents created since

1992 which relate to communication between auction houses. The subpoenas

included but were not limited to documents relating to sellers’ commissions, buyers’

premiums and other conditions of sale at auction. For a while, it looked as if the

investigations would fizzle. However, in late 1999, Christie’s lawyers, in preparation

for the government investigation, began to uncover evidence of a conspiracy. Several

people at Christie’s had suspected that price-fixing was occurring, and assiduous

questioning by Christie’s lawyers confirmed that it had occurred. This took place as

Christopher Davidge was being replaced as Christie’s chief executive. Working

quickly, in January of 2000, Christie’s lawyers agreed to an amnesty for Christie’s

conditional on Christie’s cooperation with the Justice department’s inquiry. Part of

the amnesty was conditional on getting Davidge to cooperate with the government

and, indeed, he was paid a large sum of money by Christie’s conditional on his doing

so.

3.0 The Criminal and Civil Settlements

       3.1 The Criminal Settlement

       The case progressed as follows (see especially Stewart (2001) for a detailed

description). Davidge testified for the US government and was granted amnesty along

with Christie’s. Tennant could not be extradited because price-fixing was at that time

not a criminal offence in the UK. Dede Brooks, now former president and chief

executive of Sotheby’s, pleaded guilty to one felony count of price-fixing on October



                                          10
5, 2000, and promised to cooperate fully in the government’s investigation. She was

sentenced in April of 2002 to three years’ probation, including six months home

detention, one thousand hours of community service and a criminal fine of $350,000.

Taubman was convicted of price-fixing and sentenced to a one year jail term, and

ordered to pay a fine of $7.5 million.

       The Justice Department agreed in January of 2000 not to prosecute Christie’s

in return for its cooperation in the case. In September of 2001, Sotheby’s agreed to

plead guilty to conspiring with Christie’s to fix sellers’ commissions, and agreed to

pay a fine of forty-five million dollars over five years. Sotheby’s maintained their

innocence with respect to fixing buyers’ premiums.

       3.2 The Civil Settlement

       Immediately after news of Christie’s admission of price-fixing, Christie’s

customers began filing civil suits. In April of 2000, Judge Louis A. Kaplan agreed to

class-action status for the suits, and furthermore announced that the lead counsel

would be decided by auction. The law firms were asked to name a dollar amount that

was the minimum sum they expected they could win for the plaintiffs, excluding fees

or expenses. The law firm with the highest bid would then win the position of lead

counsel, and would receive 25 percent of any settlement in excess of that dollar

amount. The remaining 75 percent of the excess would go to the class members.

       In September of 2001, the civil suit was settled when Sotheby’s and Christie’s

agreed to each pay two hundred and fifty-six million dollars to the plaintiffs. The

class in this law suit comprised anyone who had bought items through Christie’s or

Sotheby’s in the United States between January 1, 1993, and February 7, 2000, and

those who had sold through either of the two companies between September 1, 1995,

and February 7, 2000.



                                          11
       In view of the way that fees were set, it is interesting to consider the legal fees

that were paid to attorneys for the class members. The lead council received $26.75

million, which was only about 5 percent of the total recovery. As pointed out by

Mason (2004), in a suit in 1998 against NASDAQ, the plaintiff’s lawyers had

received $143.7 million, which was 14 percent of the settlement. Thus, the auction

designed by Judge Kaplan appears to be very successful.

       The settlement of the civil suit is interesting, but appears to be misguided.

Although Sotheby’s did not admit to fixing buyers’ premiums in the criminal

settlement of the case, both Christie’s and Sotheby’s agreed to each pay $256 million

to both buyers and sellers. According to the settlement, this amount was calculated

taking the price-fixing of buyers’ premiums into account. According to In Re Auction

Houses Antitrust Litigation (2001), “The proposed plan of allocation estimated the

overcharges to sellers as 1 percent of the hammer price, and those for buyers to be 5

percent of the hammer price up to and including hammer prices of $50,000, and

$2,500 for buyers at hammer prices exceeding $50,000. The net settlement fund

would be distributed to class members pro rata based upon each class member'
                                                                           s

overcharges during the relevant period.” Even if Sotheby’s had admitted to price

fixing buyers commissions, as we show below, the settlement does not coincide with

the injury that resulted to buyers and sellers.

4.0 Injury

       4.1 The Effect on the Buyers

       So, who was injured by the Sotheby’s -Christie’s price-fixing conspiracy?

Let’s first take the case of buyers’ premiums.

               4.1.1 An Initial Analysis




                                            12
       As pointed out in Ashenfelter and Graddy (2003) the usual theory of private

value auctions implies that, to first order, buyers deserve no compensation due to

increased commissions. This applies whether or not the increase is in sellers’

commissions or buyers’ premiums.      The following is the reason why. When a buyer

decides to bid in an ascending price (or “English”) auction, his strategy should be to

bid up to his reservation price, if necessary. The price that the winning bidder has to

pay is essentially (epsilon above) the reservation price of the second highest bidder.

For example, if the reservation price of the highest bidder is v1 and the reservation

price of the second highest bidder is v2, and there are no commissions, the winning

bidder wins the auction at approximately v2. These reservation prices do not change

with changes in sellers’ commissions. When buyers’ premiums are implemented,

each buyer should reduce his reservation price by an equivalent amount, resulting in a

reduction in revenue to the seller by the amount of the buyers’ premium. For

example, if commissions are charged at 10% of the hammer price, the bidder with the

highest reservation price is now willing to pay a price, p1, such that v1=p1+p1*.10, or

rearranging, p1=v1/1.1. The price that the bidder with the second highest reservation

price is willing to pay is affected similarly. Thus the hammer price becomes (epsilon

above) v2/1.1.   The higher the commission, the more the buyers reduce their bids.

Hence, the entire increase in buyers’ commissions should fall on the seller.

       There is some evidence to support the view that buyers’ premiums are shifted

to sellers. Ashenfelter (1989) studies the difference in prices at Sotheby’s and

Christie’s wine auctions when the former charged a 10% buyers’ premium while the

latter charged no buyers’ premium Indeed, hammer prices at Christie’s were 10%

higher that at Sotheby’s during this period, but this difference disappeared when

Christie’s adopted the same buyers’ premium charged by Sotheby’s. In short, both



                                           13
the conventional theory of private value auctions, and the available evidence, support

the view that buyers would not have been injured by the price fixing.

               4.1.2 Complicating Factors

       This analysis would be complete if the sellers did not set reserve prices and if

the number of buyers and sellers in the auction were fixed. However, in practice,

sellers set a secret reserve price, so that some items go unsold because the bidding

does not reach this (seller’s) reserve price. To the extent that buyers are

unconstrained by the reserve price, because the item sells for a price higher than the

reserve, the analysis above is unaffected.

       As Ginsburgh, Legros and Sahuguet (2004) show, for the situation where the

reserve price is binding, however, it is possible that the buyers will end up paying a

higher price because of the existence of the buyer’s premium. However, if the

presence of a reserve price causes the number of bidders participating in the auction to

decrease, then prices can be pushed down. This can occur if a buyer’s cost of

participating is greater than his expected surplus. Ginsburgh, Legros, and Sahuguet

(2004) provide an example where the decreased participation of resulting from higher

commissions actually helps the buyer!

        Buyers who fail to purchase or participate in the auction because of the higher

commission rates are worse off. In any case, however, this is a second order effect

and any harm done to those who do not purchase is not capable of empirical

identification. Overall, Ginsburgh, et. al. conclude that ex-ante, the welfare of all

bidders is the same, regardless of the commission.

       The above analysis does not take into account the possibility that if sellers’

supplies are elastic, some sellers may not offer their objects for sale due to the

increased commissions. This could result in more buyers competing for the same



                                             14
item, if buyers are willing to substitute between items, and the increase in the number

of bidders for each item may push up the price paid by the winning bidder.

        It is reasonable to suppose that participation effects and the effect of strategic

manipulation of reserve prices are small relative to the effects that higher

commissions have directly on sellers and buyers. To date, the theory upholds the

initial reasoning that increased commissions should have a minimal effect on buyers,

with the incidence falling fully on the sellers.

        4.2 Sellers’ Commissions

        Certainly to first order, the sellers were injured, as they had to pay a higher

commission rate on any sale that they made. It is possible that increased buyer

competition resulting from fewer items being brought to market partially compensated

sellers that actually sold for this increased commission. However, it is also possible

that increased commissions decreased buyer participation, forcing sellers to pay

dearly for the increase in commissions.        Sellers that withheld their items from the

market certainly lost out, but these sellers would not be identifiable.

        4.3 Sotheby’s and Christie’s

        Sotheby’s as a company was clearly injured by the $45 million criminal fine,

and the $256 million civil fine. The civil fine represented approximately 5 years of

profits. Without Taubman’s personal contribution of $186 million, the fine could

have bankrupted the company. Sotheby’s shareholders suffered a 15% drop in the

stock price the day after the headline that Christie’s was cooperating with the

government regarding price-fixing with Sotheby’s, and the stock dropped another

15% the day after Taubman and Brooks resigned. It is difficult to calculate the exact

amount of the total drop that was due to the scandal as other forces also affect the

stock price, but it was clearly significant.



                                               15
       Although it is difficult to quantify, some portion of the full costs of the

settlement were borne by Sotheby’s employees. As stock options made up a large

amount of compensation for senior staff, the senior employees at Sotheby’s paid some

portion of the cost of the settlement from their loss. Because of the fines, there was

also considerable financial tightness at Sotheby’s, resulting in lay-offs of some

employees and less generous benefits for others. Finally, it was reported that many

employees felt physically ill because of the betrayal they felt from their chief

executive and chairman (Mason, p. 273)

       While Christie’s avoided the criminal fine, Christie’s was still required to pay

the $256 million civil settlement. Christie’s was a privately held company, and the

large fine clearly affected the value of the company and its major shareholders. In

May of 1998, Francois Pinault, a French billionaire investor, became Christie’s largest

shareholder. He was apparently not pleased to have purchased the company at the

price that he did, in ignorance of the antitrust issues and the future fines that he and

Christie’s would bear.

       4.4 Key Participants

       Alfred Taubman was probably the participant who ended up being injured

most by the price-fixing agreement. He still maintains his innocence, but he was

convicted of price-fixing by a federal jury. He spent nearly a year in jail (his one year

and one day sentence was reduced by 54 days due to good behaviour), and he

forfeited nearly 1/5 of his personal fortune in fines. He was forced to step down as

chairman from Sotheby’s, though he remains the controlling shareholder.

       Anthony Tennant resigned as chairman of Christie’s in May of 1996, at the

expiry of his first 3-year term. The resignation was not in connection with the price-

fixing. As price-fixing is not a criminal offence in the United Kingdom, Tennant



                                            16
appeared to suffer very little from the scandal, though his reputation as a businessman

was undoubtedly damaged. He resigned as deputy chairman of Arjo Wiggins

Appleton, an Anglo-French paper company with extensive American holdings

because he could no longer travel to the United States. If he were to enter the United

States, he could be detained due to his role in the price-fixing agreement. However,

he remained a senior advisor to Morgan Stanley’s London branch.

       Dede Brooks avoided a jail sentence, though she was sentenced to three years

probation, including six months of home detention during which she had to wear an

electronic ankle bracelet, one thousand hours of community service and a criminal

fine of $350,000. Furthermore, she was forced to resign as CEO in October of 2000,

just before her guilty plea, and to forfeit all stock options and Performance Shares

owned in the company. She entered into an agreement with Sotheby’s in March of

2000 that required her to pay $3.25 million to Sotheby’s. This represented all of the

after-tax compensation she had earned with Sotheby’s since 1993. She was also

responsible for all of her legal fees. Brooks was also forced to resign from a number

of other boards, including the board of the Yale Corporation, the charitable foundation

of Yale University, and the board of Morgan Stanley Dean Witter.

       Christopher Davidge was not injured from the price-fixing scandal. He was

granted a severance payment of £5 million ($8 million), but with the condition that he

had not brought Christie’s into disrepute or broken any law. However, this condition

was dropped as the government wanted him as a witness in the Taubman trial, and

convinced Christie’s into producing him as a part of their amnesty deal. Davidge

agreed to testify only on the condition that he unconditionally receive his full

severance payment, and that he be fully indemnified in any civil litigation (Mason, p.




                                           17
286). He also received a retirement pension consisting of a capital payment of $1.6

million plus $339,000 per year (Mason, p. 362).

5.0 Economic and Policy Implications

       5.1 Theories of cartel stability

       Alternative models of cartel formation imply different predictions for the

determinants of cartel stability. Green and Porter (1984) argue that in a world of

fluctuating demand, cartel policy often involves trigger prices. In theory, when a firm

observes a price below the trigger price, it could be because of an unexpected

downturn in business, or it could be that another member of the cartel is cheating.

Whenever a lower price is observed, firms must respond by lowering their prices in

order to punish any possible cheaters. In equilibrium in their model, no firms actually

cheat, but the cartel breaks down during times of low demand as firms lower their

prices in order to enforce their cartel agreement.

       Alternatively, Rotemberg and Saloner (1986) argue that firms find it much

more profitable to cheat on a cartel agreement when business is booming. More

business is to be gained from cheating during booms; furthermore the punishment

phase is likely to occur afterwards, only as the economic cycle starts to head

downward. While collusion may be sustainable during booms, it will be at much

lower prices relative to collusion during bust periods. Thus, overall, cartels are more

likely to break up during times of high demand.

       The empirical evidence on when collusion begins or breaks up has been

mixed. A very detailed survey of this evidence has recently been provided by

Levenstein and Suslow (2002). Some case studies, such as Porter’s (1983) study of

railways, conclude that cartelization breaks down during economic downturns while

others, such as Eswaran’s (1997) and Gallet and Schroter’s (1995) studies of the



                                           18
rayon industry, indicate the reverse. Larger scale cross-section studies, which date

from Posner’s (1970) pioneering work, seem primarily to find that unstable product

markets lead to unstable cartel arrangements and are likewise inconclusive.

       The Christie’s - Sotheby’s agreement clearly was started as a response to a

very weak auction market, and it started to break up only once the market had

improved. As the market improved Christie’s and Sotheby’s were both very keen to

obtain high profile consignments as these would be very profitable, and they felt it in

their interest to cheat. This case provides evidence for collusion breaking up during

boom times, and thus adds to the debate on cartel stability.

       5.2 Amnesty

       In 1978, the Antitrust Division announced that it would consider lenient

treatment of corporations or officers that voluntarily report their involvement in price

fixing prior to government detection. Leniency was not automatic, but was

conditional, and was only granted to the first firm to come forward. Even after this

announcement, applications for leniency only averaged one a year. The Antitrust

Division then revised the policy in 1993, which resulted in more frequent use. Under

the revisions, leniency would be automatic if the corporation satisfied six

requirements. Furthermore, and perhaps most important, the new laws granted

amnesty even in cases where the government had already started an investigation.

After these changes, and in the presence of higher criminal fines that were

implemented in the late 1990s, applications for amnesty averaged about two per

month. Kobayashi (2001) provides a detailed explanation of the new laws.

       Would the price-fixing at Sotheby’s and Christie’s have come to light without

the amnesty laws? Our best guess is, probably not. First of all, a federal investigation

had already begun into price-fixing at Christie’s and Sotheby’s. Hence, under rules in



                                           19
effect prior to 1993, neither firm could be granted amnesty. Thus the firms would not

have had any incentive to report their collusion to the government. Secondly, as

discussed in Mason (2004), it appears that most of the wrongdoing was discovered by

Christie’s lawyers, as they were preparing to answer questions raised by the

government’s antitrust investigation. Without the race to report collusion (as in this

case only the first firm to do so has the ability to claim amnesty), it seems unlikely

that Christie’s lawyers would have been so assiduous in their questioning of Christie’s

employees. Hence, it appears that a key factor in this case was the change in the 1993

treatment of price-fixing investigations.

       At first glance, it may appear that the ability to declare amnesty also resulted

in a very uneven distribution of those who were required to compensate for the

damages paid to the plaintiffs. However, when civil and criminal damages are

considered together, Sotheby’s total fine was $301 million ($256 million of civil

damages plus $45 million of criminal damages); while Christie’s fine consisted only

of the $256 million of civil damages. Nonetheless, Christie’s fine was 85% of

Sotheby’s total fine, which is significant.

       The fact that Tennant and Davidge, as participants, were not injured at all,

while Taubman and Brooks suffered severe damage due to their participation in the

price-fixing scheme, is a more obvious case of unbalanced penalties. No doubt part of

this difference is due to the key advantage given to individual participants who are the

first to provide the government with evidence. However, in this case there is a further

complication introduced by the stark difference between the US and UK antitrust

laws, which certainly played some role in the differential treatment. Davidge may not

have received his $8 million from Christie’s in severance payments without the

amnesty clause, but, as the $8 million was received from Christie’s, this amount was



                                              20
equivalent to an increase in Christie’s fine. And, absent the amnesty clause, it is

unclear whether, as was the case with Sir Anthony, it would have been possible to try

Davidge in the criminal case. Thus, the amnesty clause was instrumental in

identifying price-fixing, but it did not result in very different financial penalties for

the parties, and it does not appear to be entirely responsible for the lopsided damages

placed on the individual participants.

        5.3 The Auction Process for Lead Counsel

        At first glance, the auction process that appointed Bois, Schiller and Flexner as

lead counsel appears to be a resounding success that resulted in a very large civil

settlement to the class. Although remarkably candid about her role in the fixing of

sellers’ commissions, Ms. Brooks did not provide any evidence of collusion with

respect to buyers’ premiums or of damages that such collusion might entail. Ms.

Brooks estimated that the collusion on sellers’ commissions resulted in higher profits

to Sotheby’s of some $10 to $15 million per year. Assuming that Christie’s received

the same increased profits implies that total damages suffered by sellers would be on

the order of $20 to $30 million per year. Assuming the conspiracy lasted 5 years

(approximately the time period involved) suggests total damages of $100 to $150

million. Since price fixing damages are, by statute, tripled, it appears that the

plaintiffs were amply compensated for the harm they incurred, especially in view of

the fact that they did not have to proceed to the uncertainty of a trial. Furthermore, as

discussed above, the legal fees, at $26.75 million, were a relatively small part of the

settlement.

        Whether, from the point of view of public policy, as opposed to the narrow

interests of the plaintiffs, the auction system was a success is more difficult to assess.

If the auction process was successful because the legal counsel best equipped to



                                             21
estimate the potential damages was appointed, then this auction process was truly a

success because it ensured that antitrust injury was aligned with the damages assessed

and did not incur the costs of a trial. However, it is unclear whether this is the

mechanism by which the auction process works. An alternative explanation is that the

auction process may have altered the bargaining power of the plaintiffs relative to the

defendants by ensuring that the plaintiffs had more aggressive attorneys than would

otherwise be the case. Because the plaintiff’s lawyers would not be compensated at

all if the settlement fell below their bid level, it is likely that attorneys with the

greatest taste for risk would submit the winning bid. Though this may have generated

a greater settlement for the plaintiffs than would otherwise be the case, it is unclear

that this provides the best method for aligning penalties with antitrust injury.

        Nevertheless, given the success that Judge Kaplan’s innovative method for the

selection of legal counsel attained, it is surprising that it has not been experimented

with more often. Only further experience with such a method can provide the

evidence to assess its effectiveness.

        5.4 The Compensation of Buyers at Auction

        Buyers ended up with the great proportion of the settlement, despite the fact

that is unlikely that successful buyers as a group were harmed at all. Could this be

avoided in the future? The problem here seems simply to be that the economic

analysis of the damages was faulty. It is unclear whether this was simply a result of

ignorance of the relevant theory and empirical methods, or whether there is some

unexplained political or bargaining issue that led to the settlement that resulted.

Buyers at auction, regardless of whether the buyer’s premium was changed, should

not have participated in the settlement.




                                             22
           At what point should this have been brought out? Sotheby’s and Christie’s

would have had no interest in pointing out the incidence of commissions, as the

amount of damages would be the same, whether they were awarded to the buyers or

the sellers. The lawyers who represented the sellers should have been primarily

responsible for ensuring that their clients were properly compensated, but to the extent

that buyers and sellers were represented jointly, it is unclear that the attorneys had any

incentive to bring this issue forward. Ironically, Judge Kaplan, in approving the

settlement, remarked on how unlikely it was that that injury to the buyers could be

proven:

            No one, as far as the Court is aware, has admitted price-fixing on the

           buyer side….Thus, while there is a prospect of a recovery as high as

           $600 million on the buyer side, a finding of liability is not assured and

           likely would be established only after considerable time and additional

           effort…. 3

           He approved the settlement in any case because it was voluntarily negotiated

by the parties, who should have more knowledge of the facts and risks associated with

a trial than he did. Possibly he was wrong in this presumption!

6.0 Conclusion

           The Sotheby’s-Christie’s price-fixing scandal that ended in the public trial of

Alfred Taubman provided a rare glimpse into the world of collusion. It provides

evidence of the market conditions under which the collusion began and the market

conditions under which the collusive agreement began to fall apart. It also allows an

evaluation of the government’s amnesty program in light of the settlements and the

alleged conduct of the conspirators.


3
    In Re Auction Houses Antitrust Litgation (2001), section C.


                                                    23
        The civil settlements, and they way in which they were conducted, provide

equally interesting case studies for economists. Based on this example, more public

discussion and academic research directed at the question of whether the auction is a

useful format for choosing the lead attorneys would be useful. Furthermore, in this

case the split up of the civil settlement between buyers and sellers was grossly

misguided. It would be interesting to know how often such misguided analyses are

present in similar legal situations.




                                          24
                                      References




Ashenfelter, Orley. 1989. “How Auctions Work for Wine and Art.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 3, pp. 23-36.


Ashenfelter, Orley, and Kathryn Graddy. 2003. “Auctions and the Price of Art.”
Journal of Economic Literature 41, pp. 763-787.


Ashenfelter, Orley, Kathryn Graddy, Victor Ginsburgh, Patrick Legros, and Nicolas

Sahuguet. 2003. “The Class Actions Against Christie'
                                                   s and Sotheby'
                                                                s, or A Buyer'
                                                                             s

Guide on How to Win Twice at Auction,” Art Newspaper, November, 141, p. 42.



Eswaran, Mukesh. 1997. “Cartel Unity over the Business Cycle,” Canadian Journal

of Economics 30, pp 644-72.



Gallet, Craig A., and John R. Schroeter. 1995. “The Effects of the Business Cycle on

Oligopoly Coordination,” Review of Industrial Organization 10, pp. 181-96.



Ginsburgh, Victor, Patrick Legros, and Nicolas Sahuguet. 2004. “How to Win Twice
at an Auction; On the Incidence of Commissions in Auction Markets.” Unpublished
manuscript.



Green, Edward J., and Robert H. Porter. 1984. “Noncooperative Collusion Under

Imperfect Price Information.” Econometrica 52, pp. 87-100.



In Re Auction Houses Antitrust Litigation, 2001 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 1713 (S.D.N.Y)




                                         25
Kobayashi, Bruce. 2001. “Agency, Amnesty and Antitrust: An Economic Analysis

of the Criminal Enforcement of the Antitrust Laws against Corporations.” George

Washington Law Review 69, pp. 715-744.



Levenstein, Margaret C., and Valerie Y. Suslow. 2002. “What Determines Cartel

Success?” University of Michigan Business School Working Paper No. 02-001.



Mason, C. The Art of the Steal: Inside the Sotheby’s Christie’s Auction House

Scandal. New York: G.P. Putnam’s Sons, 2004.



Porter, Robert H. 1983.     “A Study of Cartel Stability:      The Joint Executive
Committee, 1880-1886.” The Bell Journal of Economics 14. pp.301-14.


Posner, Richard A. 1970. “A Statistical Study of Antitrust Enforcement.” Journal of
Law and Economics 13. pp. 365-419.


Rotemberg, Julio J., and Garth Saloner. 1986. “A Supergame-Theoretic Model of
Price Wars During Booms.” American Economic Review 76. pp. 390-407.


Stewart, J.B. 2001. Bidding War: How an antitrust investigation into Christie’s and
Sotheby’s became a race to see who could betray whom. The New Yorker, October
15, 2001, p. 158.




                                         26
