NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

RULES, DISCRETION AND REPUTATION
IN A MODEL OF MONETARY POLICY

Robert J. Barro
David B. Gordon

Working Paper No. 1079

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

February 1983

Prepared for the conference on "Alternative Monetary Standards,"
Rochester, N.Y., October 1982. We have benefitted from discussion
at the conference and from seminars at Chicago, Northwestern and
Iowa. We are particularly grateful for comments from Gary Fethke,
Roger Myerson, Jose Scheinkman, and John Taylor. Part of this
research is supported by the National Science Foundation. The
research reported here is part of the NEER's research program in
Economic Fluctuations. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1079
February 1983

Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy

Abs tract

In a discretionary regime the monetary authority can print more

money and create more inflation than people expect. But, although these
inflation surprises can have some benefits, they cannot arise systematically
in equilibrium when people understand the policymakor's incentives and

form their expectations accordingly. Because the policymaker has the
power to create inflation shocks ex post, the equilibrium growth rates
of money and prices turn out to be higher than otherwise. Therefore, enforced
commitments (rules) for monetary behavior can improve matters. Given the
repeated interaction between the policymaker and the private agents, it
is possible that reputational forces can substitute for formal rules.
Here, we develop an example of a reputational equilibrium where the outcomes turn out to be weighted averages of those from discretion and

those from the ideal rule. In particular, the rates of inflation and
monetary growth look more like those under discretion when the discount
rate is high.

Robert J. Barro
Ecdnomics Department
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
(312) 962-8923
• David B. Gordon
Economics Department
University of Rochester
Rochester, N.Y. 14627
(716) 275-2627

In a discretionary regime the monetary authority can print more money

and create more inflation than people expect. The benefits from this surprise inflation may include expansions of economic activity and reductions

in the real value of the government's nominal liabilities. However, because
people understand the policymaker's incentives, these types of surprises--and
their resulting benefits- -cannot arise systematically in equilibrium.

People adjust their inflationary expectations in order to eliminate a con-

sistent pattern of surprises. In this case the potential for creating inflation shocks, ex post, means that, in equilibrium, the average rates of
inflation and monetary growth--and the corresponding costs of inflation--

will be higher than otherwise. Enforced commitments on monetary behavior,
as embodied in monetary or price rules, eliminate the potential for ex post

surprises. Therefore, the equilibrium rates of inflation and monetary growth
can be lowered by shifts from monetary institutions that allow discretion
to ones that enforce rules.

When monetary rules are in place, the policymaker has the temptation
each period to "cheat" in order to secure the benefits from inflation shocks.
(Because of existing distortions in the economy, these benefits can accrue

generally to private agents, rather than merely to the policymaker.) However, this tendency to cheat threatens the viability of the rules equilibrium
and tends to move the economy toward the inferior equilibrium under dis-

cretion. Because of the repeated interactions between the policymaker and
the private agents, it is possible that reputational forces can support the

rule. That is, the potential loss of reputation--or credibility--motivates the policymaker to abide by the rule. Then, the policymaker foregoes
the short-term benefits from inflation shocks in order to secure the gain

—2—

from low average inflation over the long term.

We extend the positive theory of monetary policy from our previous

paper (Barro and Gordon, 1983) to allow for reputational forces. Some monetary rules, but generally not the ideal one, can be enforced by the policy-

maker's potential loss of reputation. We find that the resulting equilibrium looks like a weighted average of that under discretion and that under

the ideal rule. Specifically, the outcomes are superior to those under
discretion--where no commitments are pertinent--but inferior to those under
the ideal rule (which cannot be enforced in our model by the potential loss
of reputation). The results look more like discretion when the policymaker's discount rate is high, but more like the ideal rule when the discount

rate is low. Otherwise, we generate predictions about the behavior of
monetary growth and inflation that resemble those from our previous anal-

ysis of discretionary policy. Namely, any change that raises the benefits
of inflation shocks--such as a supply shock or a war--leads to a higher
growth rate of money and prices.

The Policymaker's Objective

As in our earlier analysis, we think of the monetary authority's
objective as reflecting the preferences of the "representative" private

agent. Ultimately, we express this objective as a function of actual and
expected rates of inflation. Specifically, benefits derive from positive
inflation shocks (at least over some range), but costs attach to higher
rates of inflation.

-3-

The Benefits from Surprise Inflation
We assume that some benefits arise when the inflation rate for period t,

exceeds the anticipated amount, n. One source of benefits--discussed
in Barro and Gordon (1981) and in an example from Kydland and Prescott (1977,

p.477)--derives from the expectational Phillips Curve. Here, unanticipated
monetary expansions, reflected in positive values for iTt -

lead

to

increases in real economic activity. Equivalently, these nominal shocks
lower the unemployment rate below the natural rate. By the natural rate,
we mean here the value that would be ground out by the private sector in the

absence of monetary disturbances. This natural rate can shift over time
because of supply shocks, demographic changes, shifts in governmental tax and

transfer programs, and so on. The natural rate also need not be optimal.
In fact, the benefits from surprise inflation arise when the policymaker
views the natural rate as excessive, This can occur,' for example, if the
distortions from income taxation, unemployment compensation, and the like

make the average level of privately-chosen work and production too low. Because of the externalities from these distortions, the government (and the
private agents) would value stimulative policy actions that lower the unemployment rate below its natural value.

Other sources of benefits from surprise inflation involve governmental

revenues. Barro (1983) focuses on the proceeds from inflationary finance.
The expectation of inflation (formed the previous period), 'rr, determines

people's holdings of real cash, Mt i/Pt

depreciates

. Surprise

inflation,

the real value of these holdings, which allows the government to

issue more new money in real terms, (Mt -

Mt1)/Pt,

as a replacement. The

policymaker values this inflationary finance if alternative methods of

-4-

raising revenue--such as an income tax--entail distortions. Hence, the
benefit from surprise inflation depends again on some existing externality.

Calvo (1978) discusses the necessity of existing distortions in
this type of model.

The revenue incentive for surprise inflation relates to governmental

liabilities that are fixed in nominal terms, rather than to money, E!!. •

Thus, the same argument applies to nominally-denominated, interest-bearing
public debt. Suppose that people held last period the real amount of gov-

ernment bonds, Bti/Pti. These bonds carry the nominal yield, Rti, which
is satisfactory given people's inflationary expectations over the pertinent
e

horizon, •

Surprise

e

inflation,

depreciates

part of the real value

of these bonds, which lowers the government's future real expenditures for

interest and repayment of principal. In effect, surprise inflation is again
a source of revenue to the government. Quantitatively, this channel from
public debt is likely to be more significant than the usually discussed mech-

anism, which involves revenue from printing high-powered money. For example,
the outstanding public debt for the U.S. in 1981 is around $1 trillion.1

Therefore, a surprise inflation of 1 per cent lowers the real value of this

debt by about $10 billion. Hence, this channel produces an effective lump
amount of revenue of about $10 billion for each extra 1% of surprise infla-

tion. By contrast, the entire annual flow of revenue through the Federal
Reserve from the creation of high-powered money is about the same magnitude
($8 billion in 1981, $13 billion in 1980).

The attractions of generating revenue from surprise inflation are clear
if we view the depreciation of real cash or real bonds as an unexpected

capital levy. As with a tax on existing capital, surprise inflation provides
for a method of raising funds that is essentially non-distorting, ex post.

-5—

Once people have built up the capital or held the real cash or real bonds,

the government can extract revenue without disincentive effects. Of course,
the distortions arise--for capital, money or bonds--when people anticipate,

ex ante, the possibility of these capital levies, ex post. That's why
these forms of raising revenue will not end up being so desirable in a full

equilibrium where people form expectations rationally. But, for the moment,
we are just listing the benefits that attach, ex post, to surprise inflation.

The Costs of Inflation

The second major element in our model is the cost of inflation. Costs
are assumed to rise, and at an increasing rate, with the realized infla-

tion rate, ir. Although people generally regard inflation as very costly,
economists have not presented very convincing arguments to explain these costs.

Further, the present type of cost refers to the actual amount of inflation
for the period, rather than to the variance of inflation, which could more

easily be seen as costly. Direct costs of changing prices fit reasonably
well into the model, although the quantitative role of these costs is doubt-

ful. In any event the analysis has some interesting conclusions for the case
where the actual amount of inflation for each period is not perceived as

costly. Then, the model predicts a lot of inflationl

The Setup of our Example
We focus our discussion on the simplest possible example, which illus-

trates the main points about discretion, rules and reputation. Along the way,
we indicate how the results generalize beyond this example.
The policymaker's objective involves a cost for each period, z, which

-6-

is given by

z = (a/2)(rrt)

(1)

2

- bt(Tr

—

e

7rt),

where a, bt > 0.

The first term, (a/2)(rT)2, is the cost of inflation. Notice that our
use of a quadratic form means that these Costs rise at an increasing rate with
the rate of inflation, Tr. The second term, bt(lrt -

ir),

is the benefit from

inflation shocks. Here, we use a linear form for convenience.2 Given, that
the benefit parameter, bt, is positive, an increase in unexpected inflation,
-

rr,

reduces costs. We can think of these benefits as reflecting reductions

in unemployment or increases in governmental revenue.

We allow the benefit parameter, bt, to move around over time. For example,
a supply shock--which raises the natural rate of unemployment--may increase

the value of reducing unemployment through aggressive monetary policy. Alternatively, a sharp rise in government spending increases the incentives to raise

revenue via inflationary finance. In our example, bt is distributed randomly

with a fixed mean, , and variance, a.3 (Hence, we neglect serial correlation
in the natural unemployment rate, government expenditures, etc.)

The policymaker's objective at date t entails minimization of the expected
present value of costs,

(2)

=

E[z

+

+

(l+rt+l

r)(l+r+1) Z2

+

where r is the discount rate that applies between periods t and t + 1. We

assume that r is

generated from a stationary probability distribution.

(Therefore, we again neglect any serial dependence.) Also, the discount rate
is generated independently of the benefit parameter, bt. For the first period

ahead, the distribution of r implies a distribution for the discount factor,

—7-

=

l/(].+r).

We denote the mean and variance for

by

and

respectively.

The policymaker controls a monetary instrument, which enables him to
select the rate of inflation,

in each period. The main points of our

analysis do not change materially if we introduce random discrepancies
between inflation and changes in the monetary instrument. For example, we
could have shifts in velocity or control errors for the money supply. Also,
the policymaker has no incentive to randomize choices of inflation in the model.
We begin with a symmetric case where no one knows the benefit parameter,
bt, or the discount factor for the next period,

Hence,

the policymaker chooses the inflation rate,

either b or

Similarly,

when they act for period t.
without observing

people form their expectations, ir, of the

policymaker's choice without knowing these parameters. Later on we modify
this informational structure.

Discretionary Policy
Our previous paper (Barro and Gordon, 1983) discusses discretionary policy
in the present context as a non-cooperative game between the policymaker and the
private agents. In particular, the policymaker treats the current inflationary

-8—

expectation, Tr, and all future expectations, ir. for i > 0, as givens when
choosing the current inflation rate,

Therefore,

is chosen to minimize

the expected cost for the current period, Ezt, while treating 1T and all

future costs as fixed. Since future costs and expectations are independent of
the policymaker's current actions, the discount factor does not enter into the

results. The solution from minimizing Ez, where z is given in eq. (1), is
=

(3)

/a

(discretion)

We use carets to denote the solution under discretion. (With other cost
functions, ii would depend also on Tr.)

Given rational expectations, people predict inflation by solving out
the policymaker's optimization problem and forecasting the solution for Trt

as well as possible. In the present case they can calculate exactly the
choice of inflation from eq.(3)--hence,the expectations are
=

(4)

=

Since inflation shocks are zero in equilibrium-that is,
the cost from eq. (1) ends up depending only on iT In particular, the
cost is
A

z = (1/2)

(5)

—2

(b) /a

(discretion).

Policy under a Rule
Suppose now that the policyinaker can conunit himself in advance to a

rule for determining inflation. This rule can relate
the policymaker knows at date t.

parameters, b and

to variables that

In the present case no one knows the

at date t. But, everyone knows all previous values

of these parameters. Therefore, the policymaker can condition the inflation rate,

only on variables that are known also to the private agents.

(The policymaker could randomize his choices, but he turns out not to have

-9-

this incentive.) Therefore, the policymaker effectively chooses

and

together, subject to the condition that ir=ii. Then, the term that involves
the inflation shock,

drops out of the cost function in eq.(l). Given

the way that we modeled the costs of inflation--namely, as (a/2)(rr)2__it
follows immediately that the best rule prescribes zero inflation at all dates,
(6)

7T = 0

(rule).

We use an asterisk to denote the results from a rule. Eq.(6) amounts to a
constant-growth-rate-rule, where the rate of growth happens to be zero.
Finally, we can calculate the costs under a rule from eq.(l) as
(7)

z = 0

(rule)

The general point is that the costs under the rule, z, are lower than
those under discretion,

from eq.(5). The lower cost reflects the value

of being able to make commitments--that is, contractual agreements between

the policymaker and the private agents. Without these commitments, infla-

tionendsup being excessive--specifically, ilt>O__but, no benefits from higher
inflation result.

Cheating and Temptation
As noted by others (e.g. Taylor, 1975; B. Friedman, 1979), the policy-

maker is tempted to renege on commitments. In particular, if people expect
zero inflation--as occurs under the rule--then the policymaker would like to

implement a positive inflation rate in order to secure some benefits from

an inflation shock. Further, this desire does not stem from a peculiarity
in the policymaker's tastes. Rather, it reflects the distortions that make
inflation shocks desirable in the first place.

How much can the policymaker gain in period t by cheating? Assume that

-10-

people have the inflationary expectation, ir =

0, which they formed at the

start of period t. If the policyinaker treats this expectation as a given,

the choice of

that minimizes z is the one that we found before under

discretion4--namely,
(8)

=

6/a

(cheating).

We use tildes to denote values associated with cheating. The expected cost
follows from eq. (1) as
(9)

Ezt =

-(l/2)(E)2/a

(cheating).

The general point is that this expected cost is lower than that, z = 0,

from following the rule. We refer to the difference between these expected
costs as the temptation to renege on the rule--or simply as the temptation.

In the present case we have
(10)

temptation =

E(z_z)

=

(l/2)(S)2/a>0.

At the present stage we have three types of outcomes. Ranging from
low costs to high, these are
—
—2
1) cheating (with people expecting the rule), Ezt=_(l/2)(b) /a,

2) rule, z = 0,

—2

3) discretion, z = (1/2) (b) Ia.

Discretion

is worse than the rule because first, no inflation shocks arise

in either case, but second, the commitment under the rule avoids excessive

inflation. However, the rule is only a second-best solution. Cheating-when people anticipate the rule--delivers better results. That's because
the inflation shock eliminates part of the existing distortion in the economy

(which is worth the extra inflation). But, the cheating outcome is feasible
only when people can be systematically deceived into maintaining low infla-

tionary expectations. In our subsequent analysis this cannot happen

—11—

in equilibrium. However, the incentive to cheat determines which rules are
sustainable without legal or institutional mechanisms to enforce them. There
is a tendency for the pursuit of the first best--that is, the cheating outcome-to generate results that are poorer than the second best (rules) and closer
to the third best (discretion).

Enforcement of Rules

Generally, a credible rule comes with some enforcement power that at

least balances the temptation to cheat. We consider here only the enforcement
that arises from the potential loss of reputation or credibility. This
mechanism can apply here because of the repeated interaction between the
5

policymaker and the private agents.

Specifically, if the policyinaker

engineers today a higher rate of inflation than people expect, then everyone

raises their expectations of future inflation in some manner. Hence, in a
general way, the cost of cheating today involves the increase in inflationary
expectations for the future.

Consider a rule that specifies the inflation rate, rr, for period t.

The rule might prescribe rr =

0,

as before, or it might dictate some nonzero

rate of inflation. Generally, the rule can specify some dependence of
on the realizations of all variables through date t-l--that is, the values
for date t are still not observed when Tr is set.
We postulate the following form of expectations mechanism, which we
eventually show to be rational:
1)

=

2)

e =

and

(11)

t-

e

In other words if the previous inflation rate,

accords with expectations,

-12-

then people trust the government to perform in line with its announced

rule for period t-that is, 7T =

But, if the actual value departs from

expectations last period, rr1 1Ttl' then people do not expect the government
to follow its rule this period--hence, rr

'rr. Rather, private agents

anticipate that the policymaker will optimize subject to given expectations,

which defines a discretionary situation. Hence, expectations are
where

is again the discretionary outcome.
If the government follows its rule in every period, then it also vali-

dates expectations each period. Then, the first part of eq.(ll) says that
the government maintains its reputation (or credibility) in each period. On
the other hand, if the government cheats during period t, then the second
part of eq.(ll) says that the next period's expectations are the ones assO-

ciated with discretion, t+l• Then, if in period t+l the government chooses
the discretionary inflation rate, t+l (which is optimal given that expectations are 'rr+1), the actual and expected inflation rates coincide, although

at the discretionary levels. Accordingly, the first part of eq.(ll) says that

people anticipate the rules outcome, +2' for the following period. In
other words the "punishment" from violating the rule during period t is that

the discretionary (non-cooperative) solution obtains during period t+l. But,
credibility is restored as of period t÷2- -that is, things carry on as of date

t+2 as though noprevious violation had occurred. Therefore, the mechanism
in eq.(ll) specifies only one period's worth of punishment for each "crime."6
Other equilibria exist that have punishment intervals of different length,
as we discuss later on.

Consider our previous rule where rr = 0.
has credibility in period t, so that

=

0.

period t, then his best choice of inflation is

Suppose that the policymaker
If the policymaker cheats during
=

/a

from eq. (8).

-13-

(Note that eq.(11) says that the size and length of the punishment do not

depend on the size of the crime.) Then, the policymaker gains the temptation,

E(z -

z)

(1/2) ()2/a,

=

from eq. (10).

The cost of this violation is that discretion, rather than the rule,

applies for period t+l. Hence, the policymaker realizes next period the
cost,

=

(l/2)()2/a,

from eq.(5), rather than that, z÷1 = 0, from eq.(7).

Since costs for period t+l are discounted by the factor =1/(1+r) in eq. (2),
the expected present value of the loss is
(12)
We

enforcement =

=

use the term, enforcement, to refer to the expected present value of the

loss from transgressions.

The policymaker abides by the rule during period t--that is, sets

n--if the

=

enforcement is at least as great as the temptation. Otherwise,

he opts for the cheating solution,

=

(and suffers the consequences

next period). But, when forming expectations for period t, ir, people know
whether the policymaker will find it worthwhile to cheat. Hence, if the
if the cheating solution is preferable to the rule, then the expectation,

= 0,

=

is irrational. Therefore, people would not stick with the expec-

tation mechanism from eq.(ll). The rules that can apply in equilibrium are
those that have enough enforcement to motivate the policymaker to abide by

them, given the expectations mechanism in eq.(ll). Then, the equilibrium
satisfies two properties. 1irst, the expectations are rational.

In particular,

each individual's projection, rr, is the best possible forecast of the policymaker's actual choice, 7r,

the

given

the way the policymaker behaves and

given

way others form their expectations. Second, the policymaker's choice,
maximizes his objective, given the way people form their expectations!

-14-

In equilibrium rules satisfy the enforceability restriction,
(13)

-

E(z z)

temptation =

< enforcement =

E[q(z1 z1)]
-

This condition says that the costs incurred today by following the rule,
rather than cheating, are not greater than the expected value of having

the cooperative (rules) outcome next period, rather than discretion. Consider
now whether the proposed rule, rr = 0, satisfies the enforceability restric-

tion. From eq.(lO), the temptation is (l/2)(b)2/a, while from eq.(l2), the

enforcement is .(l/2)()2/a.8 Since < 1, the temptation is strictly greater
than the enforcement. Hence, the ideal rule,

=

0, is not enforceable,

at least given the expectations mechanism from eq. (11). Therefore, zero

inflation is not an equilibrium in our model. (With a different form of
cost function, rather than eq.(l), the ideal rule may or may not be enforceable.)

The Best Enforceable Rule
We look here for the best enforceable rule--that is, the one that mini-

mizes expected costs, subject to the constraint that the enforcement be at

least as great as the temptation. In the present setting, where the parameters, bt and

are unobservable at date t, the best rule has the simple

form,
(14)

ir=ir.

That is, the rule specifies constant inflation (a "constant-growth-rate rule").
But, we already know that the ideal rule, ii = 0, is not enforceable. Given

this, the enforceability restriction turns out to hold with equality for
the best enforceable rule.

Using the procedures described before, we can calculate the temptation

—15—

and enforcement associated with the rule, rr = rr.

(Note that Tr =

71

also

applies here.) The results are
(15)

temptation E(z -

(16)

enforcement =

) = (a/2) (E/a

-

and

.E(t1 z1)
-

=

.(a/2) [(b/a)2

- 112].

We graph the temptation and enforcement versus the inflation rate,
Figure 1.

(This figure was suggested to us by John Taylor.) At

temptation follows from eq. (10) as ()2/2a.

=

0,

, in
the

Then, as 71 rises, the gain

from cheating diminishes--hence, the temptation falls. Finally, when ir

equals the discretionary value, /a, the temptation equals zero. That's because the cheating solution and the rule prescribe the same inflation rate,
at this point. (As 71 increases further, the temptation increases, because-for given expectations--the policymaker prefers the discretionary inflation rate,
to higher rates of inflation.)

The enforcement equals (2/2a

when ir =

0, from eq. (12). Then, as

71 rises, the enforcement declines. That's because the cost from losing reputa-.

tion becomes smaller when the rule prescribes a higher rate of inflation. As
with the temptation, the enforcement equals zero when 71 equals the discretionary

value, bIa Here, when the policymaker cheats, people expect the same rate of
inflation--namely, the discretionary amount E/a--as when the policymaker abides

by the rule. Consequently, there is no enforcement. (When 71 increases further,
the enforcement becomes negative--that is, the policymaker prefers the punishment, where people anticipate the inflation rate &/a, to the maintenance of the
rule, where people expect an inflation rate that exceeds b/a.)
Notice that Figure 1 determines a range of announced inflation rates that

can be equilibria. Specifically, the enforcement is at least as large as the

-16-

() 2,

I

temptation =

(3/2) (b/a

-

enforcement =

(a/2) [(/a)2

0
ideal
rule

-

•TT+

a
q

/

enforceable range of

best enforceable rule
dis cretion

Figure 1
Temptation and Enforcement

—17—

temptation for values of it in the interval, (/a)(l -

1(1

+

<it

Among these, we focus on the value of r that delivers the best results in the

sense of minimizing the expected costs from eq. (2). We can rationalize this
focus on one of the possible equilibria by allowing the policymaker to choose
which value of ii to announce in some initial period. Then, as long as this
value is in the enforceable range, we assume that the private agents follow
along. That is, they all use the announced value of it as the basis for assessing

the policyinaker's performance (in accordance with eq. (ll)). Within this setup, the policymaker will, in fact, announce the value of it that leads to a
minimum of expected costs.

The best of the enforceable rules occurs where the curves for temptation
and enforcement intersect in the interior of Figure 1.
intersect at the discretionary value, it =

s/a,

(The curves also

but expected costs are higher

at this point.) Hence, the announced inflation rate is
=

(17)

(/a)(l

-

)/(l + )

(best

enforceable rule),

for which the expected cost in each period is
(18)

Ez =

Notice that, with 0 <

{(l/2)(E)2/a].[(l

-

+

< 1, the inflation rate, ir, is intermediate

between the ideal rule, 0, and discretion, b/a. In fact, the best enforceable
rule is a weighted average of the ideal rule and discretion, with the weights

depending on the mean discount factor, .

A relatively small value of ,

which means a high rate of discount on future costs, implies a relatively
high
weight on discretion--that is, a high value of irk. That's because a decrease

in q weakens the enforecent (eq. (16)), which requires ir to increase in
order to maintain the equality between the enforcement and the temptation.

—18—

Generally, an increase in the mean discount factor, q, reduces ir*, with

tending toward zero (the ideal rule) s q tends to one.1° On the other
hand, rr* tends to b/a--the discretionary result--as ' tends to zero.

(A

zero discount factor means zero enforcement, so that only discretion is

credible.) Notice that any force that influences the mean discount factor,

q, has a corresponding effect on inflation. For example, during a war we
anticipate that

will be low, which triggers high inflation (via high

monetary growth).

The expected cost from eq.(18) is also intermediate between that from
the ideal rule, which is zero, and that for discretion, which is (l/2)(E)2/a.

Remember that the ideal rule is itself a second-best solution, which is

inferior to cheating when people anticipate the ideal rule. But, cheating
cannot occur systematically when people understand the policymakerts incen-

tives and form their expectations accordingly. Rather, the lure of the
better outcome from cheating creates the temptation, which makes the ideal

rule non-enforceable. Hence, the attraction of the first best makes the
second best unattainable. We end up with a cost that exceeds the second
best (the ideal rule), but which is still lower than the third best (discretion).

The other feature of our results is the dependence of the inflation
rate, IT*, on the ratio of cost parameters, s/a. This ratio pertains to
the benefit from inflation shocks, which depends on E,

relative

to the

costs of inflation, which depends on the parameter a. An increase in the
ratio, b/a, raises the temptation, relative to the enforcement, which

requires ir to increase. In particular, if inflation is not very costly,
so that the parameter a is small, then we end up with a lot of inflation.

—19—

Also, anything that raises the mean benefit attached to an inflation shock,
b, leads to higher inflation (but, not to more benefits from inflation shocks).

In our previous paper (Barro and Gordon, 1983), which focused on the results under
discretion, we discussed some changes in the economy that can affect the betefits from

inflation shocks. For example, the parameter b tends to be high in the
following cases:

•when the natural unemployment rate is high,
•during a recession,

•during a war or other period where government expenditures rise sharply,
•when the deadweight losses from conventional taxes are high, and
•when the outstanding real stock of nominally-denominated public
debt is large.

In each case we predict that the high value of

that

triggers a high value of irk--

is, a high rate of monetary expansion by the policymaker. This view

accounts for11
•a rise in the mean inflation rate along with a rise in the
natural unemployment rate (as in the U.S. over the last 10-15 years),
•countercyclical response of monetary policy,

high rates of monetary expansion during wartime,

high rates of monetary growth in some less developed countries, and
an inflationary effect from the outstanding real stock of public
debt.

Contingent Rules
We get some new results when we modify the informational structure in

ways that motivate the policymaker to employ a contingent rule. Then, the

—20—

inflation rate varies each period in accordance with the state of the economy.
Suppose that the policymaker knows the values of the benefit parameter,
bt, and the discount factor,

when choosing the inflation rate,

people also condition their expectations, ir, on bt and

If

then the results

change little from those already presented. So, we focus on the case where
is still generated without knowledge of the contemporaneous variables,

b and
One

possibility

is that the policymaker receives information more quickly

than private agents. However, our setup does not require this informational
asymmetry. For example, when setting demands for real money balances or
holdings of real government bonds, people have to forecast rates of infla-

tion. Once people hold the government's nominal liabilities, their real
wealth changes when subsequent inflation shocks occur. Therefore, although
the government and

private

agents may have the same information at any point

in time, the agents' decisions (on how much real money and bonds to hold)

depend on expectations of inflation that were formed earlier. Therefore,
we can think of

as not being conditioned on the realizations, bt and

However, these realizations can influence the actual inflation rate, ir.

The situation is less clear for the example of the Phillips Curve. In
models where only unperceived nominal disturbances matter for real variables-as in Lucas (1972, 1973) and Barro (1976)--the pertinent value for

is

the one based on contemporaneously available information. However, some
models

with

long-term nominal contracting (Gary, 1976; Fischer, 1977; Taylor,

1980) suggest that inflationary expectations formed at earlier dates will

matter for today's choices of employment, production, etc. Then, the situation resembles that from above where people choose their holdings of

—21—

money and bonds based on forecasts of inflation. However, the rationality
of the Gray-Fischer-Taylor contracts has been questioned (Barro, 1977).

Discretion
We find the results under discretion in the same way as before. Specifically, we get
=

(19)

bt/a.

Now, the policymaker reacts to the actual value of the benefit
rather than to its mean, W.

on br__are ir =

v/a.

parameter, bt,

However, people's expectations--not conditioned

Therefore, although TF =

the realizations for bt

generate departures of inflation from its expectation. Therefore, the
inflation shocks--and the corresponding benefits from them--are sometimes
positive and sometimes negative.

The costs under discretion are now
(20)

The

results

=

(1/2)

(bt)

2/a - (br/a) (bt -

correspond to those from before (eq. (5)) if b =

b.

Looking

one period ahead, we can calculate
(21)

Ez+i =

(1/2a){()2

-

The new term is the variance of the benefit parameter, a.

The Ideal Contingent Rule
When bt is observed, the ideal rule no longer prescribes zero (or

constant) inflation at all times. Rather, the policymaker conditions the
inflation rate on the realizations for the benefit parameter. The present

example is simple enough to write out the ideal contingent rule in closed

form. Specifically--abstracting from enforcement problems--the best rule

—22—

turns out (after a large amount of algebra) to be
(22)

=

(l/a)(bt_b).

As before, the prior mean of inflation, 7r =

Eir, is

zero. But, realized

inflation exceeds its expectation--and benefits from inflation shocks arise--

when bt exceeds its mean, .

Conversely, inflation is below its expectation--

so that costs from unexpectedly low inflation occur--when b is below its
mean.

Note that inflationary expectations are always zero, but the policymaker
creates surprisingly low inflation (i.e. deflation) when the benefit para-

meter takes on relatively low values. These realizations may show up as a
recession or as other costs from a negative inflation shock. Yet, ex post,
it would clearly be preferable to have zero, rather than negative, inflation.

Then, we avoid the negative inflation shock and also have less costs due

to inflation (which are (a/2)(7r)2). So, the negative inflation shocks may
appear pointless. Yet, the ideal rule says that the policymaker should
"bite the bullet"--that is, cause a recession through contractionary mone-

tary policy--under some circumstances. That's because the surprisingly low
rate of inflation when the benefit parameter, bt, is low is the counterpart
of the surprisingly high rate of inflation when the benefit parameter is

high. Choosing zero, rather than negative, inflation for the low states
means that the prior expectation of inflation is higher than otherwise.

Then, the policymaker achieves lower benefits in the states where bt is

relatively high. In fact, it is worthwhile to incur some costs in the low
states--namely, bite the bullet through unexpectedly low inflation--in order
to "buy" the unexpectedly high inflation and the corresponding benefits in

—23—

the high states. In effect the policymaker invests in credibility when it
is relatively cheap to do so--namely, when b is low--in order to cash in on
this investment when it is most important--that is, when

bt is high.

The costs associated with the ideal rule turn out to be
(23)

z =

(l/2a)[(b)2

-

()2]

Again, we get our previous results (eq.(7)) if bt =

b.

Looking ahead one

period, the expectation of these costs is
(24)

Ez1 =

-(l/2a)c.

Because the policyinaker can match the variations in b with appropriate

responses in Tr, the expected costs fall with an increase in the variance
of the benefit parameter,

As before, we can show that the ideal rule is not enforceable in our

model3 Therefore, we go on now to examine the best enforceable, contingent
rule.

Enforceable Contingent Rules
We look at rules that express the inflation rate, ir, as a stationary
function of the state, which specifies the values of the two variables, b
and

Given that the ideal rule is unattainable, the best enforceable

rule in our model turns out to equate the temptation to the enforcement for

all realizations of b and g.'4The temptation cannot exceed the enforcement
for any of these realizations in order for the rule to be credible.

Further,

if the enforcement exceeds the temptation in some state, then we can do

better by changing the inflation rate for that state. That is, we bear more
costs than necessary by having excessive enforcement.

—24—

The present example is sufficiently simple to work out the results in

closed form. The solution for inflation turns out to be a linear function

of bt and of v'--that is,

c

=

(25)

+

c2b

+

c3v',

where the c's are constants, which have to be determined. If we conjecture
that the rule for inflation takes the form of eq.(25), then we can work out
the temptation and enforcement as functions of the parameters, c1, C2,

c3,

and the realizations for bt and q. Then, we determine the values of the
c-coefficients in order to equate the temptation to the enforcement for all

Since eq.(25) has the correct form, this operation turns

values of (bt,

out to be feasible. The results are

(26)

C2

= 1/a,

c3 =

where vj

is

-2(b/a)J/(l+),

the mean of

Hence, the best enforceable contingent rule

for inflation is16
(27)

=

(br/a)

-

2(/a)/.v/(l+).

The enforceable rule can again be viewed as a weighted average of the
ideal rule--eq. (22)--and discretion--eq.(19). In particular, the mean rate
of inflation is positive, but lower than that associated with discretion, which

is /a. The relative weights depend on the discount factor--both on the
parameters of the probability distribution for

and on the realized value.

Given the parameters of the distribution, a higher realization for q means
a lower inflation rate, rr.

17

-25-

Note that the realj7atiOn of thedjscount factor does not affect current
benefits and costs from inflation, but does influence the amount of enforcement.

Thus, the ideal rule does not depend on

of

qin eq.(22). But, for low realizations

low inflation rates are not credible, because the temptation would

exceed the enforcement. Therefore, the best enforceable rule does depend
on

in eq. (27).

The inflation rate now moves around with fluctuations in the benefit
parameter, bt. or in the discount factor,

In

particular, relatively

high realizations for b and relatively low ones for

lead to unexpectedly

high inflation. Conversely, the policymaker "bites the bullet"--that is,
creates negative inflation shocks--when the benefit parameter is lower than

normal or the discount factor ishigher than normal. The reasoning here is
similar to that from before. It is worthwhile to suffer negative inflation
shocks in some cases--that is, for low values of bt or high values of
in order to sustain low prior

expectations of inflation. Then, large gains

are attained in the cases where the benefit parameter, b, is high or the
discount factor, q, is low. These last cases are likely to be emergencies--

such as wars or other times where economic

activity or government revenues

are valued especially highly. In effect, the policymaker bites the bullet
during the non-emergencies in order to invest in credibility--an investment
that yields returns during the emergencies.

—26—

The Length of the Punishment interval
So far, our results apply when the length of the punishment interval

is fixed at one period. That is, the length of time for which the discretionary outcome obtains, conditional on cheating, equals the length of time

over which the policymaker can enjoy the results of his cheating. (The last
interval essentially defines the length of the period.) Given the length of
the punishment interval, we obtained a unique reputational equilibrium by

allowing the policymaker to announce the best one. But, if we look at different punishment intervals (which can be either greater or smaller than one
period), then we find an array of reputationa]. equilibria. At this point,
we have no satisfactory way to resolve this problem of multiple equilibria.
However, we have some observations.
First, we know that the length of the punishment interval cannot be

zero. That is, the policymaker cannot instantly restore a lost reputation.
If he could, there would be no enforcement, which means

that

the only

equilibrium is the discretionary one.

We can calculate the effect of longer punishment intervals on ex-

pectedcosts. In the present model the punishments--that is, discretionary
outcomes--never occur as part of a reputational equilibrium. Hence, we
always o at least as well if we increase enforcement, which corresponds here to
raising the length of the punishment interval. In particular, it always
looks desirable in this model to have an infinite interval, which amounts
to a form of "capital punishment."
We can modify the model so that punishments take place occasionally.18
For example, suppose that inflation depends partly on the policymaker's actions

and partly on uncontrollable events. Further, assume that people cannot fully

-27—

sort out these two influences on inflation, even ex
a form of control rule

post. Then, people adopt

where the policymaker loses reputation if the observed

inflation rate exceeds some critical value. But, because of the uncontrollable
element, this loss of reputation--and hence, the punishment--actually occur

from time to time. Then, in contemplating a more severe form of punishment,
we have to weigh the losses when punishments occur against the benefits from

greater enforcement. Thus, it is likely that the optimal punishment interval

would be finite. (However, from a positive standpoint, it does not necessarily
follow that the equilibrium with this punishment interval will be selected.)
Finally, another possibility is to introduce uncertainty about the

policymaker's preferences. Then, people try to learn about these preferences

by observing behavior. Further, the policymaker knows that people learn from
his actions, and acts accordingly. Kreps and Wilson (1980) and Milgrom and
Roberts (1980), who use this general type of model, show that unique equilibria

sometimes obtain)9 But, we have not yet pursued this route in our context,
because it relies on differences in tastes among potential policymakers.
Unfortunately, we have nothing interesting to say about the sources of these

differences. But possibly, this idea would become meaningful if we identified
policyinakers with shifting interest groups, each of which were affected differently by variations in inflation.

-.28-

Concluding Observations

Our analysis provides an example of a reputational equilibrium for

monetary policy. The results amount to a combination of the outcomes from
discretion with those from the ideal rule. Previously, we analyzed discretion and rules as distinct possible equilibria. Now, the relative
weights attached to the discrétLonaiy and rules solutions depend on the

poicymakers's discount rate and some other factors. From a
predictive standpoint for monetary growth and inflation, the results modify
and extend those that we discussed previously.

In some environments the rules take a contingent form, where inflation
depends on the realization of the benefit parameter or the discount factor.
Here, the policymaker sometimes engineers surprisingly low inflation, which

is costly at a point in time. Thus, the monetary authority "bites the bullet"
and pursues a contractionary policy, given some states of the world. By acting
this way, the policymaker sustains a reputation that permits surprisingly high
inflation in other states of the world.

We have difficulties with multiplicity of equilibria, which show up also

in the related game-theory literature. Here, the problem arises in determining
how long a loss of reputation persists. In an extended version of the model,
we can figure out the optimal length for this interval of punishment. But,
from a positive standpoint, it is unclear which equilibrium will prevail.

—29—

Footnotes
1For this

purpose we should actually look at the privately-held

component

of the funded national debt, which is about $700 billion in 1981.

2Our previous

-

1%

- )]2,

paper (Barro and Gordon, 1983) uses a term of the form,

where

> 0 depends on the natural unemployment rate for

the period. Then, the policyinaker

only

li> --

over some range. But, the general nature of the results does not change

if we substitute this more
of inflation to depend on
on

values inflation shocks--that IS,

complicated form. Also, we could modify the cost

(ITt -

where

is the optimal inflation tax

cash balances.

31n some models, such as Lucas (1973) and
Barro (1976), the coefficient
b depends

not

on the forecast variance of inflation. Most of our results would

be affected if we allowed for this type of dependence. However, this

element matters when we compare across regimes that have &ifferent forecast
variances for inflation.

4With a different

cost function, the result for

generally differs from

that under discretion,
IT.

5mis type of repeated game is discussed in J. Friedman

6Green and Porter (1981) use an analogous model for

There, the observation of a low price

(1971).

oligopoly pricing.

triggers (T-l) periods of punishment,

—30—

during which firms behave in a Cournot manner.

7me expectations mechanism from eq. (11) cannot be rational if the
game has a known, finite endpoint. Then, no punishment arises for crimes in
the last period. Working backward, the solution unravels period by period.
Our framework assumes no known termination date for the game,

although

the

game may end probabilistically. Then, a higher probability of termination
shows up as a higher discount rate--that is, as a lower mean discount factor,

.

For some related game-theory literature,see Selten (1978), Kreps and

Wilson (1980), and Milgrom and Roberts (1980).

8The two terms are equal when

= 1

only because of the specific cost

function from eq. (1). Generally, equality would arise for a value of

that

is either above or below one.

9But, recall that the equilibrium is itself non-cooperative. In particular,

each agent calculates the best forecast, v, of the policymaker's actions, while
taking as givens the way the policyinaker behaves and the way other agents form
their expectations.

10This last condition depends on the specifics of our example. However,
the direction of effect for

on ir

applies

generally.

11Some of these results can also be explained by changes in the optimal
tax rate on cash balances, which applies to the systematic part of inflation.
For example, this effect is probably important for monetary growth during wartime and in less developed countries.

—31—

12However, we did not enter the variance of inflation directly into the

cost function of eq.(l). If we had, this result could change.
13Wlien

considering the ideal rule, the temptation and enforcement turn

out to be independent of the realization
exceeds the enforcement for all discount

for b. Further, the temptation
factors, q, that are less than

one.

other cost functions, the enforcement may exceed the temptation

for some realizations. In particular, we then find that the inflation rate
does not react to variations in

in some regions.

15The enforcement is linear in

But, the temptation involves the

square of the inflation rate. Therefore, if

is linear in V, then

the temptation also involves terms that are linear in

16The solution reduces to the previous one in eq.(17) if there is no

random variation in bt and
'7Given the variance for
value of ,IEj also lowers
=

VAR(/)
'8Greeri

+

Then, bt =

,q

=

, and

and the realized value of Vj, a higher

rr. This follows by using the formula,

(r)2

and Porter (1981) have this feature in their model of oligopoly

pricing.

19Also, the Solution does not necessarily degenerate
to the discretionary
equilibrium when the game has a known,

finite endpoint. See fcomo 7, above.

—32—

References

Barro, R.J., "Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 2, January 1976, 1-32.

"Long-Term Contracts; Sticky Prices, and Monetary Policy,"

,

Journal of Monetary Economics, 3, July 1977, 305-16.

"Inflationary

,

Finance under Discretion and Rules," Canadian

Journal of Economics, January 1983.

and D.B. Gordon, "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a
Natural-Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy, 91,
August 1983.

Calvo, G., "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Eco-

nomy," Econométrica, 46, November 1978, 1411-28.
Fischer, S., "Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations and the Optimal
Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy, 85, February 1977,
191-205.

Friedman, B., "Optimal Expectations and the Extreme Information Assumptions
of 'Rational Expectations' Macromodels," Journal of Monetary Economics,
5, January 1979, 23-42.
Friedman, J.W., "A Non-cooperative Equilibrium for Supergames," Review

of Economic Studies, 38, January 1971, 861-74.

Gray, J. A., "Wage Indexation: A Macroeconomic Approach," Journal 'of
Monetary Economics, 2, April 1976, 221-36.

Green, E. J. and R. H. Porter, "Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect
Price Information," unpublished, California Institute of Technology,
January 1981.

-33-

Kreps, D.M. and R. Wilson, "On the Chain-Store Paradox and Predation:

Reputation for Toughness," unpublished,Stanford University, July 1980.
Kydland, F.E. and E.C. Prescott, "Rules rather than Discretion: the Inconsistency of Optimal Plans," Journal of Political Economy, 85, June
1977, 473-91.

Lucas, R.E., "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of
nomic Theory, 4, April 1972, 103-24.
-

, "Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs,"
American Economic Review, 63, June 1973, 326-34.

Milgrom, P. and

J.

Roberts, "Predation, Reputation and

Entry

Deterrence,"

unpublished, Northwestern University, 1980.

Selten, R., "The Chain-Store Paradox," Theory and

Decision,

9, 127-59,

1978.

Taylor, J., "Monetary Policy during a Transition to Rational Expectations,"
Journal of Political Economy, 83, October 1975, 1009-22.
,

"Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts," Journal of

tical Economy, 88, January 1980, 1-23.

