NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INEQUALITY, NONHOMOTHETIC PREFERENCES, AND TRADE:
A GRAVITY APPROACH
Muhammed Dalgin
Devashish Mitra
Vitor Trindade
Working Paper 10800
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10800
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

We are indebted to Gordon Hanson, Nuno Limão, Joaquim Silvestre, Mark Vancauteren, and seminar
participants at the University of Maryland, University of Texas – Austin and University of California at
Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, San Diego and Santa Cruz, for useful discussions and comments on an earlier draft.
We also thank Natalia Trofimenko for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Muhammed Dalgin, Devashish Mitra, and Vitor Trindade. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Inequality, Nonhomothetic Preferences, and Trade: A Gravity Approach
Muhammed Dalgin, Devashish Mitra, and Vitor Trindade
NBER Working Paper No. 10800
September 2004
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we show that inequality is an important determinant of import demand, in that it
augments the standard gravity model in a significant way. We interpret this result with the aid of a
model in which tastes are nonhomothetic. Classification of products, based on the correlation
between household budget shares in the US and income, into "luxuries" and "necessities," works
very well in our analysis when we restrict the analysis to developed importing countries. While the
imports of luxuries increase with the importing country's inequality, imports of necessities decrease
with it. Furthermore, we find that an increase in the level of inequality in the importing country
generally leads to an increase in imports from developed countries, and to a reduction in imports
from low-income countries.
Muhammed Dalgin
Gebze Yuksek Teknoloji Enstitusu
Isletme Fakultesi
Cayirova/Gebze
41400 Kocaeli
Turkey
mdalgin@maxwell.syr.edu
Devashish Mitra
Department of Economics
The Maxwell School of Citizenship and
Public Affairs
133, Eggers Hall, Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
and NBER
dmitra@maxwell.syr.edu

Vitor Trindade
Department of Economics
The Maxwell School of Citizenship and
Public Affairs
Eggers Hall, Syracuse University
Syracuse, NY 13244
vmtrinda@maxwell.syr.edu

1

Introduction

It is traditional in trade theory to assume identical and homothetic preferences across all
countries. This simplifies computations, especially in empirical work. For example, one
implication of this assumption is that in a world with free trade, the shares of countries
and individuals in overall world demand for each good are the same as their shares in
world income. Since world demand must equal world supply, a country's consumption
pattern can be explained by two things: its share of the world's GDP; and the world
output of each good. Thus each country's demand is simply a proportion of world supply.
While this approach to modeling has led to the convenient and elegant methodology of
factor-content studies, it has at the same time effectively resulted in the complete
elimination of the demand side from the picture, an embarrassing asymmetry in the
international trade literature. While we acknowledge that such an approach has been quite
successful in explaining trade flows based on differences in supply (and in particular,
based on the differences in the supply of factors), we must emphasize that it cannot by
construction explain the portion of trade that can only be understood with the inclusion of
demand considerations. In this paper, we take up such considerations.
We begin with the empirical fact that tastes are not homothetic. If that is the case,
then aggregate demand depends not solely on aggregate income, but also on the
distribution of that income, and on the per capita income level. Therefore, these two
variables matter for trade flows. To see this in more detail, suppose that tastes are
nonhomothetic, in that there are some goods that are “luxuries” and some goods that are
“necessities” (defined as goods whose income elasticity of demand is larger and smaller
than one, respectively). Imagine that income is redistributed in a country, by taking a
dollar from the poor and giving it to the rich. The same dollar in the hands of the rich will
be used to buy proportionately more luxuries, than it used to when it belonged to the
poor. Therefore, the demand for luxuries increases, and the demand for necessities
decreases. All else equal (including the country’s GDP and the world output), this
country will import more luxuries, or export fewer of them. Therefore, a country’s GDP
and world output of a good, which constitute the backbone of the well-known gravity
model, cannot be considered sufficient statistics to determine world trade flows.

1

There is indeed some evidence that all goods do not have unit income elasticity of
demand. In particular the papers by Hunter and Markusen (1988) and Hunter (1991)
specifically test for nonhomotheticity of preferences by estimating linear incomeexpansion paths that have intercepts that are significantly different from zero (see figure
1, where the income-expansion path, or Engel curve, is marked E). Their model is
consistent with a minimum subsistence level for one good (good Y), causing consumers at
very low levels of income to begin by consuming good Y only, purchasing the other good
(X) only at higher levels of income. Therefore, the strongest prediction of the model is
that income per capita is a determinant of aggregate demand. If income per capita
increases in a perfectly equal country with a representative consumer, she might go from
consumption point C1 to point C2, thereby increasing her budget share of the luxury good
(X). Note that, while the positive intercept of the Engel curve makes budget shares a
function of per capita income, its linearity implies that income redistribution, holding per
capita income constant, has no impact on the demand for a product, if everyone's income
is sufficiently high that every consumer consumes both goods. Two consumers, both
starting at consumption point C0, one of which loses income and goes to consumption C1,
while the other gains the same income, and consumes at C2, still have the same aggregate
consumption: that is, 2C0 = C1 + C2.
Consider now the possibility that preferences are nonhomothetic in a way that
results in some curvature for the Engel curve (see figure 2). Then income distribution
becomes a determinant of demand and of trade flows. Thus in figure 2, a regressive
income redistribution (from the poor to the rich) would result in an increase of the
aggregate demand for good X, and a decrease of the aggregate demand for good Y.
Some further empirical evidence for nonhomothetic tastes is provided in the paper
by Thursby and Thursby (1987). They estimate a model that controls for the usual gravity
variables (distance, common border, membership in preferential trade areas, GNPs etc),
and find that countries with more similar incomes per capita trade more. They ascribe this
result to countries with similar GDP/capita having similar consumption patterns.
Although that paper is closer to our framework, in that it estimates a gravity model, it
also does not allow for a role for income distribution.

2

The empirical work mentioned above shows the role of per capita income in the
determination of expenditure shares, thereby establishing the importance of
nonhomotheticity in tastes. But only Francois and Kaplan (1996) look at the effect of
income distribution, and in particular of inequality, on trade, albeit in a non-gravity
setting. More specifically, they look at inequality in developing countries as a
determinant of the shares of their imports of manufactured goods from developed
countries. They find that these shares increase with the inequality of the developing
country (and with its per capita income), and more so in product categories that are more
differentiated, according to their measure of product differentiation.
In this paper, we use the well-known gravity model, which has been shown in
numerous papers to be able to explain trade flows. We augment the standard gravity
model by including measures for inequality and GDP per capita, and ask whether these
measures add any explanatory power to the model. In our attempt at identifying the
impact of inequality on trade, we use consumer data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,
along with a concordance we created between BLS product categories and three-digit
SITC codes, to categorize goods into luxuries and necessities at the four-digit SITC
level.1 We then use our classification to re-aggregate trade flows into these two
categories. We estimate our augmented gravity model for imports of these two types of
goods. Since the classification is based on US household data, we find that pooling all
country pairs does not lead to any economically meaningful results. Therefore, we restrict
our sample to country pairs in which the importing (destination) country is developed
(high income).2 In other words, we look at trade flows from developed to developed
countries and from developing to developed countries. Here we find that while the
imports of “luxuries” are positively related to importing country inequality, the imports
of “necessities” are negatively related to it. This is exactly what our theory would have
predicted.

1

We look at the correlation between budget shares of each consumer good in the household survey with
income levels of different income quintiles. Goods that have a negative income correlation are classified as
necessities, while those with positive correlations are classified as luxuries.

2

We place no such restrictions on our set of exporting (source) countries.

3

Next we turn to a very well-known classification, based on product
differentiation, constructed by Rauch (1999). We check whether the coefficient of
inequality in the gravity equation is different for trade in differentiated, as compared to
homogenous goods.3 We find only weak evidence of systematic differences in the
inequality coefficient across the Rauch categories. A possible reason for this is that the
assumed relationship between product differentiation and income elasticity of demand
may be weak in practice.
We also look at a classification of trade flows based on the income levels of the
country of origin (while controlling for the country of destination). We clearly see that,
holding everything else equal, an increase in the inequality of the importing country leads
to higher imports of goods produced in rich countries and a reduction of imports
produced in poor countries. This result clearly shows that, at least on average, highincome countries are producers of luxuries while low-income countries produce
necessities.
Our work differs significantly from Francois and Kaplan (1996) in a number of
dimensions. First, note that in our analysis each observation is a country pair at a point in
time. Therefore, we make use of a lot more information than Francois and Kaplan, who
aggregate imports into each developing country across different exporters. We also
experiment with alternative measures of inequality and their various combinations. While
for the first part of our analysis, we look at the imports of developed countries from
developing as well as developed countries, for the rest of the analysis using product
classification based on Rauch categories and on the income levels of the exporting
countries, we pool all developed and developing country data. Restricting the estimation
to using only income distribution in the South, as in Francois and Kaplan (1996), can be
problematic, because of potential measurement problems in the South.4 As it turns out,
3

Rauch’s classification for differentiated goods is arguably better than the one available to Francois and
Kaplan. Its use in our paper is motivated by: (a) Linder’s (1961) book, which also motivated previous
empirical work, and which argued that income elastic goods (the “luxuries” or Linder goods) tended to be
manufactured, differentiated, goods; (b) the strong positive correlation between product differentiation and
income elasticity across product categories found by Francois and Kaplan. As it turns out, our results are
somewhat mixed across differentiation groups.

4

This would be the case, for example, if a large proportion of asset ownership and of economic
transactions in the South is informal.

4

there is an economically significant message of having four types of trade flows:
developed country to developing country, developed country to developed country, and
so on.
As explained earlier, we experiment with alternative ways of classifying goods
into necessities and luxuries. We use three alternative types of classification, one based
on the relationship between the household budget shares in each product, another based
on the income levels of exporting countries, and thirdly, the Rauch classification,
arguably a better measure of product differentiation than the one used by Francois and
Kaplan. The first two classifications are absent from the work of Francois and Kaplan.

2

Theory

If tastes are homothetic, the income expansion path is a straight line starting from the
origin.5 If tastes are nonhomothetic (as shown in figures 1 and 2), then some goods are
luxuries and others are necessities, meaning that they have income elasticities of demand
higher and lower than one, respectively. The empirical investigations of Hunter and
Markusen (1988) and Hunter (1991) find that, in contrast to the standard assumption in
trade models, tastes are nonhomothetic in a statistically and economically significant
way. According to Hunter, for example, restricting preferences to be homothetic results
in overestimating the total volume of trade by approximately 25 percent.
In this paper, we take the stance that if tastes are nonhomothetic, there is a case
for studying the effects of income distribution on trade flows. To our knowledge, ours is
the first gravity-based paper to do so. Suppose that there are n individuals in an economy
with two goods, X and Y. It is well-known that if we assume preferences to be homothetic
and identical, we can write the aggregate demand function for X as follows:

X = D( p, I ),

(1)

in which p is the price ratio (= pX/pY) of the two goods, and I = ∑ j =1 I j , Ij being the jth
n

individual's income (measured in units of Y). There is an analogous demand function for

Y. Now let us relax the assumption of homothetic tastes, which we do in two steps. First,
5

The income expansion path is the locus of consumption bundles for varying income levels at constant
prices.

5

suppose that the income expansion path is a straight line that does not pass through the
origin (this is normally called quasi-homothetic tastes, as in figure 1). This path is
consistent, for example, with assuming that good Y is food, which has a minimum
subsistence level. Here, aggregate demand is no longer simply a function of aggregate
income. In particular, it is now important to know additionally the per capita income (or
the size of the population, n). Note however that, with quasi-homothetic tastes, income
distribution still does not matter, as long as all consumers are rich enough to consume
both goods. Suppose for example that the economy has two consumers, both consuming
at C0. Let us redistribute the income from one consumer to the other, such that they end
up consuming at points C1 and C2, respectively. Aggregate demand remains unchanged.
In sum, with quasi-homothetic tastes, equation (1) is replaced by

X = D( p, I , I / n).

(2)

Finally, suppose that the income expansion path is curved (figure 2). Performing the
same income redistribution experiment as in the previous paragraph, one can easily see
that aggregate demand changes. In particular, note that aggregate demand for good X
increases (X 1 + X2 > 2X0), while it decreases for good Y. Thus, aggregate demand now
depends potentially on the income of each consumer in the economy:
X = D( p, I1 , I 2 ,..., I n ).

(3)

In our data, we do not have information on the income of every single consumer in each
economy. We do have various summary measures of income distribution, for the
countries and years in our data set. Consequently, we approximate equation (3) by
including all the determinants of demand in equation (2), and additionally a summary
measure for the distribution of income:

X = D( p, I , I / n,σ ),

(4)

where σ is our measure of income distribution, or equivalently of income inequality.
We can now make use of these theoretical insights to modify the gravity equation.
Let the value of country i’s production of luxuries and necessities be denoted by XiL and
XiN , respectively. Country i’s exports of luxuries and necessities to country j are then
given by X ij L = s j L X i L , X ij N = s j N X i N , respectively, where s j L and s j N represent

6

country j’s shares of world expenditure on luxuries and necessities respectively.6 Further,
letting α i L and α i N = (1 − α i L ) denote the shares of the value of the output of luxuries
and necessities respectively in the overall GDP of country i, we have
X ij L = s j L α i L GDP i , X ij N = s j N α i N GDP i .

(5)

Taking logs we have
log X ij L = log s j L + log α i L + log GDPi ,
log X ij N = log s j N + log α i N + log GDPi .

(6)

With non-homothetic preferences, we can write
GDP j
, (GDP / capita) j ,σ j ,σ W ),
W
GDP j
GDP
=ψ (
, (GDP / capita) j ,σ j ,σ W ),
W
GDP

s j L = φ(
sjN

(7)

where (GDP/capita) j is the per capita GDP of country j, GDPW stands for world GDP, σj
for the inequality of country j and σW for world inequality.7 Specializing the above to a
form where the logs of the expenditure shares are linear in the log of the share of GDP in
world GDP, in the log of per capita GDP and in inequality, we have:8
GDP j
) + β 2 log(GDP / capita) j + β 3σ j + β 4σ W ,
W
GDP
GDP j
= γ 0 + γ 1 log(
) + γ 2 log(GDP / capita) j + γ 3σ j + γ 4σ W .
W
GDP

log s j L = β 0 + β1 log(
log s

j
N

(8)

In (8), we have the coefficients of per capita GDP and inequality positive in the case of
luxuries and negative in the case of necessities. Plugging (8) into (6), we have:
6

Note that an importing country’s share in world expenditure on a product category is being assumed to be
the same across all source (exporting) countries for the same category, where a category represents whether
the good is a necessity or luxury. Of course, as shown above, these shares are being hypothesized to be
functions of the characteristics of the importing country. While this type of a gravity specification is usually
based on the assumption of perfect specialization, Evenett and Keller (2002) show that a somewhat less
restricted version of the gravity model is consistent with increasing returns to scale and product
differentiation as well as with incomplete specialization in a unicone 2x2x2 Heckscher-Ohlin model. For an
in-depth treatment of the relationship between the empirical gravity model and alternative theoretical
models of international trade, see Feenstra, Markusen and Rose (2001). Finally, for an excellent, exhaustive
textbook treatment of the entire gravity literature, see chapter 5 of Feenstra (2003).
7

In equation (4), all countries face a common world relative price of luxuries to necessities, and therefore
this variable is absorbed into a year fixed effect in our regressions. Thus, to avoid unnecessary clutter, we
suppress this argument in the share function presented in equation (4).

8

Alternatively, one can think of this expression as a first-order Taylor expansion in the logarithms.

7

log X ij L = β 0 + β1 log GDP j − β1 log GDPW + β 2 log(GDP / capita) j
+ β 3σ j + β 4σ W + logα i L + log GDPi ,
(9)

log X N = γ 0 + γ 1 log GDP − γ 1 log GDP + γ 2 log(GDP / capita)
+ γ 3σ j + γ 4σ W + logα i N + log GDPi .
ij

j

W

j

We estimate equations similar to these. They are essentially gravity equations, in that
exports from country i to country j depend on the logarithms of the GDP of each country.
However, the equations are modified by the inclusion of GDP/capita and inequality for
the importing country. GDP/capita, of course, has a dual role in that it also represents the
stage of development of the trading country and therefore, can capture the size of trade
barriers (both formal and informal). Therefore, its role through nonhomotheticity will be
virtually impossible to identify. The effect of nonhomothetic preferences through
inequality is more clear-cut and less contaminated. One further modification is that we
expect from the theory that the coefficients on luxuries and necessities to be different,
and therefore we will estimate two different equations, one for luxuries and one for
necessities. Finally, note that we will include terms for natural barriers to trade, such as
distance and remoteness.

3

Empirical Strategy

A. Direct measure: luxuries versus necessities
We will thus investigate the effects of inequality on trade with the use of a standard
gravity model of international trade, augmented in specific ways. The standard gravity
model estimates the volume of trade between two countries, as determined by the product
of their GDPs, and some factors that may stimulate or impede trade. Among the latter
factors, we include the distance between the two countries (which can be considered to be
a proxy for trade costs), and remoteness of the country pair from the rest of the world (the
more remote the two countries are from other countries, the more they are expected to
trade with each other). As discussed in the theory section, we add per-capita GDP and
various measures of income distribution (more properly, of income inequality), which
8

also matter if preferences are nonhomothetic. Note that, as argued by Frankel (1997), percapita GDP's also capture formal and informal trade barriers.9 Therefore, this variable
will perform a dual role, and its interpretation should be treated with care. This is one
further reason to include inequality, since its interpretation is direct and less ambiguous.
A further departure from the gravity model, as indicated by the theory, is that we
first perform all regressions by including the GDPs and the GDPs/capita of the importing
country and the exporting country separately (four variables total). To facilitate a direct
comparison with the standard gravity model, for most regressions we also report the
results in which we just use the logarithm of the product of the GDPs and the logarithm
of the product of the GDPs/capita, which restricts the coefficients on the GDPs and on the
GDPs/capita to be the same. Note that F-tests reject this restriction in all cases.
We expect that the impact of the different variables, especially GDP per capita
and inequality, on the international commerce of some good to depend on the nature of
the good being transacted. If the good is considered a luxury, then the impact of
inequality in the importing country should be positive, while if the good is a necessity,
the impact of inequality would enter negatively. We must therefore separate tradable
goods according to whether they are luxuries or necessities, and aggregate trade flows
according to these two categories.
We use a direct measure of luxuries and necessities to test the main hypothesis of
this paper: the flows of international trade can only be fully understood with the inclusion
of demand considerations. Because demand (and specifically, its non-homotheticity)
plays such a significant role, the challenge will be to use consumer behavior for that
purpose, but such that what we call a luxury or a necessity is independent of international
trade.
For this purpose, we obtained data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics detailing
consumer behavior for a wide range of consumption categories. For each of the
consumption categories defined by the BLS, the first step was to designate it as a luxury
(L) or a necessity (N). The second step of the procedure was to match 4-digit SITC
categories, for which we have trade data, to the BLS categories. Details of this procedure

9

Per-capita GDP captures the level of development, which is usually negatively correlated with formal and
informal trade barriers that are not directly measured by distance or remoteness.

9

are given in the Data Appendix. For each exporter-importer-year combination, we were
therefore able to aggregate trade into two different flows: exports in luxuries; and exports
in necessities.
More specifically, we ran OLS estimates of the following two models:
ln X ijkt = Aik + A jk + Akt + β 1Ek log (GDPit ) + β 1Mk log (GDPjt ) +

β 2 Ek log [(GDP / Capita ) it ] + β 2 Mk log [(GDP / Capita ) jt ] +

(10)

β 3k log (Distanceij ) + β 4 k log (Remote ijt ) + β 5 k Inequality jt + vijkt ,
ln X ijkt = Aik + A jk + Akt + β 1k log (GDPit GDPjt ) +

β 2 k log [(GDP / Capita ) it (GDP / Capita ) jt ] + β 3k log (Distance ij )
(11)

+ β 4 k log (Remote ijt ) + β 5 k Inequality jt + uijkt ,
k = L, N ,
where the variables are defined as follows:
Xijkt: exports from country i to country j in category k (luxuries or necessities) in year t;
GDPit: country i’s GDP in year t;
(GDP/Capita)it: country i’s GDP per capita in year t;
Distanceij: great circle distance between principal cities of countries i and j;
Remoteijt: product of the average distances of country i and country j from all other
countries, weighed by GDPs;
Inequalityjt: income inequality in (importing) country j in year t;
vijkt, uijkt: error terms, with assumed normal i.i.d. distributions.
Note that (10) is directly derived from our theory, while (11) is a restricted version of
(10) in that the coefficients of the GDPs (aggregate as well as per capita) of the importing
and exporting countries are constrained to be the same. The imposition of this restriction
gives us the traditional gravity model (where it is the product of GDPs that determines
bilateral trade flows), augmented by the inclusion of the inequality variable.

10

Note that we use country fixed effects (Aik and Ajk), which are important, as they
stand for the multilateral resistance terms in Anderson and van Wincoop (2003).10 These
country fixed effects are also expected to capture a significant part of the output
composition of countries in terms of luxuries and necessities as well as country-specific
taste parameters.11 Finally, we also use fixed “time effects,” Akt, to account for such
things as business cycles, systematic currency fluctuations, changes in price levels,
worldwide rise or fall in protectionism and so on. Also, these time effects capture world
GDP and world inequality (GDPW and σW in our theory section).
The variable Remoteijt is calculated as follows:
⎛ ∑ Distancemi GDPmt
⎜
Remoteijt = ⎜ m≠i
∑ GDPmt
⎜
m ≠i
⎝

⎞⎛ ∑ Distancemj GDPmt
⎟⎜ m≠ j
⎟⎜
∑ GDPmt
⎟⎜
m≠ j
⎠⎝

⎞
⎟
⎟.
⎟
⎠

Since, in our main results, we perform the estimation of models (10) and (11) for
the two different product categories separately, we allow all our parameters to vary across
them.
B. Homogeneous versus differentiated goods
We next use the well-known index devised by Rauch (1999), which separates
goods at the 4-digit SITC level according to three different types: goods that are traded in
organized exchanges; goods that are not traded in organized exchanges but for which a
published reference price can be found; and goods which fall under neither of the two
previous categories. Rauch argues that the last type is more differentiated than the first
two types. This is because differentiated goods have characteristics that can differ along
many dimensions; therefore, it is not easy to trade them “long distance,” as the trade that
10

This identification relies crucially on the assumption that the multilateral resistance term does not vary
with time. Rigorously speaking, that assumption is not exact, since the multilateral resistance depends on
the trade barriers of all countries, which do change over time. Since our paper does not attempt to identify
trade barriers or “border effects,” but instead attempts to explain trade flows as determined by inequality,
which are not modeled as a barrier to trade, it seems most economic to avoid the considerable cost of using
multilateral resistance terms. The case for using country fixed effects to capture the multilateral resistance
has been made quite clearly and strongly in chapter 5 of Feenstra (2003). Gravity models with country
fixed effects have been estimated by Harrigan (1996), Redding and Venables (2000), Rose and Van
Wincoop (2001) and Feenstra (2002).

11

Note that the parameter α in our theory section is specific to both the type of good (luxury or necessity)
and to the source country.

11

occurs in an organized exchange or through the aid of a reference price would be. We
estimate equations (10) and (11) for two categories of goods. k=w+r is the category that
aggregates trade in all goods with organized exchanges (denoted by w) and goods with
reference prices (r). Thus, this is the category of homogeneous goods. k=n denotes trade
in all other goods, that is, in differentiated goods.
The reason to use this index is two-fold. First, we follow Francois and Kaplan
(1996) in arguing that, intuitively, differentiated goods should behave more like luxuries.
Goods such as automobiles and toys tend to be bought by consumers who have
considerable disposable income after the bare necessities of life are met. Second, unlike
Francois and Kaplan we have at our disposal what is arguably a better measure of product
differentiation than they had.12 Therefore, as another attempt at identifying an effect of
inequality on trade, we ran separate gravity regressions (equations 10 and 11) for
homogeneous and differentiated goods, as indexed by Rauch.
C. Source country
We next try to correlate the country of origin of a given good to whether that good is a
necessity or a luxury. Here, we re-estimate the models in equations (10) and (11)
somewhat differently. First, we use total exports from country i to country j,
X ijt = ∑k = L , N X ijkt + unclassified trade.13 Second, we include additionally the variables
HighIncomei and MidIncomei. These are dummies for whether the exporting country i is
high or mid-income. Third, we also include HighIncomej and MidIncomej, which perform
the analogous role for the importing country. These dummy variables are introduced both
in levels and interacted with Inequality for the importing country.

12

Francois and Kaplan’s work predates, and therefore could not have used, Rauch’s index. For a measure
of differentiation, they simply use the proportion of the trade in each good that is intra-industry trade. This
measure, from our point of view, has two disadvantages. First, it requires two links, instead of just one:
first, it requires identifying luxuries with differentiated goods; second, identifying differentiated goods with
goods that have high volumes of intra-industry trade. By using a direct measure of differentiated goods, we
avoid the need for the second link (we have also avoided the first link in our direct measure). The second
disadvantage of conflating luxuries with intra-industry trade, is that it disallows an investigation of the
relationship between inequality and inter- versus intra-industry trade, itself a non-trivial topic that we
intend to take up in future work.
13

“Unclassified trade” refers to trade flows which could neither be classified as luxuries, nor as necessities.

12

We will then estimate the average impact of inequality on imports, for the
different combinations of income levels of the importing and the exporting countries.
Since we allow three income levels (high-income, medium-income, or low-income),
there will be nine combinations in all.
D. Robustness checks
Starting with the estimation that uses our direct classification into luxuries and
necessities, note that the dependent variable Xijkt is bounded below by zero, and the bound
is observed for a large number of bilateral observations. Therefore, besides estimating
models (10) and (11) with OLS, we also estimate a corresponding Tobit model. The
equations then change to:

ln X ijkt = Max{ Aik + A jk + Akt + β1Ek log (GDPit ) + β 1Mk log (GDPjt )
+ β 2 Ek log [(GDP / Capita ) it ]

+ β 2 Mk log [(GDP / Capita ) jt ] + β 3 k log (Distance ij )

(12)

+ β 4 k log (Remote ijt ) + β 5 k Inequality jt + vijkt , 0},
ln X ijkt = Max{ Aik + A jk + Akt + β1k log (GDPit GDPjt )
+ β 2 k log [(GDP / Capita ) it (GDP / Capita ) jt ]

(13)

+ β 3k log (Distance ij ) + β 4 k log (Remote ijt ) + β 5 k Inequality jt + u ijk , 0},
where the estimation is performed with maximum likelihood methods. Note that for all
models [(10) , (11), (12) and (13)] we replaced the (logs of) missing trade flows with
zeros. This is because typically missing trade flows happen between small countries that
are far apart, and the most likely reason for no trade to be recorded is absent or negligible
trade between them.
We also perform median regressions as robustness. This is a type of regression
that attempts to estimate the median of the dependent variable (as opposed to the mean),
conditional on the independent variables. Therefore, it is quite robust to outliers and
bunching of zeros in the dependent variable.

13

We then try further ways to check the robustness of the results. First, since it is
possible that the impact of inequality is non-linear, we experiment with the inclusion of
the square of inequality. Second, apart from using the Gini coefficient, the most widely
used summary measure of inequality, we also experiment with the ratio of the income of
the top quintile in the income distribution to the income of the bottom quintile (Q51). In
this way, we hope to capture various aspects of income inequality. This also has the
advantage that it responds to a possible criticism of the Gini index, namely that it is a
measure that is relatively insensitive to changes in the extremes of the distribution.
One further issue may be the possible endogeneity of the inequality variable. This
may occur through a Stolper-Samuelson effect, in which a country’s trade has a direct
impact on its factor rewards, and thus an indirect impact on inequality.14 We handle such
endogeneity concerns by restricting the sample in two ways: first, we exclude all
observations in which the exporting country represents more than 1% of the importing
country’s trade; second, we exclude all observations in which the exporting country has
one of the 5 largest GDPs for that year. The goals of both restrictions are the same. Note
that a country’s aggregate trade with the rest of the world can have an impact on its
inequality. By excluding each country’s major trading partners, we are restricting
ourselves to imports that will have no or at most a negligible impact on inequality.

4

Data

The trade data come from the World Trade Analyzer (WTA), which is a panel covering
trade flows from 1970 to 1997 for most countries of the world, organized by the Standard
International Trade Classification (SITC), Revision 2, at the 4-digit aggregation level.
The WTA was compiled by Statistics Canada, using the bilateral trade data available
from the United Nations Statistical Office, and it has been made available by Robert
Feenstra (2000). The usefulness of this data set comes from its two main characteristics.
First, Statistics Canada took special care to match import and export data between any
two countries. Second, imports from one country to another are reported in quite a
disaggregated manner, at the four-digit SITC level. This feature is important for us,
14

A country with a leftist government that wishes to enhance equality may well use trade policy to do so.

14

because we want to aggregate the trade data according to our classification for luxuries
and necessities, and also according to the Rauch commodity categories.
We needed to define traded goods according to whether they are luxuries or
necessities. To do this, we obtained data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics for 2001.
The BLS separates US household population into five income quintiles and, for each
quintile, lists the average expenditure share of about 100 consumption categories. We
relegate to the Data Appendix a detailed explanation of how we used this information to
construct our definition of luxuries and necessities, and how we matched it to SITC data.
Here, it suffices to say that for an exporter i, and importer j, and a year t, we had at the
end of this procedure two trade flows: exports by i to j in luxuries; and exports by i to j in
necessities.
We use Rauch’s (1999) classification, which separates 4-digit SITC goods into
three groups: goods that are traded on organized exchanges (denoted by w); goods that
have reference prices (r); and finally those goods that fall into none of these categories,
and therefore can be thought of as differentiated (n). In our regressions, we further
aggregated w and r goods into w+r, and following Rauch take this aggregate to be
homogeneous goods.
For the purpose of defining income level dummies, we separated countries into
high, medium, and low-income countries according to the World Bank’s cutoffs to
designate high income, middle income and low income countries.
Our inequality data come from Dollar and Kraay (2002), according to whom
theirs is the largest data set on inequality available up to date. It is largely a recompilation
of the UN-WIDER data set that was also used by Deininger and Squire (1996) to
construct a “high quality data set.” This data set is a panel of 137 countries, spanning the
years from 1955 to 1999.
Real GDP and per-capita real GDP data (in 1995 constant US dollars) come from
the World Bank's World Development Indicators. We obtained the logarithm of the great
circle distance data and regional dummies from Rose (2004).

15

5

Empirical Results

A. Direct measure of luxuries and necessities
We began by looking at our direct classification of trade flows into luxuries and
necessities. We ran separate regressions for exports in luxuries and exports in necessities.
Results are presented in table 1, with two alternative model specifications. Since the
classification of goods into luxuries and necessities is based on household survey data
from the US, we restrict the sample to have only high-income importing countries, while
keeping exporting countries unrestricted.15 The main prediction of the model is strongly
confirmed: not only do most gravity variables enter as predicted,16 but the only parameter
that changes sign in a significant way between the two regressions is the coefficient on
inequality. Thus, imports of necessities as defined by US household behavior go down
with inequality, and imports of luxuries go up with inequality (since the GDP / capita
plays a dual role of capturing institutions and informal trade barriers as well as nonhomotheticity of preferences, it is perhaps too much to expect it to also have the same
sign pattern). A percentage point increase in the Gini coefficient of the importing
country (the recipient of the trade flow) results in an increase in its imports of luxuries by
roughly 1.2 percent and a reduction in its imports of necessities by roughly 1.3 percent. In
other words, holding everything constant, if the US moved from its Gini coefficient of 45
to Canada’s Gini coefficient of say roughly between 30 and 35, we would get a 12 -18
percent reduction in luxury imports and a 13 - 18 percent increase in imports of
necessities. Thus, inequality seems to have a non-trivial impact on the structure of trade
flows.17

15

We tried this estimation with an unrestricted sample of all importing countries. As suspected (given that
the classification is based on household data from a high-income country, namely the US), we fail to get
any results that are economically meaningful and robust to inclusion and exclusion of country dummies,
econometric techniques, and measures of inequality.

16

The exception is Remote, which enters negatively and significant for luxuries. We do not have an
explanation for this result.

17

We also perform a large number of robustness checks as explained in detail in subsection D.

16

B. Homogeneous versus differentiated goods
The results for the OLS regressions (10) and (11) for the Rauch categories are shown on
table 2. Odd-numbered columns show results when the dependent variable is
differentiated goods (n), while the even-numbered columns are results for homogeneous
goods (w+r).
Looking first at columns (1), (2), (5) and (6), which are regressions when we use
the full set of trading partners available in the sample, we first note that most gravity
variables behave as expected: countries that are larger and closer trade more (note that the
impact of the log GDP is given by adding the coefficient on, say, log mGDP to log
mGDP/capita, which is always positive). Turning now to the parameter of interest, we see
that the impact of inequality on trade is not noticeably different between the
differentiated and the homogeneous goods. This is perhaps not on the whole surprising,
because we were after all simply positing that the definition of differentiated goods
(ultimately a combination of technological and taste characteristics, as defined by Rauch)
somehow maps to the definition of luxuries (purely a taste characteristic).
However, we also re-ran the regressions with a restricted sample, such that the
importing country is high income (that is, the variable HighIncomei=1). The regression
results with the restricted sample are represented in columns (3), (4), (7) and (8) of table
2. Here, homogeneous goods behave as necessities, in a complete reversal from the
results with the full sample. However, the results on the differentiated goods are mixed:
there is some weak support that they behave as luxuries from the coefficient on GDP /
capita,18 but the coefficient on the inequality measure loses significance. If anything, the
comparison between the two samples alerts to the importance of considering demand, and
nonhomothetic tastes in particular, for the empirical study of international trade. If tastes
were homothetic, and each country’s demand were simply proportional to world supply,
then restricting the sample of importing countries should not matter, as long as we do not
restrict the sample of exporting countries.19 Also, as in the case of our direct measure of

18

As explained before, however, a positive sign on the coefficient of per capita GDP might not mean much.
The results in table 2 for the full sample with products of GDPs and GDPs/capita (columns 5, 6) are not
sensitive to inclusion of the square of inequality, changing the estimation to Tobit, using Q51 as the
measure of inequality, or to separately regressing w and r goods, considered as homogeneous goods. The
same is true for the restricted sample (columns 7, 8), with the following exceptions: Q51 for homogeneous

19

17

luxuries and necessities, a percentage point change in the Gini coefficient can be
associated with up to a 1.3 percent change in each kind of trade flow.
C. Source country
After the mixed but suggestive results obtained by distinguishing between differentiated
and homogeneous goods, we turn our attention to whether luxuries and necessities differ
according to the income level or the stage of development of source (exporting) country.
The economically and statistically significant message we find here is: developing
countries tend to export necessities, and developed countries tend to export luxuries. Note
that this may be due to systematic technological differences between luxuries and
necessities, which cause necessities to be labor-intensive goods. But it may also be due to
differences in technological advancement of less developed versus more developed
countries.20
In order to thoroughly investigate this issue (and to see the roles of the country of
origin versus that of the destination country), we created four additional dummy
variables, as described above: HighIncomei and MidIncomei take value one if the
exporting country i is high or mid-income, respectively, with two analogous variables for
the importing country. Since we interact them with our measure of inequality for the
importing country, we need to calculate the partial effect of inequality on imports. And
since there are three types of countries (high, medium, and low income), we have nine
combinations.
Table 3 presents the regression results when the measure of inequality is the Gini
index. Most gravity variables enter with the right sign and are significant at the 1% level
(except Remote, which enters with the wrong sign, but insignificantly). Table 4 presents
the partial effects of inequality on imports, arranged in two matrices with all nine

goods becomes insignificant; the coefficient on Gini becomes insignificant for w goods (but not for r
goods).
20

In other words, the reason for the comparative advantage may follow Hecksher-Ohlin: it may be that
luxury goods, such as automobiles, but also leather bags and fashion clothing, systematically use more
capital than necessities, at the same factor prices. But the reason may also be Ricardian: simply because
they are the goods that are consumed more as the world is getting richer, it is likely that luxuries are newer
goods, with whose technology less developed countries have not yet caught up. The conclusion of either
story is that comparative advantage of richer countries is likely to fall on luxuries.

18

possibilities in each (one matrix being for the unrestricted model and the other for the
restricted one, which is the traditional gravity model augmented with inequality). Again,
these partial effects can be fairly large in magnitude.
One can discern a fair amount of structure from these matrices. Note that the
vertical dimension lets the income level of the exporting country vary, and thus it is the
dimension of greatest interest. The results provide a fairly strong confirmation of the
presumption that whether a good is a luxury or a necessity is mostly determined by
country of origin, not country of destination. To see this, consider each row one by one in
each of the two matrices. On the whole, for the first and the third rows in each of the two
matrices (barring one exception), the row determines the sign of the partial effect of
inequality on trade. In particular, by moving through the first row of both tables 4A and
4B (barring the import demand from middle income countries in table 4A which has a
positive sign but is statistically insignificant), one can easily see that import demand from
all three income levels behaves as if the exports of low income countries are necessities.21
Analogously from the last row for each of the two matrices, exports from high-income
countries behave as luxuries, irrespective of the income level of the importing country.
Only for middle income exporters does the rule break down. Here, we have a
result similar to the analysis with differentiated versus homogeneous goods: what is a
luxury for someone may be a necessity for someone else at a different income level. In
particular the pattern of signs in the middle row is reasonable: as the importer grows
richer, it sees middle income countries more and more as low income, and therefore it
sees middle income exports more and more as necessities. Note that the reverse sign
pattern on the middle row would be unexpected.
In sum, this sub-section provides fairly strong support for the following stylized
fact, to our knowledge not known to the economics literature: poor countries export
necessities, and rich countries export luxuries.
Furthermore, at the margin of this major determinant, an additional determinant of
what constitutes luxury or necessity is the income level of the importer. This lends
support for an Engle curve that not only is curved, but it is so in a complicated way, such

21

Note that the first entry in the matrix 4A is negative but insignificant at the 10% level. However, it just
misses the 10% mark, in that it is significant at the 12% level.

19

that goods that are luxuries initially, tend to become necessities at higher income levels.
With these facts in hand, it becomes more and more inescapable that a correct
specification of the gravity model must make an allowance for demand.
D. Robustness checks
Finally, we performed several robustness checks, a selection of which is reported
in table 5. First, we checked for non-linearities with respect to inequality. Introduction of
an additional squared inequality term (columns 1, 2) does not qualitatively or even
quantitatively change the results in any way. The partial derivatives of imports with
respect to inequality remain preserved in terms of sign, magnitude and significance (as
compared to the linear case).
As a further robustness check, we also use the ratio of the income share of the
fifth quintile to that of the first quintile (Q51) as an alternative measure of inequality that
we use on the right-hand side (columns 3, 4). Q51 has the right signs – negative in the
case of necessities and positive in the case of luxuries. While it is only marginally
significant in the case of necessities, it is highly significant (at the 1% level) in the case of
luxuries.
Columns (5) – (8) report Tobit and Median regressions. The results are very
robust with the median regressions, and for necessities with Tobit, while the coefficient
of interest loses significance for the Tobit regression in luxuries. Note that the
interpretation of the Tobit results is likely to be affected by the likely existence of
heteroscedasticity in our panel data.
Columns (9) and (10) report the results when we take out each country’s main
trading partners. In particular, they exclude observations in which the exporting country
represents more than 1% of the importer’s import flows. As explained in section 3, this is
done to allay the worry that the Inequality is endogenous. For the remaining (smaller)
exporters, most likely the chain of causality runs unambiguously from inequality to
imports, not the other way round. An inspection of columns (9) and (10) reveals the
essential robustness of the main results in table 1. Columns (11) and (12) perform the

20

analogous analysis when we exclude the largest five economies each year from the
exporting side.22

6

Conclusion

In this paper, we are mostly concerned with the question of how a change in income
distribution affects the volume and pattern of trade. In the framework of established trade
theory, the assumption of homothetic and identical tastes rules out the distribution of
income as a determinant of trade. In our theoretical framework, we drop the assumption
of homothetic preferences and we empirically pursue our investigation on the effect of
inequality on trade with the use of a gravity model.
Overall, our findings show that inequality affects the structure and the origin of
trade flows. In almost every regression, inequality variables are both economically and
statistically significant. When we separate goods according to whether they are luxuries
or necessities, based on consumer surveys, we see that a product’s characteristic is a
major predictor of the impact of inequality on trade. This provides a tighter link with the
theory. These results are robust across measures of inequality and across specifications,
and estimation methodology. Secondly, another pattern of the relationship between
inequality and trade is as follows: as inequality increases in the importing countries, we
observe that imports from rich countries increase while imports from poor countries
decrease. Besides, most standard variables of the gravity model remain qualitatively the
same, in the presence of inequality, as in the existing gravity literature.

22

Some additional robustness tests were performed. We tried adding the inequality of the exporting
country. For the bilateral trade sample we are focusing on, exporting country inequality remains
insignificant and in fact its t-ratio is less than one in all cases. This is understandable since in deriving the
gravity model, we find that the country that produces a tradable good will consume a negligible share of the
output of that good in a world with many countries. Bilateral imports should then be a function of, in
addition to the other gravity variables, the importing country’s inequality and the inequality of the rest of
the world, which in turn can be expressed as a function of importing country inequality and overall world
inequality. Our year dummies capture variations in world inequality from one year to another. We also tried
to combine some of the tests, for example, including the square of the inequality measure in a Tobit
regression. Finally, as explained in subsection B, for the Rauch categories, we tried to separate regressions
for the w and for the r goods.

21

DATA APPENDIX

This appendix describes how we classified 4-digit SITC goods as necessities or
luxuries.23 First, we obtained data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics on household
expenditure shares in the US in 2001. The BLS separates household population into five
income quintiles and, for each quintile, lists the average expenditure share of about 100
expenditure categories. For example, the BLS category labeled “APM1” is “apparel and
services, men, 16 and over.” For this category, expenditure shares of the different
quintiles, from the bottom quintile to the top quintile, are 0.8, 0.8, 0.8, 0.9 and 1.0%,
respectively. We defined any category whose expenditure share is weakly rising (as in
this example) as a luxury. Conversely, any category whose expenditure share weakly
decreases is classified as a necessity. We did not classify either as luxuries or necessities
those BLS categories whose shares vary in a non-monotonic way, or whose shares do not
vary at all.
The second part of our procedure was to match the BLS categories to SITC codes.
To do so, we went through the description of each 4-digit SITC, and matched it with a
BLS description. Some judgment calls were needed, as we now detail. To use the
example above, we matched the BLS category APM1, “apparel and services, men, 16 and
over,” to the following SITC codes:
•

8421: overcoats and other coats, men’s

•

8422: suits, men’s, of textile fabrics

•

8423: trousers, breeches etc., of textile fabrics24

•

8424: jackets, blazers, of textile fabrics

•

8429: other outer garments of textile fabrics

•

842A: outer garments, men’s, of textile fabrics

•

842X: outer garments, men’s, of textile fabrics

•

8441: shirts, men’s, of textile fabrics

These eight SITCs were therefore assigned as luxuries, and many other SITC codes were
in this way assigned as either luxuries or necessities. We also assigned as luxuries less
23

A file with our classification is posted online: http://faculty.maxwell.syr.edu/vmtrindade/research.htm.

24

Even though “men’s” is not explicitly mentioned in this category 8423 or in 8424 and 8429, it can be
inferred from the “X” and “A” categories, as explained later.

22

than ten SITC categories, for which there was no direct BLS correspondence, but that
clearly are luxuries: for example, SITC 8973, “jewelry of gold, silver or platinum.” Of
course, many SITC remained unclassified either as luxuries or necessities, because there
was no clear BLS correspondence.
Some of the judgment calls had to do with the fact that the wording describing the
BLS codes and the SITC did not correspond to each other in a clean way. Furthermore,
generally speaking, the BLS categories are at a fairly more aggregated level than the
SITC. To illustrate these problems, take SITC categories 0573 “bananas, fresh or dried,”
and 0579 “fruit, fresh or dried, not elsewhere specified.” We matched both to the BLS
category FHF1 “fresh fruits,” on the following two assumptions: consumer tastes for
most fruits are similar, therefore consumer behavior for a more disaggregated fruit
(bananas) should closely match the consumer behavior for aggregate fruit; furthermore,
most trade is likely to be in fresh fruit, the part in which the BLS and SITC descriptions
coincide.
The SITC, as revised by Statistics Canada, includes some codes ending in X or
XX, which for our purposes can be interpreted as aggregate, or “unallocated,” trade (for
more details, see Feenstra 2000, page 5). The criterion to match these codes to the BLS
codes was a modified majority rule. Generally, if the BLS supplied a closely
corresponding aggregate code (those codes end in 0 or 00), we simply matched the
corresponding aggregates; otherwise, if over half the disaggregated SITC codes were
assigned to a single BLS code, we also assigned the aggregate SITC code to the same
BLS code.25
Another issue was posed by the so-called rolled-up codes, also created by
Statistics Canada, many of which end with the letter A. These codes were the result of
combining two or more SITC codes (for details the reader is referred again to the
Feenstra paper). We checked all rolled-up codes for consistency. Generally, we forced
consistency by letting the rolled-up code dictate its assigned BLS code to all the original
SITCs that were rolled up into it. In some cases, we used judgment to make exceptions to
25

An exception to this general rule was SITC 1XXX, “beverages and tobacco,” which we assigned to BLS
AB00 “alcoholic beverages,” rather than TB00 “tobacco products and smoking supplies.” Note that for our
purposes this choice does not matter, since both AB00 and TB00 are necessities according to expenditure
shares.

23

this rule. For example, Statistics Canada rolled up code 7631 “gramophones & record
players, electric,” into 7649 “parts of apparatus of division 76.” We left 7649 unassigned
to any BLS code.26 However, we decided to still assign 7631 to the BLS category that
clearly corresponds to it: ENT0 “televisions, radios, audio equipment.”
To summarize, at the end of this procedure, we had three types of SITC: luxuries,
necessities, and unassigned. We dropped all unassigned trade, and separately aggregated
the luxuries and the necessities. Thus, for exporter i, importer j, and year t, we had two
trade flows: exports in luxuries; and exports in necessities.

26

This was also the result of a general criterion. Since the BLS expenditure categories refer to final
consumer expenditures, there is no information regarding parts or components. Therefore, all SITCs that
refer specifically to parts were left unassigned, and therefore were dropped out of all estimations. Also
unassigned were all machinery, except when these are household appliances. Finally, we left unassigned
codes that mix machinery with both industrial and household applications (e.g. SITC 7412 “furnace burners
for liquid fuel and parts”).

24

References

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop, 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to
the Border Puzzle.” American Economic Review, 93, 1 (March), 170-192.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, 1996. “A New Data set Measuring Income Inequality.”
World Bank Economic Review, 10, 3, 565-591.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay, 2002. “Growth is Good for the Poor.” Journal of
Economic Growth, 7, 3 (September), 195-225.
Evenett, Simon and Wolfgang Keller, 2002. “On Theories Explaining the Success of the
Gravity Equation.” Journal of Political Economy 110, 281-316.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2000. “World Trade Flows, 1980-1997.” University of California,
Davis manuscript.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2002. “Border Effects and the Gravity Equation: Consistent Methods
for Estimating the Gravity Equation.” Scottish Journal of Political Economy 49, 491-506.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2003. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Practice.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Feenstra, Robert C., James A. Markusen and Andrew K. Rose, 2001. “Using the Gravity
Equation to Differentiate Among Alternative Theories of Trade.” Canadian Journal of
Economics, 34(2), 430-447.
Francois, Joseph F. and Seth Kaplan, 1996. “Aggregate Demand Shifts, Income
Distribution, and the Linder Hypothesis.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 2
(May), 244-250.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1997. “Regional Trading Blocs in the World Trading System.”
Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Harrigan, James, 1996. “Openness to Trade in Manufactures in the OECD.” Journal of
International Economics 40, 23-39.
Hunter, Linda C., 1991. “The Contribution of Nonhomothetic Preferences to Trade.”
Journal of International Economics, 30, 345-358.
Hunter, Linda C. and James R. Markusen, 1988. “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of
Trade,” in Robert C. Feenstra, Ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Linder, Staffan, 1961. An Essay on Trade and Transformation. Almqvist and Wicksell,
Stockholm.
25

Rauch, James E., 1999. “Networks Versus Markets in International Trade.” Journal of
International Economics, 48, 1 (June), 7-35.
Redding, Stephen and Anthony Venables, 2000. “Economic Geography and International
Inequality.” CEPR Discussion Paper #2568.
Rose, Andrew K., 2004. “Do We Really Know That the WTO Increases Trade?”
American Economic Review, 94, 1 (March).
Rose, Andrew K. and Eric van Wincoop, 2001. “National Money as a Barrier to
International Trade: The Real Case for Currency Union.” American Economic Review 91,
386-90.
Thursby, Jerry G. and Marie C. Thursby, 1987. “Bilateral Trade Flows, the Linder
Hypothesis, and Exchange Risk.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69, 3 (August),
488-495.

26

Y

E
Y2

C2

Y0
Y1

C0
C1

X1

X0

X2

X

Figure 1
Quasi-Homothetic Preferences

Income per capita matters: vector C2 is not parallel to vector C1.
Income Distribution does not matter: 2C0 = C1 + C2

27

Y

C0

Y0
Y1

E

C2

Y2

C1

X1

X0

X2

X

Figure 2- Nonhomothetic Preferences

Income distribution matters: 2C0 ≠ C1 + C2

28

Table 1: OLS regressions with direct measure of Necessities and luxuries.
Regressand

Imports in
Necessities

Imports in
Luxuries

Imports in
Necessities

Imports in
Luxuries

-0.013***
(0.004)
1.040***
(0.206)
-0.233
(0.486)
0.227
(0.202)
1.714***
(0.552)
-1.487***
(0.025)
-0.643
(3.578)

0.013***
(0.004)
0.745***
(0.167)
-2.683***
(0.394)
1.094***
(0.156)
4.078***
(0.468)
-1.527***
(0.023)
-6.542**
(2.996)

-0.013***
(0.004)

0.012***
(0.004)

-1.487***
(0.025)
0.467
(3.540)
0.827***
(0.197)
0.444**
(0.191)

-1.525***
(0.023)
-2.019
(2.965)
0.143
(0.156)
1.602***
(0.148)

Regressors
Inequality (Gini)
Log xGDP
Log mGDP
Log xGDP/Capita
Log mGDP/Capita
Log distance
Log Remote
Log (xGDP mGDP)
Log (xGDP/Capita
mGDP/Capita)

Observations
26644
26644
26644
R-squared
0.75
0.84
0.75
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
column title shows commodity categories
year, exporting and importing country dummies not shown

26644
0.84

29

Table 2: OLS results for separate Rauch categories.
Regresssand

Regressors
Inequality (Gini)

Log xGDP
Log mGDP

(1)
n
full
0.011***
(0.002)
0.314***
(0.112)
−1.168***
(0.141)

Log (xGDP
mGDP)
Log xGDP/Capita 1.392***
(0.105)
Log mGDP/Capita 2.584***
(0.147)
Log (xGDP/Capita
mGDP/Capita)
Log Distance
−1.488***
(0.015)
Log Remote
−3.680
(2.453)

(2)
w+r
full
0.008***
(0.003)
0.485***
(0.137)
0.555***
(0.175)

0.968***
(0.131)
1.230***
(0.182)
−1.617***
(0.016)
2.843
(3.002)

(3)
n
restr.
−0.003
(0.003)
0.437***
(0.165)
−0.768*
(0.403)

1.179***
(0.159)
2.516***
(0.463)
−1.339***
(0.021)
−4.892
(3.244)

(4)
w+r
restr.
−0.013***
(0.004)
0.966***
(0.208)
1.511***
(0.499)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

n
full
0.012***
(0.002)

w+r
full
0.008***
(0.003)

n
restr.
−0.003
(0.003)

w+r
restr.
−0.013***
(0.004)

−0.269***
(0.091)

0.539***
(0.113)

0.236
(0.156)

1.082***
(0.198)

1.843***
(0.085)
−1.488***
(0.015)
−1.065
(2.451)

1.037***
(0.105)
−1.618***
(0.016)
2.076
(2.996)

1.378***
(0.149)
−1.338***
(0.021)
−3.715
(3.205)

0.283
(0.191)
−1.511***
(0.026)
7.138*
(3.941)

0.301
(0.204)
0.641
(0.557)
−1.509***
(0.026)
9.060**
(3.993)

Observations
67956
67956
26644
26644
67956
67956
26644
26644
R-squared
0.82
0.72
0.85
0.74
0.82
0.72
0.85
0.74
Regressand: log of import volume, in differentiated goods (‘n’), and in homogeneous goods (‘w+r’). Columns (1), (2), (5) and (6) are
the results with the full sample. Columns (3), (4), (7) and (8) restrict to observations in which the importing country is high income.
Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *, **, *** denote results significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

30

Table 3: Regressions with interactions of source country income level

Inequality
measure

mGini

mGini

(1)

(2)

−0.009
(0.006)
0.472***
(0.129)
−0.113
(0.166)

−0.017***
(0.006)

Regressors
Inequality
Log xGDP
Log mGDP
Log (xGDP mGDP)
Log xGDP/Capita
Log mGDP/Capita
Log (xGDP/Capita
mGDP/Capita)
Log Distance
Log Remote
mHighIncome
mMidIncome
xHighIncome
xMidIncome
mIneq x mHighIncome
mIneq x mMidIncome
mIneq x xHighIncome
mIneq x xMidIncome
Observations
R-squared

0.323***
(0.108)
1.220***
(0.125)
2.019***
(0.172)
−1.597***
(0.016)
−2.294
(2.787)
1.569***
(0.304)
−0.474
(0.289)
−2.676***
(0.154)
−0.650***
(0.126)
−0.036***
(0.007)
0.015**
(0.007)
0.077***
(0.002)
0.022***
(0.002)

1.421***
(0.102)
−1.577***
(0.016)
−1.952
(2.792)
1.440***
(0.300)
−0.361
(0.286)
−2.965***
(0.152)
−0.875***
(0.127)
−0.029***
(0.007)
0.016**
(0.007)
0.084***
(0.002)
0.027***
(0.002)

67956
0.77

67956
0.77

Regressand: log total bilateral imports. ‘x’ refers to exporting country variables. ‘m’
refers to importing country variables.
Robust standard errors in parenthesis.
*, **, *** denote results significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.
mHighIncome, mMidIncome: dummies for the importing country being high or midincome. xHighIncome, xMidIncome: analogous dummies for the exporting country.

31

Table 4: Partial effects of inequality on imports, by income level of importer and
exporter.
A. From table 3, column (1).
Importer
Low
Medium
High
Income
Income
Income
Exporter
Low
Income

−0.0087
(0.118)

0.0068
(0.163)

−0.0442***
(1.38e−24)

Medium
Income

0.0137**
(0.014)

0.0292***
(2.36e−09)

−0.0218***
(2.22e−07)

High
Income

0.0684***
(3.10e−35)

0.0839***
(0)

0.0329***
(9.30e−15)

Medium
Income

High
Income

B. From table 3, column (2).
Importer
Low
Income
Exporter
Low
Income

−0.0166***
(0.003)

−0.0003
(0.945)

−0.0456***
(2.26e−26)

Medium
Income

0.0104*
(0.064)

0.0267***
(5.11e−08)

−0.0185***
(8.73e−06)

High
Income

0.0672***
(3.2e−33)

0.0834***
(0.00)

0.0381***
(1.31e−19)

p-values in parenthesis.
*, **, *** denote results significant at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

32

Table 5: Robustness checks for the direct measure of luxuries and necessities
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Nec.

Lux.

Nec.

Lux.

Nec.
Tobit

Lux.
Tobit

-0.029
(0.031)
0.000
(0.000)

-0.089***
(0.026)
0.002***
(0.000)

-0.017***
(0.005)

0.001
(0.006)

0.051***
(0.013)
1.329***
(0.197)
-3.226***
(0.464)
0.438**
(0.187)
4.761***
(0.530)
-1.553***
(0.025)
-10.712***
(3.387)

1.679***
(0.253)
0.315
(0.560)
-0.421*
(0.244)
1.231*
(0.641)
-1.591***
(0.031)
1.397
(4.627)

3.102***
(0.268)
-3.435***
(0.605)
-1.179***
(0.264)
6.320***
(0.697)
-1.911***
(0.031)
-2.447
(4.777)

21757
0.84

26644
0.24

26644
0.35

Regressand
Regressors
Inequality (Gini)
Square Inequality
(Gini)
Inequality (Q51)
Log xGDP
Log mGDP
Log xGDP/Capita
Log mGDP/Capita
Log Distance
Log Remote

1.042***
(0.207)
-0.258
(0.493)
0.226
(0.202)
1.734***
(0.557)
-1.487***
(0.025)
-0.349
(3.597)

0.760***
(0.167)
-2.841***
(0.398)
1.086***
(0.156)
4.199***
(0.471)
-1.527***
(0.023)
-4.700
(3.025)

-0.021
(0.015)
1.178***
(0.244)
-0.330
(0.575)
0.055
(0.239)
1.420**
(0.628)
-1.477***
(0.027)
0.544
(4.086)

Observations
26644
26644
21757
R-squared
0.75
0.84
0.75
Partial effect of
-.0132***
.011***
Inequality (p-values)
(.002)
(.003)
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
column title shows commodity categories
year, exporting and importing country dummies not shown
R-squared for median regressions are pseudo R-squareds.

33

Table 5 (continued)
(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

Nec.
Median

Lux.
Median

Nec.

Lux.

Nec.

Lux.

-0.012***
(0.003)
0.255
(0.163)
0.256
(0.344)
0.995***
(0.157)
0.786**
(0.386)
-1.369***
(0.020)
1.334
(2.984)

0.016***
(0.002)
-0.557***
(0.118)
-1.919***
(0.248)
2.096***
(0.113)
2.912***
(0.279)
-1.305***
(0.015)
-3.419
(2.150)

-0.021***
(0.006)
2.416***
(0.340)
-2.844***
(0.638)
-2.050***
(0.337)
5.142***
(0.697)
-1.044***
(0.067)
-1.113
(7.627)

0.003***
(0.001)
0.014
(0.032)
0.132***
(0.047)
-0.046
(0.032)
-0.094**
(0.047)
-0.016**
(0.008)
0.621
(0.418)

-0.014***
(0.004)
1.329***
(0.224)
-0.152
(0.507)
-0.033
(0.219)
1.579***
(0.574)
-1.585***
(0.027)
-2.413
(3.926)

0.014***
(0.004)
0.605***
(0.182)
-2.621
(0.409)
1.233***
(0.172)
3.975***
(0.483)
-1.584***
(0.026)
-8.068**
(3.305)

9308
0.11

25339
0.74

25339
0.82

Regressand
Regressor
Inequality (Gini)
Log xGDP
Log mGDP
Log xGDP/Capita
Log mGDP/Capita
Log Distance
Log Remote

Observations
26644
26644
12782
R-squared
0.56
0.66
0.65
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
column title shows commodity categories
year, exporting and importing country dummies not shown
R-squared for median regressions is pseudo R-squared.

34

