                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FEAR OF SERVICE OUTSOURCING: IS IT JUSTIFIED?

                                               Mary Amiti
                                              Shang-Jin Wei

                                          Working Paper 10808
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10808


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




This paper was prepared for the October 2004 Panel Meeting of Economic Policy in Amsterdam. The authors
wish to thank Peter Clark, Tito Cordella, Aart Kraay, and Raghuram G. Rajan for helpful comments, and
Piyush Chandra, Autria Mazda and Li Zeng for excellent research assistance. The views in the paper are
those of the authors, and do not necessarily reflect those of the IMF or its policies.The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Mary Amiti and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Fear of Service Outsourcing: Is It Justified?
Mary Amiti and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 10808
September 2004
JEL No. F1, F2

                                           ABSTRACT

The recent media and political attention on service outsourcing from developed to developing

countries gives the impression that outsourcing is exploding. As a result, workers in industrial

countries are anxious about job losses. This paper aims to establish what are the hypes and what are

the facts. The results show that although service outsourcing has been steadily increasing it is still

very low, and that in the United States and many other industrial countries "insourcing" is greater

than outsourcing. Using the United Kingdom as a case study, we find that job growth at a sectoral

level is not negatively related to service outsourcing.

Mary Amiti
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
mamiti@imf.org

Shang-Jin Wei
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street NW
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
swei@imf.org
                                           -2-




                                      I. INTRODUCTION

         Outsourcing of services has received an enormous amount of attention in the media and
political circles in recent times. In just five months, between January and May 2004, there were
2,634 reports in US newspapers on service outsourcing, mostly focusing on the fear of job
losses.1 In particular, there have been reports about jobs moving from industrial countries like
the United States and the United Kingdom to developing countries such as India. These
concerns are not limited to the United States. Similar reports appeared in newspapers in other
industrial countries such as the United Kingdom, which had 380 reports on outsourcing in its
newspapers during the same period. Newspapers in Australia have also published similar
reports. Figure 1 plots a quarterly count of news stories or commentaries in major newspapers
and newswire service reports on international service outsourcing from the first quarter of 1991
to the first quarter of 2004 in the United States and the United Kingdom, which we have
constructed using an electronic database on newspaper articles (FACTIVA). Both indexes show
a clear upward trend in media interest in international outsourcing of services.2

         All this media hype would lead one to believe that service outsourcing is some new
phenomenon that has exploded. What has stirred such an interest in outsourcing? Many people
would argue that outsourcing is indeed just a normal part of international trade, whereas others
see it as something different. To date, there is not even agreement on what the term outsourcing
means. The American Heritage Dictionary defines it as “The procuring of services or
products...from an outside supplier or manufacturer in order to cut costs." Some people interpret
“outside” to mean outside the firm, and others outside the country. Both usages are common.
But since the main concerns in industrial countries are with “exporting jobs” to developing
countries, we will restrict our attention to international outsourcing. We delve further into the
meaning and origins of outsourcing in the next section.

        What is new about outsourcing today is that it is increasingly in services. Although
international outsourcing of material inputs is still far more quantitatively important than
services for a typical industrialized economy, which we show below, the current wave of
anxiety in advanced economies is mostly about international outsourcing of services. There is a
sense in which services outsourcing is qualitatively different from material outsourcing in terms
of the “stress effect.” In the past, the service sector was largely considered impervious to
international competition. Accountants did not fear that someone abroad would take their high-
paying jobs, but they certainly benefited from the cheaper imported manufactured goods that
open trade allowed. For this reason, service sector professionals were likely to have been
staunch supporters of open trade. With the improvement in the communication technology such

1
  During the two-week period, from March 1 to March 15, 2004, there were 270 such stories
that simultaneously mentioned outsourcing and either job loss or unemployment in the same
story.
2
  The index for the United States exhibits local peaks in 1996, 2000, and 2004, which are all
presidential election years.
                                            -3-




as the internet, services can cross political borders via the airwaves. Jobs in fields ranging from
architecture to radiology seem much more at risk. While it was possible for firms to relocate
abroad in the past, they had to give up something—their closeness to important markets, for
example. With the new technologies they can retain these links while also obtaining access to
cheap, but well-trained labor. The lack of control and the worry that outsourcing could spread
contributes to the fears of white collar workers. A study conducted by the University of
Maryland found that, in the United States, among those with incomes over $100,000, the
percentage actively supporting free trade slid from 57 percent in 1999 to 28 percent in January
2004 (Rajan and Wei, 2004).

         Whether there is any basis for this anxiety has not been carefully examined. Besides
newspaper articles, which are largely based on management consultant reports, there is very
little empirical research on service outsourcing. We present an overview of the literature in
Section III. The growth of service outsourcing and its effects deserve closer attention for a
number of reasons. First, there does appear to be a backslide in support for free trade policies,
particularly among white-collar workers. Even if there were no evidence of job losses arising
from outsourcing, the fear itself of losing one’s job is of concern. These kinds of fears lead to
lobbying for protectionist type policies. For example, in Australia there were news reports of
lobbies by Australian software companies to restrict (other) Australian firms’ ability to
outsource software designs to India. In the United States, the Senate passed restrictions on
foreign outsourcing for federal contracts in March 2004 (though it did not become law). Trade
and Industry Secretary Patricia Hewitt stated that the United Kingdom will not pass
protectionist legislation (see Financial Times, 5/3/2004, page 6). If support for protectionist
policies increases, then this may not continue to be their stance. In addition, even though we
may expect service outsourcing to lead to long-run benefits, there may be short-term adjustment
costs in the form of job losses. Many theoretical trade models assume full employment and
perfect factor mobility between sectors, but rigidities in the labor market can lead to short-term
employment effects. It is important, therefore, to assess how large these effects are in order to
inform the policy debate on possible relocation assistance programs.

        The main objective of this paper is to investigate and to establish what are the hypes and
what are the facts about service outsourcing. First, we develop a set of stylized facts describing
the trends in service outsourcing, which we present in Section IV. We focus on business
services and the computing and information service trade as these most closely reflect the
service categories that are generally thought of as being outsourced. Some of our results correct
some misleading impressions that one may derive from the news media, while others
complement them. We examine the following questions: Has service outsourcing exploded in
recent years? How does it compare with the level of material outsourcing? Who are the biggest
outsourcers of services? Who are the biggest recipients of service outsourcing from the rest of
the world (the “insourcers”)? And are there big job losses arising from service outsourcing?

        A number of interesting results emerge. We show that service outsourcing has been
steadily increasing but is still at very low levels. For example, in the United States, imports of
computing and business services as a share of GDP were only 0.4 percent in 2003. This share
has roughly doubled each decade—from 0.1 percent in 1983 to 0.2 percent in 1993, and to
                                            -4-




0.4 percent in 2003, based on IMF’s balance of payments trade data. A similar picture emerges
from industry level outsourcing intensity ratios, which we constructed using input/output
coefficients. These show that material outsourcing is at much higher levels than service
outsourcing.

        Interestingly, in the United States and in many other industrial countries, exports of
these services are greater than imports. The United States has a net surplus in services and this
surplus has been increasing in recent years. This highlights that trade in services, like trade in
goods, is a two-way street. In value terms the United States is the largest importer and exporter
of combined computing and business services. However, when scaled by GDP, the proportion
of outsourcing-type trade in the United States is low compared with the rest of the world. Based
on 2002 figures, its share of imports of business services as a proportion of its GDP ranks 117th
in the world, with the United Kingdom ranking 85th. In comparison, China, which ranked 99th in
the world, is ahead of the United States. The countries with the highest ratio of imports of
business services to GDP are Angola, the Republic of Congo, Mozambique, and Ireland.

        The second main contribution of the paper is provided in Section V, where we analyze
the effects of service and material outsourcing on employment, using the United Kingdom as a
case study. We find there is no evidence that outsourcing led to employment losses in the
United Kingdom during the period 1995 to 2001 in either the manufacturing to the services
sectors. In section VI we present our conclusions.

                                    II. WHAT’S IN A NAME?

        The use of the term outsourcing has not been standardized. Outsourcing generally refers
to the procuring of material inputs or services by a firm from outside the firm. Outsourcing can
be domestic or international. Examples of domestic outsourcing would include, say, a Detroit-
based automobile company that contracts out the production of some of its parts to a firm in
Cleveland, Ohio; or if the auto firm contracts out its employee food service to a local restaurant
which in turn provides the service on the site of the auto firm. Issues relating to domestic
outsourcing have not featured prominently in the media. The main concern in the public debate
is mostly about international outsourcing, particularly the outsourcing by firms in advanced
economies to firms located in low-wage countries.

        In this paper, we focus on international outsourcing, defined as the procuring of service
or material inputs by a firm from a source in a foreign country. This term includes both intra-
firm international outsourcing (by which the foreign provider of the input is still owned by the
firm) and arm’s-length international outsourcing (by which the foreign provider of the input is
independent from the firm using the input). International outsourcing is part of a country’s
imports (of goods and services).

         Interestingly, the earliest use of the word “outsource” that we have traced appears to
refer to international outsourcing of services. According to the Oxford English Dictionary
(http://dictionary.oed.com), the earliest use was about the British auto industry contracting out
engineering design work to Germany and appeared in an article in 1979 in the Journal of Royal
                                            -5-




Society of Arts, Vol. CXXVII, 141/1.3, 4 For whatever reason, many other early uses of the terms
“outsource” and “outsourcing” also tend to be related to the automobile industry, though they
could refer to material inputs as well as services. The earliest use of the terms in the United
States that can be traced electronically, according to FACTIVA, appeared in the Harvard
Business Review in 1980, and in a major U.S. newspaper in 1981.

        Another commonly used word for outsourcing is offshoring. The word “offshore” has a
long history and can be traced at least to 1895, according to the on-line version of Oxford
English Dictionary. It means “moving away from the shore” or “foreign.” Using “offshoring” to
refer to international outsourcing in the way we have defined above has a much shorter history.

        The word “insourcing” was once used to refer to the production of something inside a
company that it used to contract out.5 In this paper, we define it as outsourcing in the opposite
direction (from foreign-located firms to domestic firms). For example, the phrase U.S.
“insourcing” refers to the outsourcing from the rest of the world to the United States.

                                   III. RELATED LITERATURE

        This section reviews the literature on outsourcing. It starts with a discussion of
empirical studies on material and service outsourcing, and then moves on to the relevant
theoretical models.
                                          A. Empirical

       In the empirical literature, while there is a large set of papers on material input
outsourcing, there is very little on service outsourcing.




3
  The original sentence stated: “We are so short of professional engineers in the motor industry
that we are having to outsource design work to Germany.”
4
  There are interesting historical examples of outsourcing much earlier than 1979, for example
when the British military used German mercenaries to fight U.S. revolutionaries, but our focus
here is on outsourcing services related to the production process.
5
  The earliest use that we have traced (using FACTIVA) appeared in an article by Dale Buss in
the July 20, 1984 issue of the Wall Street Journal, “Whether Ford, GM Keep Small-Car Output
in U.S. May Hinge on Firms’ Labor Talks.” The original sentence reads, “… Ford’s Mr. Pestillo
says that the company could eventually become efficient enough to ‘insource’ production of
such things as manual transmissions, which it currently purchases from the outside.” Note that,
as in the case of early uses of “outsourcing,” this term was also used in association with the auto
industry.
                                           -6-




Material Outsourcing

        A number of papers have studied the evolution of material outsourcing in the United
States and other member countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD). For example, see Feenstra and Hanson (1996), Campa and Goldberg
(1997), Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001), Yeats (2001), Hanson, Mataloni and Slaughter (2004),
and Borga and Zeile (2004). Generally, these studies found a steady increase in the extent of
international outsourcing of material inputs (measured in different ways by different authors)
over time. For example, Yeats (2001) estimates that 30 percent of OECD exports of machinery
and transport equipment comprised parts and components in 1995, and 26 percent in 1978. This
share is the highest for the United States and increased from 36 percent in 1978 to 40 percent in
1995; in Europe it increased from 26 percent to 28 percent; and in Japan from 15 percent to
26 percent. However, when looking at the share of components imported in apparent
consumption of transport and machinery for 1995, the EU shows the highest share at 16
compared to 11 percent in the United States and 8 percent in Japan.

        In addition to examining the magnitude and trends in material outsourcing, the literature
has studied their effects on productivity and the wage skill premium. Egger and Egger (2001)
find that there is a negative effect of international material outsourcing on the productivity of
low-skilled workers in the short run, but a positive effect in the long run. They found that
international outsourcing of materials contributed to 3.3 percent of real value added per low-
skilled worker in the EU from 1993 to 1997. They attribute the negative short-run effect to
imperfections in the EU labor and goods markets.

        Several papers have studied the effect of international outsourcing of material inputs on
the wage skill premium. By relocating the unskilled-intensive parts of the production process
from relatively skill abundant countries to unskilled-abundant countries, outsourcing is expected
to increase the relative demand for skilled labor in the skill-abundant country and hence
increase the skill premium. Empirical evidence in the United States (Feenstra and Hanson,
1996, 1999) and the United Kingdom (Hijzen et al, 2002) confirm this finding. Feenstra and
Hanson (1999) show that outsourcing contributed between 17.5 to 40 percent of the increase in
the non-production wage share over the period 1979 to 1990. Feenstra and Hanson (1997) also
show that liberalized foreign investment and trade led to an increase in the skill premium in
Mexico too. The foreign assembly plants located on the border were created by U.S. firms
outsourcing their less skill-intensive parts, which are more skill intensive relative to other
industries in Mexico.

Service Outsourcing

        The literature becomes much thinner when it comes to international outsourcing of
services. Focusing on the information technology (IT) sector in the United States, Mann (2004)
argues that globalization—specifically international outsourcing of IT hardware led to a fall of
10 to 30 percent in prices of IT hardware, which translated into higher productivities in all
sectors that use IT hardware. Mann then argues that IT software—a form of international
outsourcing of services—should be expected to benefit the economy in the same way as IT
                                             -7-




hardware. Furthermore, if one assumes that IT software is more price elastic than IT hardware,
then the expected productivity gains could be even higher. Finally, Mann documented that IT
industries had exhibited a high job growth, so the international outsourcing does not appear to
hurt job growth in that sector.

        Amiti and Wei (2004), using data on all manufacturing industries in the United States,
find that service outsourcing is positively correlated with labor productivity in the United States
but material outsourcing is insignificant. Gorg and Hanley (2003) show that international
outsourcing of services had a positive impact on productivity in the electronics industry in
Ireland between 1990 and 1995. They also found that outsourcing of tangible inputs did not
have a significant effect on productivity during this period. Girma and Gorg (2003) find positive
evidence of service outsourcing on labor productivity and total factor productivity in the United
Kingdom between 1980 and 1992, but they are unable to distinguish between domestic and
foreign outsourcing.

        Studies on service outsourcing and employment effects have mainly been conducted by
management consultants. For example, McKinsey Global Institute’s report (2003) is a widely
quoted study on service outsourcing. It makes a prediction on job loss due to outsourcing from
2003 to 2015 and computes the distribution of gains between the country that does the
outsourcing and the one that receives the outsourcing. The underlying methodology used to
make the calculations is not entirely transparent in the report, making it difficult to assign
standard errors to the estimates. The McKinsey report also makes the point that the amount of
job losses due to outsourcing is a relatively trivial share of overall job losses during the normal
course of a business cycle. Brainard and Litan (2004) provide an overview of these studies, and
focus on the distributional effects of outsourcing, pointing out that it is the low paid jobs that are
being replaced with higher paid jobs. They also provide a number of policy prescriptions for the
United States. Shultze (2004) provides some indirect evidence of job losses related to service
outsourcing and concludes that the effect is very small.

       A more rigorous study of the effects of service outsourcing on employment is provided
in Amiti and Wei (2004) using U.S. data. This study also concludes that there is a small
negative effect of service outsourcing on employment when using highly disaggregated data.
Some details of this study are provided in Section V of this paper.

                                          B. Theoretical

Although there is a rich body of literature that models a firm’s decision on where to locate
different parts of the production stage, all these models assume perfect inter-sectoral labor
mobility so they do not make predictions on net job losses. For example, Jones and Kierzkowski
(1990, 1991, and 2001), Dixit and Grossman (1984), Krugman and Venables (1995), Deardorff
(1998a and b), Yi (2003) and Amiti (2004) develop models of where different parts of the
production stage will be located. When trade costs or technological progress leads to
international fragmentation of different parts of the production stage, firms engage in input
trade, and this can be thought of as part of outsourcing. These are models of non-integrated
firms, where different firms own different production stages, and hence the type of trade that
                                            -8-




takes place is referred to as arm’s-length trade. Outsourcing can also take place between
vertically integrated firms, such as in Helpman’s (1984) model of vertical foreign direct
investment, which is referred to as intra-firm trade.6 Antras (2003) introduces incomplete
contracts to study ownership decision (whether firms should own the plants producing
intermediate inputs or not); and Antras and Helpman (2003) combine the ownership decision
with the decision on whether intermediate input producing plants should be located abroad or
not. In all of these models, the focus is on the outsourcing of material inputs but these could, in
principle, be re-interpreted as service inputs.

        Trade economists generally assume full employment and perfect factor mobility
between sectors within a country, for example, as in the Heckscher-Ohlin model, so then all the
action is on factor prices, i.e., the net employment effects are essentially assumed away. And in
this kind of model you do not need to have a large amount of trade to affect factor prices. All
you need is for goods prices to change, which then affect factor prices (i.e. Samuelson–Stolper
theorem). These international price changes can arise for many reasons. For example, the threat
of foreign competition in itself can drive down goods prices even if the trade does not take
place.

         The H-O model is generally considered to be a long-run model, i.e., with factors
perfectly mobile. So in this model trade can lead to sectoral employment changes as one sector
contracts and another expands but no net job losses. In the short run, there may be rigidities that
prevent perfect factor mobility and hence give rise to net employment effects. For example,
Sachs and Shatz (1994) argue that any of the following factors could give rise to net
employment losses in manufacturing: “(i) the low-wage workers have a positively sloped supply
elasticity, so that a decline in their wage leads to a decline in labor force participation; (2) low-
wage workers are unionized, and unions maintain wages above full-employment levels; or (3)
low-wage workers have alternative employment opportunities in non-manufacturing (such as
services), so that they leave the manufacturing sector entirely when international competition
puts downward pressure on wages.” Krugman (1995) presents a H-O model with rigid factor
prices to show how trade can give rise to big employment effects. If one were to also introduce
frictions in inter-sectoral labor mobility then these effects would be even larger.7



6
  This slicing up of the production chain across different countries has also been referred to in
the literature as international production sharing, globalized production, de-localization,
fragmentation, intra-product specialization, intra-mediate trade, and offshoring. Intra-firm
international outsourcing has also been related to vertical foreign direct investment, and vertical
specialization.
7
  The McKinsey report indicated that more than 69 percent of workers who lost jobs due to
imports in the United States between 1979 and 1999 were re-employed (this is based on U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics data). Of course, this means that 31 per cent were not re-employed,
highlighting that there may be some rigidities in the labor market.
                                            -9-




IV. GLOBAL PATTERNS OF SERVICE OUTSOURCING—THE UNTOLD STORIES IN THE MEDIA

       In this section, we document a set of features about patterns of global service trade that
have been under-reported or misreported by news media. Specifically, we aim to address the
following questions. Is there a discreet and abrupt rise in service outsourcing in industrialized
economies in recent years? What is the relative importance of service outsourcing versus
material outsourcing? Who are the biggest outsourcers of services in the world? Who are the
biggest recipients of service outsourcing from the rest of the world?

        We first provide a description of the data used to measure outsourcing before moving on
to the results.

                               A. Measurement of Outsourcing

       Outsourcing is generally difficult to measure because information on which parts of the
production stage are contracted out are not readily available, so we need to rely on indirect
measures. We construct two different types of measures of outsourcing. The first is an
economy-wide measure based on imports of computing (which includes computer software
designs) and other business services (which include accounting and other back-office
operations), using data from International Monetary Fund’s Balance of Payments Statistics
Yearbook, which in turn is compiled from the reports to the IMF by the national authorities of
member countries. This is the main data source we use to explore patterns of cross-border
services trade.

         We chose to focus on trade in computing and information and other business services
because these are the categories that most likely encompass outsourcing activities. The other
categories, such as travel and education, are less likely to include such activities so we excluded
them from the study. We would expect that business services should predominantly comprise
inputs used by firms, but the computing category is likely to include a higher component of final
consumer purchases. However, it is impossible to specify the exactly how much of the trade is
in final consumer services. As a robustness check, at least for the U.S. data, we compared the
trends in the IMF statistics with those provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA).
The BEA splits services trade by affiliates and non-affiliates. The affiliate trade is undertaken
by multinational corporations, between parents and affiliates, so more closely reflects
outsourcing trade. We found that the trends for affiliate trade are similar to those indicated by
the IMF data.

        The second measure of service outsourcing is calculated on an industry basis for the
United Kingdom, as Feenstra and Hanson (1996, 1999) do for material inputs for the United
States. For a given industry i, its outsourced services as a share of total non-energy inputs,
OSSi, is calculated as follows:
                                            - 10 -




             input purchases of service j by industry i         imports of service j
OSSi =                                                  *
         j   total nonenergy inputs used by industry i    production j +imports j -exports j

The first square bracketed term is calculated using input/output tables. The denominator
includes all non-energy material inputs, listed in Appendix II, plus the following nine service
industries: telecommunications; banking and finance, insurance and pension funds, and
auxiliary financial services; renting of machinery; computer services; research and
development; legal activities, accountancy services, market research, and management
consultancy; architectural activities and technical consultancy; advertising; and other business
services.8

        The second square bracketed term is calculated using international trade data from the
IMF’s Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbooks. Unfortunately, imports of each input by
industry are unavailable. As a proxy, an economy-wide import share is applied to each industry.
To illustrate, the U.K. economy imported 20.5 percent of business services in 2001. We then
assume that each industry (in the manufacturing and service sectors) imports 20.5 percent of the
business services used in that year. On average, a U.K. industry uses 4.5 percent of business
services as a proportion of total non-energy material inputs. So the outsourcing intensity of
business services for a typical industry would be 0.205*0.045=9.2 percent. We then aggregate
across the nine service inputs to get the average service outsourcing intensity for each industry.
The breakdown of the two components of the outsourcing intensity ratio for each service
category is provided for 1992 and 2001 in Table 1.

        An analogous measure is constructed for material outsourcing for each industry i,
denoted OSMi. In total, our sample consists of 78 industries (69 manufacturing industries and 9
service industries).

         A number of potential problems with our outsourcing measures should be noted. First,
they are likely to under-estimate the value of outsourcing because the cost of importing services
is likely to be lower than the cost of purchasing them domestically. So it would be preferable to
have quantity data rather than current values but this is unavailable for the United Kingdom.
Second, applying the same import share to all industries is not ideal, but given the unavailability
of imports by industry this is our “best guess”. This strategy was used by Feenstra and Hanson
(1996, 1999) to construct measures of material outsourcing. This approach apportions a higher
value of imported inputs to those industries that are the biggest users of those inputs. Although
this seems reasonable, without access to actual import data by industry it is impossible to say
how accurate it is. Third, the total use of inputs by industry only includes those inputs purchased

8
  The three finance categories, banking and finance, insurance and pension funds, and auxiliary
financial services are aggregated into one category to match the employment data. For the same
reason, we aggregate the three categories legal activities, accountancy services, and market
research and management consultancy.
                                           - 11 -




from a different industry so services produced within the industry are not included, hence the
extent of outsourcing is unlikely to be precisely measured. Despite these limitations, we believe
that combining the input use information with trade data does provide a reasonable proxy of the
proportion of services imported from abroad.

                       B. Outsourcing Trends in Developed Countries

        International outsourcing of services has increased in the United States but still remains
low, based on our economy-wide measure using IMF international trade data. Imports of
computer and information plus other business services as a share of GDP were only 0.4 percent
in 2003. This share has roughly doubled in each decade—from 0.1 percent in 1983 to 0.2
percent in 1993, and to 0.4 percent in 2003. The United Kingdom has a higher outsourcing ratio
than the United States—at 0.9 percent in 1983, 0.7 percent in 1993, and 1.2 percent in 2003.

        A similar picture emerges from industry level outsourcing intensity ratios, which were
constructed using input/output coefficients. Figure 2 presents the average outsourcing intensity
ratios across manufacturing and service industries, weighted by output. These ratios indicate
that on average the share of service imports in the United Kingdom increased from 3.5 percent
in 1992 to 5.5 percent in 2001. These figures are higher than those for the United States, which
increased from 0.4 percent to 0.8 percent over the same period (see Amiti and Wei, 2004). But
in both cases there is clearly an upward trend.

       Material outsourcing intensities are significantly higher than service outsourcing in both
the United Kingdom and United States. Material outsourcing is around 27 percent in the United
Kingdom and 12 percent in the United States. From Figure 2, we see that in the United
Kingdom material outsourcing peaked in 1996 and has been on a downward trend since then. In
the United States it has been steadily increasing but at a slower pace than service outsourcing.

         In sum, service outsourcing is much lower than material outsourcing, but it is increasing
at a faster pace.

                     C. Which Countries Are the Biggest Outsourcers?

        Media reports might give the impression that outsourcing is mostly about the United
States and other industrialized countries contracting out services to India and a few other
developing countries. This is not entirely correct.

       To set the record straight, we look at the trade data in two categories of services that
have been most intensely reported: computer and information services and other business
services. In value terms, other business services (which we will refer to as just business
services) are by far the larger of the two categories.

       Using data for 2002, the latest year for which internationally comparable data were
available, the top outsourcers of business services in dollar amounts are United States
                                           - 12 -




(US$41 billion), Germany (US$39 billion), followed by a group of countries with trade
approximately of the same order of magnitude, Japan ($25 billion), the Netherlands
(US$21 billion), Italy (US$20 billion), France (US$19 billion), and the United Kingdom
(US$16 billion). Interestingly, India and China—two countries that have been portrayed as
major recipients of outsourcing in the media—are themselves significant outsourcers of
business services (with a value of US$11 billion for India and US$8 billion for China, and
ranked 11th and 18th in the world, respectively). Table 2 lists the value of imports for these
services for selected countries with their rankings in the world.

        In the categories of computer and information services (which is quantitatively an order
of magnitude smaller than business services), the top five importers are Germany, United
Kingdom, Japan, Netherlands, and Spain. The United States is a close 6th. China is ranked at
10th place. Unfortunately, there is no data from the IMF’s Balance of Payments Statistics
Yearbook for India on trade in computer and information services.

        Of course, larger economies naturally trade more than smaller ones. Therefore, to get a
sense of the importance of outsourcing for a local economy, it is important to scale the value of
imports by the size of the economy. For example, if one scales imports of business services by
local GDP, none of the countries mentioned above would appear in the top ten list. In fact,
smaller economies like Angola, the Republic of Congo, Mozambique, Ireland, and Vanuatu turn
out to be much more outsourcing-intensive, with the ratio of imported business services to GDP
exceeding 10 percent. In contrast, the United States has an outsourcing ratio in business services
less than half of a percent of its GDP (ranked 117th in the world), and the United Kingdom
slightly over 1 percent of its GDP (ranked 85th). As a comparison, India imports a larger amount
of business services as a share of GDP (2.4 percent) than the United States and the United
Kingdom. Table 3A lists the share of imports of services as a proportion of local GDP and their
ranks. The country rankings are almost the same if one scales the value of service imports by
local total service value-added. See Table 3B.

      In sum, the notion that large industrialized countries outsource more intensely than other
economies is not supported by the trade data.

                            D. Who Are the Biggest “Insourcers”?

        Like trade in goods, trade in services is a two-way street. Most countries receive
outsourcing of services from other countries as well as outsource to other countries. In recent
times, the word “insourcing” has been used as a shorthand for the amount of outsourcing a
country receives from the rest of the world. We use exports of business and computing services
as a proxy for insourcing.

        Who are the biggest insourcers or the recipients of global outsourcing? In dollar terms,
the top five recipients in 2002 are the United States (US$59 billion), the United Kingdom
(US$37 billion), Germany (US$28 billion), France (US$21 billion), and the Netherlands
                                           - 13 -




(US$20 billion). India, a country that has received the most media attention as a recipient
of outsourcing, is ranked at 6th place (US$18.6 billion); and China is ranked at 14th place
(US$10 billion). It is worth emphasizing that India is one of the biggest exporters of business
services in the world but there are five industrialized countries ahead of it. The data show that
the top recipients of global service outsourcing tend to be rich, industrialized countries, rather
than poor developing countries.
        However, if one scales the value of exports by the size of local GDP, smaller economies
turn out to be more insourcing-intensive than the larger ones. For example, from Table 5 we see
that the top three insource-intensive economies are Vanuatu, Singapore, and Hong Kong SAR,
each with exporting services as a share of local GDP exceeding 10 percent. By this metric, India
is somewhat more insourcing-intensive than the United Kingdom (3.8 percent of GDP vs.
2.4 percent); and China is somewhat ahead of the United States (0.8 percent of GDP vs.
0.6 percent).

                        E. Who Are the Biggest Surplus Countries?

        At this point, it is natural to consider the balance of payments implications of service
outsourcing. Are industrialized economies more likely to run a deficit in services trade than
developing countries? The answer is a resounding no. In fact, the largest surplus countries of
combined computing and business services in the world are the United Kingdom and the United
States.

        Figure 3 plots the time series of the US imports, exports, and the net balance of business
services. Tables 5 and 6 rank countries in terms of exports of business services and computing,
and net balance, respectively. We note that the United States has been running a surplus in this
service category every year since 1980, as does the United Kingdom. They are in fact, the
largest and the second largest surplus countries in the world, respectively. In other words, if
every country reduced its overall service outsourcing, the United States and the United
Kingdom would be the biggest two losers in terms of net dollars lost in service trade. The U.S.
current account deficit would become bigger, not smaller.

        However, the patterns for other industrialized countries are more varied. For example, in
business services, Germany has been running a small deficit every year throughout our sample,
between 1980 and 2001. France had been consistently running a small surplus until the end of
the sample when it switches to a mild deficit. There does not seem to be a consistent pattern
of a country being in net surplus or deficit in business services solely based on the level of
development. For example, in India, imports and exports of business services were fairly
balanced in much of the early part of the sample. However, starting from 1996, exports have
really taken off, surpassing imports by an ever widening margin, resulting in a reasonably large
surplus position today. For China, the relative size of imports and exports of business services
alternates between periods, though it ends the sample with a small surplus.

       Figure 4 plots time series of imports, exports and the trade balance in computer and
information services. The patterns are broadly similar to trade in business services, with both
the United States and United Kingdom showing a net surplus, and China alternating between a
                                                     - 14 -




surplus and deficit. The new feature in computing trends relative to business services is that
Ireland is the largest surplus country in computing.

         To sum up, the presumption that global service trade is dominated by lopsided one-way
outsourcing from developed countries to developing countries is not supported by the data. If
anything, several major industrialized countries, notably the United States and the United
Kingdom, export more outsourcing type services than they import from the rest of the world. It
is particularly important to note that the United States and United Kingdom are net exporters of
services since the media seem to equate outsourcing with job losses (and insourcing with job
gains). Of course, to assess whether there are in fact any short-term job losses arising from
outsourcing we need a more rigorous analysis, which we turn to in the next section.

                              V. DOES SERVICE OUTSOURCING REDUCE JOBS?

        A factor behind the recent anxiety in advanced economies over service outsourcing is
the fear of losing jobs at home. If labor were perfectly mobile between sectors then a job lost in
one sector would be gained in another. However, if one adds rigidities to the labor market in a
trade model then outsourcing could lead to net employment losses, at least in the short run. In
this case, even a small amount of outsourcing could lead to large job losses. But outsourcing
could also lead to job growth. On the one hand, every job lost is a job lost.9 On the other hand,
firms that have outsourced could and should become more efficient and expand production and
expand employment in other lines of work. If firms relocate their relatively inefficient parts of
the production process to another country, where they can be produced more cheaply, they can
expand their output in production stages for which they have comparative advantage. These
productivity benefits can translate into lower prices generating further demand and hence create
more jobs. This job creation effect could in principle offset the direct job losses due to
outsourcing.

        As the predictions from the theory are ambiguous, we turn to the data. We estimate the
effects of outsourcing on employment using a common empirical specification of labor demand
(see Hamermesh, 1993) as follows:10

    ln Lit = α 0 + α1 ln wit + γ ln ωit + δ ln yit                                  (2)
 where w is the wage rate, is a vector of other input prices, and y is the level of output. In
general, an increase in the wage is expected to have a negative effect on employment demand,
whereas an increase in the price of other inputs would lead firms to substitute away from the

9
  Note that this would also be true for domestic outsourcing. The main difference is that the job
lost with domestic outsourcing is necessarily gained in another sector in the domestic economy.
But with foreign outsourcing this job is lost to a foreign country, hence the focus on
international outsourcing.
10
   This is derived from a cost function using Shepard’s lemma.
                                                  - 15 -




more expensive inputs toward labor. Of course, an increase in output would lead to higher
employment.

        The question arises as to which input prices to use for outsourcing. If the firm is a
multinational firm deciding on how much labor to employ at home and abroad then it should be
the foreign wage. But not all of outsourcing takes place within multinational firms and also with
outsourcing from many countries it is unclear which foreign wage to include, if any. Firms that
import inputs at arm’s-length don’t care about the wages but instead are concerned about the
price of the imported service. Since we do not have prices of imported services we use the
outsourcing intensity as an inverse proxy of price of imported service inputs, i.e., the lower the
price of imported service inputs the higher the outsourcing intensity. For other input prices, such
as the rental rate on capital, we assume that all firms face the same price, which we assume is
some function of time, r=f(t).

       We take first differences of equation (2), denoted by              , giving the following estimating
equation,

∆ ln Lit = α 0 + α1∆ ln wit + α 2 ∆ ln OSSit + α 3 ln OSM it + β ∆ ln ωit + γ∆ ln yit + δ Dt + ε it (3)


where lnOSSit is the log difference in service outsourcing intensity, and lnOSMit is the log
difference of material outsourcing intensity. We also include up to two period lags of these
variables to take account that employment effects may not be instantaneous. This first
difference specification controls for any time-invariant industry-specific effects such as industry
technology differences. We also include year fixed effects, Dt, to control for any unobserved
effect common across all industries, such as changes in the cost of capital, and in some
specifications we also include industry fixed effects.

         In our companion paper (Amiti and Wei, 2004), we estimate this equation using U.S.
data, where we found the effect on jobs depends crucially on the level of disaggregation. When
the U.S. economy was decomposed into 450 sectors, a faster growth in outsourcing at a sector
level is associated with a small negative growth in jobs in that sector (i.e., α2<0). However,
when the U.S. economy was decomposed into 96 sectors (still very disaggregated but less so
than the 450-sector classification), there is no correlation between job growth and growth of
outsourcing at the sector level. These results seem sensible. At sufficiently disaggregated levels,
every outsourced job is a job lost. Hence, job growth and outsourcing may be negatively related.
At the other extreme, for the economy as a whole, outsourcing is likely to change only the
sectoral composition of the jobs, but not necessarily the aggregate level of employment. The
interesting finding is that one does not need to aggregate the sector very much. Even when the
U.S. economy is disaggregated into 96 sectors, one can already see enough creation of new jobs
in the outsourcing-intensive sectors that can offset jobs lost due to outsourcing.

       A nagging question is whether the results from the U.S. case are applicable to European
and other advanced economies. Therefore, it would be useful to re-examine this question for
                                           - 16 -




another economy. In this section of the paper, we turn to a case study of the United Kingdom.
The United Kingdom makes an interesting comparison with the United States. First, as we have
shown at the beginning of this paper, the anxiety over service outsourcing in the United
Kingdom is likely to be as high as in the United States, as indicated by the intensity of news
coverage if scaled by the size of the economy. Second, the United Kingdom actually engages in
about three times as much service outsourcing as a share of its GDP (1.2 percent in 2001) as the
United States (0.4 percent in 2001).

Statistical Results

        The data we use is for the United Kingdom from 1995 to 2001. It includes 69
manufacturing industries and 9 service industries. The list of industries and details of the
variables are provided in Appendices 1 and II.

        To fix ideas, we first look at some examples of sectors with the fastest and the slowest
employment growth and their associated growth in service outsourcing. The top five and bottom
five industries ranked by total employment growth are presented in Table 7A; and the top five
and bottom five industries ranked by service outsourcing growth are presented in Table 7B.
From Tables 7A and 7B, we see that no uniform pattern emerges between service outsourcing
and employment growth. For example, the “other transport equipment” sector has the second
highest growth in employment and one of the highest growth in service outsourcing, yet the
“preparation and spinning of textile fibers” sector experienced negative employment growth
over the period and was ranked one of the biggest outsourcing sectors. In contrast, both the
“man made fiber” and the “machine tools” sectors experienced a large decline in employment
growth, yet the “man made fiber” sector experienced high service outsourcing growth and the
“machine tools” sector experienced a rapid decline in service outsourcing. A scatter plot of
service outsourcing growth and employment growth for all 78 industries is presented in Figure
5.

        In Tables 8 and 9, we present our results using statistical analysis to relate job growth at
a sectoral level to the change in service outsourcing at the same disaggregated level. Tables 8A
and 8B present the results for the manufacturing industries and Tables 9A and 9B present the
results for the service industries. In the first column of Table 8A, we simply look at correlations
between employment and outsourcing and the first period lag; and in the second column we add
second period lags. In both of these specifications service outsourcing appears to have a positive
effect on employment. In the third column we add wages and output as specified in equation
(3). As hypothesized, wage has a significant negative effect on employment, and output has a
significant positive effect. Even with these additional controls, service outsourcing still has a
positive significant coefficient.

       However, there is some concern that taking first time differences might induce
measurement error, particularly when the variables are aggregated at the industry level. To
address this concern, we re-estimate the equations using two period differences, which we
                                           - 17 -




present in columns (4), (5) and (6) of Table 8A.11 Now, we see that service outsourcing has a
significant positive coefficient only at the 10 percent significance level, in column (4) where
only one period lags are included, and an insignificant effect when we add second period lags in
column (5). In column (6), where we add wages and output, the outsourcing coefficient remains
insignificant, but wages still has the hypothesized negative sign and output has the expected
positive sign. So the positive coefficient on service outsourcing is not robust to specifications
with longer time differences.

        In Table 8B, we conduct further sensitivity analysis to determine whether there is any
effect from service outsourcing on manufacturing employment. Again, the first three columns
present the results with one-period time differenced variables, and the last three columns with
two-period time differenced variables. The first column in Table 8B includes the price of output
rather than the amount produced, in order to allow outsourcing to affect employment through
the scale affect. For example, outsourcing of services could result in more efficient production
and hence lower prices of output resulting in increased demand for output, which in turn
increases derived demand for labor. Here the outsourcing coefficient is only significant at the
10 percent level (in column 1), and insignificant in column (4) with two period differenced data.
In columns 2 and 3, and 5 and 6 we go back to controlling for output (instead of price) and add
a lagged dependent variable to take account of persistence. A similar picture emerges, with a
positive significant coefficient on service outsourcing with one period differenced data, and
barely significant in two period differenced data.

        As a final check, we add industry fixed effects to take account of the differences in
unobserved industry characteristics such as differences in technology that could be driving
employment growth. Again, the service outsourcing coefficients are significant with one period
differenced data and insignificant with two period differenced data.

        The main message from Tables 8A and 8B is that outsourcing does not have a negative
effect on manufacturing employment. The positive coefficient is not robust across
specifications, and in none of the specifications did we see a negative coefficient. The
insignificant effect on employment may be explained by the level of industry aggregation. For
example, a worker may lose her job due to outsourcing but then find a job in another firm within
the same industry classification. Then the effect would not show up in aggregate data.

        In Tables 9A and 9B, we present the results for the services industries. All the
specifications are the same as for the manufacturing industries except we include nominal
output instead of real output because service price indices were unavailable. The first two
specifications in Table 9A that look only at partial correlations show an insignificant effect for
both one period difference and two period difference specifications. The only specification with
a significant negative effect at the 5 percent level is with two period differenced data in Table

11
 Ideally, one would take longer time differences to wash out the measurement error but this
was not possible with a short time series of seven years. See Griliches and Hausman (1986).
                                           - 18 -




9B, column (3) but this is a small net effect and is not robust across specifications. For example,
once we add industry-specific effects, this effect disappears. So there does not appear to be any
robust significant negative effect from service outsourcing on service industries.

       In sum, the statistical results would appear to suggest that jobs displaced by service
outsourcing are likely to be offset by new jobs created in the same sector.

                                  VI. CONCLUDING REMARKS

        In developed countries, there is a tremendous amount of anxiety over international
outsourcing of services. The anxiety comes in part from the perception one may obtain from the
news media that global service trade is exploding and that it is dominated by lopsided, one-way
outsourcing from developed countries to developing countries, and that this will lead to massive
job losses in countries such as the United States and United Kingdom.

       This paper presents a body of evidence that suggest neither aspect of anxiety is well
supported by the data. In particular, most developed countries are not particularly more
outsourcing-intensive (when adjusted for economic size) than many developing countries. In
any case, many developed countries tend to run surpluses—i.e., the rest of the world outsources
more to them than the reverse—in those categories most often featured in the news media, for
example, business services and computer and information services. In fact, the United States
and the United Kingdom have run the largest and second largest surpluses in services trade in
the world in recent years.

         Using data on 78 sectors in the United Kingdom, we found no evidence to support the
notion that sectors with higher growth of service outsourcing would have a slower rate of job
growth. In our companion paper on the U.S. economy (Amiti and Wei, 2004), we find that a
negative effect on employment can be detected if the economy is decomposed to 450 sectors,
but the negative effect disappears when one looks at slightly broadly defined sectors (96 sectors
in the US economy). These results suggest that service outsourcing not only would not induce a
fall in aggregate employment, but also has the potential to make firms/sectors sufficiently more
efficient, leading to enough job creation in the same sectors to offset the lost jobs due to
outsourcing.

      To conclude, the risk of service outsourcing dramatically reducing job growth in the
advanced economies has been greatly exaggerated.
                                                       - 19 -




                                           Table 1. Outsourcing of Services

1992
Services                                                          Share of   Service
                                                                                                 Import of Service j
                                                      Mean      Std Dev           Min     Max

Telecommunications                                   0.0153     0.0373         0.0012   0.2937            0.1360
Finance and Banking                                  0.0467     0.0322         0.0165   0.2758            0.0316
Renting of Machinery                                 0.0137     0.0099         0.0020   0.0704            0.1167
Computer Services                                    0.0112     0.0185         0.0012   0.0916            0.1290
Research and Development                             0.0083     0.0314         0.0000   0.2764            0.1494
Legal, Accountancy and Management Services           0.0319     0.0533         0.0031   0.2789            0.0612
Architectural Activities and Technical Consultancy   0.0235     0.0316         0.0029   0.2337            0.0808
Advertising                                          0.0198     0.0260         0.0000   0.1364            0.0785
Other Business Services                              0.0291     0.0661         0.0000   0.3677            0.2153

2001
Services                                                          Share of   Service
                                                                                                 Import of Service j
                                                      Mean      Std Dev           Min     Max

Telecommunications                                   0.0158     0.0393         0.0022   0.3175            0.1170
Finance and Banking                                  0.0429     0.0232         0.0073   0.1762            0.0775
Renting of Machinery                                 0.0158     0.0162         0.0016   0.1290            0.0877
Computer Services                                    0.0211     0.0302         0.0027   0.1543            0.0922
Research and Development                             0.0069     0.0161         0.0000   0.1440            0.1740
Legal, Accountancy and Management Services           0.0372     0.0588         0.0020   0.2823            0.0604
Architectural Activities and Technical Consultancy   0.0256     0.0287         0.0058   0.2231            0.0794
Advertising                                          0.0252     0.0360         0.0016   0.2250            0.0731
Other Business Services                              0.0429     0.0978         0.0018   0.5554            0.2048
                                                              - 20 -




                            Table 2. Who Are the Biggest Absolute Outsourcers, 2002? 1/

Million US Dollars

                                                                                                           Computer & Information
Rank          Country                     Business Services            Rank     Country
                                                                                                                  Services

       1      United States                             40,929           1      Germany                                     6,124
       2      Germany                                   39,113           2      United Kingdom                              2,602
       3      Japan                                     24,714           3      Japan                                       2,148
       4      Netherlands                               21,038           4      Netherlands                                 1,586
       5      Italy                                     20,370           5      Spain                                       1,572
       6      France                                    19,111           6      United States                               1,547
       9      United Kingdom                            16,184           9      France                                      1,150
      11      India                                     11,817           10     China, P.R.                                 1,133
      18      China, P.R.                                7,957           14     Russia                                        592
      20      Russia                                     4,583


1/
     For India, information on computer and information services is not given in the IMF Balance of Payments Yearbook.


Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook.
                                                          - 21 -




                        Table 3. Who Are the Biggest Relative Outsourcers (2002)? 1/

A. Ratio to Local GDP (%)

                                                                                                       Computer & Information
Rank          Country                   Business Services          Rank       Country
                                                                                                              Services

        1     Angola                             35.01                  1     Cyprus                              2.06
        2     Congo, Republic of                 22.33                  2     Luxembourg                          1.25
        3     Mozambique                         17.41                  3     Moldova                             0.71
        4     Ireland                            15.44                  4     Belgium                             0.57
        5     Vanuatu                            14.22                  5     Guyana                              0.48
       44     India                               2.40                 13     Germany                             0.31
       57     Germany                             1.96                 29     Russia                              0.17
       74     France                              1.33                 30     United Kingdom                      0.17
       75     Russia                              1.33                 43     China, P.R.:                        0.09
       85     United Kingdom                      1.03                 48     France                              0.08
       99     China, P.R.                         0.63                 57     Japan                               0.05
      103     Japan                               0.62                 73     United States                       0.01
      117     United States                       0.39




B. Ratio to Value-added of Local Service Sector (%)

                                                                                                       Computer & Information
Rank          Country                   Business Services          Rank       Country
                                                                                                              Services

        1     Angola                           1.39                     1     Luxembourg                          1.60
        2     Congo, Republic of               0.80                     2     Moldova                             1.43
        3     Papua New Guinea                 0.35                     3     Guyana                              1.19
        4     Mozambique                       0.33                     4     Ireland                             0.81
        5     Ireland                          0.28                     5     Belgium                             0.79
       37     India                            0.05                    12     Germany                             0.45
       59     Germany                          0.03                    26     Russia                              0.31
       70     Russia                           0.02                    29     China, P.R.                         0.27
       78     China, P.R.                      0.02                    33     United Kingdom                      0.23
       80     France                           0.02                    53     France                              0.11
       90     United Kingdom                   0.01                    59     Japan                               0.08
      104     Japan                            0.01                    74     United States                       0.02
      115     United States                    0.01

1/
     There is no separate information on computer and information services in the balance of payment'
                                                                                                    s of India.
Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook.
                                                            - 22 -




                         Table 4. Who Are the Biggest Absolute Insourcers (2002)? 1/

Million US Dollars

                                                                                                        Computer & Information
Rank          Country                   Business Services            Rank     Country
                                                                                                              Services

      1       United States                  58,794                    1      Ireland                             10,426
      2       United Kingdom                 36,740                    2      United Kingdom                       5,675
      3       Germany                        27,907                    3      United States                        5,431
      4       France                         20,864                    4      Germany                              5,185
      5       Netherlands                    20,074                    5      Spain                                2,487
      6       India                          18,630                   10      France                               1,191
      8       Japan                          17,401                   11      Japan                                1,140
     14       China, P.R.                    10,419                   12      China, P.R.                           638
     29       Russia                          2,012                   25      Russia                                137

1/
     There is no separate information on computer and information services in the balance of payment'
                                                                                                    s of India.

Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook.
                                                           - 23 -




                            Table 5. Who Are the Biggest Relative Insourcers, 2002? 1/

A. Ratio to Local GDP (%)

                                                                                                                 Computer &
Rank          Economy                      Business Services          Rank       Economy
                                                                                                             Information Services

        1     Vanuatu                           17.13                       1    Ireland                              8.54
        2     Singapore                         14.98                       2    Cyprus                               2.19
        3     Hong Kong SAR                     11.53                       3    Luxembourg                           1.09
        4     Papua New Guinea                  10.55                       4    Costa Rica                           0.91
        5     Luxembourg                         9.78                       5    Belgium                              0.76
       21     India                              3.79                     17     United Kingdom                       0.36
       33     United Kingdom                     2.35                     24     Germany                              0.26
       50     France                             1.45                     42     France                               0.08
       54     Germany                            1.40                     49     United States                        0.05
       79     China, P.R.                        0.82                     51     China, P.R.                          0.05
       88     Russia                             0.58                     54     Russia                               0.04
       90     United States                      0.56                     59     Japan                                0.03
       95     Japan                              0.44




B. Ratio to Value-added of Local Service Sector (%)

                                                                                                                 Computer &
Rank          Economy                      Business Services          Rank       Economy
                                                                                                             Information Services

        1     Papua New Guinea                  32.95                       1    Ireland                            15.64
        2     Vanuatu                           23.85                       2    Guyana                               1.50
        3     Singapore                         21.93                       3    Costa Rica                           1.46
        4     Swaziland                         16.06                       4    Luxembourg                           1.40
        5     Hong Kong SAR                     13.46                       5    Armenia                              1.09
       13     India                              7.82                     18     United Kingdom                       0.51
       44     United Kingdom                     3.28                     24     Germany                              0.38
       53     China, P.R                         2.45                     38     China, P.R.                          0.15
       64     Germany                            2.07                     42     France                               0.12
       66     France                             2.03                     51     Russia                               0.07
       87     Russia                             1.04                     52     United States                        0.07
       91     United States                      0.76                     60     Japan                                0.04
       94     Japan                              0.66

1/
     There is no separate information on computer and information services in the balance of payment'
                                                                                                    s of India.

Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook
                                                                                           - 24 -




                             Table 6. Who Are the Biggest Surplus and Deficit Countries, 2002? 1/

                                                                                                                   Computer &
Rank        Economy                       Business Services             Rank       Economy                                                      Rank    Economy             Total
                                                                                                               Information Services

Surplus countries                                                       Surplus countries                                                       Surplus countries

      1     United Kingdom                     20555.96                      1     Ireland                             9882.71                     1    United Kingdom   23628.68

      2     United States                      17864.30                      2     United States                       3884.00                     2    United States    21748.30

      3     Hong Kong SAR                      15424.54                      3     United Kingdom                      3072.72                     3    Hong Kong SAR    15663.41

      4     India                               6813.44                      4     Canada                              1077.12                     4    India             6813.44

      5     Singapore                           3826.12                      5     Spain                                 914.65                    5    Singapore         3826.12

      6     China, P.R.                         2462.05                    15      France                                 41.39                    9    China, P.R.       1967.20

     10     France                              1752.32                                                                                          10     France            1793.70


Deficit countries                                                       Deficit countries                                                       Deficit countries

 135        Russia                             -2570.90                    95      Russia                               -454.30                 137     Russia            -3025.20

 139        Korea                              -4450.90                    96      China, P.R.                          -494.85                 139     Italy             -4001.71

 140        Japan                              -7313.51                    97      Italy                                -674.85                 140     Korea             -4555.30

 141        Indonesia                          -7985.71                    98      Germany                              -939.29                 141     Indonesia         -7985.71

 142        Germany                           -11205.43                    99      Japan                               -1007.74                 142     Japan             -8321.25

 143        Ireland                           -13882.01                   100      Brazil                              -1118.10                 143     Germany          -12144.72

1/
     Positive numbers in this table represent net insourcing of services (surplus), and negative numbers represent net outsourcing (deficit).


Source: IMF, Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook
                                                                             - 25 -




         Table 7A. United Kingdom: Top Five and Bottom Five Sectors of Employment Growth,
                                           1995-20011/

                                                                       Total Employment            Rank of Total      Service Outsourcing     Rank of Service
Industry
                                                                          Growth (%)             Employment Growth   Intensity Growth (%)   Outsourcing Growth
Top Five
Computer and related activities                                               144.0                         1                 5.2                    58
Other transport equipment                                                       73.9                        2                72.6                     8
Renting of machinery and equipment                                              52.9                        3                17.1                    39
Advertising                                                                     52.0                        4                 8.2                    51
Television and radio transmitters                                               46.5                        5                 -9.5                   68
Bottom Five
Preparation and spinning of textile fibers                                     -47.0                       74               100.2                     4
Knitted and crocheted fabrics and articles                                     -48.2                       75                 6.7                    55
Wearing apparel; dressing and dying of fur                                     -53.4                       76                 29.3                   29
Finishing of textiles                                                          -54.0                       77                 -4.2                   65
Footwear                                                                       -69.0                       78                -46.1                   78




Table 7B. United Kingdom: Top Five and Bottom Five Sectors of Service Outsourcing Growth
                                     1995-20011/

Table 7B. Top Five and Bottom Five Sectors of Service Outsourcing Growth (UK, 1995-2001)
                                                                       Total Employment            Rank of Total      Service Outsourcing     Rank of Service
Industry
                                                                          Growth (%)             Employment Growth   Intensity Growth (%)   Outsourcing Growth
Top Five
Man-made fibers                                                                -38.9                       73               185.8                     1
Vegetable and animal oils and fats                                               3.8                       30               132.5                     2
Cement, lime and plaster                                                       -31.3                       71               118.5                     3
Preparation and spinning of textile fibers                                     -47.0                       74               100.2                     4
Production and distribution of electricity                                      -8.4                       48                91.3                     5
Bottom Five
Cutlery, tools and general hardware                                             -6.9                       46                -16.2                   74
Building and repairing of ships and boats                                       -5.2                       43                -18.6                   75
Sports goods, games and toys                                                   -23.7                       61                -23.5                   76
Machine tools                                                                  -28.2                       67                -28.3                   77
Footwear                                                                       -69.0                       78                -46.1                   78

1/
     Industries in this study are aggregated into 84 sectors, which are based on SIC (92) 3-digit codes.


Sources: Employment data are from the Annual Employment Survey (AES, 1995-1997) and Annual Business
Inquiry (ABI, 1998-2001). Service outsourcing ratios are calculated from input-output tables.
                                                            - 26 -




Table 8A. United Kingdom: Manufacturing Employment and Service Outsourcing, 1995-2001

Dependent variable            ln(employment)
                                         One Period Difference                          Two Period Difference
Variable                         (1)              (2)                (3)       (4)              (5)                (6)
    ln (OSS)t                 0.079*             0.128**          0.105**    0.104*            0.091               0.100
                              (0.048)            (0.065)           (0.047)   (0.053)          (0.077)             (0.062)
    ln (OSS)t-1               0.063*              0.027           0.063***    -0.012           0.042               0.051
                              (0.033)            (0.033)           (0.018)    (0.04)          (0.054)             (0.032)
    ln (OSS)t-2                                   -0.047            0.004                      -0.068              0.011
                                                 (0.039)            (0.02)                    (0.062)             (0.044)
    ln (OSM)t                  -0.056             -0.094            -0.009     0.118           -0.346              -0.202
                              (0.157)            (0.169)           (0.111)     (0.19)         (0.241)             (0.208)
    ln (OSM)t-1                -0.115             -0.132            0.043    -0.328**          0.233               0.276
                              (0.123)            (0.139)           (0.072)    (0.128)         (0.198)             (0.179)
    ln (OSM)t-2                                 -0.346***           0.034                    -0.637***             -0.066
                                                 (0.129)           (0.088)                    (0.155)             (0.143)
    ln (wage)t                                                   -0.742***                                      -0.683***
                                                                   (0.036)                                        (0.048)
    ln (wage)t-1                                                    0.069                                          0.052
                                                                   (0.045)                                         (0.09)
    ln (wage)t-2                                                    0.081                                        0.112**
                                                                    (0.07)                                        (0.056)
    ln (real output)t                                             0.444***                                       0.461***
                                                                   (0.081)                                         (0.13)
    ln (real output)t-1                                           0.254***                                       0.193**
                                                                   (0.067)                                        (0.095)
    ln (real output)t-2                                             -0.028                                         0.043
                                                                   (0.074)                                        (0.097)
Time Fixed Effects              Yes               Yes                Yes       Yes              Yes               Yes
Industry Fixed Effects          No                No                 No        No               No                No

N                               345               276                256       276              207               192
R2                              0.12              0.18               0.76      0.14             0.17              0.72

Legend : * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



Note: In columns (4) to (6), all variables are differenced over two periods i.e. ∆x(t)=x(t)-x(t-2)
                                                            - 27 -




    Table 8B. United Kingdom: Manufacturing Employment and Service Outsourcing–Sensitivity Tests,
                                            1995–2001


Dependent variable             ln(employment)
                                       One Period Difference                           Two Period Difference
Variable                      (1)                  (2)               (3)      (4)               (5)               (6)
    ln (OSS)t                0.093               0.096**        0.096**       0.067           0.089*              0.120
                           (0.058)                (0.043)        (0.039)      (0.07)          (0.051)            (0.077)
    ln (OSS)t-1             0.042*               0.046***       0.045***      0.038            0.001              0.038
                           (0.024)                (0.017)        (0.015)     (0.049)          (0.026)            (0.032)
    ln (OSS)t-2              -0.005                -0.010         0.013       -0.020           -0.019             0.037
                           (0.025)                (0.018)        (0.021)      (0.05)          (0.035)            (0.057)
    ln (OSM)t                -0.168                0.006          -0.022      -0.338           -0.155              -0.13
                           (0.143)                (0.102)        (0.123)     (0.248)          (0.178)            (0.193)
    ln (OSM)t-1              -0.078                0.023          -0.042      0.203            0.212              0.068
                            (0.089)               (0.075)        (0.101)     (0.221)          (0.158)            (0.108)
    ln (OSM)t-2              -0.089                0.013          0.011     -0.343**           -0.125             -0.054
                             (0.08)               (0.085)        (0.078)     (0.166)          (0.118)            (0.147)
    ln (wage)t            -0.790***             -0.753***      -0.847***   -0.766***        -0.692***          -0.799***
                            (0.045)               (0.037)        (0.065)     (0.072)          (0.045)            (0.118)
    ln (wage)t-1             -0.003              0.249**        -0.093**      0.055          0.557***             -0.059
                            (0.045)               (0.105)        (0.070)     (0.103)          (0.125)            (0.058)
    ln (wage)t-2             0.018                 0.075          -0.021      -0.032          0.085*              -0.010
                            (0.074)               (0.067)        (0.048)      (0.07)          (0.047)            (0.091)
    ln (real output)t                            0.434***       0.431***                     0.403***           0.417**
                                                  (0.075)        (0.081)                      (0.105)             (0.16)
    ln (real output)t-1                            0.161        0.337***                       -0.054           0.304***
                                                (0.072)**        (0.111)                      (0.089)            (0.086)
    ln (real output)t-2                            -0.080         0.058                        -0.104             0.117
                                                  (0.084)        (0.060)                      (0.075)            (0.121)
    ln (price) t            0.186                                            0.137
                           (0.278)                                          (0.393)
    ln (price) t-1          -0.319                                           -0.531
                           (0.283)                                          (0.664)
    ln (price) t-2          0.204                                            0.520
                           (0.152)                                          (0.344)
    ln (employment)t-1                          0.259**                                      0.716***
                                                (0.112)                                       (0.100)
Time Fixed Effects           Yes                  Yes            Yes         Yes               Yes               Yes
Industry Fixed Effects       No                   No             No          No                No                Yes
N                            256                  256                256     192               192               192
R2                           0.64                 0.77           0.86        0.52              0.81              0.89


Legend : * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



Note: In columns (4) to (6), all variables are differenced over two periods i.e., ∆x(t)=x(t)-x(t-2)
                                                          - 28 -




Table 9A. United Kingdom: Service Sector Employment and Service Outsourcing, 1995–2001


Dependent variable            ln(employment)
                                         One Period Difference                         Two Period Difference
Variable                         (1)              (2)               (3)        (4)             (5)                (6)
    ln (OSS)t                  -0.011            0.324              0.156     0.348            0.314              0.134
                              (0.328)           (0.434)            (0.215)   (0.554)          (0.816)            (0.257)
    ln (OSS)t-1                -0.227            -0.138             -0.080    -0.455           -0.591             -0.170
                              (0.477)            (0.53)            (0.199)    (0.43)          (0.427)            (0.137)
    ln (OSS)t-2                                  -0.133             0.354                      0.567            0.858***
                                                (0.306)            (0.211)                    (0.698)            (0.171)
    ln (OSM)t                  -0.036            0.485             -0.376*    0.216            0.221            -0.693**
                              (0.268)           (0.456)            (0.203)   (0.562)          (0.894)            (0.242)
    ln (OSM)t-1                -0.180            -0.202             0.086     -0.472           0.007             0.431*
                              (0.329)           (0.391)            (0.234)   (0.491)          (0.938)            (0.231)
    ln (OSM)t-2                                  -0.255             0.072                      -0.408             0.041
                                                (0.226)            (0.167)                    (0.612)            (0.204)
    ln (wage)t                                                   -0.939***                                     -0.975***
                                                                   (0.069)                                       (0.095)
    ln (wage)t-1                                                    0.112                                         0.187
                                                                   (0.083)                                        (0.12)
    ln (wage)t-2                                                    0.057                                         0.120
                                                                   (0.068)                                       (0.094)
    ln (nominal output)t                                          0.797***                                      1.181***
                                                                   (0.229)                                       (0.268)
    ln (nominal output)t-1                                          0.141                                         -0.197
                                                                   (0.226)                                       (0.283)
    ln (nominal output)t-2                                          0.203                                        0.343*
                                                                   (0.186)                                        (0.17)
Time Fixed Effects              Yes              Yes               Yes        Yes              Yes               Yes
Industry Fixed Effects          No               No                No         No               No                No

N                                45               36                36         36               27                27
R2                              0.24             0.28              0.91       0.14             0.33              0.95

Legend : * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01



Note: In columns (4) to (6), all variables are differenced over two periods i.e., ∆x(t)=x(t)-x(t-2)
                                                          - 29 -




Table 9B. United Kingdom: Service Sector Employment and Service Outsourcing–Sensitivity Tests, 1995–2001

Dependent variable             ln(employment)
                                 One Period Difference                 Two Period Difference
Variable                        (1)                 (2)                (3)               (4)
    ln (OSS)t                  -0.169             -0.387             -0.45**            -0.451
                              (0.263)            (0.390)             (0.183)           (0.579)
    ln (OSS)t-1                -0.129            -0.674*            -0.267**            -0.783
                              (0.157)            (0.332)             (0.097)           (0.476)
    ln (OSS)t-2                0.167              -0.257            0.472***            -0.023
                              (0.225)            (0.320)             (0.147)           (0.577)
    ln (OSM)t                 -0.334*             -0.686           -0.671***            -0.889
                              (0.177)            (0.393)             (0.177)           (0.722)
    ln (OSM)t-1                0.248              -0.369            0.534***            -0.113
                              (0.188)            (0.321)             (0.168)           (0.394)
    ln (OSM)t-2                0.093              -0.165              0.161             -0.669
                              (0.121)            (0.285)             (0.128)           (0.824)
    ln (wage)t               -0.864***          -0.952***          -0.861***           -0.806*
                              (0.073)            (0.132)             (0.067)           (0.295)
    ln (wage)t-1              0.607**             0.060             0.833***            0.202
                              (0.242)            (0.133)             (0.133)           (0.228)
    ln (wage)t-2               -0.044             -0.002              -0.063             0.03
                              (0.074)            (0.094)             (0.054)           (0.166)
    ln (nominal output)t      0.556**             0.257             0.630**             -0.183
                              (0.238)            (0.346)             (0.206)           (1.179)
    ln (nominal output)t-1     -0.211             -0.095             -0.455*            -0.123
                               (0.21)            (0.216)              (0.22)           (0.320)
    ln (nominal output)t-2     0.083              -0.166              0.115             -0.779
                              (0.162)            (0.375)             (0.117)           (1.258)
    ln (employment)t-1        0.612**                               0.815***
                               (0.29)                                (0.138)
Time Fixed Effects             Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
Industry Fixed Effects         No                  Yes                No                 Yes

N                               36                  36                 27                27
  2
R                              0.93                0.96               0.97              0.92

Legend : * p < 0.1; ** p < 0.05; *** p < 0.01

Note: In columns (4) to (6), all variables are differenced over two periods i.e., ∆x(t)=x(t)-x(t-2)
                                               - 30 -




                                Figure 1. News count of Outsourcing

         Freq uency (US)



   60




    50




   40




   30




   20




    10




     0




US news sources: Dow Jones News Service, Financial Times, The New York Times (Abstracts), The Seattle
Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post.
                                                                          - 31 -




                              Figure 2. United Kingdom: Outsourcing Intensity of Intermediate Inputs
                                       (Weighted Average Across All Industries by Outputs)

                                       Imported Service Inputs
                                        (Share in total non-energy inputs)

                              7.00%

                              6.50%

                              6.00%
      Outsourcing Intensity




                              5.50%

                              5.00%

                              4.50%

                              4.00%

                              3.50%

                              3.00%
                                         1992     1993     1994    1995      1996          1997   1998   1999   2000   2001

                                                                                    Year




                                         Imported Intermediate Manufacturing Input
                                          (Share in total non-energy inputs)

                              32.00%

                              31.00%

                              30.00%
  Outsourcing Intensity




                              29.00%

                              28.00%

                              27.00%

                              26.00%

                              25.00%

                              24.00%
                                          1992    1993     1994    1995      1996          1997   1998   1999   2000   2001

                                                                                    Year




Source: Input-Output Tables - United Kingdom National Accounts
                                                        - 32 -




                           Figure 3. Insourcing and Outsourcing of Business Services
                                                (billion dollars)

                                                                                           In s o urc ing ( +)
                                                                                           B a la nc e
                                                                                           O u t s o urc ing ( - )




             United States                                            United Kingdom
                                                          50
 80
                                                          40
 60
                                                          30
 40                                                       20
 20                                                       10
  0                                                        0

-20                                                       -10
                                                          -20
-40
                                                          -30
-60
                                                                1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001
      1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001



              Germany                                                 France
40                                                        30
30
                                                          20
20
10                                                        10
 0
                                                           0
-10
-20                                                       -10
-30
                                                          -20
-40
-50                                                       -30
      1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001                   1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001




               China                                                  India
15                                                         25
                                                           20
10
                                                           15

  5                                                        10
                                                            5
  0                                                         0
                                                           -5
 -5
                                                          -10
-10                                                       -15
      1982   1985   1988    1991   1994   1997   2000           1980 1983 1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001



      Sources: IMF Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook and International Financial Statistics.
                                                             - 33 -




              Figure 4. Insourcing and Outsourcing of Computer and Information Services
                                            (billion dollars)

                                                                                                          In s o u rc in g ( +)
                                                                                                          B a la n c e
                                                                                                          O u t s o u rc in g ( - )



              United States                                                    United Kingdom
 7.0                                                             7.0
 6.0                                                             6.0
 5.0                                                             5.0
 4.0                                                             4.0
                                                                 3.0
 3.0
                                                                 2.0
 2.0
                                                                 1.0
 1.0
                                                                 0.0
 0.0                                                            -1.0
-1.0                                                            -2.0
-2.0                                                            -3.0
-3.0                                                            -4.0
       1986     1989     1992     1995     1998     2001                1991    1993     1995   1997    1999      2001         2003



                Germany                                                         France
8.0                                                             1.5
6.0                                                             1.0
4.0
                                                                0.5
2.0
0.0                                                             0.0
-2.0
                                                                -0.5
-4.0
                                                                -1.0
-6.0
-8.0                                                            -1.5
       1986     1989     1992     1995     1998     2001               1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002




                China                                                          Ireland
 0.9                                                            14.0
 0.6                                                            12.0
 0.3                                                            10.0
 0.0                                                             8.0
-0.3                                                             6.0
-0.6                                                             4.0
-0.9                                                             2.0
-1.2                                                             0.0
-1.5                                                             -2.0
         1997     1998     1999     2000     2001     2002                1998     1999     2000       2001     2002         2003



   Sources: IMF Balance of Payments Statistics Yearbook and International Financial Statistics.
                                                                      - 34 -




Figure 5.                                  United Kingdom: Service Outsourcing Growth and Employment Growth, 1995-2001



                                200




                                150




                                100
  Total Employment Growth (%)




                                 50




                                   0




                                 -50




                                -100
                                    -100            -50         0                  50                 100   150   200
                                                                     Service Outsourcing Growth (%)
                                                    - 35 -




                                          Appendix 1: Data Sources

Variable                         Source                                    Description/Notes
Trade Data: imports and          IMF Balance of Payments,
exports of computing and         International Financial Statistics
information services; and
other business services
News count                       FACTIVA, Dow Jones & Reuters,
                                 www.factiva.com
Input/output tables*             National Statistics online, United
Total compensation               Kingdom, (www.statistics.gov.uk)
Output in current values
Employment**                     Annual Employment survey (AES)            Great Britain,
                                                                           SIC92 3 digit, 1995-98
                                 Annual Business Inquiry (ABI)             United Kingdom,
                                                                           SIC92 5 digit 1998-2001
                                 Census of Employment, Northern            Northern Ireland,
                                 Ireland                                   1995 and 1997
Price Indices***                 National Statistics online, United        Manufacturing industries
                                 Kingdom, (www.statistics.gov.uk)          only, SIC92.
Notes:
*
  In order for the information from all sources to match, certain industries are aggregated together. The
employment data from ABI are first aggregated into SIC92 3-digit level so as to match the categories of AES. A
second stage of aggregation happens whenever there is a multiple-to-multiple correspondence between the I/O
tables codes and the SIC92 3-digit codes. Finally, after dropping out industries which are either not of interest to
this study, such as agriculture and mining sectors, or with incomplete information, we are left with 69
manufacturing industries, and 9 service industries, listed below.
**
  The regional coverage of the two sources of employment information are different. In order to make the two data
comparable, the following steps were taken. First, the data for employment from Northern Ireland were added to
employment data from Great Britain to get employment figures for United Kingdom for 1995-1997. Note, for 1996
the employment in north Ireland is taken as a simple average of 1995 and 1997 employment. There still remain
some industries for which there is no corresponding data in Northern Ireland. For these industries, the information
of the overlapping year (1998) serves as a bridge to merge the whole series, with the employment of Great Britain
industries assumed to be constant ratios of those of United Kingdom.
***
  These price indices are available at different levels of disaggregation (SIC 92 classification) and do not
correspond to industries in our sample in a one-to-one fashion. Hence, we constructed a weighted average of these
PPI (using average employment for the United Kingdom for the period 1998 to 2001as weights – the only years
available at the appropriate level of disaggregation) to get price indices at 3 digit SIC level.
                                                   - 36 -




                               Appendix II. List of Industries in the U.K. Sample

Manufacturing Industries -

      IO   Industry Name                                          IO      Industry Name
 8         Meat processing                                   49           Glass and glass products
 9         Fish and fruit processing                         50           Ceramic goods
 10        Oils and fats                                     51           Structural clay products
 11        Dairy products                                    52           Cement, lime and plaster
 12        Grain milling and starch                          53           Articles of concrete, stone etc
 13        Animal feed                                       54           Iron and steel
 14        Bread, biscuits etc                               55           Non-ferrous metals
 15        Sugar                                             56           Metal castings
 16        Confectionery                                     57           Structural metal products
 17        Other food products                               58           Metal boilers and radiators
 18        Alcoholic beverages                               59           Metal forging, pressing, etc
 19        Soft drinks and mineral waters                    60           Cutlery, tools etc
 20        Tobacco products                                  61           Other metal products
 21        Textile fibres                                    62           Mechanical power equipment
 22        Textile weaving                                   63           General purpose machinery
 23        Textile finishing                                 64           Agricultural machinery
 24        Made-up textiles                                  65           Machine tools
 25        Carpets and rugs                                  66           Special purpose machinery
 26        Other textiles                                    67           Weapons and ammunition
 27        Knitted goods                                     68           Domestic appliances nec
 28        Wearing apparel and fur products                  69           Office machinery & computers
 29        Leather goods                                     70           Electric motors and generators etc
 30        Footwear                                          71           Insulated wire and cable
 31        Wood and wood products                            72           Electrical equipment nec
 32        Pulp, paper and paperboard                        73           Electronic components
 33        Paper and paperboard products                     74           Transmitters for TV, radio and phone
 34        Printing and publishing                           75           Receivers for TV and radio
 36        Industrial gases and dyes                         76           Medical and precision instruments
 37        Inorganic chemicals                               77           Motor vehicles
 38        Organic chemicals                                 78           Shipbuilding and repair
 39        Fertilisers                                       79           Other transport equipment
 40        Plastics & synthetic resins etc                   80           Aircraft and spacecraft
 41        Pesticides                                        81           Furniture
 42        Paints, varnishes, printing ink etc               82           Jewellery and related products
 43        Pharmaceuticals                                   83           Sports goods and toys
 44        Soap and toilet preparations                      84           Miscellaneous manufacturing nec & recycling
 45        Other chemical products                           85           Electricity production and distribution
 46        Man-made fibres                                   88           Construction
 47        Rubber products
 48        Plastic products                                 Total Manufacturing Industries = 69


Service Industries -

  IO       Industry Name                                       108          Research and development
  99       Telecommunications                                  109          Legal activities
 100       Banking and finance                                 110          Accountancy services
 101       Insurance and pension funds                         111          Market research, management consultancy
 102       Auxiliary financial services                        112          Architectural activities and technical consultancy
 106       Renting of machinery etc                            113          Advertising
 107       Computer services                                   114          Other business services

                                                                       Total Service Industries = 9
Note: Shading indicates industries that have been grouped together to match input/output classifications.
Specifically, industries 14-17, 18-19, 25-26, 36-40, 100-102, and 109-111 are treated as 6 groups of industries.
                                          - 37 -


                                      REFERENCES

Amiti, Mary, 2004, “Location of Vertically Linked Industries: Agglomeration Versus
       Comparative Advantage,” European Economic Review, forthcoming.

______, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “Service Outsourcing, Productivity and Employment,”
        IMF Working Paper, forthcoming.

Antras, Pol, 2003, “Firms, Contracts and Trade Structure,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       Vol. 118, pp. 1374–1418.

______, and Elhanan Helpman, 2003, “Global Sourcing”, NBER Working Paper No. 10082,
      (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Borga, Maria, and William J. Zeile, 2004, “International Fragmentation of Production and
       the Intrafirm Trade of United States Multinational Companies,” WP2004–02, Bureau
       of Economic Analysis.

Brainard, Lael and Robert Litan, 2004, "Offshoring Service Jobs: Bane or Boon and What to
       Do?” The Brookings Institution Policy Brief No. 132.

Campa, Jose and Linda S. Goldberg, 1997, “The Evolving External Orientation of
      Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from Four Countries”, NBER Working Paper
      No. 5919 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).

Council of Economic Advisors, 2004, Economic Report of the President.

Deardorff, Alan V., 1998a, “Fragmentation in Simple Trade Models,” Research Seminar in
      International Economics Discussion Paper No. 422.

_______, 1998b “Fragmentation Across Cones,” Research Seminar. International Economics
      Discussion Paper No. 427.

Dixit, Avinash K. and Gene M. Grossman, 1982, “Trade and Protection with Multistage
        Production,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. XLIX(4), pp. 583–94.

Egger, Hartmut and Peter Egger, 2001, “International Outsourcing and the Productivity of
       Low-Skilled Labour in the EU,” Working Paper 152/2001, Austrian Institute of
       Economic Research (WIFO) Vienna.

Feenstra, Robert C., 2004, “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the
       Global Economy,” forthcoming.

_______, and Gordon H. Hanson, 1996, “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality”
      American Economic Review, Vol. LXXXVI, pp. 240–45.
                                         - 38 -


_______, 1997, “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s
      Maquiladoras,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 371–94.

_______, 1999, “The Impact of Outsourcing and High Technology Capital on Wages:
      Estimates for the United States, 1979–1990,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.,
      Vol. 114 (3), pp. 907–940.

_______, 2001, “Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality: A Survey of Trade and
      Wages,” Handbook of International Trade.

Gereffi, Gary, 1999, “International Trade and Industrial Upgrading in the Apparel
       Commodity Chain” Journal of International Economic, Vol. 48, pp. 37–70.

Girma, Sourafel and Holger Gorg, 2003, “Outsourcing, Foreign Ownership and Productivity:
       Evidence from United Kingdom Establishment Level Data,” Discussion Paper 361,
       German Institute for Economic Research.

Gorg Holger and Aoife Hanley, 2003, “International Outsourcing and Productivity: Evidence
      from Plant Level Data,” Research Paper 2003/20, University of Nottingham.

Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A. Hausman, 1986, “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of
       Econometrics, Vol. 31, pp. 93–118.

Hamermesh, Daniel, 1993, “Labor Demand,” Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University
     Press.

Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni and Matthew J. Slaughter, 2004, “Vertical
      Production Networks in Multinational Firms” NBER Working Paper 9723
      (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research) .

Helpman, Elhanan, 1984, “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
     Corporations,” Journal of Political Economy , Vol. 92, pp. 451–72.

Hijzen, Alexander, Holger Gorg and Robert C. Hine, 2002, “International Fragmentation and
       Relative Wages in the United Kingdom,” Research Paper 717 Bonn.

Hummels, David, Ishii Jun and Kei-Mu Yi, 2001, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical
    Specialization in World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 54(1),
    pp. 75–96.

Jones, Ronald and H Kierzkowski, 1990, “The Role of Services in Production and
       International Trade: A theoretical framework,” in Jones and Krueger (eds), The
       Political Economy of International Trade, Blackwell.
                                         - 39 -


______,1999, “Globalization and the Consequences of International Fragmentation,” in R.
      Dornbusch, G. Calvo and M.Obstfeld (eds), The Festschrift in Honor of Robert
      Mundell, MIT Press, Cambridge.

______,2001, “A Framework for Fragmentation,” in Cheng and Kierzkowski (eds),
      Fragmentation and International Trade, Oxford University Press.

Kirkegaard, Jacob F., 2004, “Outsourcing-Stains on the White Collar?” Institute of
       International Economics.

Krugman, Paul, 1995, “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences,” Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, Vol. (1), pp. 327–62.

_______, and Anthony J. Venables, 1995, “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 110, pp. 857–80.

Mann, Catherine L., 2004, “Globalization of IT Services and White Collar Jobs: The Next
      Wave of Productivity Growth,” International Economics Policy Briefs 3–11.
      Institute of International Economics.

Markusen, James, 2002, Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade.
      Cambridge: MIT press.

McKinsey Global Institute, 2003, “Offshoring: Is it a Win-Win Game?” San Francisco,
     www.mckinsey.com/knowledge/mgi/offshore.

Rajan, Raghuram G., and Shang-Jin Wei, 2004, “The Non-Threat That is Outsourcing,”
       Newspaper op-ed.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Howard J. Shatz, 1994, “Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing,”
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.

Schultz, Charles, 2004, “Offshoring, Import Competition and Jobless Recovery,” Brookings
       Brief.

Slaughter, Matthew J., 2000, “Production Transfer Within Multinational Enterprises and
       American Wages,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 50, pp. 449–72.

Ten Raa, Thijs and Edward N. Wolff, 2001, “Outsourcing of Services and the Productivity
      Recovery in United States Manufacturing in the 1980s and 1990s” Journal of
      Productivity Analysis, Vol. 16(2), pp. 149–65.

Yeats, Alexander J., 2001, “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing?” in Arndt, S.W. and
       H.Kierzkowski (eds.) Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the World
       Economy, Oxford University Press.
                                     - 40 -


Yi, Kei-Mu., 2003, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth in World Trade?,”
      Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 111(1), pp. 52–102.
