                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE EFFECT OF COLLEGE CURRICULUM ON EARNINGS:
               ACCOUNTING FOR NON-IGNORABLE NON-RESPONSE BIAS

                                         Daniel S. Hamermesh
                                          Stephen G. Donald

                                         Working Paper 10809
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10809


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




We thank the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation for financial support of this project, and Dean Richard
Lariviere for having suggested conducting the survey. Merrick Brown and Mark Pocock offered excellent
research assistance, while Davis Phillips provided invaluable aid in identifying and choosing the sample.
Most important, Jamie M. Doyle was instrumental in improving, fielding and analyzing the initial results of
the questionnaire. Joseph Altonji, Ronald Ehrenberg, Scott Gehlbach, Gary Solon and Jeff Underwood gave
very helpful suggestions, and useful comments were received from participants in seminars at several
universities and the NBER. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Daniel S. Hamermesh and Stephen G. Donald. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of College Curriculum on Earnings: Accounting for Non-Ignorable Non-Response Bias
Daniel S. Hamermesh and Stephen G. Donald
NBER Working Paper No. 10809
September 2004
JEL No. J310, I210

                                           ABSTRACT

We link information on the current earnings of college graduates from many cohorts to their high-

school records, their detailed college records and their demographics to infer the impact of college

major on earnings. We develop an estimator to handle the potential for non-response bias and

identify non-response using an affinity measure – the potential respondent’s link to the organization

conducting the survey. This technique is generally applicable for adjusting for unit non-response. In

the model describing earnings, estimated using the identified (for non-response bias) selectivity

adjustments, adjusted earnings differentials across college majors are less than half as large as

unadjusted differentials and ten percent smaller than those that do not account for selective non-

response.

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
and NBER
hamermes@eco.utexas.edu

Stephen G. Donald
Department of Economics
University of Texas
Austin, TX 78712-1173
donald@eco.utexas.edu
1         Introduction
The impact of undergraduate curriculum on earnings has attracted substantial attention
from economists, sociologists and educational researchers over the past two decades.
(Wise, 1975; Grogger and Eide, 1995; Black et al, 2003, are just a few of the studies that
have considered the issue of college major, and even high school curriculum has garnered
some attention–Altonji, 1995; Rose and Betts, 2002). Partly the focus has stemmed
from the large gender disparity in choices of major and the disproportionate fraction
of women who choose majors with low earnings potential for both sexes (cf. Gerhart,
1990; Datcher Loury, 1997; Turner and Bowen, 1999; Joy, 2003). Despite the extensive
examination of the relationship between college curriculum and earnings, however, there
is a substantial need for additional research on this topic due to a variety of problems
with existing studies.
        Among the diﬃculties in the literature are: 1) Most of the studies examine the eﬀect of
major on earnings only a few years after students complete college, thus failing to measure
the lifetime-income eﬀects of diﬀerent majors. This matters to the extent that the slopes
of age-earnings profiles diﬀer across majors; 2) Much of the research in this area does not
account for background/ability measures that may be correlated with choice of major; 3)
Most of the literature lacks information on the actual courses taken by the college student,
focusing solely on his/her major field. 4) Some of the literature considers college major
without considering performance in college, thus perhaps confusing the impact of major
with the possibly correlated performance in college. 5) Definitions of college majors are
not standard across universities, so that comparisons may generate errors insofar as the
representation in the sample of majors by alma mater is non-random.1
        All of these are problems with the underlying data–none of the data sets used (typ-
ically large national surveys) deals with all these diﬃculties. The data set we have
created here circumvents all these problems. It describes a well-defined set of college ma-
jors from one single (albeit very large) university; there is more background information
    1
    Perhaps the most useful survey along these criteria is that underlying Bowen and Bok (1998), which
deals with all of these diﬃculties except the third.


                                                 [1]
on the students than has hitherto been available in studies of this issue; there is detailed
information on the courses the students took in college, not just on the broad indicator of
their major or their average performance; and the graduates in the sample range from the
very recent to those who left the institution over 20 years before the survey was fielded.
    The entire literature has an additional deficiency, one that is recognized as pervasive
in survey-based research generally: The respondents on whom the studies are based
are unlikely to be random individuals from among the college graduates who form their
sampling frames. Even with a carefully chosen sampling frame, those people who respond
and provide current information on their earnings are likely to be a selected sample of
graduates. This issue, of non-ignorable non-response bias, is a specific problem in sample
selectivity that seems to be of general importance but that has received relatively little
attention in the literature on survey methods (Little and Rubin, 2002). In this study we
provide an approach to identifying the selectivity that generates the non-response bias.
While the particular method is specific to our particular problem, the basic idea provides
guidelines for handling this diﬃculty in survey work generally.


2     The Underlying Data
We designed a questionnaire to elicit information on graduates’ current earnings and
occupational attachment, hours of work, postgraduate education (if any), how they fi-
nanced their college education, and current family status (marital status, and age and
number of children). (A copy of the questionnaire is available on request.) The ques-
tionnaire was purposely kept short to ease the task of respondents and to allow it to be
readily machine-readable.
    The sampling frame consists of randomly chosen undergraduates taken from the pop-
ulation of graduates from the years 1979-80, 1984-85, 1989-90, 1994-95 and 1999-2000
of the largest single-campus university in the United States, the University of Texas at
Austin. This choice of graduating classes enables us to study a cross section of the cur-
rent earnings of people covering a range of ages concentrated between 23 and 43, and to


                                            [2]
use the other information so that we have background data on their current demographic
status and some characteristics of their current employment. The goal was to obtain
1600 members of each class as potential respondents to the survey.2 This amounted to a
sample of slightly over 25 percent of the graduates in those classes.
       From the University’s administrative records system we obtained information on the
entire college careers of everyone in the sampling frame, including the identity of and
grade in each course taken at the university, the total number of credits received and
grade-point average attained, and college major. Moreover, we had information on their
pre-college backgrounds, including their rank in their high school graduating class and
their SAT score (or the SAT-equivalent of their ACT score) from their applications to the
University. In addition, since we knew the area where they lived while in high school, we
were able to construct environmental background measures for each student, including
the median family income (in 1990 dollars) in the Census tract (or untracted town) where
the student graduated from high school.
       The first choice to be made is how to classify graduates by major. This choice pervades
all studies in this literature. The goal is presumably to ensure reasonable cell sizes while
guaranteeing some degree of homogeneity of the kinds of majors included in each cell.
There are over 80 majors in the University, ensuring that the number of respondents in
some of them would be minute if we treated every major separately. Moreover, some
majors that existed in 1979-80 disappeared, while new ones were created during the two
decades. To circumvent both problems we generally define major in terms of the college
in which the student’s major was situated. A list of the eleven majors is shown in the left
column of Table 1, while the second and third columns show the numbers of graduates
in the sampling frame and the number of survey respondents.
       Using this sampling frame, we mailed the survey to 7970 graduates from the five
classes under study.3 Regrettably, although the University had addresses on all of these
   2
     We ensured randomness by using the random number generator in SAS to produce samples of 1600
individuals in each graduating class.
   3
     For a variety of reasons a few people slipped out of the sampling frame, leading to the 7970 actually
surveyed rather than the desired 8000.



                                                   [3]
graduates, apparently not all were valid. Thus during the seven months from the date
the survey was mailed out (November 20, 2001) until the date the books were closed
on the survey (June 30, 2002), 424 envelopes were returned as undeliverable. No doubt
too some of the other non-respondents never received the survey and thus never had the
choice to select into the sample of respondents. We thus treat all 5,955 non-respondents
identically, classifying them as one group and the 2,015 respondents as the other group.


3     Initial Analyses
The means of the responses to the central questions from the survey, on the high-school
background variables, and on the variables describing experience at the University, are
presented in Table 2 separately by college major and then for the aggregate of respon-
dents. The data on earnings are conditional on a respondent having reported positive
earnings (as some respondents were not working at the time of the survey, while a minute
number indicated that they were working but did not respond on the question about
earnings).
    Clearly, there are substantial diﬀerences across major in average earnings, with the
highest-earning majors (Honors Plan II, and “hard” business) having an average almost
three times that of the lowest (Education). Much of the diﬀerences across majors must
be due to diﬀerences in what the students bring to and do at the University. Students in
the higher-earning majors generally have higher SAT totals upon entry, and the fractions
of students taking upper-division math and science courses and doing well in them are
greater too. The diﬀerences are also consistent with the results of diﬀerential eﬀort in the
labor market and male-female diﬀerences in earnings. Thus respondents in the higher-
earning majors tend to state that they work longer hours than those in lower-earning
majors; and except for the Honors Plan II major, the fraction of women in the higher-
earning majors is lower. On the other hand, advanced degrees are more prevalent among
those graduates who have majored in subjects that eventually generate lower earnings.
Similarly, family incomes in the areas where the students attended high school do not


                                            [4]
diﬀer across majors; and absolutely unsurprisingly there are no diﬀerences across majors
in average GPA (again, except for the Honors Plan II major).
       We have collected the data on this sample, including the unusually complete back-
ground and pre-college information, and the very long follow-up of some the graduates.
The standard approach would be to estimate earnings equations controlling for all the
high-school background measures, college achievement, additional demographic informa-
tion, and college major for those respondents who were working at the time of the survey.
The results of various versions of this regression model describing the logarithm of earn-
ings are presented in the first three columns of Table 3, in which the excluded major is
Education.4 Even adjusting for all the other variables on which we have information,
there are important diﬀerences in adjusted earnings across major fields, with most of
them being in the directions one would expect. Engineering and the “hard” business
disciplines of accounting and finance pay more. These pay diﬀerentials are, however,
nowhere nearly as large as one might have expected, because many of the important
control variables are correlated with both major and earnings (as was suggested by the
means in Table 2). A diﬀerence of 21 log points between earnings in the “hard” business
majors and social science majors is large, but not huge; and the diﬀerence between the
“soft” business majors and others is even less.5
       Other than our findings about the adjusted diﬀerences in earnings by major, perhaps
the most interesting results are those on the variables that we believe are unique to the
data set that we have assembled. Even within major, taking more upper-division science
or math courses and doing better in them raise eventual earnings. While the eﬀects are
   4
     For respondents on whom we did not have information on the additional variables included in the
estimates in the second and third columns we added an indicator of that variable being missing. Re-
estimating the equations eliminating the observations with item non-responses had only minute eﬀects
on these coeﬃcient estimates and the others.
   5
     If we separate economics majors from others in the social sciences, we find that their adjusted earn-
ings are halfway between those in the “hard” and “soft” business curricula. Re-estimating the equations
using only the classes of 1980 and 1985 to remove people who might still be investing substantially
in their skills hardly changes the estimated coeﬃcients on the indicators for college major. Similarly,
using the entire sample, allowing for major-specific time trends in adjusted earnings does not add to
the equations’ explanatory power and has little eﬀect on inferences about adjusted earnings diﬀerences
across majors.



                                                   [5]
not highly significant statistically, the t-statistics generally exceed 1.28. A student who
takes 15 credits of upper-division science and math courses and obtains a B average in
them will earn about 10 percent more than an otherwise identical student in the same
major (based on the estimates in Column (3)) who takes no upper-division classes in
these areas. There is clearly a return to taking these diﬃcult courses, even after we have
adjusted for diﬀerences in mathematical ability by using the total SAT score (with only
tiny diﬀerences in this and the other results if the total SAT score is broken down in
math and verbal scores).6
       Also intriguing is the role of the student’s background, which we have proxied by
the average income in the area where he/she attended high school. Those students who
performed equally well on the SAT and in college, but who came from an area where
the average income was one standard deviation above the mean, earned about 7 percent
more than those who came from an area where it was one standard deviation below the
mean. Whether these long-lasting eﬀects stem from diﬀerences in home background, in
the quality of schooling in high school, or in access to information networks cannot, of
course, be inferred from these results. Nonetheless, that we find long-term impacts of
this size in this fairly homogeneous sample on which we have so much other information
suggests how powerful diﬀerences in students’ neighborhood and family backgrounds can
be.
       Not surprisingly, earnings are higher among graduates in the earlier classes (students
further along in their careers), with the pattern of coeﬃcients exhibiting perfectly the
usual inverse J-shaped age-earnings profile. Indeed, the annual returns in the first five
post-college years are 6 percent, tapering oﬀ to 3.5 percent in the next quinquennium,
and 1.5 percent in each of the next two quinquennia.7 The adjusted female-male wage
gap is small for single women compared to single men (8 percent). Comparing married
   6
     The importance of access to this information should not be underestimated. Estimated earnings
diﬀerences across majors are substantially higher (e.g., the premium for “hard” business rises to 64
log points, that for engineering to 50 log points) when the information on science and math courses is
excluded from the equation in Column (1).
   7
     We explored this further by adding a quadratic in age in these equations. The coeﬃcient estimates
were unsurprisingly small and statistically insignificant.


                                                 [6]
women to married men the gender diﬀerential is a 25-percent wage disadvantage, even in
this sample of graduates of the same institution. Married men earn substantially more
than single men, while married women suﬀer a wage penalty compared to their single
counterparts (in data where we cannot observe a woman’s labor-force history).
      While the means by major implied that graduate degrees had little eﬀect on earnings,
the regressions on the micro data show that a doctorate or doctoral-equivalent degree
raises earnings by between 13 and 18 percent (depending on the specification), but a
Masters degree has no eﬀect on earnings. The implied return to a year spent obtaining
a Masters degree is slightly negative, while that to obtaining a doctorate (or equivalent)
is not large, perhaps only 4 to 6 percent. Remembering that this category includes
Ph.D. degrees and professional (J.D. and M.D.) degrees, the diﬀerences between these
results and others’ findings (going back as far as Ashenfelter and Mooney, 1968) about
the returns to obtaining a doctorate are slight.8
      The remaining control variables generally produce the expected results. Each addi-
tional hour of market work raises earnings by almost 3 percent (and, while a quadratic
term is statistically significant, its inclusion does not alter the other results). Neither
of the high-school achievement variables is highly significant, nor is college GPA. The
former may stem from the relative homogeneity of the sample, but the latter is more
surprising. While we saw that average GPA does not diﬀer across majors, it is surprising
that within a major going from a B to an A average raises annual earnings by only 7
percent.
      One of the final variables measured whether having paid part of the cost of college
through student loans provides otherwise identical graduates an incentive (conditional on
their major and their hours of work), to search for higher-paying jobs or put forth more
eﬀort per hour on the job. In this data set it does not; nor does the eﬀect become signifi-
cant when we fail to condition on hours of work. In this sample self-employed respondents
earn substantially more than otherwise identical graduates, but this result stems mainly
  8
    Excluding the indicators for advanced degree from our regressions has only minute eﬀects on the
estimated impacts of the indicators of college major on earnings.



                                                [7]
from their presence in certain high-paying occupations, particularly medicine and law.9
       There are two potentially serious diﬃculties with these estimates, neither of which
appears to have been addressed in the literature on the impact of college major on
earnings. The former, and probably the less important, is the possible correlation of
potential earnings with the choice of whether to participate in the labor market. This
is the standard self-selection problem that has been addressed repeatedly, initially by
Gronau (1974) and Heckman (1976). Although we do pay attention to it, it is unlikely
to be very important in these data, since the overwhelming majority of the graduates in
this sample are employed.
       The potentially more important diﬃculty with these estimates is that they are based
on a sample (respondents) that is self-selected, perhaps non-randomly. To examine this
potential problem, consider the probit results shown in Column (4) of Table 3. The de-
pendent variable indicates whether the person responded to the survey. The probit only
describes a small portion of the variation in the probability of response, but it is significant
overall. More important, there are diﬀerences across major in the probability of response:
The vector of ten indicators of college major is statistically significant (χ2 (10) = 30.37,
with the 1-percent level of significance being 23.21). We believe a similar problem per-
vades estimates throughout the literature on the impact of college major on earnings.
Hence the rest of this study is devoted to devising ways to account for the problem of
non-response bias, which appears to be present in the usual least-squares estimates, and
to determine how large the impact of this apparently non-ignorable non-response bias is
in our particular example. In doing so we lay out an approach to identifying the eﬀects of
non-response that may be useful in a wide variety of other problems in the social sciences.
   9
    When a large vector of indicators of detailed occupations is included in these regressions, the eﬀect
of being self-employed drops substantially, and the vector of coeﬃcients on the occupation indicators is
significant as a whole. Including it does not, however, greatly change the relative sizes of the estimated
impacts of college major on earnings.




                                                   [8]
4        A General Approach to Accounting for Non-ignorable
         Non-response Bias
The previously unaddressed problem that we face is how to account for the possible (and
in our sample demonstrated) nonrandomness in the probability of response to our survey.
We can capture the problem by the following three-equation model:

                          y1 = 1(x01 δ1 + ε1 > 0) — responded                                           (1)

                          y2 = 1(x02 δ2 + ε2 > 0) — employed if responded                               (2)

                     log y3 = x03 δ3 + ε3 if y2 = 1 — earnings                                          (3)

where (1(.)) denotes an indicator equaling one if the event in brackets is true.
       Problems of double selectivity have been addressed often in the empirical litera-
ture (e.g., Ham, 1982; Tunali, 1986), but little attention has been paid to the crucial
question of identification. In most cases either the estimator merely accounts for the
cross-correlation in the errors of the pair of equations or identifies the model through
nonlinearity in the specification of the selection equations. The crucial problem with this
double-selectivity model, as in the entire literature on selectivity, is identification.10 Se-
lectivity into the labor market among survey respondents is the less serious problem–we
can use the standard identifier of presence of young children, which arguably determines
labor-force participation but does not aﬀect earnings conditional on participation. Thus
the number of children and the age of the youngest child are included in x2 but not in
x3 in the log-earnings equation (3). The more serious issue is that of finding a variable
or set of variables that might identify whether a randomly chosen graduate has decided
to respond to the survey–some measure that is included in x1 but not in x2 or x3 . The
identifier obviously must, moreover, be something that is obtainable for all graduates in
the sampling frame, not merely for those who chose to respond.
       All of the variables included in the probits in Column (4) of Table 3 are included
  10
     In addition to the most well-studied problem, that of selectivity into the labor force, selectivity out
of longitudinal samples is one that has been analyzed in a similar framework and with equal or greater
diﬃculties of finding appropriate identifying variables (Falaris and Peters, 1998).


                                                    [9]
in the earnings equation (3), so none of them solves the problem. We believe that
in any randomly chosen sampling frame some of the individuals will be more likely to
respond because they have developed some ties to the organization that is requesting
their cooperation. We call an indicator of those ties an aﬃnity measure–an indicator
of the potential respondent’s aﬃnity for the people or group conducting the survey and
thus his/her potential interest in responding.11 This might be a commonality of religion,
evidence of participation in some group in common with the organization doing the
survey, or something else. In our case the Alumni Oﬃce of the University provided us
with information on whether or not an individual in the sampling frame is currently
a member of the University’s alumni association. The variable, TexasEx, is thus an
indicator variable that we believe will be correlated with the individual’s likelihood of
completing the survey.12
       One might argue that membership in the alumni association aﬀects wages–perhaps
membership generates contacts that help the members in their careers. We believe that
this argument is weaker than an objection to identification of female labor-force partici-
pation through the presence of young children. In that case one might reasonably claim
that employers, knowing that a woman has young children, will pay her lower wages
because of additional expected absences and a perceived lack of interest in her career. In
the end, whether this particular variable is a good identifier is ultimately a philosophi-
cal question. There is no doubt, however, that the aﬃnity measure helps to distinguish
between respondents and non-respondents: The membership rate among respondents is
25.0 percent, while among non-respondents it is only 13.0 percent.
       We believe that this approach to identification is generally applicable–in most social
surveys one has some inkling of which members of the sampling frame have a greater
or lesser aﬃnity for those people fielding the survey. Moreover, increased response rates
should be obtainable by (subtle) indications in introductions to the survey that might
  11
     We do not believe this general approach has been suggested before. Attempts have been made (e.g.,
Copas and Farwell, 1998) to use respondents’ expressed willingness to answer questions to extrapolate
to the characteristics of nonrespondents.
  12
     The alumni association of this institution calls itself the TexasExes.



                                                [10]
elicit the respondents’ aﬃnities for the researchers who are conducting it (university
aﬃliation in our case).13 In many cases at least some of the determinants of that aﬃnity
can be argued to be independent of the outcomes that the researcher is interested in
studying. An aﬃnity measure can thus be viewed as similar to Philipson’s (1997) proposal
to view survey response probabilities as something amenable to market forces, except
that here we have defined the data market as an implicit market in attachment to the
University (and to its researchers who conducted the survey).


5      Adjusting For Non-Response Bias
We estimate the model described in equations (1)-(3) under a variety of conditions. The
key feature of the model is that we only see earnings if y1 = 1 (responded) and y2 = 1
(working if responded). In addition we only see y2 if the individudal responded to the
survey. We first present the correction term under the general condition that (ε1 , ε2 , ε3 )
are jointly i.i.d. and then proceed to the particular assumptions used in this paper. The
general form of the correction term can be written in the usual way as,

                 E(log y3 |x, y1 = 1, y2 = 1) = x03 δ3 + E(ε3 |x, y1 = 1, y2 = 1)

                         E(ε3 |x, ε1 > −x01 δ1 , ε2 > −x02 δ2 ) = g(x01 δ1 , x02 δ2 )

where we are assuming that (ε1 , ε2 , ε3 ) are distributed indepenently of x. In particular,
                                             R∞ R∞     R∞
                                             −∞ −x02 δ2 −x01 δ1 ε3 f (ε1 , ε2 , ε3 )dε1 dε2 dε3
                   g(x01 δ1 , x02 δ2 )   =   R∞ R∞      R∞
                                              −∞ −x02 δ2 −x01 δ1 f (ε1 , ε2 , ε3 )dε1 dε2 dε3

Thus in the most general case we have the partially linear model,

                                     log y3 = x03 δ3 + g(x01 δ1 , x02 δ2 ) + ξ

                                E(ξ|x, y1 = 1, y2 = 1) = 0

                                V (ξ|x, y1 = 1, y2 = 1) = σξ2 (xi )
  13
    While this is generally true, the aﬃnity can occasionally backfire: One potential respondent wrote
back a six-page diatribe against the University, accusing it of spoiling his life.



                                                         [11]
In this model the slope coeﬃcients will be identified provided,

                                   E(x3 |x01 δ1 , x02 δ2 , y2 = 1) 6= x3

The reasoning for this is exactly analogous to that given in Newey (1988) and Ahn and
Powell (1993) where semi-parametric methods are employed to estimate the standard
sample selection model. Although assuming a particular distribution for the residuals
would seem to circumvent this requirement (in the case of normality at least), iden-
tification would be achieved through arbitrary choice of functional form, may not be
entirely convincing and in any event may give rise to imprecise estimates if there is little
nonlinearity in the correction term.
    We can specialize things a bit by assuming,

                                    E(ε3 |ε1 , ε2 ) = γ1 ε1 + γ2 ε2

in which case we get,

                      E(ε3 |x, ε1 > −x01 δ1 , ε2 > −x02 δ2 )
                                         2
                                         X
                                    =         γj E(εj |ε1 > −x01 δ1 , ε2 > −x02 δ2 )
                                        j=1

Assume joint normality of (ε1 , ε2 ), with variance-covariance matrix Σ normalized to be
such that the variances are 1 and the covariance is equal to the correlation ρ12 . Letting
the correlations between ε3 and εj be ρj3 (for j = 1, 2) and the standard deviation of ε3
be σ3 , as shown in the Appendix (using φ(.) and Φ(.) as the standard normal pdf and
cdf and φ(., .; Σ) as the joint normal pdf of (ε1 , ε2 )) we can write,
                                                     φ(c1 )(1 − Φ(c∗2 ))                  φ(c2 )(1 − Φ(c∗1 ))
E(ε3 |x, ε1 > −x01 δ1 , ε2 > −x02 δ2 ) = σ3 ρ13 R ∞ R ∞                      +σ3 ρ23 R ∞ R ∞
                                                 c1 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2 dε1          c1 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2 dε1

where we use the shorthand notation cj = −x0j δj ,
                                       c1 − ρ12 c2 ∗ c2 − ρ12 c1
                                 c∗1 = q           , c2 = q
                                          1 − ρ212          1 − ρ212

    In this paper we employ two- (or three-step) estimation procedures analogous to
the original suggestion of Heckman (1979) in the context of the simpler sample selection

                                                   [12]
model. We first estimate δ1 , δ2 and ρ12 using suitable models of response and the decision
to work, plug these into the two correction terms and then do OLS estimation of the
earnings equation for the subsample of responders who reported earnings. We use three
diﬀerent approaches that are described in the Appendix and describe them in decreasing
generality. The most eﬃcient and general procedure is based on estimating δ1 , δ2 and ρ12
jointly using maximum likelihood under the assumption of joint normality of (ε1 , ε2 ). This
involves taking into account the endogenous response in the estimation of the decision
to work - a Bivariate Probit model with selection. The likelihood for this is provided
in the Appendix. This is referred to as the “ρ free, two-step” approach. A second, less
eﬃcient approach allows for ρ12 to be free, but estimates δ1 , δ2 and ρ12 (based on the
likelihood for y1 and y2 ) using a three-step estimation method. First, δ1 is estimated by a
Probit model of response. Second, δ2 and ρ12 are estimated by a Probit model for y2 that
takes into account the endogenous response and takes the initial estimates of δ1 as given.
Then all of the estimates are used to construct the correction terms for inclusion in the
earnings equation, which is estimated in a third step by OLS. This approach is referred
to as the “ρ free, three-step” approach. The final method based on these correction terms
is obtained under the assumption that ρ12 = 0. In this case the correction terms simplify
to
                                                        φ(c1 )           φ(c2 )
             E(ε3 |x, ε1 > −x01 δ1 , ε2 > −x02 δ2 ) = σ3 ρ13   + σ3 ρ23
                                                       Φ(−c1 )          Φ(−c2 )
so that there are two of the usual sample selection corrections as in Heckman (1979) — one
accounting for endogenous response and the other accounting for the endogenous decision
to work. Additionally, the assumption that ρ12 = 0 implies that there is no sample
selection problem in estimating a model of the decision to work using only responders.
Hence we can estimate δ1 using a Probit model of response and δ2 using a Probit model
on the decision to work in the sample of reponders. This approach is referred to as the
“ρ = 0” method.
     As is usual in selection correction models we face the problem of correcting standard
errors for the use of estimates of parameters to estimate the correction terms. Under the
assumption that the correction terms have zero coeﬃcients, one can obtain appropriate

                                                [13]
standard errors using heteroskedasticity consistent robust standard errors. We use these
robust standard errors for the “ρ = 0” and “ρ free, three-step” methods. For the “ρ free,
two step” which is the most general and eﬃcient, we provide standard errors that correct
for the pre-estimation error in the construction of the correction terms. The method for
doing this is as described in Newey and McFadden (1994).
       Although we have argued that our exclusion restrictions are suﬃcient to allow iden-
tification of the parameters in the earnings equation, one may call into question the
normality assumption and the various linearities assumed in the above structure. It is
infeasible to perform a fully non-parametric approach to estimation of the earnings equa-
tion (using, say, the non-parametric approach in Das, Newey and Vella (2003), hereafter
DNV) due to the number of explanatory variables and the small sample size.14 It is
possible to gain some insight into identification as well as robustness by adapting the
framework of DNV to our case and then considering a restricted version of their methods
(as they indeed do in their empirical example). As noted in their paper, if we were to let
E(log y3 |x) = µ(x3 ), then conditional on responding and reporting positive earnings one
can write down the selection-corrected regression function as,

                   E(log y3 |x, y2 = 1, y1 = 1) = µ(x3 ) + λ(p1 (x1 ), p2 (x2 ))

                           p1 (x1 ) = P (y1 = 1|x) = P (y1 = 1|x1 ),

                           p2 (x2 ) = P (y2 = 1|x) = P (y2 = 1|x2 )

The pj (xj ) are the propensity scores for response and for working. As shown in DNV,
the function µ(x3 ) is identified provided there are variables aﬀecting the two propensity
scores that do not enter into µ(x3 ). This result is similar to the reasoning given above
for the linear model with a general correction term. Then DNV provide methods that
involve non-parametric estimation of the propensity scores and then estimation of the
earnings equation using methods for additive regression estimation, with the propensity
scores entering the selection correction.
  14
    See Vella (1998) for a discussion of propensity scores in estimating models involving one selection
equation.


                                                 [14]
   In our case things are complicated by the fact that, although we can identify and
estimate p1 (x1 ) through the response variable, the propensity score is not as easy to obtain
because we do not observe the decision to work for a random sample. We potentially
have sample selection bias in the estimation of the decision to work because this is only
observed for responders. Thus we cannot generally estimate p2 (x2 ) using the decision to
work variable for responders. In our case we are only able to estimate P (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x),
since we only observe the decision to work for responders. Note that under mild regularity
conditions,
                         P (y1 = 1 ∩ y2 = 1|x) = C(p1 (x1 ), p2 (x2 ))

where C is some function (referred to as a copula). Noting that,

                  P (y1 = 1 ∩ y2 = 1|x) = P (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x)P (y1 = 1|x)

then provided that C is suﬃciently regular we can solve r = C(p1 , p2 ) for p2 as a function
of p1 and r, as
                                        p2 = C −1 (p1 , r).

Using this we can then solve for p2 (x2 ) as follows,

                           p2 (x2 ) = C −1 (p1 (x1 ), p2|1 (x2 , p1 (x1 ))p1 (x1 ))

                  p2|1 (x2 , p1 (x1 )) = P (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x)

Thus we can rewrite the correction term as,

                                 λ∗ (p1 (x1 ), p2|1 (x2 , p1 (x1 )))

for some unknown function λ∗ .
   We employ a simplified three-step estimator based on the above heuristics. In the
first step we estimate p1 (x1 ) using a linear probability model of y1 on x1 . In the second
step we estimate a partially linear probability model to estimate p2|1 (x2 , p1 (x1 ))), which
is assumed to have the form,

                            p2|1 (x2 , p1 (x1 ))) = x02 θ2 + h(p1 (x1 ))

                                                [15]
This involves a regression of y2 (for responders) on x2 and polynomial functions of p̂1 (x1 )
(estimated in the first step). This is a kind of response bias (or selection) corrected version
of the decision to work. Finally, in the third step we also assume that the mean function
for earnings (for responding workers) is of the partially linear form, with µ(x3 ) = x03 θ3
and with the usable correction term λ∗ (p1 (x1 ), p2|1 (x2 , p1 (x1 ))) being approximated by
two-dimensional polynomials in p̂1 (x1 ) and p̂2|1 (x2 , p̂1 (x1 ))). This particular formulation
of the model reinforces the importance of having exclusion restrictions on x3 relative
to x2 and on x2 relative to x1 , since without such restrictions there would be perfect
multicollinearity in the second and third steps of the three step procedure. In what
follows we consider only the cases where the polynomials are all linear or all quadratic
in the various correction terms. Standard errors for these two estimation procedures (for
the earnings equation) are obtained by bootstrapping the entire three-step procedure
to take full account of the first two steps. A complete justification of this approach is
beyond the scope of this paper but is possible by adapting the results of DNV.


6     Estimates of the Complete Model of the Determi-
      nants of Earnings
Before we discuss the various estimates of the complete model, equations (1)-(3), that we
have proposed, we present estimates of a model of log-earnings in which the identification
comes solely oﬀ the nonlinearity in the probits that generate the selectivity parameters
λ1 and λ2 . The variables included in the vectors x1 and x2 are thus identical to those in
x3 , except that x2 also includes the variables describing the presence and age of children.
(The results are qualitatively the same if we exclude the children variables from x2 .)
This approach provides no real identification of the sample non-response; but it has been
employed in the general literature on selectivity (a problem first pointed out by Olsen,
1980). Here and in the rest of this section we present results only for the set of x3 that is
included in Column (1) of Table 3. As in that Table, the results here change little when
we use the expanded set of regressors.


                                              [16]
       The first thing to note from the estimates based on attempting to identify the impacts
on earnings oﬀ the nonlinearity in the selectivity models is the absolutely unsurprising
result that the R2 in this expanded equation is almost identical to the third significant
digit to that of the equation in Column (1) of Table 3, which includes all the same
variables but excludes these selectivity terms. What is diﬀerent, however, is nearly the
entire set of coeﬃcients. Most of these are far larger than their counterparts in Table
3, and they imply absurdly large diﬀerences in the returns to diﬀerent college majors.
Given the unadjusted means in Table 2 and the pattern of variation across majors in
the components of x3 , it is very diﬃcult to believe, for example, that social science
majors earn 5.96 (exp(1.546 + .239)) times as much as humanities majors, yet that is
what these estimates imply. Equally disturbing, the standard errors of the parameter
estimates have become much larger, to the point that few of these inflated parameter
estimates are statistically significant. At least in this case, trying to identify selectivity
oﬀ the nonlinearity in the probits in equations (1) and (2) leads to severe problems of
multicollinearity in estimating equation (3). These estimates make no sense.
       The second column of Table 4 shows the estimates of (3) based on identification that
comes from the exclusion of the aﬃnity indicator and the presence of children from (3),
and their inclusion in the selectivity equations (1) and (2) respectively. For this first
set of estimates we assume that the errors in (1) and (2) are independent–that the
correlation of the residuals in them is ρ = 0, so that we need not account for cross-
equation correlation in the selectivity equations. The selectivity term describing whether
the respondent works is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. This is not surprising–this
is a sample that is majority male, and the college-graduate women who are included
are more likely to be committed to working in the presence of young children than are
American women generally.15
       The selectivity correction for non-response bias has a significant eﬀect on the respon-
dent’s log-earnings. Conditional on the observable variables, however, it appears that
  15
   68 percent of the female graduates with children under age 6 are employed, while 77 percent of those
whose youngest child is between 6 and 18 are employed.



                                                 [17]
there is negative selectivity: Those who are predicted to be more likely to respond based
on unobservable characteristics earn less than otherwise (observably) identical individu-
als. Most important, though, is that accounting for non-response does matter, and our
method of identifying it is useful.
    The substantive focus is on the diﬀerences in earnings across majors. Here the results
vary somewhat from the least-squares estimates shown in Table 3; but although ac-
counting for selectivity helps describe earnings, the changes in the implied diﬀerences in
earnings across majors are not large. The earnings diﬀerentials are generally on the order
of 10 to 20 percent smaller than was suggested by the least-squares estimates. Also, their
levels of statistical significance (tested against the excluded category, education major)
are somewhat lower than implied by the least-squares estimates. Nonetheless, diﬀerences
between the (adjusted) highest-paying majors–“hard” business and engineering–and
the (adjusted) lowest-paying majors–humanities and education–are highly significant
statistically.
         The coeﬃcient estimates on the other variables change even less from their coun-
terparts in Table 3, and there is no general pattern of increase or decrease. Otherwise
identical single women earn 9 percent less than men; a two-standard error increase in
background income (income in the graduate’s high-school district) generates a 12 per-
cent increase in earnings above that of an otherwise identical graduate; and there is
a 28 (8) percent marriage premium (penalty) for men (women). As before, there is a
roughly 18 percent premium to earning a doctorate (not a great rate of return, even on
the three-year law degree that is included in this category), and having only a Masters
degree has essentially no impact on earnings (other than the possible option value of
allowing pursuit of a doctorate). Each additional weekly hour of work has a large eﬀect
on weekly earnings. Moreover, as in the least squares estimates, adding a quadratic in
weekly hours to these equations produced the inverse-U shaped relationship that has
been noted for broad samples of the labor force (Biddle and Zarkin, 1989), although it
did not qualitatively aﬀect the other estimates.
    Columns (3) and (4) of Table 4 list the estimates of equation (3) under diﬀerent

                                           [18]
approaches to estimation when the assumption that ρ = 0 is relaxed.16 In Column
(3) we add correction terms computed from joint estimates of (1) and (2), including
in each of x1 and x2 the TexasEx and children variables respectively, using the two-step
procedure. In Column (4) the correction terms are estimated by the three-step procedure,
first estimating δ1 and then using those estimates to derive estimates of δ2 and ρ12 . These
are then included in the log-earnings regression.
       The changes between the estimates of δ3 when we relax the assumption that ρ = 0
diﬀer so minutely from those produced under this assumption as not to merit specific com-
ment. Typically there are diﬀerences only in the third significant decimal place between
the parameter estimates in Columns (3) and (4) and those in Column (2). Moreover, the
explanatory power of the equation increases by less than .001. One must infer that in this
example the correlation between the errors in predicting non-response and in predicting
whether a respondent works is unrelated to the workers’ earnings (conditional on their
other characteristics).
       The estimates shown in Columns (5) and (6) of Table 4 are based on the second
general approach to estimating δ3 that we have derived–-the estimation of propensity
scores describing the probabilities of non-response and employment. In Column (5) we
specify the propensity scores as linear functions of the underlying variables and enter the
estimated scores into the log-earnings regression. Comparing these estimates to those
in Columns (2)—(4), we see that they are generally larger (although in most cases the
earnings diﬀerences by major are still not quite so pronounced as they were in the least-
squares estimates shown in Column (1) of Table 3). As with the extension of the standard
selectivity correction, this alternative approach too does not greatly aﬀect our inferences
about the impacts of the variables of interest.
       The final column in Table 4 shows the results of estimating the log-earnings equation
when we use the estimated propensity scores for non-response and employment based
on quadratics describing the scores (and thus also including an interaction term between
  16
    The programs required to estimate the models with ρ = 0, ρ 6= 0, and those based on propensity
scores are available upon request from the authors.



                                               [19]
the estimated linear scores for non-response and employment). These estimates, which
we view as the most reliable among those presented in the two Tables, change the results
from Column (5) so that the adjusted earnings diﬀerences across majors are with two
exceptions even less than those shown in Column (2).
       Excluding the essentially unidentified estimates in Column (1) of Table 4, the dif-
ferences that we have found between the most extreme sets of estimates matter but are
not qualitatively very large. A fair conclusion is that, while it makes sense to undertake
the adjustments for both non-response bias and labor-force selectivity, in this sample the
non-randomness implied by behavior along both margins is nearly independent of the
diﬀerences in earnings across college major. The techniques are generally applicable and
useful in a wide variety of problems where one believes there is non-response bias in the
data and where one can obtain an aﬃnity measure to identify it; but while they do alter
our results somewhat, the qualitative changes are not large.


7        How Large Are Earnings Diﬀerences by Major?
There is immense popular discussion and even joking about the poor economic prospects
of students who choose to major in the liberal arts–particularly the humanities and
the less rigorous social sciences.17 The evidence in Table 2 on mean earnings by college
major suggests these diﬀerences are indeed huge–with earnings in the highest-paying
major being roughly three times those in the lowest-paying. The first column of Table
5 presents the means of the logarithms of earnings by major. The variation even in the
means of log-earnings is immense, with the implied mean in the highest-paying major
(“hard” business) being nearly 150 percent more than that in the lowest-paying major
(education). The standard deviation of these logarithmic means is 0.305–a substantial
amount of inequality, considering that the grade-point averages do not diﬀer across major,
that the students’ average ages are the same, and that they all graduated from the same
  17
    On the Tonight Show (September 18, 2003) Jay Leno noted that philosophy majors spend much of
class time debating whether the glass is half-full or half-empty. This prepares them for their subsequent
careers–as waiters.



                                                  [20]
institution.
       Looking only at the raw means is very misleading. As Table 2 showed too, the
qualifications that students bring to the university, including the proxy for their raw
ability, SAT, their background and demographic characteristics, diﬀer substantially across
majors. So too do their post-college academic attainment and the eﬀort they put forth
on their jobs. The second and third columns of Table 5 repeat the coeﬃcients on the
indicator variables in the equations describing log-earnings (from Column (1) of Table
3 and Column (6) of Table 4). Almost exactly half of the pay premia in the highest-
paying majors–“hard” business and engineering in particular–is accounted for by the
diﬀerences in endowments and post-college activities. The role of diﬀerences in hours
worked is particularly large. When these adjustments are taken into account, the degree
of inter-major variation in earnings, as measured by the standard deviations of (adjusted)
log-earnings, falls to 0.153. A remarkably large fraction of the perceived diﬀerences
in earnings among workers who made diﬀerent curriculum choices while in college are
not inherent in those choices.18 An additional 10 percent of the remaining variation in
adjusted earnings across majors is accounted for when we adjust for the non-response
that created a non-randomly selected sample.
       All of the diﬀerences in earnings by college major are conditional on the individuals
having chosen their major. We have not identified what earnings diﬀerences would be if
there were random assignment to majors–an experiment that does not seem possible.
We have ignored selectivity into major that is related to unobservable characteristics,
partly in order to concentrate on identifying non-response bias, partly because we do not
believe that we can find good identifiers for choice of major in our data.19 Whether the
estimated diﬀerences in relative earnings across majors are larger or smaller than what
would be observed with random assignment is not clear–it depends on whether there is
  18
     The inference would not be changed greatly if we also accounted for diﬀerences in the probability
of employment by major: The only significant diﬀerence in this sample is between education majors (a
lower employment probability) and all others.
  19
     Arcidiacono (2004) uses the NELS data to identify the choice of major and gauge the eﬀect of
endogenous choice of major on earnings diﬀerences among majors (four broad categories) twelve years
after graduation.



                                                [21]
positive or negative selection into majors on the unobservables. So long as the selectivity
is positive, as seems likely, even the much reduced estimated relative earnings diﬀerences
across majors shown in the final column of Table 4 overestimate the diﬀerences that
would be observed if students chose their majors randomly.


8    Conclusions and Future Uses
Using a survey that has enabled us to obtain more background information on students
than acquired heretofore, we have examined the relationship between college major and
labor-market success, as proxied by earnings. The estimates demonstrate that much
of the diﬀerences among individuals that appear to make some majors so much more
attractive than others are uninformative about the value added by particular majors.
Rather, we have found that over half of the variance in the logarithm of earnings across
majors is accounted for by sorting by ability, high-school performance, parents’ economic
status, students’ demographic characteristics, and the amount of labor supplied to the
market. The choices that students make about their college major do aﬀect their earnings,
but the impacts of the choices are not extreme.
        Although this examination of the relationship between college major and earnings
improves on certain aspects of the literature in this area, it has the drawback of being
based on only one institution. This drawback allowed us to obtain more pre-college
background information and college course information than have been available in any
previous study, at the potential cost of having a sample that may not be representative
of all U.S. college graduates. The next step for research in this area is to obtain represen-
tative samples of graduates from a large enough group of representative universities with
the same detailed information that we have obtained to allow this kind of estimation to
be conducted accounting for potential diﬀerences that are attributable to inter-university
diﬀerences in choice of major.
        In order to infer the impacts on earnings from these survey results we needed to
account for possible non-response bias in our sample. To do so we had to develop a way of


                                            [22]
identifying the selectivity that is inherent in any social-science sampling procedure. The
identifier we use is the aﬃnity of the potential respondent to the survey organization, in
our case indicated by the potential respondent’s membership in the University’s alumni
association. An aﬃnity identifier can, we believe, be developed analogously in many
surveys, with the results usable in inferring the importance of non-response bias. While
it was not very important in our sample, even though the identifier was quite successful,
it may be in other cases.
        The aﬃnity-identifier solution to the problem of non-ignorable non-response bias
leads to the realization that interactions between potential respondents and the particular
identity of those conducting a survey generate a larger problem in drawing inferences from
that survey. Altering the identity of the organization or individual conducting a survey
will alter the mix of respondents (and perhaps too the veracity, or at least the care, with
which they respond). That in turn will generate statistics describing the survey results
that depend on choices made about the identity of the surveyor. The role of aﬃnity in
survey research is a potentially extremely fruitful area for investigation.




                                            [23]
REFERENCES
Hyungtaik Ahn and James Powell, “Semiparametric Estimation of Censored Selection
    Models with a Nonparametric Selection Mechanism,” Journal of Econometrics, 58
    (July 1993): 3-29.

Joseph Altonji, “The Eﬀects of High School Curriculum on Education and Labor Market
    Outcomes,” Journal of Human Resources, 30 (Summer 1995): 409-38.

Peter Arcidiacono, “Ability Sorting and the Returns to College Major,” Journal of Econometrics,
    121 (July 2004): 343-75.

Orley Ashenfelter and Joseph Mooney, “Graduate Education, Ability and Earnings,”
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 50 (February 1968): 78-86.

Jeﬀ Biddle and Gary Zarkin, “Choice Among Wage-Hours Packages: An Empirical In-
    vestigation of Male Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 7 (October 1989):
    415-37.

Dan Black, Lowell Taylor and Seth Sanders, “The Economic Reward to Studying Eco-
    nomics,” Economic Inquiry, 43 (July 2003) 365-77.

William Bowen and Derek Bok, The Shape of the River. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
    versity Press, 1998.

Andrew Copas and Vern Farwell, “Dealing with Non-Ignorable Non-Response by Using
    an ‘Enthusiasm-to-Respond’ Variable,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society A,
    161 (1998): 385-96.

Mitali Das, Whitney Newey and Francis Vella, “Nonparametric Estimation of Sample
    Selection Models,” Review of Economic Studies, 70 (January 2003): 33-58.

Evangelos Falaris and Elizabeth Peters, “Survey Attrition and Schooling Choices,”
    Journal of Human Resources, 33 (Spring 1998): 531-54.


                                        [24]
Barry Gerhart, “Gender Diﬀerences in Current and Starting Salaries: The Role of Per-
    formance, College Major, and Job Title,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
    43 (April 1990): 418-33.

Jeﬀ Grogger and Eric Eide, “Changes in College Skills and the Rise in the College Wage
    Premium,” Journal of Human Resources, 30 (1995): 280-310.

Reuben Gronau, “Wage Comparisons: A Selectivity Bias,” Journal of Political Economy,
    82 (Nov.-Dec. 1974): 1119-43.

John Ham, “Estimation of a Labour Supply Model with Censoring Due to Unemploy-
    ment and Underemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 49 (July 1982): 335-
    354.

James Heckman, “The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Truncation, Sam-
    ple Selection and Limited Dependent Variables, and a Simple Estimator for Such
    Models,” Annals of Economic and Social Measurement, 5 (Fall 1976): 475-92.

––––––-, “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica, 47 (Jan-
    uary 1979): 153-61.

Lois Joy, “Salaries of Recent Male and Female College Graduates: Educational and La-
    bor Market Eﬀects,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 56 (July 2003): 606-
    21.

Roderick Little and Donald Rubin, Statistical Analysis with Missing Data. New York:
    Wiley, 1987.

Linda Datcher Loury, “The Gender Earnings Gap among College-Educated Workers,
    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 50 (July1997): 580-93.

Whitney Newey, “Two Step Series Estimation of Sample Selection Models,” Unpub-
    lished Paper, MIT 1988.



                                        [25]
––––––- and Daniel McFadden, “Large Sample Estimation and Hypothesis Test-
    ing,” in Robert Engle and Daniel McFadden, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4.
    Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1994, 2111-2245.

Randall Olsen, “A Least Squares Correction for Selectivity Bias,” Econometrica, 48
    (1980): 1815-20.

Tomas Philipson, “Data Markets and the Production of Surveys,” Review of Economic Studies,
    64 (January 1997): 47-72.

Heather Rose and Julian Betts, “The Eﬀect of High School Courses on Earnings,”
    Unpublished paper, Public Policy Institute of California, 2002.

Insan Tunali, “A General Structure for Models of Double-Selection and an Application
    to a Joint Migration/Earnings Process with Remigration,” Research in Labor Economics,
    8 (1986): 235-82.

Sarah Turner and William Bowen, “Choice of Major: The Changing (Unchanging)
    Gender Gap,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 52 (January 1999): 289-313.

Francis Vella, “Estimating Models with Sample Selection Bias: A Survey,” Journal of Human Resources,
    33 (Winter 1998): 127-69.

David Wise, “Academic Achievement and Job Performance,” American Economic Review,
    65 (June 1975): 350-66.

Jeﬀrey Wooldridge, Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge,
    MA: MIT Press, 2002.




                                        [26]
Appendix
Calculation of Correction Terms
Under the condition that E(ε3 |ε1 , ε2 ) = γ1 ε1 + γ2 ε2 one can characterize the coeﬃcients
(using the usual linear projection formula) as,
                                Ã         !                Ã                   !
                                    γ1            σ3           ρ13 − ρ12 ρ23
                                              =
                                    γ2          1 − ρ212       ρ23 − ρ12 ρ13

To find the correction terms E(εj |ε1 > c1 , ε2 > c2 ) we note that the density of ε1 |ε1 >
c1 , ε2 > c2 is given by,
                 R∞                                                                 q
                 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2
                                            φ(ε1 )(1 − Φ((c2 − ρ12 ε1 ) / 1 − ρ212 )
             R∞ R∞                        =        R∞R∞
              c1 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2 dε1           c1 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2 dε1

Then,

                E(ε1 |ε1 > c1 , ε2 > c2 )
                                    R∞                                         q
                                 ε1 φ(ε1 )(1 − Φ((c2 − ρ12 ε1 ) / 1 − ρ212 )dε1
                                    c1
                            =            R∞ R∞
                                          c1 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2 dε1
                              φ(c1 )(1 − Φ(c∗2 )) + ρ12 φ(c2 )(1 − Φ(c∗1 ))
                            =         R∞ R∞
                                       c1 c2 φ(ε1 , ε2 ; Σ)dε2 dε1

with the last line following using integration by parts. Then using a similar expression
for E(ε2 |ε1 > c1 , ε2 > c2 ) and the definition of (γ1 , γ2 ) we can derive the correction terms
detailed in the text.

Preliminary Estimation
Here we derive the likelihood for (y1 , y2 ) under the assumption that (ε1 , ε2 ) ∼ N(0, Σ).
We can write the joint density of (y1 , y2 ) as,

                      f (y1 , y2 |x1 , x2 ) = f (y1 |x1 , x2 )f (y2 |y1 = 1, x1 , x2 )y1

where the second term on the right reflects the fact that we only see y2 when y1 = 1.
Now it is straightforward to see that,

                         f (y1 |x) = P (y1 = 1|x1 )y1 P (y1 = 0|x1 )1−y1
                                         = Φ(x01 δ1 )y1 (1 − Φ(x01 δ1 ))1−y1

Next for y2 we have that we can write,

                                                ε2 = ρ12 ε1 + v2

                                                      [27]
where v2 is indepenent of ε1 and v2 ∼ N(0, 1 − ρ212 ). Then

        P (y2 = 1|ε1 , x) = E(1(x02 δ2 + ε2 > 0)|ε1 , x)
               = E(1(x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 + v2 > 0)|ε1 , x) = Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )
        P (y2 = 0|ε1 , x) = 1 − Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )

Then,

      P (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x) = E(1(x02 δ2 + ε2 > 0)|ε1 > −x01 δ1 , x)
               = E(Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )|ε1 > −x01 δ1 , x)
      P (y2 = 0|y1 = 1, x) = 1 − E(Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )|ε1 > −x01 δ1 , x)

where,

                      E(Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )|ε1 > −x01 δ1 , x)
                               Z ∞
                        1
                   =                    Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )φ(ε1 )dε1
                     Φ(x01 δ1 ) −x01 δ1
                                        = P (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x)

with P (y2 = 0|y1 = 1, x) being defined similarly. Note that these integrals need to be
computed numerically using quadrature. Then we have,

                f (y2 |y1 = 1, x) = P (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x)y2 P (y2 = 0|y1 = 1, x)1−y2

and the joint density of y2 , y1 is,

                               f (y1 , y2 |x) = f (y1 )f (y2 |y1 = 1, x)y1

   The method referred to as the “ρ free, two step” approach involves estimating δ1 , δ2
and ρ12 jointly by maximizing the full log-likelihood
                                                     n
                                                     X
                          log L(δ1 , δ2 , ρ12 ) =          log(f (y1i , y2i |x1i , x2i ))
                                                     i=1

The method referred to as “ρ free, three step” approach involves estimating δ1 by maxi-
mizing,
                                                     n
                                                     X
                                    log L(δ1 ) =            log f (y1i |x1i )
                                                      i=1

and then estimating δ2 and ρ12 jointly by maximizing,
                                                     n
                                                     X
                           log L(δ2 , ρ12 |δ̂1 ) =         y1i log fˆ(y2 |y1 = 1, x)
                                                     i=1



                                                      [28]
where,

              fˆ(y2 |y1 = 1, x) = P̂ (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x)y2 P̂ (y2 = 0|y1 = 1, x)1−y2
                                           Z ∞
                                    1
      P̂ (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x) =        0
                                                   Φ((x02 δ2 + ρ12 ε1 ) /(1 − ρ212 )1/2 )φ(ε1 )dε1
                                Φ(x1 δ̂1 )  −x0 δ̂
                                              1 1

                        P̂ (y2 = 0|y1 = 1, x) = 1 − P̂ (y2 = 1|y1 = 1, x)

For both of these methods, as noted in Wooldridge (2002), identification of δ2 is on a
more solid foundation (other than through functional form assumptions) if one can have
an exclusion restriction such that there is one variable in x1 that is not in x2 . This is
achieved in our case by having the aﬃnity measure in x1 but not in x2 .
   In the third case where “ρ = 0” it is easy to see that the joint likelihood simplifies.
One can estimate δ1 by maximizing,
                                                    n
                                                    X
                                   log L(δ1 ) =           log f (y1i |x1i )
                                                    i=1

and then estimate δ2 by maximizing,
                                   n
                                   X                          y2i
                    log L(δ2 ) =         y1i log(Φ (x02i δ2 )       (1 − Φ (x02i δ2 ))1−y2i
                                   i=1

which are a simple Probit model for y1 on the whole sample and a Probit model for y2
on the sample for whom y1i = 1.




                                                    [29]
Table 1. Sampling Frame and Response Rate by Major

                                      No. in Sampling       No. of         Response
                                              Frame      Respondents         Rate
                                                                           (percent)
                                                  (1)             (2)        (3)
 Major
Architecture and Fine Arts                       422              74            17.5
Business—Softa                                   629             164            26.1
Business—Hard                                   1026             271            26.4
Communications                                   997             233            23.4
Education                                        544             128            23.5
Engineering                                      863             264            30.6
Humanities                                       759             156            20.6
Natural Sciences and                            1188             306            25.8
 Pharmacology
Nursing and Social Work                          165              50            30.3
Plan IIb                                         138              45            32.6
Social Sciencesc                                1239             324            26.2

TOTAL                                           7970            2015            25.3

In Tables 1-5:
a
The “Hard” business majors are accounting, actuarial science, business engineering, data processing, finance,
management information science, and a few miscellaneous descriptions. The “Soft” business majors are all the rest,
mostly general business, management and marketing.
b
    A special multidisciplinary honors major.
c
    Anthropology, economics, geography, government, psychology and sociology.
Table 2. Means of Salary and Major Control Variables by Major (Standard Deviations in
Parentheses)

                                                                HS                   Upper
                                                               Area                 Div. Sci.
                      Current             Percent   College   Income     Weekly     & Math      Masters or   Cell
                     Salary ($)   SAT     Female     GPA        ($)      Hours      Grades      Doctorate    Size
           Major

     Architecture,    53,214      1,184     0.536     3.139     38,772     41.804       2.562        0.268   56
        Fine Arts     (31,553)    (151)    (.503)    (.420)   (12,619)   (10.705)      (.729)       (.447)

   Business--Softa   109,052      1,145    0.478     2.817      39,071     43.284       2.557        0.313   134
                     (128,053)    (119)    (.501)    (.431)   (13,092)   (14.028)      (.684)       (.466)

  Business--Hard     124,372      1,185    0.318     3.055      39.612     45.247       2.888        0.296   223
                     (136,368)    (135)    (.467)    (.457)   (14,147)   (13.816)      (.616)       (.458)

 Communications       77,874      1,128     0.599     2.891     37,968     40.967       2.753        0.209   182
                      (93,839)    (135)    (.491)    (.439)   (14,335)   (14.306)      (.719)       (.408)

        Education     43,233      1,114     0.791     3.045     40,551     40.767       2.832        0.267   86
                      (24,488)    (118)    (.409)    (.425)   (14,534)   (12.311)      (.815)       (.445)

      Engineering    102,293      1,237    0.185     3.026      39,609     44.833       2.988        0.302   222
                      (90,714)    (124)    (.389)    (.494)   (13,963)   (11.908)      (.529)       (.460)

      Humanities      56,524      1,190     0.524     3.064     40,259     42.427       2.777        0.516   124
                      (37,058)    (154)    (.501)    (.550)   (13,492)   (15.255)      (.987)       (.502)

 Natural Sciences,    91,796      1,194    0.542     2.984      38,173     42.119       2.900        0.392   260
   Pharmacology      (104,227)    (136)    (.499)    (.493)   (14,517)   (14.260)      (.620)       (.489)

  Nursing, Social     48,900      1,128    0.850     3.055      38,095     33.850       3.006        0.425   40
           Work       (36,805)    (102)    (.362)    (.462)   (11,490)   (16.143)      (.738)       (.501)

          Plan IIb   128,290      1,364    0.579     3.626      46,901     43.605       3.449        0.605   38
                     (177,275)    (120)    (.500)    (.281)   (17,656)   (19.748)      (.989)       (.495)

  Social Sciencesc    79,805      1,138    0.500     2.851      39,927     40.030       2.519        0.432   266
                      (82,540)    (147)    (.501)    (.542)   (14,733)   (15.436)      (.574)       (.496)


        All Fields    88,819      1,178     0.477     2.985     39,408     42.316       2.829        0.351   1631
                     (101,388)    (143)    (.500)    (.498)   (14,200)   (14.303)      (.477)       (.477)
Table 3. Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Earnings, and Probit Estimates of
Survey Responsea
                                      Log(Current Earnings) Respond=1
                                         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)

   Major:      Architecture and Fine   0.165     0.179     0.170     -0.044
                                Arts   (2.26)    (2.43)    (2.34)    (1.610)

                     Business---Soft   0.413     0.421     0.417      0.046
                                       (5.37)    (5.50)    (5.56)    (1.720)

                    Business---Hard    0.522     0.514     0.501      0.038
                                       (7.07)    (6.89)    (6.83)    (1.450)

                   Communications      0.366     0.359     0.347      0.023
                                       (5.09)    (4.98)    (4.95)    (1.000)

                        Engineering    0.372     0.367     0.367      0.086
                                       (3.94)    (3.85)    (3.94)    (2.510)

                        Humanities     0.097      0.100    0.099      -0.013
                                       (1.35)    (1.400)   (1.39)    (0.540)

                             Plan II   0.393     0.406     0.418      0.087
                                       (2.74)    (2.79)    (2.92)    (2.080)

                    Social Sciences    0.314     0.307     0.300      0.052
                                       (4.84)    (4.72)    (4.77)    (2.280)

                   Natural Sciences,   0.293     0.299     0.294      0.040
                     Pharmacology      (3.72)    (3.80)    (3.83)    (1.520)

              Nursing, Social Work     0.212     0.229     0.230      0.061
                                       (2.37)    (2.62)    (2.71)    (1.570)

                      Class of 1980     0.644     0.680     0.645     0.025
                                       (11.91)   (11.42)   (11.03)   (1.610)

                      Class of 1985     0.571     0.590     0.559     -0.009
                                       (11.35)   (11.43)   (10.97)   (0.610)

                      Class of 1990     0.495     0.507     0.488     0.041
                                       (10.45)   (10.57)   (10.29)   (2.650)

                      Class of 1995     0.319    0.322     0.313      0.033
                                       (7.000)   (7.08)    (6.89)    (2.200)

                               GPA     0.024     0.057     0.067      0.027
                                       (0.70)    (1.56)    (1.86)    (2.590)
Table 3, cont.
                               Log(Current Earnings)               Respond=1
                               (1)           (2)          (3)               (4)
      Upper Div. Sci. &      0.0014        0.0019       0.0021            0.0001
          Math Credits       (1.22)        (1.61)       (1.77)            (0.210)

      Upper Div. Sci. &      0.029         0.027         0.023             0.002
          Math Grades        (1.74)        (1.65)        (1.43)           (0.510)

       HS Area Income        0.003         0.003         0.002             0.001
                ($000)       (3.06)        (2.34)        (2.15)           (1.920)

                Masters      -0.019        -0.020        -0.013
                             (0.51)        (0.55)        (0.34)

              Doctorate      0.172         0.158         0.128
                             (2.99)        (2.72)        (2.20)

                Married      0.256         0.252         0.252
                             (5.50)        (5.45)       (5.470)

                Female       -0.082        -0.082        -0.071            0.031
                             (1.72)        (1.68)        (1.48)           (3.060)

       Married*Female        -0.277        -0.276        -0.284
                             (4.54)        (4.55)        (4.69)

         Weekly Hours        0.028         0.028         0.028
                            (13.87)       (13.79)       (13.94)

                   SAT                   -0.00012       -0.0011
                                           (0.83)        (0.72)

          HS Percentile                   -0.0026       -0.0024
                                           (1.76)        (1.69)

          Student Loan                                   0.016
                                                         (0.49)

         Self Employed                                   0.224
                                                         (3.90)

                      N       1501         1501          1501              7970

                     R2      0.477         0.481         0.490
a
    Robust t-tatistics in parentheses. The excluded major is Education.
Table 4. Regression Estimates of the Determinants of Earnings with Correction Terms (N=1501)a
                                  Functional            ρ free,   ρ free,   Propensity   Propensity
                                    Form                 two-     three-       Score        Score
                                                ρ=0      step      step       Linear      Quadratic
                                     (1)         (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)          (6)
Major:        Architecture and     -1.025      0.178    0.177     0.175     0.188        0.162
                     Fine Arts     (0.96)      (2.37)   (2.28)    (2.33)    (2.52)       (2.04)

               Business---Soft      1.504      0.389    0.389     0.389     0.396        0.378
                                    (1.52)     (5.05)   (4.99)    (5.04)    (5.12)       (4.80)

               Business---Hard      1.417      0.503    0.503     0.502     0.509        0.489
                                    (1.74)     (6.73)   (6.41)    (6.73)    (6.79)       (6.36)

              Communications        0.919      0.350    0.350     0.349     0.361        0.342
                                    (1.80)     (4.72)   (4.62)    (4.70)    (4.86)       (4.47)

                   Engineering      2.313      0.336    0.336     0.336     0.339        0.316
                                    (1.32)     (3.47)   (3.38)    (3.47)    (3.50)       (3.28)

                   Humanities      -0.239      0.099    0.099     0.098     0.110        0.086
                                   (0.77)      (1.38)   (1.36)    (1.35)    (1.51)       (1.16)

                        Plan II     2.314      0.333    0.334     0.333     0.363        0.338
                                    (1.33)     (2.23)   (2.23)    (2.23)    (2.43)       (2.25)

               Social Sciences      1.546      0.292    0.292     0.292     0.298        0.279
                                    (1.39)     (4.50)   (4.43)    (4.50)    (4.57)       (4.18)

              Natural Sciences,     1.234      0.270    0.270     0.270     0.285        0.265
                Pharmacology        (1.44)     (3.39)   (3.28)    (3.39)    (3.56)       (3.27)

               Nursing, Social      1.585      0.162    0.162     0.159     0.213        0.196
                        Work        (1.26)     (1.66)   (1.64)    (1.64)    (2.20)       (2.03)

                 Class of 1980      1.229      0.619    0.619     0.617     0.655        0.646
                                    (2.25)     (9.21)   (8.96)    (9.26)    (10.47)      (10.41)

                 Class of 1985      0.325      0.568    0.568     0.566     0.594        0.584
                                    (1.65)     (9.83)   (9.55)    (9.76)    (10.91)      (10.47)

                 Class of 1990      1.447      0.461    0.462     0.460     0.494        0.488
                                    (1.65)     (8.21)   (8.14)    (8.31)    (9.41)       (9.36)

                 Class of 1995      1.091      0.281    0.282     0.279     0.332        0.326
                                    (1.52)     (4.33)   (4.15)    (4.34)    (5.66)       (5.61)

                          GPA       0.699      0.022    0.022     0.023     0.006        0.007
                                    (1.26)     (0.58)   (0.55)    (0.61)    (0.17)       (0.17)

            Upper Div. Sci. &
                Math Credits        0.003      0.001    0.001     0.001     0.002        0.002
                                    (1.60)     (1.08)   (0.47)    (1.08)    (1.27)       (1.31)

            Upper Div. Sci. &       0.086      0.027    0.027     0.027     0.027        0.027
                 Math Grades        (1.60)     (1.63)   (1.58)    (1.63)    (1.62)       (1.65)
Table 4, cont.
                                     Functional                                     Propensity   Propensity
                                       Form                  ρ free,     ρ free,       Score        Score
                                                   ρ=0      two-step   three-step     Linear      Quadratic
                                        (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
                   HS Area Income     -0.012      0.004      0.004       0.004      0.004        0.004
                            ($000)    (0.82)      (3.31)     (1.49)      (3.32)     (3.22)       (3.14)

                          Masters     -0.026      -0.027    -0.027      -0.028      -0.015       -0.015
                                      (0.67)      (0.71)    (0.69)      (0.73)      (0.40)       (0.39)

                         Doctorate     0.167      0.163      0.164      0.163       0.170        0.171
                                       (2.89)     (2.82)     (2.80)     (2.82)      (2.96)       (2.98)

                          Married      0.244      0.245      0.246      0.244       0.266        0.292
                                       (5.02)     (5.05)     (4.38)     (5.01)      (5.59)       (5.93)

                           Female      0.674      -0.094     -0.094     -0.093      -0.102       -0.104
                                       (0.99)     (1.85)     (1.84)     (1.82)      (2.02)       (2.03)

                   Married*Female     -0.247      -0.243     -0.244     -0.241      -0.306       -0.309
                                      (3.27)      (3.23)     (2.83)     (3.17)      (4.22)       (4.29)

                     Weekly Hours      0.028       0.027     0.027       0.027      0.028        0.027
                                      (14.03)     (13.90)   (13.99)     (13.89)     (13.92)      (13.91)

                                λ1
                                       9.332      -0.185     -0.215     -0.222
      Correction
       factors:




                                       (1.11)     (1.80)     (1.81)     (1.92)

                                λ2    -0.129      -0.131    -0.146      -0.164
                                      (0.59)      (0.60)    (0.62)      (0.72)
    Propensity
     Scores:           Responded                                                    0.452        0.681
                                                                                    (1.91)       (0.29)

                         Working                                                    -0.199       3.994
                                                                                    (0.68)       (1.69)

                      Responded2                                                                 0.661
                                                                                                 (0.26)

                        Working2                                                                 -2.319
                                                                                                 (1.84)

                   Responded*
                    Working                                                                      -0.629
                                                                                                 (0.33)

                         Constant     -7.014       9.077     9.070       9.070      8.871        7.069
                                      (0.49)      (38.25)   (35.96)     (38.90)     (27.84)      (6.23)

                              R2     0.478     0.479       0.479         0.479      0.479        0.481
a
 Robust t-statistics in parentheses. Robust and correct t-statistics in parentheses for the efficient model. The
excluded major is Education.
Table 5. Earnings Differential by Major (Log Points), Unadjusted and Adjusted

          Major             Raw Differential Adjusted Differential Adjusted Differential
                                               Based on Table 3      Based on Table 4
                                   (1)                (2)                   (3)

  Architecture, Fine Arts         0.212               .165                  0.162
     Business--Softa              0.722               .413                  0.378
     Business--Hard               0.899               .522                  0.489
    Communications                0.393               .366                  0.342
        Education                 0.000               .000                  0.000
       Engineering                0.801               .372                  0.316
       Humanities                 0.210               .097                  0.086
          Plan II                 0.614               .393                  0.338
     Social Sciences              0.410               .314                  0.279
    Natural Sciences,                                 .293
     Pharmacology                 0.538                                     0.265
  Nursing, Social Work            0.030               .212                  0.196

   Standard Deviation             0.305               0.153                 0.139
