NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CEO OVERCONFIDENCE AND CORPORATE INVESTMENT
Ulrike Malmendier
Geoffrey Tate
Working Paper 10807
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10807
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

We are indebted to Brian Hall and David Yermack for providing us with the data. We are very grateful to
Jeremy Stein for his invaluable support and comments. We also would like to thank Philippe Aghion, George
Baker, Stefano DellaVigna, Edward Glaeser, Rick Green, Brian Hall, Oliver Hart, Caroline Hoxby, Dirk
Jenter, Larry Katz, Tom Knox, David Laibson, Andrei Shleifer and various participants in seminars at
Harvard University, MIT, University of Chicago, Northwestern University, UC Berkeley, Stanford
University, UCLA, CalTech, Yale University, Univeristy of Michigan, Duke University, NYU, Columbia
University, Wharton, LSE, CREST, CEMFI, LMU Munich, and at the EER, the Russell Sage Summer
Institute for Behavioral Economics and at the SITE for helpful comments. Mike Cho provided excellent
research assistance. Malmendier acknowledges financial support from Harvard University (Dively
Foundation) and the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

CEO Overconfidence and Corporate Investment
Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate
NBER Working Paper No. 10807
September 2004
JEL No. G31, G32, D21, D23, D82
ABSTRACT
We argue that managerial overconfidence can account for corporate investment distortions.
Overconfident managers overestimate the returns to their investment projects and view external
funds as unduly costly. Thus, they overinvest when they have abundant internal funds, but curtail
investment when they require external financing. We test the overconfidence hypothesis, using panel
data on personal portfolio and corporate investment decisions of Forbes 500 CEOs. We classify
CEOs as overconfident if they persistently fail to reduce their personal exposure to company-specific
risk. We find that investment of overconfident CEOs is significantly more responsive to cash flow,
particularly in equity-dependent firms.
Ulrike Malmendier
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
ulrikem@stanford.edu
Geoffrey Tate
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
tate@wharton.upenn.edu

In this paper, we argue that personal characteristics of CEOs in large corporations lead to
distortions in corporate investment policies. In particular, we study the investment decisions of CEOs who overestimate the future returns of their companies, measured by failure
to divest company-specific risk on their personal accounts. We find that overconfident CEOs
have a heightened sensitivity of corporate investment to cash flow, particularly among equitydependent firms.
The two traditional explanations for investment distortions are the misalignment of managerial
and shareholders interests (Jensen and Meckling (1976), Jensen (1986)) and asymmetric information between corporate insiders and the capital market (Myers and Majluf (1984)). Both
cause investment to be sensitive to the amount of cash in the firm. Under the agency view,
managers overinvest to reap private benefits such as “perks,” large empires, and entrenchment.
Since the external capital market limits the extent to which managers can pursue self-interested
investment, an influx of cash flow enables the manager to invest more and increases investment
distortions. Under asymmetric information, the managers themselves (who act in the interest
of shareholders) restrict external financing in order to avoid diluting the (undervalued) shares
of their company. In this case, cash flow increases investment, but reduces the distortion.
The empirical literature, starting with Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), confirms the
existence and robustness of investment-cash flow sensitivity after controlling for investment
opportunities. While most of the literature relates investment-cash flow sensitivity to imperfections in the capital market, this interpretation remains controversial (Kaplan and Zingales,
(1997), (2000); Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen, (2000)).
We propose an alternative explanation for investment-cash flow sensitivity and suboptimal
1

investment behavior. Rather than focusing on firm-level characteristics, we relate corporate
investment decisions to personal characteristics of the top decision-maker inside the firm. Building on Roll (1986) and Heaton (2002), we argue that one important link between investment
levels and cash flow is the tension between the beliefs of the CEO and the market about the
value of the firm. Overconfident CEOs systematically overestimate the return to their investment projects. If they have suﬃcient internal funds for investment and are not disciplined by
the capital market or corporate governance mechanisms, they overinvest relative to the first
best. If they do not have suﬃcient internal funds, however, they are reluctant to issue new
equity because they perceive the stock of their company to be undervalued by the market. As
a result, they curb their investment. Additional cash flow provides an opportunity to invest
closer to their desired level.
Our overconfidence story builds upon a prominent stylized fact from the social psychology
literature, the “better than average” eﬀect. When individuals assess their relative skill, they
tend to overstate their acumen relative to the average (Larwood and Whittaker, (1977); Svenson, (1981); Alicke, (1985)). This eﬀect extends to economic decision-making in experiments
(Camerer and Lovallo (1999)). It also aﬀects the attribution of causality. Because individuals
expect their behavior to produce success, they are more likely to attribute good outcomes to
their actions, but bad outcomes to (bad) luck (Miller and Ross (1975)). Executives appear to be
particularly prone to display overconfidence, both in terms of the “better-than-average eﬀect”
and in terms of “narrow confidence intervals” (Larwood and Whittaker, (1977); Kidd, (1970);
Moore, (1977)).1 This finding is attributed to three main factors, which trigger overconfidence:
the illusion of control, a high degree of commitment to good outcomes, and abstract reference

2

points that make it hard to compare performance across individuals (Weinstein (1980); Alicke
et al. (1995)). All three factors are pertinent in the context of corporate investment. A CEO
who hand-picks an investment project is likely to believe he can control its outcome and to
underestimate the likelihood of failure (March and Shapira (1987); Langer, (1975)). The typical CEO is also highly committed to good company performance since his personal wealth and
the value of his human capital fluctuate with the company’s stock price. And finally, assessing
relative managerial skill or, specifically, the ability to pick profitable investment projects is
diﬃcult — even ex post — due to other factors that influence overall firm performance.
Heaton (2002) first showed that common distortions in corporate investment may be the result
of managers overestimating the returns to their investment. We expand on Heaton’s insight in
two ways. First, we model how the pre-existing capital structure aﬀects the role of overconfidence. Second, we empirically test the predictions of the model.
To construct measures of overconfidence, we exploit the over-exposure of typical CEOs to their
firms’ idiosyncratic risk. CEOs receive large grants of stock and options as compensation. They
cannot trade their options or hedge the risk by short-selling company stock, and the value of
their human capital is intimately linked to the firm’s performance. Because of this underdiversification, risk-averse CEOs should exercise their options early given a suﬃciently high
stock price (Lambert, Larcker and Verrechia (1991); Meulbroek, (2001); Hall and Murphy,
(2000), (2002)). We take two main approaches to translate this logic into overconfidence
measures. First, we identify a benchmark for the minimum percentage in the money at which
CEOs should exercise their options for a given year immediately following the vesting period.
If a CEO persistently exercises options later than suggested by the benchmark, we infer that he
3

is overconfident in his ability to keep the company’s stock price rising and wants to profit from
expected price increases by holding the options. Second, we look at the end of the option’s
duration. If a CEO is optimistic enough about his firm’s future performance that he holds
options all the way to expiration (typically ten years), we classify him as overconfident. Finally,
since under-diversified CEOs should also avoid acquiring additional equity, we classify CEOs
who habitually increase their holdings of company stock as overconfident.
We apply these measures to a panel data set on the options and stock holdings of CEOs of 477
large U.S. companies between 1980 and 1994. As a first test of the classifications, we find that
CEOs who excessively hold company stock options do not earn significant abnormal returns
over the S&P 500 on average. This result helps to rule out alternative explanations of “late
exercise” based on inside information. We also explicitly address other potential explanations
of our overconfidence measures. In the second step of the analysis, we show that investmentcash flow sensitivity is significantly higher for “late exercisers” or “stock purchasers” than for
their peers. As predicted by the model, overconfident CEOs invest more when they have more
cash at hand. Further, the sensitivity of investment to cash flow is strongest for CEOs of equity
dependent firms, for whom perceived financing constraints are most binding.
We provide complementary evidence that CEO characteristics other than overconfidence have
explanatory power for corporate decision-making. CEOs with an engineering (or scientific) education or employment background display higher investment-cash flow sensitivity, while CEOs
with a financial education or employment background exhibit lower sensitivity. Furthermore,
the sensitivity is higher for “depression babies” born in the 1930s and CEOs who assume multiple positions in their company (president, chairman of the board). These findings lend further
4

support to the view that not only firm-level, but also personal characteristics are important
for a better understanding of corporate decision-making.2 However, overconfidence matters for
investment-cash flow sensitivity beyond the eﬀects of these observable CEO characteristics.
One caveat to our results is the issue of endogeneity. Observable personal characteristics like
employment background or birth cohort could be selection criteria for the CEO. Boards may
even take overconfidence into account in choosing a CEO — though this seems harder to identify
ex ante. We are able to alleviate some endogeneity concerns with additional controls. We show
that our results are not driven by industry eﬀects, firm eﬀects (where possible), or tangible
firm characteristics like size and degree of financial constraint. Most importantly, however,
endogeneity does not aﬀect our main conclusion. If the board chooses a CEO because of his
overconfidence, it should be aware of the “dark sides” of this personality feature (such as
distorted investment behavior) and take steps to explicitly address them.
The overconfidence-based explanation for investment distortions has a number of novel policy
implications. Traditional theories, which link investment-cash flow sensitivity to capital market
imperfections or misaligned incentives, propose timely disclosure of corporate accounts or highpowered incentives as potential remedies. Our findings suggest that these provisions may not
suﬃce to address managerial discretion. A manager whose incentives are perfectly aligned
and who does not face any informational asymmetries may still invest suboptimally if he is
overconfident. He believes that he is acting in the best interest of shareholders. Thus, refined
corporate governance structures, involving a more active board of directors or constraints on
the use of internal funds, may be necessary to achieve first best investment levels.

5

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section I we present a simple model
that develops the prediction that managerial overconfidence leads to positive investment-cash
flow sensitivity. In Section II we introduce the data used in our analysis. Section III describes
the construction of our overconfidence measures and discusses alternative explanations. Section IV provides evidence that overconfidence increases the sensitivity of investment to cash
flow. Section V provides evidence that CEO overconfidence matters more in equity-dependent
firms. Section VI assesses the robustness of the overconfidence eﬀect to the inclusion of other
observable CEO characteristics. Section VII concludes.

I

Model

We propose a simple two-period model that demonstrates the eﬀect of managerial overconfidence on corporate investment in an eﬃcient capital market. Since our goal is to demonstrate
the distortionary power of overconfidence, we abstract from informational asymmetries and
agency problems and assume that the manager maximizes current shareholder value.3 The
only friction in the model comes from the manager’s inflated perception of the firm’s investment opportunities.
Consider a firm with existing assets A and s shares outstanding. At time 1, cash flow C is
realized. The CEO chooses the level of investment I ∈ [0, ∞) and a means of financing. The
investment generates a (weakly positive) stochastic future return, realized at time 2. We denote
the expected return to investment I as R(I), with R0 > 0 and R00 < 0 for all I. To guarantee
interior solutions, we also assume that R0 (I) > 1 for some I. The interest rate is normalized

6

to zero. An overconfident CEO overestimates future returns by percentage ∆. Hence, for all
levels of investment I, the CEO perceives the expected return to be R(I) · (1 + ∆), with ∆ = 0
in the benchmark case of a rational CEO.
To finance I, the CEO can either use internal funds or raise external finance (debt or equity).
We consider the choice among cash, risk-free debt, and equity. In this setting, equity is the only
financial instrument where the CEO’s overestimation of future returns results in disagreement
about the appropriate price.4 We assume that the firm has an exogenous capacity for riskless
debt D determined by the collateral value of the existing assets and, thus, strictly smaller
than the going-concern value (A > D). This condition ensures repayment in all states of the
world and arises endogenously if there is a positive probability of investment failure (i.e. zero
returns) for all I. The maximization problem of the CEO is thus:

s
[A + C + R(I)(1 + ∆) − c − d]
s + s0
s0
s.t.
(A + C + R(I) − c − d) = I − c − d
s + s0
max

(1)

I,s0 ,c,d

c ≤ C,

d ≤ D,

c ≥ 0,

d ≥ 0,

(2)

c+d≤I

(3)

I≥0

(4)

where c is the amount of cash financing, d the amount of debt financing, and s0 the number of
new shares. New shareholders demand an equity stake equal in value to the amount of capital
they provide to the firm, I − c − d. Let (I ∗ , c∗ , d∗ ) be the solution to the CEO’s maximization
ˆ =
problem (1)-(4). Further, let Iˆ be the level of investment satisfying R0 (I)

1
1+∆

and IF B

be the (first-best) level of investment satisfying R0 (IF B ) = 1. Then, the following lemma

7

characterizes the eﬃciency of the CEO’s investment decision.
Lemma 1. (i) If the CEO is rational (∆ = 0), I ∗ = IF B for all C, D. (ii) If the CEO is
ˆ and Iˆ > I ∗ > IF B for
overconfident (∆ > 0), I ∗ = Iˆ > IF B for all C, D such that C + D ≥ I,
ˆ
all C, D such that C + D < I.
Proof. See Appendix.
Not surprisingly, the rational CEO invests at the first-best level regardless of the availability
of internal funds. The overconfident CEO, instead, overinvests. Perceived financing costs,
however, mitigate overinvestment if the CEO is cash-constrained, implying sensitivity to cash
flow as summarized in the following proposition.

Proposition 1 (i) If the CEO is rational (∆ = 0), I ∗ is independent of internal cash flow C
for all C, D. (ii) If the CEO is overconfident (∆ > 0), I ∗ is independent of C for all C, D such
ˆ
that C + D ≥ Iˆ and strictly increasing in C for all C, D such that C + D < I.
Proof. See Appendix.
An overconfident CEO believes (incorrectly) that the market is understating the present value
of investment returns and that issuing shares will dilute the claims of current shareholders. Thus, he is unwilling to issue shares to finance his desired investment level, generating
investment-cash flow sensitivity when internal resources are scarce. Proposition 1 also illuminates the importance of a firm’s debt capacity. The higher is D the more likely are cash and
ˆ Thus, we
debt financing to be suﬃcient for any desired level of investment, i.e. C + D ≥ I.
expect to observe investment-cash flow sensitivity more often in equity-dependent firms (with
8

overconfident CEOs) than in firms with untapped debt capacity.
While the overinvestment result depends on the specification of overconfidence, the finding
of investment-cash flow sensitivity does not. For instance, suppose that the CEO is also
overconfident about the value of existing assets, A. Some of these assets could be his own prior
investments so that he also overestimates future cash flows generated by A. We can capture
this overestimation as an upward bias in the valuation of A, which may be smaller or larger
than the overestimation of the return flow R. The CEO then maximizes

s
s+s0 [A (1 + ∆A )

+

R(I)(1 + ∆R ) + C − c − d]. In this setting, the overconfident CEO displays investment-cash
flow sensitivity, both for ∆A > ∆R and for ∆A < ∆R . However, the CEO underinvests when
∆A > ∆R and overinvests when ∆A < ∆R .
Assuming that other factors which influence investment cash-flow sensitivity do not vary systematically with overconfidence, we have the following two empirically testable predictions.
Prediction 1. The investment of overconfident CEOs is more sensitive to cash flow than the
investment of CEOs who are not overconfident.
Prediction 2. The investment-cash flow sensitivity of overconfident CEOs is more pronounced
in equity-dependent firms.
Whether investment-cash flow sensitivity increases in overconfidence depends on the specification of the return function and, more generally, of the overconfidence model.5 Therefore,
we will not attempt to construct a continuous measure of overconfidence but rather compare
the investment behavior of “overconfident” versus “non-overconfident” CEOs. Even taking this
approach, however, measurement error might weaken or hide the diﬀerence between investment9

cash flow sensitivity in the overconfident and non-overconfident groups if the relationship is
not monotonic. Therefore, the success of the empirical analysis depends on the precision of
our measure of overconfidence.
In the following Sections, we test these two predictions. The empirical analysis consists of two
steps. The first step is the construction of an empirical overconfidence measure. The second
step is the analysis of the relationship between overconfidence and the sensitivity of investment
to cash flow (Prediction 1) and the change in this relationship as equity-dependence increases
(Prediction 2).

II

Data

We analyze a sample of 477 large publicly-traded United States firms from the years 1980 to
1994. To be included in the sample, a firm must appear at least four times on one of the lists
of largest US companies compiled by Forbes magazine in the period from 1984 to 1994.6
The core of the data set is described in detail in Hall and Liebman (1998) and Yermack
(1995). Here, we will simply highlight some of the more important features of the data for our
purposes. The virtue of this data set is that it provides us with detailed information on the
stock ownership and set of option packages — including exercise price, remaining duration, and
number of underlying shares — for the CEO of each company year by year. From this data
we obtain a fairly detailed picture of the CEO’s portfolio rebalancing over his tenure. What
we cannot deduce is the exact stock price at which the exercise of a particular option package
occurred in a given year. Thus, whenever this information is required, we check the robustness
10

of our results to three diﬀerent assumptions on the CEO’s ability to time the market in the
short run: first, that exercise occurs at the maximum price during the fiscal year, second, that
it occurs at the median price, and, third, that it occurs at the mean price.
In order to examine the relationship between a CEO’s transactions on his personal account and
on corporate accounts, we supplement the data set with various items from the COMPUSTAT
database. We measure investment as capital expenditures (item 128), cash flow as earnings
before extraordinary items (item 18) plus depreciation (item 14), and capital as property,
plants and equipment (item 8). We normalize investment and cash flow with beginning-of-theyear capital. Given that our sample is not limited to manufacturing firms (though it mainly
consists of large, nonfinancial firms), we check the robustness of our results to normalization
by assets (item 6). We measure Q as the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets.
Market value of assets is defined as total assets (item6) plus market equity minus book equity.
Market equity is defined as common shares outstanding (item 25) times fiscal year closing
price (item 199). Book equity is calculated as stockholders’ equity (item 216) [or the first
available of common equity (item 60) plus preferred stock par value (item 130) or total assets
(item 6) minus total liabilities (item 181)] minus preferred stock liquidating value (item 10)
[or the first available of redemption value (item 56) or par value (item 130)] plus balance sheet
deferred taxes and investment tax credit (item 35) when available minus post retirement assets
(item 336) when available. Book value of assets is total assets (item 6).7 The data contains
a few severe outliers, e.g. observations of capital normalized cash flow that are more than 50
standard deviations away from the mean. To ensure that these outliers do not contaminate
our results, we trim cash flow at the one percent level.8

11

In addition, we supplement the data with personal information about the CEOs’ employment
histories and educational backgrounds, using Dun and Bradstreet and Who’s Who in Finance
and Industry. We classify CEOs into three groups based on their field of study: CEOs with
finance education (undergraduate or graduate degrees in accounting, finance, business, and
economics), CEOs with technical education (degree in engineering or the natural sciences),
and CEOs with other degrees (law, literature, etc.)9 We also classify CEOs into three groups
based on their employment experience: CEOs with a career in finance if they previously worked
in a financial institution, as a CFO, treasurer, accountant or in other finance-related positions;
CEOs with a technical career if they are individual patent-holders, previously worked as an
engineer or in other technically-oriented positions; and CEOs with a general management
career. Finally, we use CRSP to gather stock prices for the companies in our sample. The left
columns of Table I (“Full Sample”) present the summary statistics of the data.10

[INSERT TABLE I HERE]

III
A

Overconfidence Measures
Definitions

We construct three measures of overconfidence, or proxies for ∆, based on the personal portfolio
decisions of CEOs: Holder 67, Longholder, and Net Buyer. The first two measures, Holder
67 and Longholder, use the timing of option exercises to identify overconfidence. The third
measure, Net Buyer, uses the habitual acquisition of company stock. Our measures exploit the

12

underdiversification of CEOs. CEO compensation contracts regularly contain large quantities
of stock and option grants. To maximize the incentive eﬀects of these holdings, the options
cannot be traded and the sale of stock may be restricted. Further, firms prohibit CEOs from
perfectly hedging against the risk by short-selling company stock. Most importantly, CEOs’
human capital is invested in their firms, so that a bad outcome in the firm will not only
negatively impact their personal portfolios, but also reduce their outside options. All of these
eﬀects leave CEOs highly exposed to the idiosyncratic risk of their company.
Unlike perfectly hedged outside investors, then, CEOs must trade oﬀ the option-value of holding stock options against the costs of underdiversification. Though the optimal schedule for
exercise depends on their individual wealth, degree of risk-aversion and diversification (Hall and
Murphy (2002)), it is generally true that risk aversion and underdiversification predict early
exercise of executive options. Similarly, underdiversified CEOs, in order to divest themselves of
idiosyncratic risk, should minimize their holdings of company stock. Overconfidence, however,
may lead CEOs to overestimate the future returns of their investment projects. Therefore,
they believe that the stock prices of their companies will continue to rise under their leadership more than they objectively should expect. As a result, overconfidence induces them to
postpone option exercise or even buy additional company stock in order to benefit personally
from the expected future gains.
These arguments may not hold for CEOs who display overoptimism about exogenous variables
or overestimate the precision of their beliefs. Overoptimism about the general economic environment need not induce investment in the CEOs’ own companies. Miscalibration reduces
the expected volatility of the stock and thus the value of holding options. The key aspects of
13

overconfidence for our results are overestimation of skill and self-attribution by the CEO.

Holder 67. For our first measure, we consider the status of each individual option package in
our sample at the end of the vesting period. To maintain comparability across packages with
vesting periods of diﬀerent duration, we examine the first year in which all of the packages
in the sample are at least partially exercisable, year five. We then compute the percentage
in the money for each package. Risk aversion and underdiversification predict that CEOs
should exercise options immediately after the vesting period if the amount in the money is
beyond a rational benchmark. We use the Hall and Murphy (2002) framework as a theoretical
guide in choosing a reasonable benchmark for the percentage in the money at or above which
CEOs should exercise newly-vested options. We also follow their calibrations to proxy for
(unobserved) CEO wealth, diversification, and risk-aversion. We apply the resulting threshold
for early exercise to the full sample of CEOs (rather than attempting to calibrate individually)
and check the robustness of our results to a wide range of reasonable parameter values.
To begin, we take 67 percent in the money during the fifth year as our threshold. If an
option is more than 67 percent in the money at some point in year five, the CEO should have
exercised at least some portion of the package during or before the fifth year. This threshold
corresponds to a risk aversion of three in a CRRA utility specification and to a percentage of
wealth in company equity equal to 66. We then construct Holder 67 as follows. We consider
the subsample of CEOs who at least twice during the sample period had options that were
valued above the threshold during the fifth year. We then identify the first instance (if any)
at which the CEO failed to exercise such an option during or before the fifth year. From this

14

point in time onward, we classify the CEO as overconfident if he subsequently exhibits the
same behavior at least one more time during his tenure as CEO. As we are interested in a
“permanent” rather than “transitory” overconfidence eﬀect, our measure targets CEOs who
“habitually” exercise options late. We repeat this exercise starting at 50 percent in the money
and incrementing by five up to 150 percent in the money to verify the robustness of our results
to variations in the parameters (e.g., 100 percent corresponds to ρ = 3; 50 percent of wealth
in stock).
Whenever we use these Holder measures in an estimation, we restrict the sample to CEOs
who at least twice during the sample period had options that were valued above the threshold
during the fifth year. This restriction guarantees that every CEO in the subsample had the
“opportunity” to be classified as overconfident and, thus, limits the degree of unobserved
overconfidence in the control group. It also guarantees that we are not overproportionally
identifying CEOs as overconfident when the stock of their firm is doing well. On the other
hand, our restriction considerably limits the number of observations; for Holder 67, it declines
from 3728 to 1058.

Longholder. To construct our second measure, Longholder, we focus on the expiration date of
option packages rather than the end of the vesting period. We classify a CEO as overconfident
(for all of his years in the sample) if he ever holds an option until the last year of its duration.
As the typical option in the sample has 10 years duration and is fully vested (at the latest)
by year five, the CEO chooses to hold, rather than exercise, the option for at least five years.
Thus, again, our measure targets “habitual” failure to diversify, or a “personality,” rather than

15

“time-varying,” overconfidence eﬀect. Further, over 85 percent of options that are held until
their final year are in the money and the median percentage in the money for such options is
253 percent. Thus the CEO could have profitably exercised these options before their last year.
Indeed, failure to exercise these options prior to expiration is diﬃcult to reconcile with any
reasonable calibration of the Hall and Murphy framework. Therefore, the Longholder measure
alleviates the dependence on calibrated thresholds for rational exercise. It also enables us to
circumvent the sample restriction (and potential loss of power) of the Holder measures. It is
thus best suited for tests where we must reduce or split the sample (e.g. Prediction 2).

Net Buyer. To construct our third measure, Net Buyer, we exploit the tendency of some CEOs
to purchase additional company stock despite their already high exposure to company risk.
Specifically, we consider the subsample of CEOs who keep their position as CEO for at least
10 of the 15 years in our sample. We identify CEOs as overconfident if they were “net buyers”
of company equity during their first five years in our sample,11 i.e. bought stock on net in
more years than they sold on net during their first five sample years.12 Whenever we use
this measure in an estimation, we exclude the first five years of the CEOs’ tenures. Thus, we
use disjoint subsamples of CEO years to establish overconfidence and to measure its potential
eﬀects on investment. This approach ameliorates endogeneity concerns, but at the cost of
(again) reducing sample size substantially — here to 842.

16

B

Discussion

In the middle and right columns of Table I, we show firm and CEO summary statistics for
subsamples of firm years determined by overconfidence sample restrictions and measured overconfidence. For brevity, we use only Holder 67 in these comparisons. Thus, all firm years
included in either subsample are from firms with CEOs who meet the selection criterion of
having at least two options that exceeded the 67 percent threshold in year five. The patterns
are similar for the other overconfidence measures.13
Note that of the 113 CEOs who meet the selection criterion, 58 display overconfidence in
their personal portfolio decisions. By comparison, 85 of 661 CEOs are overconfident using the
Longholder measure and 97 of 158 using Net Buyer. Thus, the measure ensuring the largest
sample size, Longholder, is also the most conservative measure of overconfidence. There are no
significant diﬀerences in observable firm or CEO characteristics across the overconfident and
control samples. In particular, the distribution of firms across Fama-French industry groups is
virtually identical in the overall sample, the subsample satisfying the selection criterion, and
the overconfident subsample. Thus, our overconfidence measure appears orthogonal to firm
characteristics, at least as measured at the industry level.
In Table II, we present the pairwise correlations among the three overconfidence measures
and CEO and firm characteristics. We consider the overconfidence measures two at a time
due to diﬀerences in the subsamples on which we will apply them. Sample A presents the
correlations for Longholder and Holder 67 on the Holder 67 subsample; Sample B presents the
correlations for Longholder and Net Buyer on the Net Buyer subsample; Sample C presents

17

the correlations for Net Buyer and Holder 67 on the intersection of the Net Buyer and Holder
67 subsamples. The correlation between Longholder and Holder 67 is strong and highly significant (0.2472). The correlation between Net Buyer and Holder 67 is also positive, though
weaker (0.0628). There is only a small positive correlation between Net Buyer and Longholder.
Overall, these relationships suggest that our measures are capturing the same eﬀect. We find
few reliable correlations between our overconfidence measures and firm or CEO characteristics. The relationships often reverse for diﬀerent overconfidence measures or for the same
measure on diﬀerent subsamples of data, suggesting that overconfidence is not proxying for
firm characteristics or observable CEO characteristics.

[INSERT TABLE II HERE]

Of particular interest are the relationships among stock ownership, vested options and our
overconfidence measures. Mechanistically, an overconfident CEO who delays option exercise
or purchases additional company stock will increase his holdings. However, other factors — like
firm size, firm age, corporate governance, and tenure — are substantially more important in
determining the level of ownership. Overall, then, it is not surprising that there is no consistent
correlation between stock or option ownership and the overconfidence measures. Further, the
board typically grants stock and options to confer incentives on the CEO. But, traditional
agency theory suggests that the incentive eﬀect of stock and options will reduce investment-cash
flow sensitivity, the opposite prediction of our overconfidence model. Thus, simple measures
of stock and option ownership are not adequate to capture CEO overconfidence, particularly
in this context.
18

Before turning to the eﬀects of overconfidence on investment, we briefly consider some alternative explanations of the measures.

1. Inside information. A CEO may decide not to decrease exposure to company risk because
of private information about future stock prices that makes holding options or buying stock
attractive. Inside information also predicts investment-cash flow sensitivity. Since the information has not been incorporated into the market price, the firm’s stock is undervalued and
investment may be sensitive to cash flow for the usual Myers-Majluf reasons.
One of the key distinctions between overconfidence and information is persistence. Positive
information is most naturally viewed as a transitory, rather than fixed eﬀect. Information with
enough precision to justify increasing exposure to company risk is likely to be short term, and
it is unlikely that the same CEO would repeatedly receive positive draws. Our overconfidence
measures, instead, target a habitual tendency to hold too much company risk (or a fixed
overconfidence eﬀect). Holder 67 requires that a CEO fail to exercise options that are beyond
the threshold at least twice. Longholder requires that a CEO fail to exercise options for at
least five years. Net Buyer requires that the factor leading the CEO to purchase additional
company stock still aﬀects investment decisions in a disjoint future time period.
Still, Holder 67 places no restriction on how long the CEO must hold the option beyond
the fifth year and, thus, could potentially capture short term delays in option exercise. To
distinguish the two stories for this measure, we analyze the exercise behavior of CEOs over
time. Under the inside information hypothesis, we would expect a CEO to sometimes hold his
options (when he has positive inside information) and to sometimes exercise them early (when

19

he has negative inside information). To test this, we run a random eﬀects probit regression of
the probability that a CEO holds an option that is at least 67 percent in the money in the
fifth year on the number of times that CEO has held such an option in the past.14 The sample
consists of the 759 firm years in which a CEO had options beyond the 67 percent threshold in
the fifth year after the grant date. The dependent variable is equal to one whenever the CEO
did not exercise any portion of those options prior to that year. Panel A of Table III presents
the regression results. In Column (1), the coeﬃcient of “past late exercises” is positive (0.2493)
and highly significant (z = 4.40). This implies that the typical CEO, rather than varying his
exercise behavior over time, either persistently holds options beyond the 67 percent threshold
or persistently exercises early. The results are robust to the inclusion of Q (Column 2) and the
firm’s earnings-price ratio (Column 3) as controls. Consistent with Jenter (2002), high values
of Q — perhaps, in this context, a proxy for market overvaluation — appear to decrease the
probability of late exercise. The earnings-price ratio eﬀect, on the other hand, appears to go
the wrong direction for an overvaluation story (though it is statistically insignificant). Panel
B of Table III shows the percentage of CEOs who hold an option that is 67 percent in the
money divided into categories based on the number of past late exercises. Overall, the results
suggest that the number of times a CEO has held a 67 percent-in-the-money option in the
past is considerably more important in determining the CEO’s future exercise behavior than
any information about current or future stock price performance — an indication of a personal
fixed eﬀect on option exercise decisions.

[INSERT TABLE III HERE]

20

The second key distinction between overconfidence and information is performance. If positive
information is the true reason for not diversifying the personal portfolio, then CEOs who
exhibit this behavior should earn positive abnormal returns over a strategy of diversification.
We calculate the distribution of returns among all CEOs who had options beyond the 67 percent
threshold, but did not exercise. We compare those returns to the (hypothetical) returns from
exercising the options during the fifth year and investing the proceeds in the S&P 500. As we
do not know the exact price at which CEOs exercised their options, we calculate the returns
under three alternative assumptions. First, we assume that CEOs are able to perfectly time
the market in the short run and exercise at the maximum price during the fiscal year of their
actual and hypothetical exercise. Then, as alternatives, we consider exercise at the mean or
median price during the year. Table IV shows that CEOs do not beat the market by holding
options beyond the threshold. The return diﬀerential is not positive and statistically diﬀerent
from zero under any assumption about exercise behavior. Viewed diﬀerently, the average
CEO does not consistently beat the market by holding options: the average CEO who holds
beyond the 67 percent threshold beats the S&P 500 only 45.86 percent of the time. The results
are similar for the Longholder measure. We find that CEOs whose options were at least 40
percent in the money in year nine (i.e. past the relevant Hall and Murphy threshold for that
year) and who did not exercise would have been better oﬀ on average had they exercised and
invested in the S&P 500 (though the mean is not significant). This result also holds when we
consider the alternative strategies of exercising in the eighth, seventh, sixth, or fifth years with
appropriate adjustments to the threshold (Malmendier and Tate (2003)). Thus, there is no
evidence that positive information, on average, motivates CEOs who hold options beyond the

21

theoretically-motivated thresholds.

[INSERT TABLE IV HERE]

2. Signalling. Another reason why CEOs may want to hold company risk is to convey a
(potentially) costly signal to the capital market that their firm’s prospects are better than the
prospects of similar firms. However, the most natural version of the signalling story would have
the opposite prediction for investment. Signalling should alleviate informational asymmetries
and, thus, lead to less investment-cash flow sensitivity among the firms where CEOs hold
their options. Thus, the tests of our investment predictions themselves will help to dispel this
alternative explanation.
Moreover, the usefulness of option exercises as a signalling device is doubtful. Financial services
firms and the financial press, while following stock purchases and sales of insiders closely,
generally discount option exercises as signals of future stock prices. They point to vesting
and expiration times as the main determinants of exercise.15 Our only stock-based proxy for
overconfidence, Net Buyer, measures overconfidence and investment-cash flow sensitivity for
two disjoint time periods to specifically eliminate the influence of signalling.
The same arguments address the hypothesis that CEOs use their insider trades opportunistically to raise the capital market valuation of their firms.

3. Risk tolerance. Alternatively, one might want to interpret our measures of overconfidence as
measures of risk attitude. A CEO may hold his options beyond the threshold simply because
he is less risk-averse and, therefore, less aﬀected by underdiversification. If anything, however,
22

lower risk aversion should predict lower investment-cash flow sensitivity since less risk averse
managers should be more willing to lever up the firm. Thus, once again, the tests of the
empirical predictions of our model will provide evidence against this story. Moreover, while
higher risk-tolerance induces option holders to exercise their options later, it does not imply
that the CEO should habitually buy additional stock of his company. Indeed, to explain the
Net Buyer measure, CEOs would need to be risk-seeking on average.

4. Tax reasons. An option holder may postpone exercise to delay the payment of taxes on
his profits. Personal income tax deferral, however, would not predict higher sensitivity of
investment to cash flow among holders, nor does it apply to additional stock purchases.
5. Procrastination. Finally, CEOs might hold options until expiration if they are “inertial” in
the sense of O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001). This inertia on their personal account may carry
over to the firms’ corporate account in a reluctance to conduct equity issues, or generally a
preference for the “quiet life” (Bertrand and Mullainathan, (2003)). We find, however, that
more than 68 percent of the CEOs classified as overconfident under the Longholder measure
conduct other transactions on their personal portfolios in the two years prior to the year their
“longheld” option expires. We also find in Malmendier and Tate (2003) that Longholder CEOs
are significantly more likely to conduct acquisitions than their peers and, thus, do not appear
to procrastinate on the corporate account. Finally, an inertial CEO should not habitually
purchase company equity and, so, should not be classified as overconfident under the Net
Buyer measure.16

We will take further steps to distinguish overconfidence from alternative explanations (partic-

23

ularly information) in the context of the investment regressions that follow.

IV
A

Test 1: Overconfidence and Investment
Empirical Specification

To test the model’s prediction that the sensitivity of investment to cash flow increases in
overconfidence (Prediction 1), we use the following general regression specification:

Iit = β 1 + β 2 Qit−1 + β 3 Cit + Xit0 B4 + β 5 ∆it + β 6 Cit · Qit−1 + Cit · Xit0 B7 + β 8 Cit · ∆it + εit (5)

where C stands for cash flow, Q is market value of assets over book value of assets, X is the set
of additional controls used in the regression, and ∆ is the overconfidence measure. X usually
includes corporate governance, stock ownership (as a percentage of total shares outstanding),
and total number of vested options (normalized by total number of shares outstanding).17 Our
measure of corporate governance is the number of outside directors who are currently CEOs
in other companies.18 We also include year- and firm-fixed eﬀects as well as (year)*(cash flow)
interactions. Where relevant, we include interactions of industry dummies and cash-flow. We
use Fama and French’s specification of twelve industry groups.19 The null hypothesis is that
β 8 , the coeﬃcient on the interaction of cash flow and overconfidence, is equal to zero.
One alternative to controlling for industry eﬀects on investment-cash flow sensitivity would be
to remove all cross-sectional variation by including firm fixed eﬀects interacted with cash flow

24

in the analysis. Because our measures require a long tenure within the firm in order to identify
a CEO as overconfident, identifying the eﬀect only from time series variation within the firm
is typically not feasible. That is, there are an insuﬃcient number of cases of overconfident and
non-overconfident CEOs in the same firm to draw robust inference from any estimations. The
lack of identifiable cases points to a potentially severe sample selection bias from including
fixed eﬀects in panel regressions and identifying solely out of somewhat anomalous firms with
multiple short-tenured CEOs. Nevertheless, where there is enough within-firm variation in
CEO overconfidence to interact firm fixed eﬀects with cash flow, we report the results.
In order to account for serial correlation and heteroskedasticity, we estimate (5) in two diﬀerent
ways. First we run an OLS regression so that our results can be compared with the earlier
investment to cash flow sensitivity literature. Then we recompute the standard errors by
clustering the observations within each firm. This process treats the time series of observations
within the firm as a single observation, eﬀectively eliminating any serial correlation.

B

Holder 67

First we estimate (5) using Holder 67 and its variants as our overconfidence measures. We run
a set of three baseline regressions to demonstrate the eﬀects of Q and cash flow on investment:
first with no additional controls, then including firm-fixed eﬀects, and finally including firmfixed eﬀects as well as controls for CEO stock ownership, CEO option holdings, firm size,
corporate governance and their interactions with cash flow. The results are presented in Table
V for the 67 percent threshold. The first two regressions confirm the stylized facts of the

25

investment-cash flow sensitivity literature — namely that cash flow has a large amount of
explanatory power beyond Q for investment. Among the control variables, we find that CEOs
who own a higher percentage of their company — both in company stock and in options — display
a smaller investment to cash flow sensitivity. Thus, high ownership may indeed mitigate agency
problems, especially among a subsample of successful firms with high stock price appreciation.
We also find that Q has more impact on investment for higher levels of cash flow (although
this eﬀect is not consistently significant). If current cash flow measures the success of past
investment decisions, this result suggests that more successful companies are more responsive
to investment opportunities in determining the level of their investment. Corporate governance,
measured by outside CEOs on the board, slightly increases investment-cash flow sensitivity.
This eﬀect, however, appears to be linked to the subsample of relatively successful firms in these
regressions. In Table VII, for example, we find a weak negative eﬀect of corporate governance
on investment-cash flow sensitivity for the entire sample of firms. Finally, larger firms have
significantly less sensitivity of investment to cash flow than smaller firms. One interpretation
of this result is that size captures the eﬀects traditionally attributed to financing constraints
in the investment-cash flow sensitivity literature.

[INSERT TABLE V HERE]

Then, given a baseline for comparison, we estimate Equation (5) using our benchmarked holder
measure (“Holder 67”) as a proxy for ∆. Columns (4) to (7) in Table V present the results. The
coeﬃcient on the interaction of the holder indicator with cash flow is positive (0.2339 in the
OLS specification with controls) and highly significant. The result is robust to clustering the
26

standard errors by firm and including industry eﬀects interacted with cash flow. As predicted
by our model, CEOs who demonstrate a higher level of overconfidence than their peers in
their personal portfolio decisions also exhibit a higher sensitivity of corporate investment to
cash flow. Figure 1 presents the regression results varying the threshold for rational exercise
between 50 percent and 150 percent (along with the sample restriction). The results are the
same. We also examine the eﬀect of holding options that are between zero and 50 percent in
the money and find an insignificant negative eﬀect on investment-cash flow sensitivity. Thus,
as predicted, increased investment-cash flow sensitivity comes only from holding highly in-themoney options.

[INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE]

To further distinguish the overconfidence eﬀect on investment decisions from insider trading,
we split Holder 67 into late exercisers who lose money on at least one of the options they hold
beyond the threshold and late exercisers who always profit. If information contaminates our
Holder 67 measure, then much of the eﬀect should be isolated in the winner portion of the split.
Thus, we test whether the investment eﬀects we have attributed to overconfidence are present
among the “loser” subgroup, given their demonstrated lack of favorable insider knowledge.
First, we diagnose whether our (other) overconfidence measures are more associated with the
“loser” subgroup (who are most likely to be overconfident) or the “winner” subgroup (who
may have positive private information). We find that the correlation between Longholder
and the “loser” variable constructed from Holder 67 is 0.2699, while the correlation between
Longholder and the “winner” portion is −0.0138. Similarly, the correlation between the Net
27

Buyer variable and the “loser” variable is 0.1263 and the correlation between Net Buyer variable
and the “winner” variable is −0.1402.20 Thus, our overconfidence measures are most associated
with the CEOs who appear to be overconfident rather than well-informed.
Next, we repeat the regressions of Tables V, splitting Holder 67 into “losers” and “winners.”. If
the investment-cash flow sensitivity were driven by (highly persistent) inside information, then
we should not be able to replicate the results for the “losers.” Table VI shows the estimates of
Equation (5). We find that the estimated coeﬃcient of the “loser” indicator (Hold and Lose 67)
interacted with cash flow is positive, significant, and similar to the coeﬃcient on Holder 67 in
Table V (the coeﬃcient on Hold and Lose 67 is 0.2366 in the OLS with controls specification).
We also find a positive eﬀect of the “winner” indicator (Hold and Win 67) on investment-cash
flow sensitivity, which may indeed reflect positive inside information. The key result, then,
is that the eﬀect of Holder 67 remains when we remove the eﬀect of these CEOs from the
estimate. Finally, as there is only a small number of CEOs (10) in the “winner” subgroup, we
test the robustness of the result to weaker assumptions. We find that the results are virtually
identical if we instead classify CEOs as “winners” if they more often outperform the S&P 500
when they hold beyond the threshold than underperform. Overall, then, inside information
does not appear to drive our results.

[INSERT TABLE VI HERE]

28

C

Longholder

Table VII gives the results of estimating Equation (5) using the Longholder variable as our
proxy for ∆.21 As in Table V, Q appears to positively impact the sensitivity of investment
to cash flow. Also, as before, equity ownership and firm size are negatively associated with
investment-cash flow sensitivity. Vested options now positively impact investment-cash flow
sensitivity. This positive correlation may indicate that CEOs with high ownership in vested
options are more reluctant to dilute existing shares.22 It could also arise if the cumulative
eﬀect of overconfidence in option exercise decisions outweighs the impact of new grants and
provisions of the compensation contract in determining the level of vested options. Most importantly, Longholder CEOs have higher sensitivity of investment to cash flow. The eﬀect
is robust to controlling for diﬀerential sensitivities among the twelve Fama-French industries.
Further, there is enough within-firm variation in Longholder to identify the Longholder effect on investment-cash flow sensitivity including firm fixed eﬀects interacted with cash flow.
This specification eliminates any alternative explanation of our results that relies on fixed
cross-sectional diﬀerences across firms with and without overconfident CEOs. Although these
estimates are not robust to clustering the observations by firm, they are robust to alternative
methods of controlling for serial correlation. The coeﬃcients in Prais-Winsten regressions assuming a common first order autoregressive structure on the errors across panels are 0.2385
with a t-statistic of 2.73, 0.2043 with a t-statistic of 2.80, and 0.1324 with a t-statistic of 2.76
without industry or firm fixed eﬀects interacted with cash flow, with industry eﬀects interacted with cash flow, and with firm fixed eﬀects interacted with cash flow, respectively. All
estimates are significant at the 1 percent level. Again, we conclude that an overconfident CEO
29

will increase investment more when cash flow increases than his less confident peers.

[INSERT TABLE VII HERE]

D

Net Buyer

Table VII also presents the results from estimating Equation (5) using Net Buyer to capture
overconfidence. CEOs are classified as overconfident based on their stock purchase decisions
during their first five years in the sample. Equation (5) is estimated using only the remaining
years of the CEOs’ tenure. Most of the control variables in these regressions behave as in our
prior estimations. The eﬀect of Q interacted with cash flow is now negative and marginally
significant. Though this result is diﬃcult to interpret, it is not relevant for our results (see
Column 4). The most important finding is that being a Net Buyer increases the sensitivity
of investment to cash flow. The result is robust to the inclusion of industry eﬀects on cash
flow sensitivity. Though the result without industry interactions is not quite significant in the
cluster specification (p-value = 0.118), the estimate controlling for industry eﬀects on cash
flow sensitivities is significant (p-value = 0.057).
As described in Section III, identifying overconfidence and measuring its eﬀect on investmentcash flow sensitivities in disjoint time periods allow us to distinguish managerial overconfidence
from other explanations (like positive information or signalling motives) that would cause
simultaneous failure to diversify and cash flow sensitivity. To further check the robustness of
the results, we reestimate the regression with a one year gap between the two sample periods.
The results are similar.
30

Overall, overconfidence increases the sensitivity of investment to cash flow under any measure.

V

Test 2: Overconfidence and Financial Constraints

In Section I, we show that overconfidence should matter most for firms that are equitydependent (Prediction 2). If a firm has a suﬃcient amount of cash or untapped debt capacity
to finance all of the CEO’s desired investment projects, then cash flow may not aﬀect the
level of investment. If a firm must instead access the equity market for additional finance,
overconfidence should have an impact on the sensitivity of investment to cash flow.
We take several approaches to test this prediction. First, we construct the Kaplan-Zingales
index of financial constraint — used by Lamont, Polk and Saá-Requejo (2001), Malmendier
and Tate (2003) and Baker, Stein, and Wurgler (2003) — for our sample of firms. Kaplan and
Zingales (1997) generate direct measures of financing constraints, using annual reports and
even information gleaned from the company’s executives, to classify their sample of firms as
either constrained or unconstrained. They then estimate an ordered logit of this classification
on five accounting ratios meant to quantify these financial constraints: cash flow to total
capital, Q, debt to total capital, dividends to total capital, and cash holdings to capital. We
apply the estimates of this ordered logit regression to our sample and construct an index of
financial constraints (or equity dependence) as follows:

CFit
+ 0.2826389 ∗ Qit + 3.139193 ∗ Leverageit
Kit−1
Dividendit
Cit
−39.3678 ∗
− 1.314759 ∗
Kit−1
Kit−1

KZit = −1.001909 ∗

31

Higher values of the linear combination of the five ratios imply a higher degree of financial
constraint.23 We separate our sample into quintiles based on the lagged value of the KaplanZingales index and estimate Equation (5) separately on each quintile. We use Longholder as
the proxy for overconfidence, since the sample restrictions necessary to use Holder 67 or Net
Buyer would severely limit the number of observations in each of the five subsamples. We find,
as predicted, that the eﬀect of overconfidence on the sensitivity of investment to cash flow is
significant only for the top quintile of the Kaplan-Zingales index (Table VIII). This eﬀect is
strong (the coeﬃcient estimate is 0.4990) and highly statistically significant (t = 3.52), where
standard errors are clustered by firm. Though we cannot include the interaction of firm eﬀects
with cash flow in these regressions since some quintiles would be left with too few identifiable
observations, the results are robust to the inclusion of industry eﬀects on cash flow sensitivity.

[INSERT TABLE VIII HERE]

As a further robustness check on the results, we apply several other measures of equity dependence as substitutes for the Kaplan-Zingales index. We consider the following measures: firm
age, defined as the number of years since Compustat first reported a non-missing market value
of equity for the firm; firm size; dividend payment (common plus preferrred); and S&P long
term debt ratings. As above, we split the sample into quintiles based on the value of each of
our alternative measures at the end of the prior fiscal year. In the case of credit ratings, data
unavailability leaves us with roughly 60% fewer observations. So, we instead split the sample
into firms with ratings of BBB or lower and firm with ratings of A, AA, or AAA. In all cases,
the strongest positive eﬀect of overconfidence on investment-cash flow sensitivity is among the
32

most equity-dependent firms: the quintile of the youngest firms, the smallest firms, the firms
that pay the fewest dividends, and the sample of firms with debt ratings of BBB or lower.
In two cases, firm size and credit ratings, this eﬀect is not statistically signigicant; however,
the coeﬃcients are remarkably stable across the alternative measures (ranging from 0.28 to
0.36).24
Since the mechanism by which overconfidence increases the sensitivity of investment to cash
flow is perceived undervaluation and reluctance to issue equity, we also consider the diﬀerences
in financing decisions between overconfident and non-overconfident CEOs. Using the financing
deficit as defined by Frank and Goyal (2003), we find that overconfident CEOs are more likely
than other CEOs to raise debt (rather than equity) to cover financing needs.25
Thus, both predictions of our simple model of overconfidence are confirmed in the data.

VI

Other Personal Characteristics

In this section we examine the relationship between overconfidence and other observable executive characteristics: educational and employment background, birth cohort, and accumulation
of titles within the company. We analyze their eﬀects on investment-cash flow sensitivity and
ask whether CEO overconfidence aﬀects investment decisions independently. First, we estimate
Equation (5) including each of these characteristics (in lieu of a proxy for ∆) and industry effects interacted with cash flow. As Columns (1)-(4) of Table IX show, CEOs with technical
education have more investment-cash flow sensitivity than CEOs with general education while
CEOs with financial education have less. The results are similar replacing educational back33

ground with employment background (untabulated). CEOs who belong to the Great Depression birth cohort also have more investment-cash flow sensitivity. Donaldson (1990) provides
a nice description of the psychology underlying this eﬀect26 :

“. . . the reader should bear in mind the organizational context of the time
[at General Mills in the late 1960s/mid 1970s]. The corporate leaders of this period were young adults in the 1930s whose early business and personal lives were
profoundly aﬀected by the collapse of the capital markets during the Great Depression. This led them to be deeply skeptical of the public capital markets as a reliable
source of personal or corporate funding, to avoid financial risk wherever possible,
and to have an instinctive aﬃnity for a strategy of self-suﬃciency” (p. 125).

In addition, CEOs who have accumulated additional titles (President and Chairman of the
Board) display heightened sensitivity of investment to cash flow. Finally, we include all of
the characteristics and Longholder as a proxy for overconfidence (Column 6). Longholder still
strongly predicts higher investment-cash flow sensitivity. The 1930s cohort eﬀect and finance
education eﬀect also remain significant. We conclude that more conventional “style” eﬀects,
rooted in the CEO’s background, may be important for determining investment policy.27 However, overconfidence is distinct from these observable CEO characteristics.

[INSERT TABLE IX HERE]

34

VII

Conclusion

The main goal of this paper is to establish the relationship between managerial overconfidence
and corporate investment decisions. Our analysis consists of three main steps. First, we derive,
in a simple model of the corporate investment decision, the prediction that the sensitivity of
investment to cash flow is strongest in the presence of overconfidence. We then construct
three measures of overconfidence, using data on personal portfolio decisions of the CEO: (1)
Does the CEO hold his options beyond a theoretically-calibrated benchmark for exercise? (2)
Does the CEO hold his options even until the last year before expiration? (3) Did the CEO
habitually buy stock of his company during the first five sample years? Whenever the answer
to one of these questions is yes, we classify a CEO as overconfident. Additional tests on the
persistence of such behavior and on the CEO’s gains and losses from option exercise strengthen
the interpretation of these measures as proxies for overconfidence.
We then regress investment on cash flow, the overconfidence measure and the interaction of
overconfidence and cash flow. We find a strong positive relationship between the sensitivity
of investment to cash flow and executive overconfidence. The coeﬃcients of the interaction
term of overconfidence and cash flow are highly significant for all of our measures. We also
find that overconfidence matters more in firms that are equity dependent, as predicted by the
overconfidence model.
These results have important implications for contracting practices and organizational design.
Specifically, standard incentives such as stock- and option-based compensation are unlikely
to mitigate the detrimental eﬀects of managerial overconfidence. As a result, the board of

35

directors may need to employ alternative disciplinary measures, such as debt overhang, which
can suﬃce to constrain overconfident CEOs. In addition, the results confirm the need for
independent and vigilant directors.

36

Appendix
I−c−d
Proof of Lemma 1. Solving Equation 2 for s0 yields s0 = s A+C+R(I)−I
. Substituting into
the objective function, we can rewrite the maximization problem as follows28 :

max A + C + R(I)(1 + ∆) − (I − c − d) ·
I,c,d

s.t. c ≤ C,
c ≥ 0,

d ≤ D,

d ≥ 0,

c+d≤I

A + C + R(I)(1 + ∆) − c − d
− (c + d)(A1)
A + C + R(I) − c − d
(A2)

I ≥0

(A3)

Our assumptions on R(·) ensure I ∗ > 0. For simplicity, we ignore the non-negativity constraints
c ≥ 0 and d ≥ 0 and show instead that the optimal solution to the unconstrained problem
satisfies them. Let λ, µ, and ν be the Lagrange multipliers on the constraints c ≤ C, d ≤ D,
and c + d ≤ I respectively. Then, the following conditions determine the optimal investment
and financing plan:
∗

∗

∗

)(1+∆)−c −d
R0 (I ∗ )(1 + ∆)− A+C+R(I
A+C+R(I ∗ )−c∗ −d∗

−(I ∗ − c∗ − d∗ )· (A+C+R(I

A+C+R(I ∗ )(1+∆)−c∗ −d∗
A+C+R(I ∗ )−c∗ −d∗
A+C+R(I ∗ )(1+∆)−c∗ −d∗

A+C+R(I ∗ )−c∗ −d∗
∗
∗

λ(c − C) = 0,

λ ≥ 0,

µ ≥ 0,

−
−

∗ )−c∗ −d∗ )R0 (I ∗ )(1+∆)−R0 (I ∗ )(A+C+R(I ∗ )(1+∆)−c∗ −d∗ )

(A+C+R(I ∗ )−c∗ −d∗ )2
∆R(I ∗ )(I ∗ −c∗ −d∗ )
−1−λ−ν =
(A+C+R(I ∗ )−c∗ −d∗ )2
∗
∗
∗
∗
∆R(I )(I −c −d )
−1−µ−ν =
(A+C+R(I ∗ )−c∗ −d∗ )2
∗
∗
∗

µ(d − D) = 0,
ν≥0

(A4)
+ν = 0

0

(A5)

0

(A6)

ν(c + d − I ) = 0

(A7)

(i) Suppose ∆ = 0. Then conditions (A4)-(A6) simplify to:
R0 (I ∗ ) − 1 + ν = 0
−λ − ν = 0

−µ − ν = 0

(A8)
(A9)
(A10)

From (A9) and (A10), we must have λ = µ = −ν. But, since the multipliers must be nonnegative, we conclude that λ = µ = ν = 0. Thus, from (A8), R0 (I ∗ ) = 1 and I ∗ = IF B .
Further, all financing plans (c∗ , d∗ ) satisfying (A2) and (A3) at I ∗ are optimal.
(ii) Suppose ∆ > 0. We consider separately the cases ν = 0 and ν > 0.
If ν = 0, the constraint c + d ≤ I does not bind at I ∗ . Thus, this case includes all optimal
plans in which the CEO issues shares (s0 > 0). From conditions (A5) and (A6)
λ=µ=

(A + C + R(I ∗ ) − c∗ − d∗ )2 + ∆R(I ∗ )(A + C + R(I ∗ ) − I ∗ )
−1
(A + C + R(I ∗ ) − c∗ − d∗ )2

(A11)

Then, since A + R(I ∗ ) > I ∗ − C, λ = µ > 0. Thus, c∗ = C and d∗ = D from (A7), and (A3)
37

is satisfied.29 From condition (A4)
R0 (I ∗ ) =

1
A+C+R(I ∗ )−I ∗
A+C−c∗ −d∗
1 + ∆ A+R(I
∗ )+C−c∗ −d∗ A+R(I ∗ )(1+∆)+C−c∗ −d∗

and, substituting c∗ = C and d∗ = D,
R0 (I ∗ ) =

1
A+C+R(I ∗ )−I ∗
A−D
1 + ∆ A+R(I
∗ )−D A+R(I ∗ )(1+∆)−D

(A12)

Notice that c∗ = C, d∗ = D, and c∗ + d∗ ≤ I ∗ imply C + D ≤ I ∗ . With R(I ∗ ) ≥ 0, ∆ ≥ 0,
1
< R0 (I ∗ ) < 1. Thus, as R00 < 0,
C + D ≤ I ∗ , A > D and A + R(I ∗ ) > I ∗ − C we have 1+∆
ˆ
I ∗ < Iˆ and, by implication, C + D < I.
Now suppose ν > 0. Then, c∗ + d∗ = I ∗ and the optimal financing plan does not include equity
(s0 = 0). Then, using (A5) and (A6)
λ=µ=

A + C + R(I ∗ )(1 + ∆) − c∗ − d∗
−1−ν
A + C + R(I ∗ ) − c∗ − d∗

(A13)

Solving for ν and substituting in (A4) gives
R0 (I ∗ )(1 + ∆) − 1 − λ = 0

(A14)

1
First, consider λ = µ = 0. Then, R0 (I ∗ ) = 1+∆
which implies I ∗ = Iˆ > IF B . Further, as
ˆ And, all financing plans (c∗ , d∗ ) satisfying 0 ≤ c∗ ≤ C,
c∗ ≤ C and d∗ ≤ D, we have C +D ≥ I.
0 ≤ d∗ ≤ D, and c∗ + d∗ = I ∗ are optimal.

Next, consider λ = µ > 0. Then, from (A7), c∗ = C and d∗ = D and (A3) is satisfied. Further,
1+λ
1
ˆ Thus, as R00 < 0, I ∗ < Iˆ and, by implication, C + D < I.
ˆ
> 1+∆
= R0 (I).
R0 (I ∗ ) = 1+∆
Finally, using ν > 0, (A13) and (A14), 1 +
and IF B < I ∗ . Q.E.D.

∆R(I ∗ )
A+R(I ∗ )−D

> R0 (I ∗ ) (1 + ∆) implying R0 (I ∗ ) < 1

Proof of Proposition 1. (i) For ∆ = 0, R0 (I ∗ ) = 1 implies that I ∗ is independent of C.
(ii) For ∆ > 0 and ν = 0, (A12) gives
dI ∗
dC =

0

∗

∆R (I )(A−D)
− R00 (I ∗ )[(A+R(I ∗ )−D)(A+R(I ∗ )(1+∆)−D)+∆(A−D)(A+C+R(I
∗
)−I ∗ )]+2R0 (I ∗ )(R0 (I ∗ )−1)(1+∆)(A+R(I ∗ )−D)

A > D, A + R(I ∗ ) > I ∗ − C, and R0 (I ∗ ) < 1 imply

dI ∗
dC

ˆ
> 0. Further, C + D < I.

ˆ For
For ∆ > 0 and ν > 0, I ∗ = Iˆ and is thus independent of C over the subset C + D ≥ I.
dI ∗
∗
ˆ
C + D < I, we have instead I = C + D and thus dC = 1 > 0. Q.E.D.

38

References
Alicke, Mark D., 1985, Global self-evaluation as determined by the desirability and controllability of trait adjectives, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 49, 1621-1630.
Alicke, Mark D., M. L. Klotz, David L. Breitenbecher, Tricia J. Yurak, et al., 1995, Personal
contact, individuation, and the better-than-average eﬀect, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 68, 804-825.
Baker, Malcolm, Jeremy C. Stein, and Jeﬀrey Wurgler, 2003, When does the market matter?
Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms, Quarterly Journal of Economics
118(3), 969-1006.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2003, Enjoying the quiet life: managerial
behavior following anti-takeover legislation, Journal of Political Economy 111(5), 1043-1075.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Antoinette Schoar, 2003, Managing with style: The eﬀect of managers
on firm policies, Quarterly Journal of Economics 118(4), 1169-1208.
Brickley, James A., Coles, Jeﬀrey L., and Rory L. Terry, 1994, Outside directors and the
adoption of poison pills, Journal of Financial Economics 35, 371-390.
Byrd, John W., and Kent A. Hickman, 1992, Do outside directors monitor managers? Evidence
from tender oﬀer bids, Journal of Financial Economics 32, 195-221.
Camerer, Colin, and Dan Lovallo, 1999, Overconfidence and excess entry: an experimental
approach, American Economic Review 89, 306-318.
Donaldson, Gordon, 1990, Voluntary restructuring: the case of General Mills, Journal of Financial Economics 27(1), 117-141.
Dun & Bradstreet Reference Book of Corporate Managements, 1997 (Bethlehem, Pa.).
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 2002, Testing trade-oﬀ and pecking order predictions
about dividends and debt, Review of Financial Studies 15, 1-33.
Fazzari, Steve, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Peterson, 1988, Financing constraints and cor-

39

porate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 141-195.
Fazzari, Steve, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce Peterson, 2000, Investment-cash flow sensitivities
are useful: a comment on Kaplan and Zingales, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 695-705.
Frank, Murray Z. and Vidhan K. Goyal, 2003, Testing the pecking order theory of capital
structure, Journal of Financial Economics 67, 217-248.
Hadlock, Charles J., 1998, Ownership, liquidity, and investment, Rand Journal of Economics
29, 487-508.
Hall, Brian J., and Jeﬀrey B. Liebman, 1998, Are CEOs really paid like bureaucrats?, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 113, 653-691.
Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy, 2000, Optimal exercise prices for executive stock options,
American Economic Review 90, 209-214.
Hall, Brian J., and Kevin J. Murphy, 2002, Stock options for undiversified executives, Journal
of Accounting and Economics 33, 3-42.
Hart, Oliver, 1993, Theories of optimal capital structure: a managerial discretion perspective,
in Margaret M. Blair, ed.: The Deal Decade: What Takeovers and Leveraged Buyouts Mean
for Corporate Governance (Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.).
Hart, Oliver, 2001, Financial contracting, Journal of Economic Literature 34, 1079-1100.
Heaton, J. B., 2002, Managerial optimism and corporate finance, Financial Management 31,
33-45.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance and takeovers,
American Economic Review 76, 323-329.
Jensen, Michael C., and William Meckling, 1976, The theory of the firm: managerial behavior,
agency costs, and ownership structure, Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305-360.
Jenter, Dirk, 2002, Market timing and managerial portfolio decisions, Working Paper, MIT.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 1997, Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide

40

useful measures of financing constraints?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, 169-215.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales, 2000, Investment-cash flow sensitivities are not a valid
measure of financing constraints, Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, 707-712.
Kidd, John B., 1970, The utilization of subjective probabilities in production planning, Acta
Psychologica 34, 338-347.
Lambert, Richard A.; David F. Larcker and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1991, “Portfolio Considerations in Valuing Executive Compensation,” Journal of Accounting Research 29(1), 129-149.
Lamont, Owen, Christopher Polk, and Jesus Saa-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and
stock returns, Review of Financial Studies 14, 529-554.
Langer, Ellen J., 1975, The illusion of control, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
32, 311-328.
Larwood, Laurie, and William Whittaker, 1977, Managerial myopia: self-serving biases in
organizational planning, Journal of Applied Psychology 62, 94-198.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Geoﬀrey Tate, 2003, Who makes acquisitions? CEO overconfidence
and the market’s reaction, Stanford GSB Research Paper No. 1798.
March, J. G., and Z. Shapira, 1987, Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking, Management Science 33, 1404-18.
Meulbroek, Lisa K., 2001, The eﬃciency of equity-linked compensation: understanding the full
cost of awarding executive stock options, Financial Management 30, 5-30.
Miller, Dale T., and Michael Ross, 1975, Self-serving biases in the attribution of causality:
Fact or fiction?, Psychological Bulletin 82, 213-225.
Moore, P. G., 1977, The manager’s struggle with uncertainty, Journal of The Royal Statistical
Society Series A 149, 129-165.
Myers, Stewart, and Nicholas Majluf, 1984, Corporate financing and investment decisions when
firms have information that investors do not have, Journal of Financial Economics 13, 187-221.

41

O’Donoghue, Ted D., and Matthew Rabin, 2001, Choice and Procrastination, Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 121—160.
Roll, Richard, 1986, The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers, Journal of Business 59,
197-216.
Svenson, Ola, 1981, Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers?, Acta
Psychologica 47, 143-148.
Weinstein, N., 1980, Unrealistic optimism about future life events, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 39, 806-820.
Who’s Who in Finance and Industry, 1980/81-1995/96 (Marquis, Chicago, Ill.).
Yermack, David, 1995, Do corporations award CEO stock options eﬀectively, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 237-269.

42

Notes
1

Upward bias in the assessment of future outcomes is sometimes referred to as “overoptimism” rather than

“overconfidence.” We follow the literature on self-serving attribution and choose the label “overconfidence” in
order to distinguish the overestimation of one’s own abilities (such as IQ or managerial skills) and outcomes
relating to one’s own personal situation from the general overestimation of exogenous outcomes (such as the
growth of the US economy).
2

See also Bertrand and Schoar (2003) on the impact of managerial style on firm policy.

3

A manager who is not self-interested does not necessarily act in the interest of current shareholders since

eﬃcient investment implies maximizing the total value of the firm (see Hart, (1993) and (2001)). To conform
with the previous literature, we assume that the manager maximizes current shareholder value. Moreover, in
the case of overconfident managers, it is not clear whether value maximization leads to more eﬃcient outcomes
than the maximization of current shareholder value since managers and shareholders will not agree on the
value-maximizing course of action even without managerial self-interest.
4

The investment-cash flow sensitivity result replicates in any setting with at least one financial security that

is not risk-free and thus induces disagreement about its price.
5

See Kaplan-Zingales (1997) for a similarly posed theoretical problem.

6

Note that this criterion limits the number of IPOs in our sample (and, thus, the relevance of the more

stringent restrictions on insider trading associated with such firms, such as lockup periods).
7

Definitions of Q and its components as in Fama and French (2002).

8

The results are similar if we instead winsorize cash flow at one percent.

9

The few CEOs with degrees belonging to more than one group are classified in multiple categories.

10

We lose 130 (financial) firms when we merge in the accounting data necessary to construct cash flow,

investment, and Q due to missing data. Additionally, our treatment of cash flow and the requirement that
options and stock holdings data be present for a firm year to be included in the regressions brings the total
number of firms to 337.
11

We exclude CEOs for whom data on stock purchases is not present for more than one of these five years.

12

Note that some of the increase in share-holdings may arise due to new stock grants. This component is

unlikely to be the driving factor behind our classification, however. Indeed, we find that there are no restricted
stock grants in the CEO-years we use to construct this measure.
13

See Malmendier and Tate (2003) for a similar split of summary statistics using the Longholder measure.

14

The results are the same if we look only at CEOs who had an option reach the 67 percent threshold at least

43

twice.
15

Financial advisory firms that track insider trades often report only the purchases and sales of stocks, not

the exercise of options (see for instance the websites of Investar, Quicken; also EDGAR). Other websites make it
explicit that option exercise should be understood as “noise” with respect to insider knowledge, see for instance
http://www.winninginvesting.com/insider.htm (“The employees consider the options part of their salary..”) or
http://invest-faq.com/articles/trade-insider.html (“same-day exercise of a stock option and selling the resulting
stock ... rarely means very much”); similarly, the weekly column “Insider Trading Spotlight” in the Wall Street
Journal, the weekly coverage of insider-trading information in the Financial Times.
16

This conclusion is somewhat clouded by the possibility that new grants contaminate the Net Buyer measure.

17

Stock ownership and vested options, like Q, are taken at the beginning of the fiscal year. Also, we multiply

vested options by 10 in the regressions so that its mean is comparable to the mean of stock ownership.
18

Among others, Brickley, Coles, and Terry (1994) suggest that the number of outside executives are an

improvement on previous measures of corporate governance; see also Byrd and Hickman (1992). An alternative
measure available in our data set is board size. Employing an indicator of eﬃcient board size (fewer than 12
members) as a measure of governance gives similar results.
19

See French’s website (http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html) for de-

finitions. The results are typically robust to larger numbers of industry classifications with the results on the
largest samples (e.g., the personal characteristic results in Section VI) robust to even the full set of 48 Fama
and French groups.
20

The correlations between the “loser” and “winner” variables and Longholder are calculated using the Holder

67 sample restriction; the correlations between the “loser” and “winner” variables and Net Buyer are calculated
using the intersection of the Holder 67 and Net Buyer sample restrictions. All correlations except Longholder
and “winner” are statistically significant at the one percent level.
21

Because of space considerations, Table VII does not display the benchmark regressions of investment on

only cash flow and Q, including and excluding fixed eﬀects. However, the results of those regressions are similar
to the results in Table V for the Holder 67 subsample.
22

See Hadlock (1998).

23

To construct the index, we use the definition of Q as in Kaplan and Zingales (1997). The ratios composed

from COMPUSTAT data items are: cash flow to capital = (item 18 + item 14) / item 8 ; Q = [item 6 + (item24
* item 25) - item 60 - item 74] / item 6 ; debt to capital (leverage) = (item 9 + item 34) / (item 9 + item 34
+ item 216) ; dividends to capital = item21 + item 19) / item 8 ; cash to capital = item 1 / item 8. Item 8,
capital, is always taken at the beginning of the year.

44

24

Table available upon request.

25

Tables are available upon request.

26

We thank the referee for suggesting this quotation.

27

See also Bertrand and Schoar (2003).

28

Notice that we need A + R(I ∗ ) > I ∗ − C for this problem to be well-defined. A + R(I ∗ ) = I ∗ − C implies

that the CEO cannot raise funds from the equity markets (and thus I ∗ = c∗ + d∗ ). Thus, cash flow sensitivity
ˆ
arises if and only if internal funds are insuﬃcient to cover desired investment (C + D < I).
29

Notice that all cash and debt capacity is exhausted before the CEO will issue equity.

45

Table I

Summary Statistics
The sample with "Holder67 Sample Restriction" contains all CEO years of CEOs who had options more than 67% in the money in the fifth year at least two times during their sample tenure.
The "Holder67 Sample" contains all CEO years after the CEO fails to exercise a five-year-old option that is at least 67% in the money, provided that he subsequently does it again at least
once.
Full Sample
Number of Firms = 337
Variable
Obs. Mean Median
SD Min.
Max.
Assets ($M)
3742 5,652 2,286 12,759
14 198,599
Capital ($M)
3740 2,448
989 5,599
4 128,063
Investment ($M)
3742 382
151
949
0 17,810
Investment normalized by lagged capital 3742 0.23
0.18 0.25
0
5.72
Investment normalized by lagged assets
3742 0.09
0.07 0.08
0
1.64
Cash flow ($M)
3742 453
191
985 -618 15,726
Cash flow normalized by lagged capital
3742 0.35
0.25 0.35 -0.24
2.55
Cash flow normalized by lagged assets
3742 0.11
0.10 0.07 -0.16
0.65
Q (beginning of the fiscal year)
3742 1.44
1.14 0.92 0.51
12.26
Earnings/Price Ratio
3648 0.05
0.06 0.15
-7
1
ROA
3742 0.06
0.05 0.06 -0.21
0.55
Corporate governance (Outside CEOs)
3742 1.77
1 1.59
0
9
Distribution across Fama French 12 Industry Groups (3728 observations)
Consumer Nondurables 0.11
Telecommunication
0.04
Utilities
Consumer Durables 0.04
0.17
Manufacturing 0.13
Shops
0.11
Energy 0.03
Health
0.05
Chemicals and Allied Products 0.06
Money
0.06
Other
0.07
0.26
Business
Equipment
(
y)
A. Firm Data Summary Statistics

Holder67 Sample Restriction
Number of Firms = 113
Obs. Mean Median
SD Min.
1058 5,584 2,161 12,978 20.3
1058 1,831
846 3,616
4
1058 370
159
878
0
1058 0.25
0.21 0.23
0
1058 0.10
0.08 0.07
0
1058 490
203 1,005 -117
1058 0.42
0.32 0.35 -0.11
1058 0.13
0.12 0.07 -0.06
1058 1.58
1.31 0.90 0.66
1030 0.06
0.06 0.06 -0.94
1058 0.08
0.07 0.07 -0.19
1058 1.74
1 1.58
0
(1056 observations)
Cons. ND
0.14 Telecomm.
Utilities
Cons. D
0.05
Shops
Manuf.
0.11
Energy
Health
0.01
Chemicals
Money
0.12
0.12
Bus. Equip.
Other

Max.
180,237
42,027
11,712
5.72
0.07
11,713
2.46
0.59
10.71
0.35
0.55
8
0.02
0.03
0.12
0.09
0.05
0.26

Holder67 Sample
Number of Firms = 58
Obs. Mean Median
SD Min.
Max.
305 6,802 2,532 18,782 197 180,237
305 2,306
924 5,049 48.6 42,027
305 477
182 1,190
0 11,712
305 0.23
0.21 0.12
0
0.94
305 0.09
0.08 0.06
0
0.42
305 616
249 1,317 -60 11,713
305 0.40
0.31 0.33 -0.09
2.46
305 0.12
0.12 0.07 -0.06
0.49
305 1.62
1.39 0.75 0.83
6.49
304 0.05
0.05 0.04 -0.22
0.15
305 0.07
0.06 0.06 -0.19
0.32
305 1.85
1 1.73
0
8
(305 observations)
Cons. ND
0.10 Telecomm.
0.02
Cons. D
Utilities
0.05
0.00
Manuf.
Shops
0.10
0.12
Energy
Health
0.02
0.10
Money
Chemicals
0.15
0.05
0.16
0.25
Other
Bus. Equip.

(http://mba.tuck.dartmouth.edu/pages/faculty/ken.french/data_library.html).

B. CEO Data Summary Statistics
Variable
Age
Years as CEO
CEO & President & Chairman (dummy)
Founder (dummy)
Stock ownership (%)
Vested options (% of shares outst.)
"Depression baby" (born in 1930s)
(dummy)
Finance career (dummy)
Technical career (dummy)
Finance education (dummy)
MBA (dummy)
Technical education (dummy)

Obs.
3741
3716
3742
3186
3742
3742
3741
2014
2014
2218
2218
2218

Number of CEOs = 697
Mean Median
SD Min.
57.57
58 6.77
33
8.53
6 7.44
1
0.38
0 0.49
0
0.17
0 0.37
0
0.023 0.0012 0.07
0
0.002 0.0005 0.01
0
0.37
0.23
0.19
0.33
0.27
0.56

0
0
0
0
0
1

0.48
0.42
0.39
0.47
0.44
0.50

0
0
0
0
0
0

Max.
84
45
1
1
0.951
0.463

Obs.
1058
1058
1058
944
1058
1058

1
1
1
1
1
1

1058
693
693
786
786
786

Number of CEOs = 113
Mean Median
SD Min.
58.02
58 6.12
41
10.81
9 7.24
1
0.37
0 0.48
0
0.17
0 0.38
0
0.017 0.002 0.05
0
0.004 0.001 0.01
0
0.42
0.21
0.18
0.38
0.33
0.52

0
0
0
0
0
1

0.49
0.41
0.38
0.49
0.47
0.50

0
0
0
0
0
0

Max.
82
39
1
1
0.38
0.11

Obs.
305
297
305
279
305
305

1
1
1
1
1
1

305
187
187
215
215
215

Number of CEOs = 58
Mean Median
SD Min.
60.78
61 5.88 44
13.72
12 5.91
6
0.40
0 0.49
0
0.17
0 0.38
0
0.009 0.003 0.02
0
0.005 0.002 0.01
0
0.37
0.15
0.17
0.45
0.36
0.48

0
0
0
0
0
0

0.48
0.36
0.38
0.50
0.48
0.50

0
0
0
0
0
0

Max.
82
35
1
1
0.22
0.07
1
1
1
1
1
1

Table II

Correlations
Sample A: CEOs with options more than 67% in the money in the fifth year at least 2 times.
Sample B: CEOs with at least ten years in the data and no more than one missing observation of ownership in the first five years. Data from the first five years of each CEO's tenure excluded.
Sample C: CEOs with options more than 67% in the money in the fifth year at least 2 times and with at least ten years in the data and no more than one missing observation of ownership in the first five
years. Data from the first five years of each CEO's tenure excluded.
Overconfidence and Firm Characteristics
Holder 67
A. B. C.
Holder 67
Longholder
Net Buyer
Size
Q
CF/k
Stock Ownership
Vested Options
Corporate Governance

1.00
0.25
n/a
0.15
0.03
-0.03
-0.10
0.10
0.04

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

1.00
n/a
0.06
0.06
-0.04
-0.04
-0.18
0.06
0.02

Longholder
A.
B. C.
1.00
n/a
-0.17
0.10
0.11
-0.07
0.17
0.02

1.00
0.01
-0.11
0.11
0.15
-0.19
0.30
0.04

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

Net Buyer
A. B.
C.

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

1.00
0.25
-0.11
-0.16
-0.20
-0.11
0.06

1.00
0.32
-0.10
-0.08
-0.18
-0.15
0.01

A.

Size
B.

C.

A.

Q
B.

C.

A.

1.00
-0.25
-0.20
-0.20
-0.31
0.33

1.00
-0.34
-0.10
-0.12
-0.26
0.29

1.00
-0.28
-0.12
-0.13
-0.37
0.35

1.00
0.44
-0.01
0.18
-0.08

1.00
0.40
-0.01
0.18
-0.15

1.00
0.44
-0.09
0.20
-0.09

1.00
0.06
0.25
-0.08

CF/k
B.

C.

1.00 1.00
0.11 0.00
0.27 0.34
-0.09 -0.01

Stock Ownersh.
A.
B.
C.

1.00 1.00 1.00
0.10 -0.07 0.01
-0.14 -0.23 -0.15

Vested Options
A.
B.
C.

1.00 1.00 1.00
-0.16 -0.14 -0.18

Overconfidence and CEO Characteristics
Holder 67
A.
-0.06

B.
C.
n/a -0.15

"Depression baby"
CEO & President &
0.04 n/a 0.05
Chairman
Finance Career
-0.09 n/a -0.16
Technical Career
-0.01 n/a 0.02
Tenure
0.25 n/a -0.05
Coefficients in italics are significant at 10%.

Longholder
A.
B. C.

Net Buyer
A. B.
C.

-0.03 -0.07

n/a

n/a 0.04 0.04

-0.04
-0.10
-0.12
0.02

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a

-0.06
-0.13
-0.05
-0.06

0.13 0.07
0.08 0.29
-0.25 -0.26
-0.21 -0.18

Depression Baby
A.
B.
C.

CEO/Pres/Chm.
A.
B.
C.

Finance Career
A.
B.
C.

Techn. Career
A.
B.
C.

1.00 1.00 1.00
-0.15 -0.15 -0.07
-0.14 -0.12 -0.13

1.00 1.00 1.00
0.14 0.07 0.22

Tenure
A.

B.

C.

1.00 1.00 1.00
-0.01
-0.05
0.10
-0.18

-0.02
0.06
0.07
-0.35

-0.10
-0.03
0.15
-0.28

1.00
-0.14
0.07
0.01

1.00
-0.12
0.01
-0.01

1.00
-0.19
0.04
-0.03

1.00 1.00 1.00

Corp. Gov.
A. B. C.

1.00 1.00 1.00

Table III

Persistence of Exercising Behavior
In Panel A, the dependent variable is a dummy variable taking the value one if the CEO fails to exercise a five-year-old option that
reaches at least 67% in the money in the current period. Past Late Exercises is the number of times that the CEO has exercised such
options late in the past. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets at the beginning of the year. Earnings/Price
ratio is the minimal earnings to price ratio during the fiscal year. Panel B presents statistics on late exercises of stock options
partitioned by the number of past late exercises by the CEO in question.

A. Random Effects Probit Regression
Sample: Observations with 67%-in-the-money options (in year five)

(1)
0.2493
(4.40)***

Past Late Exercises
Q

(2)
0.2569
(4.57)***
-0.1519
(1.79)*

Earnings/Price Ratio
Observations
Number of CEOs

759
278

742
273

(4)
0.266
(4.80)***
-0.1514
(1.81)*
-0.8128
(0.89)
728
271

(3)
0.2571
(4.61)***

-0.709
(0.77)
731
272

Absolute value of z statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

B. Percent of "Late Exercisers" Partitioned by Number of Last Late Exercises
Sample: Observations with 67%-in-the-money options (in year five)

Past Late Exercises

% Who Exercise Late

Number of CEOs

0

0.32

487

1

0.64

128

2

0.73

67

3

0.94

32

4
>4

0.79

28

0.74

23

Table IV

Distribution of Returns of "Late Exercisers" (67%, 5th year)
The table presents data on the returns of late exercising CEOs (Holders 67) by percentiles. The first column presents the percentage in the money at
the maximum price during the fifth fiscal year from grant date for each option package that is held beyond the 67% threshold. The second, third and
fourth columns present the returns (in %) relative to exercising the options during year five and investing instead in the S&P500, assuming exercise
at the maximum, mean, and median stock prices during the fiscal year respectively. We also present the last percentile for which the return is
negative under each price assumption. All returns are annualized.
Sample: CEOs who have option packages at least 67% in the money in the 5th year after the option grant and who have not exercised the options
before the 5th year.

Percentage in the money in year 5

Return (in %) relative to exercising during year 5 and investing in S&P500

Exercise at fiscal-year
maximum price

Exercise at fiscal-year
mean price

Exercise at fiscal-year
median price

Percentile

% in the
money

Percentile

Return

Percentile

Return

Percentile

Return

10th

161.89

10th

-16.56

10th

-16.48

10th

-16.45

20th

213.71

20th

-10.32

20th

-10.51

20th

-11.65

30th

280.97

30th

-6.40

30th

-5.89

30th

-7.39

40th

366.88

40th

-2.79

40th

-2.50

40th

-2.56

46th

-0.66

46th

-0.38

49th

-0.05

50th

1.02

50th

1.64

50th

0.30

50th

435.88

60th

616.83

60th

5.72

60th

6.94

60th

5.59

70th

905.43

70th

10.86

70th

10.96

70th

11.62

80th

1,395.22

80th

19.16

80th

17.32

80th

16.05

90th

2,326.39

90th

28.27

90th

25.27

90th

25.07

Mean
Standard Deviation

1,275.90
3,336.66

3.60
20.23

4.85
20.96

3.57
21.15

Observations
CEOs

182
86

182
86

182
86

182
86

Table V

Regression of Investment on Cash Flow and Exercise Behavior
The dependent variable in the regressions is Investment, defined as firm capital expenditures and normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Cash flow is
earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of
assets at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested
options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested
options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is comparable to stock ownership. Size is the natural logarithm of assets at the beginning of the year. Corporate
governance is the number of outside directors who currently serve as CEOs of other companies.
Holder 67 is a dummy variable equal to 1 for all CEO-years after the CEO holds a five-year-old option that is more than 67% in the money, provided that he
subsequently does it again at least once. Industries are defined as the twelve Fama-French industry groups. In Columns 6 and 7, standard errors are robust to
heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation.
Sample: CEOs with options more than 67% in the money in the fifth year at least two times

Baseline Regressions

Cash flow
Q

no fixed
effects, no
controls

fixed
effects, no
controls

fixed
effects,
controls

(1)
0.2052
(9.73)***
0.0250
(3.04)***

(2)
0.6419
(7.19)***
0.0635
(6.54)***

(3)
1.6579
(9.85)***
-0.0049
(0.24)
-0.1077
(0.19)
0.1946
(1.61)
0.0466
(2.45)**
-0.0042
(0.54)
0.0521
(2.64)***
-0.5749
(1.38)
-0.4612
(4.15)***
-0.1713
(8.47)***
0.0363
(2.16)**

Stock ownership (%)
Vested options
Size
Corporate governance
(Q)*(Cash flow)
(Stock ownership)*(Cash flow)
(Vested options)*(Cash flow)
(Size)*(Cash flow)
(Corporate governance)*(Cash flow)
Holder 67
(Holder 67)*(Cash flow)
Year fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
(Year fixed effects)*(Cash flow)
(Industry fixed effects)*(Cash flow)

no
no
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes
no

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

1058
0.13

1058
0.56

1058
0.61

Constant included. Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Late Exercise of 67%-in-the-Money Options (in year
5)
overoverstandard industry - CF
confidence confidence
errors
interactions,
with fixed with fixed
clustered by clustered by
effects, no
effects,
firm
firm
controls
controls
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.6729
1.7044
1.7044
1.2911
(7.56)*** (10.20)*** (2.99)***
(3.22)***
0.0656
-0.0088
-0.0088
-0.0112
(6.79)***
(0.44)
(0.18)
(0.35)
-0.1834
-0.1834
0.1892
(0.33)
(0.26)
(0.34)
0.1398
0.1398
0.1989
(1.17)
(1.04)
(1.55)
0.0543
0.0543
0.0429
(2.88)***
(1.47)
(1.44)
-0.0071
-0.0071
-0.0131
(0.92)
(0.75)
(1.40)
0.0648
0.0648
0.0645
(3.28)***
(0.83)
(1.28)
-0.6897
-0.6897
-1.1138
(1.67)*
(0.45)
(0.97)
-0.2981
-0.2981
-0.5015
(2.62)***
(1.32)
(2.62)***
-0.1754
-0.1754
-0.1433
(8.77)***
(2.31)**
(2.64)***
0.0441
0.0441
0.0597
(2.65)***
(1.69)*
(2.61)**
-0.0351
-0.0495
-0.0495
-0.0362
(1.35)
(1.96)*
(1.67)*
(1.27)
0.1648
0.2339
0.2339
0.1718
(3.39)*** (4.70)***
(2.59)**
(2.20)**
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
yes
1058
0.56

1058
0.62

1058
0.62

1056
0.67

Figure 1

Holder Regression for Different % in the Money
Figure 1 presents the results of reestimating the regression specified in Column 6 of Table V using different percentages in the money as thresholds for rational exercise in the classification of CEOs as
overconfident. More specifically, Holder 67 is replaced in the regression by Holder "x" where Holder "x" is a dummy variable equal to 1 for all CEO-years after the CEO holds a five-year-old option that
is more than "x"% in the money, provided that he subsequently does it again at least once. In addition, the sample is restricted in each regression to the subsample of CEOs who at least twice had options
that reached at least "x"% in the money after five years. The number of CEOs meeting this restriction for each "x" is presented below along with the subset of those CEOs who are classified as
overconfident using the Holder "x" measure. Coefficients on Holder "x" interacted with cash flow are significant at the 5% level for all x except x = 50, 80, and 85 which are significant at 1%, where
standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation.

0.3

140
120

Number of CEOs

100

0.2

80
0.15
60
0.1

40

0.05

20
0

0
50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100 105 110 115 120 125 130 135 140 145 150

% in Money ("x")

Regression Coefficient

0.25
CEOs
Overconfident CEOs
Coefficient on Holder "x" interacted
with Cash Flow

Table VI

Regression of Investment on Cash Flow and Exercise Behavior
The dependent variable in the regressions is Investment, defined as firm capital expenditures and normalized by capital at the beginning of the fiscal year. Cash flow is
earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of
assets at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested
options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options
are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is comparable to stock ownership. Size is the natural logarithm of assets at the beginning of the fiscal year. Corporate governance
is the number of outside directors who currently serve as CEOs of other companies.
Hold and Win 67 is a dummy variable equal to 1 for all CEO-years after the CEO holds a five-year-old option that is more than 67% in the money, provided that he
subsequently does it again at least once and that he earns excess returns by holding the options (relative to exercising in the fifth year and investing the proceeds in the
S&P 500) each time. Hold and Lose 67 is a dummy variable equal to 1 for all CEO-years after the CEO holds a five-year-old option that is more than 67% in the money,
provided that he subsequently does it again at least once and that he loses money by holding such an option (relative to exercising in the fifth year and investing the
proceeds in the S&P 500) at least once. Returns are calculated using the maximum stock price during the fiscal year. Industries are defined as the twelve Fama-French
industry groups. In Columns 6 and 7, standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation.
Sample: CEOs with options more than 67% in the money in the fifth year at least two times

Baseline Regressions

Cash flow
Q

no fixed
effects, no
controls

fixed
effects, no
controls

fixed
effects,
controls

(1)
0.2096
(9.58)***
0.0271
(3.14)***

(2)
0.6576
(7.14)***
0.0668
(6.29)***

(3)
1.7235
(9.83)***
-0.0057
(0.26)
-0.2164
(0.31)
0.1802
(1.46)
0.0535
(2.71)***
-0.0042
(0.52)
0.0527
(2.53)**
-0.7401
(1.71)*
-0.4438
(3.87)***
-0.1761
(8.42)***
0.0383
(2.18)**

no
no
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes
no

yes
yes
yes
yes

1016
0.13

1016
0.55

1016
0.61

1016
0.56

1016
0.62

1016
0.62

1014
0.68

Stock ownership (%)
Vested options
Size
Corporate governance
(Q)*(Cash flow)
(Stock ownership)*(Cash flow)
(Vested options)*(Cash flow)
(Size)*(Cash flow)
(Corporate governance)*(Cash flow)
Hold and Win 67
(Hold and Win 67)*(Cash flow)
Hold and Lose 67
(Hold and Lose 67)*(Cash flow)
Year fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
(Year fixed effects)*(Cash flow)
(Industry fixed effects)*(Cash flow)
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

Late Exercise of 67%-in-the-Money Options (in year
5) with Losses
overoverstandard industry - CF
confidence confidence
errors
interactions,
with fixed with fixed
clustered by clustered by
effects, no
effects,
firm
firm
controls
controls
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.681
1.7368
1.7368
1.3526
(7.42)*** (9.95)*** (2.90)***
(3.21)***
0.0716
-0.007
-0.007
-0.0055
(6.74)***
(0.32)
(0.14)
(0.16)
-0.2233
-0.2233
-0.09
(0.33)
(0.33)
(0.14)
0.1311
0.1311
0.2108
(1.07)
(0.94)
(1.54)
0.0587
0.0587
0.0504
(2.99)***
(1.52)
(1.63)
-0.0072
-0.0072
-0.0124
(0.90)
(0.75)
(1.36)
0.0647
0.0647
0.072
(3.10)***
(0.82)
(1.41)
-0.8257
-0.8257
-1.196
(1.92)*
(0.55)
(1.09)
-0.2907
-0.2907
-0.5406
(2.46)**
(1.25)
(2.57)**
-0.1768
-0.1768
-0.1575
(8.46)***
(2.27)**
(2.72)***
0.0467
0.0467
0.0561
(2.67)***
(1.72)*
(2.64)***
-0.1359
-0.0679
-0.0679
-0.0621
(2.49)**
(1.31)
(0.81)
(0.64)
0.3254
0.2869
0.2869
0.1855
(3.82)*** (3.45)***
(1.96)*
(1.24)
-0.0289
-0.0622
-0.0622
-0.0498
(0.94)
(2.09)**
(1.76)*
(1.61)
0.1417
0.2366
0.2366
0.1699
(2.22)**
(3.71)***
(2.33)**
(1.91)*

Constant included. Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table VII

Regression of Investment on Cash Flow and Longholder or Net Buyer
The dependent variable in the regressions is Investment, defined as firm capital expenditures and normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Cash flow is earnings
before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets at the
beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the
CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10
so that the mean is comparable to stock ownership. Size is the natural logarithm of assets at the beginning of the year. Corporate governance is the number of outside directors
who currently serve as CEOs of other companies.
Longholder is a dummy variable equal to one if the CEO ever held an option until the last year prior to expiration. N Buyer is a dummy variable equal to one if the CEO was
a net buyer of stock more years than he was a net seller in his first five years in the sample. Columns 5 - 8 includes only CEOs with at least 10 years in the sample and
excludes their first five years. Industries are defined as the twelve Fama-French industry groups. Standard errors in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 are robust to heteroskedasticity and
arbitrary within-firm serial correlation.

Longholder Regressions

N et Buyer Regressions

overstandard firm - CF
fixed
confidence
errors interactions,
effects, with fixed
clustered clustered by
controls
effects,
by firm
firm
controls
(1)
0.7249
(8.33)***
Q
0.0814
(7.53)***
Stock ownership (%)
0.1936
(2.37)**
Vested options
-0.0231
(0.24)
Size
-0.0465
(4.81)***
Corporate governance
0.0012
(0.31)
(Q)*(Cash flow)
-0.0062
(0.63)
(Stock ownership)*(Cash flow)
0.0186
(0.12)
(Vested options)*(Cash flow)
0.3198
(4.46)***
(Size)*(Cash flow)
-0.0595
(5.67)***
(Corporate governance)*(Cash flow) -0.0074
(0.82)
Longholder
Cash flow

(Longholder)*(Cash flow)

(2)
0.656
(7.50)***
0.0851
(7.89)***
0.196
(2.41)**
0.003
(0.03)
-0.0494
(5.12)***
0.0023
(0.59)
-0.0099
(1.02)
0.002
(0.01)
0.2847
(3.97)***
-0.053
(5.04)***
-0.0096
(1.07)
-0.0504
(2.65)***
0.1778
(5.51)***

(3)
0.656
(2.53)**
0.0851
(1.99)**
0.196
(1.01)
0.003
(0.01)
-0.0494
(2.34)**
0.0023
(0.43)
-0.0099
(0.23)
0.002
(0.00)
0.2847
(1.19)
-0.053
(1.55)
-0.0096
(0.49)
-0.0504
(1.00)
0.1778
(1.33)

(4)
1.1063
(2.59)**
0.1009
(1.45)
0.1138
(0.54)
0.0098
(0.07)
-0.0213
(0.53)
0.0058
(1.22)
-0.0234
(0.04)
0.2694
(1.91)*
-0.0427
(0.61)
-0.0202
(1.18)
-0.0242
(0.34)
-0.0306
(1.05)
0.1126
(1.32)

fixed
effects,
controls

overconfidence
with fixed
effects,
controls

standard industry - CF
errors
interactions,
clustered clustered by
by firm
firm

(5)
1.6262
(7.24)***
0.0752
(3.45)***
0.3543
(0.91)
0.1104
(0.72)
-0.0860
(3.36)***
0.0025
(0.26)
-0.0555
(2.44)**
-0.8325
(1.25)
-0.1131
(0.85)
-0.1517
(5.49)***
0.022
(0.92)

(6)
1.555
(6.99)***
0.0770
(3.57)***
-0.0964
(0.24)
0.0639
(0.42)
-0.0790
(3.12)***
0.0071
(0.74)
-0.0721
(3.17)***
0.3991
(0.56)
-0.0012
(0.01)
-0.1653
(6.02)***
0.0006
(0.03)

(7)
1.555
(4.19)***
0.0770
(3.23)***
-0.0964
(0.24)
0.0639
(0.43)
-0.0790
(1.48)
0.0071
(0.42)
-0.0721
(1.80)*
0.3991
(0.34)
-0.0012
(0.01)
-0.1653
(3.43)***
0.0006
(0.01)

(8)
1.382
(2.46)**
0.0677
(2.96)***
-0.1138
(0.27)
0.0934
(0.64)
-0.0827
(1.53)
-0.0025
(0.16)
-0.0502
(1.53)
0.5724
(0.44)
0.0221
(0.11)
-0.1123
(2.31)**
0.0337
(0.55)

1.0615
(2.83)***
0.4226
(4.33)***

1.0615
(1.84)*
0.4226
(1.57)

0.1053
(0.11)
0.449
(1.92)*

Net Buyer
(Net Buyer)*(Cash flow)

Year fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
(Year fixed effects)*(Cash flow)
(Industry fixed effects)*(Cash flow)
(Firm fixed effects)*(Cash flow)
Observations
Adjusted R-squared

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
yes

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
no
no

yes
yes
yes
yes
no

3742
0.54

3742
0.54

3742
0.54

3742
0.63

842
0.53

842
0.54

842
0.54

842
0.56

Constant Included. Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table VIII

Regression of Investment on Cash Flow and Overconfidence by Equity Dependence
The dependent variable in the regressions is Investment, defined as firm capital expenditures and normalized by capital at the beginning of the
year. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Q is the market
value of assets over the book value of assets and is taken at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock owned
by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6
months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is
comparable to stock ownership. Size is the natural logarithm of assets at the beginning of the year. Corporate governance is the number of
outside directors who currently serve as CEOs of other companies. Longholder is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO ever held an option
until the last year prior to expiration.
Firms are classified according to quintiles of the Kaplan-Zingales index, where the highest quintile contains the most constrained subsample. All
standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation.

OLS with Fixed Effects

Cash flow
Q
Stock ownership (%)
Vested options
Size
Corporate governance
(Q)*(Cash flow)
(Stock ownership)*(Cash flow)
(Vested options)*(Cash flow)
(Size)*(Cash flow)
(Corporate governance)*(Cash flow)
Longholder
(Longholder)*(Cash flow)

Most
Constrained
(1)
1.1538
(2.21)**
0.1844
(4.48)***
-0.4103
(1.60)
0.1414
(0.59)
-0.0428
(1.04)
0.0022
(0.21)
-0.1685
(2.12)**
-0.3707
(0.69)
-0.4152
(1.18)
-0.0446
(0.69)
-0.0439
(0.91)
-0.0832
(1.72)*
0.4990
(3.52)***

(2)
0.1763
(0.34)
0.0598
(1.41)
0.5790
(2.02)**
-0.3270
(1.02)
-0.0175
(0.73)
-0.0044
(0.64)
0.0364
(0.30)
-1.2622
(1.48)
1.3804
(2.31)**
-0.0144
(0.23)
0.0954
(2.26)**
0.0831
(1.74)*
-0.1449
(1.10)

(3)
0.8952
(2.08)**
0.0700
(1.99)**
0.0266
(0.15)
0.2748
(1.43)
-0.0223
(0.94)
0.0034
(0.57)
-0.0420
(0.53)
-1.0177
(1.32)
0.0486
(0.08)
-0.0482
(1.05)
-0.0318
(1.24)
-0.0196
(0.68)
0.0680
(0.67)

(4)
0.5259
(1.01)
0.0124
(0.43)
-0.1723
(1.16)
0.2150
(0.53)
-0.0664
(1.54)
-0.0073
(0.51)
0.0371
(1.00)
0.5432
(0.92)
-0.1765
(0.55)
0.0258
(0.47)
0.0237
(0.57)
-0.0219
(0.43)
0.0025
(0.02)

Least
Constrained
(5)
0.6969
(2.50)**
-0.0346
(0.41)
0.3433
(0.79)
0.7829
(1.09)
-0.0425
(0.81)
0.0122
(0.52)
0.0420
(0.64)
0.0685
(0.10)
-0.6750
(1.22)
-0.0413
(0.98)
-0.0273
(0.80)
-0.1404
(1.10)
0.2453
(1.28)

---------------------------------------------->

Year fixed effects
Firm fixed effects
(Year fixed effects)*(Cash flow)

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

728
0.75

728
0.82

729
0.91

728
0.78

728
0.56

Constant included. Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

Table IX

Regression of Investment on Personal Characteristics and Longholder
The dependent variable in the regressions is Investment, defined as firm capital expenditures and normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Cash
flow (CF) is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets
over the book value of assets at the beginning of the year. Titles is a dummy variable equal to one for all CEO-years if the CEO is also president and
chairman of the board. Tenure is the number of years the CEO has held that position. "Depression baby" is a dummy variable equal to one if the CEO was
born in the 1930s. Finance Education is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO had "financial education." Financial education includes undergraduate
and graduate degrees in accounting, finance, business (incl. MBA), and economics. Technical Education is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO had
"technical education." Technical education includes undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering, physics, operations research, chemistry,
mathematics, biology, pharmacy, and other applied sciences.
Longholder is a dummy variable equal to one if the CEO ever held an option until the last year prior to expiration. Industries are defined as the twelve
Fama-French industry groups. All standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation.

OLS with Fixed Effects

Cash Flow
Q
Titles
(Titles)*(CF)
Tenure
(Tenure)*(CF)

Titles

Cohort 1930s

Employment
Background

(1)
0.9414
(3.08)***
0.0751
(1.04)
-0.0239
(0.97)
0.1342
(1.38)
-0.0013
(0.88)
0.0032
(0.70)

(2)
1.0181
(2.78)***
0.078
(1.08)

(3)
0.9946
(2.87)***
0.0868
(1.25)

"Depression baby"
("Depression baby")*(CF)

0.04
(1.62)
-0.123
(1.80)*
-0.0475
(1.78)*
0.0894
(1.21)

(4)
0.8087
(2.94)***
0.0769
(1.05)
-0.0208
(0.86)
0.1234
(1.30)
-0.0018
(1.18)
0.0043
(0.92)
-0.0527
(1.88)*
0.1427
(2.00)**
0.051
(2.26)**
-0.1458
(2.34)**
-0.0486
(1.96)*
0.1022
(1.44)

(5)
0.7106
(2.63)***
0.0819
(1.13)
-0.0199
(0.83)
0.1222
(1.30)
-0.0013
(0.93)
0.0026
(0.60)
-0.0432
(1.69)*
0.1255
(1.85)*
0.0513
(2.32)**
-0.1482
(2.40)**
-0.0503
(2.07)**
0.1117
(1.59)
-0.0642
(1.65)
0.2196
(1.97)*

2201
0.55

2201
0.56

2201
0.56

-0.0021
(1.20)
0.0044
(0.89)
-0.0415
(1.33)
0.1138
(1.32)

Finance Education
(Finance Education)*(CF)
Technical Education
(Technical Education)*(CF)

All Personal
All Personal
Characteristics
Characteristics
and Longholder

Longholder
(Longholder)*(CF)

Observations
Adjusted R-squared

2201
0.56

2201
0.55

Constant included. Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Controls for Corporate governance, Stock ownership, Vested options, Size and interactions of these variables and of Q with Cash Flow are included.
Fixed effects for Year and Firm and the interactions of (Year)*(CF) and (Industry)*(CF) are also included.

