                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  JURISDICTIONAL ADVANTAGE

                                            Maryann Feldman
                                             Roger Martin

                                         Working Paper 10802
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10802


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




Prepared for the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Innovation and the Economy Conference
(Washington, D.C.: Tuesday, April 13, 2004). This paper has benefited from comments and suggestions by
Scott Stern, Josh Lerner, Will Strange and Wendy Dobson. Rich Bryden at the Institute for Strategy and
Competitiveness provided assistance with data. Comments appreciated. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Maryann Feldman and Roger Martin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Jurisdictional Advantage
Maryann Feldman and Roger Martin
NBER Working Paper No. 10802
September 2004
JEL No. O1, R5, R3

                                            ABSTRACT

Our objective in this paper is to define jurisdictional advantage, the recognition that location is

critical to firms’ innovative success and that every location has unique assets that are not easily

replicated. The purpose is to be normative and policy oriented. Drawing from the well-developed

literature on corporate strategy, we consider analogies to cities in their search for competitive

advantage. In contrast to the more passive term locational advantage, our use of the term jurisdiction

denotes geographically-defined legal and political decision-making authority and coordination.

Thus, jurisdictions may be constructed and managed to promote a coherent activity set. We review

recent advances in our understanding of patterns of urban specialization and the composition of

activities within cities, which suggest strategies that may generate economic growth as well as those

strategies to avoid. This paper then considers the role of firms and their responsibility to

jurisdictions in light of the net benefits received from place-specific externalities, and concludes by

considering the challenges to implementing jurisdictional advantage.

Maryann Feldman
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
Canada M5S 3E6
feldman@rotman.utoronto.ca

Roger Martin
Joseph L. Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, Ontario
Canada M5S 3E6
                                      Jurisdictional Advantage


Introduction

       Economic growth is a preoccupation among economists and government policy makers.

Traditionally the focus has been at the national level, however research has shifted the focus to

lower geographic units defined as clusters of industrial activities or alternatively as regions. The

literature suggests that economic growth is a local process and that cities are an important, if not

the most important economic unit, in generating new development, competitiveness and

prosperity. When we talk about geographically-defined clusters of industrial activity or regional

economic development we are really talking about cities and the activities that take place within

the city’s sphere of influence1. It has not been popular to talk about cities in a policy context for

several decades in the United States; however, the new economic geography literature suggests

that the time has come to focus on cities and the construction of what we term jurisdictional

advantage as a means to promote economic growth and prosperity.

       Research has established that cities, due to the geographic proximity of firms and other

institutions, provide localized knowledge externalities or spillovers that provide positive

economic value. Moreover, cities increase opportunities for interaction that facilitates learning

and the absorption of knowledge, provide a venue for experimentation with new ideas and

enhance the ability to exchange ideas and engage with others who have relevant expertise. As a

result, firms in these locations enjoy higher productivity, greater innovation and growth, and pay

higher wages. A growing literature documents these advantages. However, these topics have




                                                                                                   1
more than an academic interest. The literature begs the question: if you are responsible for a

jurisdiction, what should you do to promote prosperity and economic growth?

       Our objective in this paper is to define jurisdictional advantage, the recognition that

location is critical to firms’ innovative success and that every location has unique assets that are

not easily replicated. The purpose is to be normative and policy oriented.       Drawing from the

well-developed literature on corporate strategy, we consider analogies to cities in their search for

competitive advantage. In contrast to the more passive term locational advantage, our use of the

term jurisdiction denotes geographically-defined legal and political decision-making authority

and coordination. Thus, jurisdictions may be constructed and managed to promote a coherent

activity set. We review recent advances in our understanding of patterns of urban specialization

and the composition of activities within cities, which suggest strategies that may generate

economic growth as well as those strategies to avoid. This paper then considers the role of firms

and their responsibility to jurisdictions in light of the net benefits received from place-specific

externalities, and concludes by considering the challenges to implementing jurisdictional

advantage.



Alternatives to Shaping a Jurisdiction

       There are two extreme philosophies available to policy makers to foster economic

development. One potential approach is laissez-faire – simply letting market forces work. The

rationale is that industrial clusters that are part of successful cities arise for a variety of

historically contingent or serendipitous factors not easily replicated. Firms locate and invest in a

particular city for reasons that are not well understood, much less predictable and controllable.

This view suggests that the most constructive thing a jurisdiction can do is let market forces




                                                                                                  2
determine its future fate and simply hope for the best. Given the challenges of jurisdictional

decision-making, the laissez-faire approach has some appeal but it is not without drawbacks.

Since industrial development demonstrates high levels of path dependence and increasing

returns, if a city misses out on an important trend, new technology or infrastructure investment

on the basis of a laissez-faire attitude, it may miss out for a very long time. Moreover, the

existence of market failures associated with innovative activity inhibits the efficient allocation of

resources, suggesting that there may be a role for government involvement.

       An opposing philosophy advocates aggressive planning towards a targeted industry in

what is a “if you build it they will come” philosophy. Typically, politicians and civic leaders

focus on some emerging, high-growth industry with great fanfare, high-profile events and the

commitment of substantial public resources.        These efforts are often mimicked by similar

jurisdictions in a classic bandwagon effect. For example, currently, forty-eight of the fifty states

currently have biotechnology initiatives (Biotechnology Industry Organization, 2001). Most of

these focus on human therapeutics and attempt to leverage local universities and medical

schools.

       There are numerous examples where governments have not been able to establish clusters

by fiat. One illustrative example is New Jersey’s failed attempt to replicate the success of

Silicon Valley (Leslie and Kargon, 1997).          Despite the presence of prominent research

universities and substantial private R&D sector, the net effect was several strategic partnerships

rather than broad-based economic development. Even in cases where policymakers were able to

implement an economic development vision, as in the case of Research Triangle Park, Link

(1995, 2002) documents that it took over fifty years of concerted efforts to begin to realize

measurable outcomes. Even when efforts are successful at generating start-up companies it is




                                                                                                   3
difficult for a jurisdiction to garner longer term benefits if complementary assets are lacking

(Connecticut Center for a New Economy 2004).

       The nature of innovation makes it difficult to dictate industrial clusters. Commercializing

technological breakthroughs requires translating scientific potential into consumer needs and

product markets. At its earliest stages, before applications are easily described or generally

appreciated, locating near the center of innovative activity provides critical competitive business

advantage. Realizing the potential of a technological breakthrough requires a sophisticated

understanding of consumer needs, existing markets for product innovation and factor inputs and

prevailing production technology. Co-location increases awareness of emerging trends and

reduces uncertainty for firms.     Innovation clusters spatially in locations where knowledge

externalities reduce the costs of discovery and commercialization.

       When a technology reaches a stage when it can be easily understood and valued, the

established centers – the first movers – already have an advantage. Increasing returns is a feature

of innovation and knowledge-based industrial activity. As a result, there is a tendency for

activities which are ahead to get even further ahead (Arthur 1996). By the time an industry is

well-known enough to be targeted for economic development other jurisdictions have probably

already captured the lion’s share of the benefits and are positioned for greater advantage.

Moreover, the path of emerging industries is difficult to predict and is extremely fluid. Planning

efforts based on current assumptions will never be able to anticipate future scientific

developments and the direction that a technology may take. Consider the Internet as a case in

point. In 1990, few, if any, jurisdictions focused on this technology but by the middle of the

decade, the country was caught in dot-com-mania with numerous public sector initiatives, tax

incentives and business incubators that have mostly been abandoned now.




                                                                                                 4
       A middle alternative to the two philosophies discussed may be ableto influence the

quality and shape of economic outcomes by making judicious investments and avoiding costly

mistakes – deliberately constructing jurisdictional advantage by building on existing, not easily

replicated resources and by complementing private sector activities. The pursuit of jurisdictional

advantage is not without challenges because there are so many factors that influence outcomes.

However, given that future prosperity and quality of life are at stake, questions of how this might

be done are of more than just academic interest.




Corporate Strategy as an Analogy

       We believe a helpful analogy can be made between jurisdictions and firms with respect to

strategic advantage. Certainly, cities have more complex objective functions overall than do

firms. However when we think about economic development specifically within the context of

cluster formation and industrial competitiveness, the analogy is instructive.      For firms, the

overarching goal is to gain and maintain competitive advantage, which translates into above

average returns for shareholders. The way to achieve competitive advantage is to create a

competitive strategy that is consistent with trends in the firm’s industry and appropriate to the

firm’s resources and capabilities.

       One important school of competitive strategy holds that competitive advantage arises

from the concept of creating a unique activity system, which is achieved either by an advantage

of low cost or by way of differentiation (Porter 1980). A unique activity system is a web of

activities that, when working together, provide an advantage that is difficult, if not impossible,

for competitors to replicate, because the individual activities fit well together and actually

reinforce each other. For example, Southwest Airlines has been the most successful airline in the



                                                                                                 5
US market over the past 30 years, in level of profitability, stability of earnings and growth in

market share. Competitive advantage is not achieved through any single thing it does such as

flying a completely standard fleet of Boeing 737s, or by flying from secondary airports, or

having the most frequent daily departures from each of its locations, or by utilizing the Internet

rather than travel agents for booking. Rather, Southwest achieves advantage by performing all of

these (and more) activities in ways that fit together and reinforce each other to produce a

significant and sustainable cost advantage over all of its competitors, while offering high and

consistent service to its customers. Any competitor would have to match every single aspect of

Southwest’s activity system to challenge the overall outcome – and thus far no competitor has

been successful in doing so (Porter 1996).

       The activity system can provide a low cost advantage by enabling the firm to produce a

product or service for a segment of customers that is roughly equivalent to that of the competitor

at a significantly lower cost – resulting in higher profitability than the average competitor as is

the case for Southwest Airlines. It is important to note that being a low cost firm is not the same

as being a low price firm. Having the same cost structure as competitors and deciding to sell at a

lower profit margin is not a strategy for long term advantage, but rather a strategy of transferring

value from corporate shareholders to customers. It is simply not a sustainable long-term strategy.

Any competitive firm that objects to inroads made on the base of a low price approach can

simply cut its own prices and margins to compete. This, ultimately, leads to a race to the bottom

in terms of profitability. And any firm with a cost advantage in the industry in question will be

able to set prices lower and force the low price player out of the industry. In many respects,

numerous dot-com bubble firms employed the ultimate low price strategy – giving away their

product or service – and confused both themselves and the capital markets into believing it was a




                                                                                                  6
sensible strategy. It was not sound because low price is not a viable strategy in the absence of

low costs.

       Alternatively, a firm’s activity system can provide a differentiation advantage by

enabling the firm to produce a product or service that is considered to be uniquely more valuable

than those of competitors by a segment of customers and for which those customers are willing,

even happy, to pay a premium price. For example, Progressive Insurance offers a differentiated

automobile insurance service to a non-standard segment of drivers. It offers quotes that are

better-tailored to the true risk category of drivers and provides quick and easy settlement of

claims by way of an extensive fleet of van-based adjusters. Like Southwest Airlines, Progressive

also has a unique activity system that features many activities, such as its massive pricing

database, a fleet of claims-settling vans, unique training and compensation structures, as well as

a unique investment philosophy, which fit together and reinforce each other to produce a service

that is highly-valued by its customers and is produced at a competitive cost.

       A competitive cost structure is important to the differentiation strategy because having a

premium price with a cost structure that eats up the entire premium is not a strategy for long-

term competitive advantage. It is a strategy for satisfying customers but not for providing

adequate returns to shareholders. Keeping the cost structure under control requires an activity

system that minimizes the total systems cost of providing a differentiated product or service.

       The concepts of strategy and strategic thinking have become well-accepted by firms over

the past thirty years. Strategy allows firms to define what they are about and most importantly

what they are not about. In the next section of the paper we argue that a city or region may seek

to attain jurisdictional advantage by building an activity system that is unique and is valuable in

producing either a low cost or differentiation advantage over other jurisdictions.




                                                                                                 7
Seeking Jurisdictional Advantage

       Since a jurisdiction does not have shareholders, per se, the question is for whose benefit

should a jurisdiction seek advantage? John Locke argued that government is the vehicle for

collective action (Locke 1967). Like firms, jurisdictions are socially constructed entities that can

raise funds, organize resources and live on in perpetuity or at least do these things better than

individuals can. Locke’s argument is that government is a legitimate tool by which individuals

may further their shared interests by acting in common. While these shared interests should not

rest on any particular conception of the common good or individual happiness, it is a

fundamental premise of Locke’s argument that income and wealth are instrumental goods

desired, to some extent, by everyone.

       A measure of the common good is the prevailing wealth in the jurisdiction. Wealth is a

combination of wages and investments. For most of the world’s population, housing equity

represents their single largest investment and the value of jurisdictional amenities and local

quality of life is capitalized in housing prices. Higher levels of local public services, higher local

wages and a growing local economy all contribute to appreciation of real estate values and the

wealth of property owners. Since the majority of American households own their own homes

increases in property values are broadly distributed across the population. Moreover, increases

in property values yield higher tax revenues for the jurisdiction which, if used judiciously,

increase amenities. In this way, virtuous cycles of economic growth are created.

       Wages are an important measure of the wealth of the jurisdiction. The greater the

positive variance in wage levels from the mean, the greater the jurisdictional advantage from

which the residents benefit, other things being equal. However, there are two adjustments that

should be made to this measure. First, when comparing jurisdictions across countries, wages



                                                                                                    8
adjusted for purchasing power parity should be the measure, as is the case when comparing gross

domestic product (GDP) per capita. Second, an additional refinement would be to adjust after-

tax wages for major differences in government services and amenities provided. So if after-tax

wages were used to compare jurisdictions of a US city with a Canadian city, there should be an

adjustment for the fact that the residents of the Canadian city receive greater health care benefits

through government expenditure. For individuals living in the U.S more of their health care

costs would be paid for from after-tax wages.

                                           Table 1 Here

       Table 1 presents differences in wages by jurisdiction for those industries which have

some demonstrated competitive advantage. As a benchmark, the average annual wage for all

U.S. industries was approximately $33,200 in 2001. We list city-industries that have a higher-

than-average national wage for the industry, a location quotient greater than one, indicating

geographic concentration relative to national employment, and more than 10,000 employment.

This table demonstrates that while cities specialize in certain industrial clusters, that

specialization varies widely across cities in the same industry.

       Creating and sustaining positive wage differentials is the essence of jurisdictional

advantage. It is important to note that this is not synonymous with attracting high-technology

industries, which has been a preoccupation of many economic development initiatives. Many of

the high-technology industries offer substantial employment numbers and higher than national

average wages but they are not the only such industries. Equally transformative are investments

in existing, more mature industries that are already in place and can invest as a means to compete

with lower-cost locations. The relatively low-technology financial services cluster is one of

highest paying clusters.      In addition, other mature industries, for example, printing and




                                                                                                  9
publishing or metal manufacturing have continued to innovate and provide something that

markets value. Distribution and logistics is another industry that is based on efficient inventory

control and the process of innovation

       In addition, many of theses clusters represent well-know associations between places and

industries. For example, distribution services in Atlanta have a long history as a transportation

hub and Los Angeles as a concentration of entertainment. Certain clusters, such as education

and knowledge creation; analytical instruments, aerospace vehicles and defense; communications

equipment; information technology; and medical devices appear to cluster together and to be

more conducive to multiple clustering than others industries (Porter 2003).

       Across the US economy, average wages differ greatly across and within industry clusters,

demonstrating that some industries tend to produce higher prosperity than others. However,

wages in the same cluster vary substantially by jurisdiction, indicating that jurisdictions can

influence the level of prosperity generated by a given industry or cluster. Table 2 present four

representative industries, one from each quartile of the distribution of industry wages. Financial

services are in the first quartile with mean annual wages of $75,000; medical devices are from

the second quartile with mean annual wages of $50,000; metal manufacturing represents the third

quartile with mean annual wages of $37,200; and, building fixture, equipment and services is in

the bottom quartile with mean annual wages of $31,000. Similarly, the four cities listed were

selected to represent quartiles of the distribution of wages within the industry. Each city

presented in Table 2 had a location quotient greater than 1, which indicates to relative

specialization for the industry within the geographic unit2, a minimum of one thousand workers,

and average wages that are greater than the average wages for the city as indicated in column (3).




                                                                                               10
Even when the wages are not high relative to the highest wages for the industry, they are higher

relative to the mean city wages.

                                            Table 2 here

       To construct jurisdictional advantage requires a jurisdictional strategy – a set of choices

which produces a jurisdictional activity system that generates either low cost advantage or

differentiation advantage.    The “customers” for a jurisdiction are job-providing entities –

primarily, but not exclusively, firms. Jurisdictions are, in many respects, collections of firms,

both large and small. And just as firms are one economic entity that organizes resources and

production, jurisdictions are themselves another economic entity that provides a platform for

similarly organizing resources. High wage jobs are the reward for the jurisdiction that can

generate advantage and in doing so attract, incubate and grow firms. Jurisdictional advantage

produces an environment that both attracts investments by existing firms to the jurisdiction and

promotes the creation of start-up businesses in the jurisdiction. It also produces an environment

that helps all of these firms prosper while operating in that jurisdiction.

       The logic of endogenous growth suggests that new start-up firms will be an important

source of growth. New firms are based on the identification of new market opportunities and

they frequently get started as a means to bring new technology to the market. Most importantly,

these firms are relatively geographically immobile as entrepreneurs build upon local networks

and expertise. Individuals start companies based on their prior experience and interests, typically

fulfilling some niche that a larger firm may judge too small, exploiting a new opportunity that

may have a risk profile unsuited to a larger firm, or using a unique set of skills and knowledge to

develop applications. Many individuals have location inertia because of lack of family mobility,

simple preferences or the risk of establishing a new company in a new location. In building their



                                                                                                11
companies, entrepreneurs rely on their local contacts, connections, and knowledge of the

business environment.

       History is replete with examples of co-located firms defining technological frontiers and

speeding up the rate of technological advance.       The geographic concentrations of related

industries create synergies that provide unique activity sets that promote the emergence of new

industries: combining new knowledge with existing expertise is the essence of innovation. New

industries typically begin with new firm formation and the efforts of entrepreneurs. Some of

these new start-ups will be gazelles in terms of rapid growth, creating new industries and

disrupting existing firms in their wake. Most will be smaller players that will operate in a niche

for which the firm has some competitive advantage.

       What is low cost in the context of jurisdictional advantage? It is not low wages, which is

the first thing that comes to mind. A low-wage jurisdictional strategy is like a low price

company strategy. It does not produce advantage. At a company, a low price strategy produces

low profits for the shareholders and is dangerous because it leaves the company vulnerable to

being out-invested by high-profit competitors. In a jurisdiction, a low wage strategy produces

wages that are lower than the average of other jurisdictions which connotes disadvantage for its

residents not advantage.

       Approaches centered on industrial recruitment with special tax incentives and various

other inducements to lower the costs of doing business for firms are not low cost strategies

either. There is absolutely nothing unique or hard to replicate in terms of giving dollars away to

firms. The evidence is that this type of strategy is a race to the bottom in a zero-sum game.

There is no evidence that it leads eventually to higher wages, which is the measure of a




                                                                                               12
successful low cost jurisdictional strategy. Moreover, these types of operations are frequently

the first to be closed when the cost structure changes.

       A successful low cost jurisdictional strategy would exist if a jurisdiction produces an

equivalent environment to other jurisdictions but at a lower cost. For example, the city of

Edmonton, Alberta has produced a K-12 educational system that generates among the highest

results of any North American jurisdiction and it accomplished this superior outcome with

below-average costs through unique approaches to management of the system (Chen and Mintz

2004). This allows Edmonton to charge lower personal taxes, other things being equal, which

increases the after-tax wages of residents, enhancing the competitive outcome of the jurisdiction.

       A differentiated jurisdictional strategy exists when a set of activities produces a uniquely

attractive environment for a given segment of job-providing entities at a similar cost to other

jurisdictions yet with greater potential benefits. An example is the externalities available to a

biotech firm by locating near a number of industry-leading biotech firms already operating in the

greater-Boston area. These externalities are outside of the ability of markets to price but there is

evidence to suggest that firms gain economic value from them.             Firms are simply more

productive in certain locations, better able to innovate and create unique value. It is this greater

productivity that translates into higher profits and higher wages.



Jurisdictional Strategy and Jurisdictional Advantage

   The next concern is how a jurisdiction may position itself to capture economic growth.

Economic growth is not easy to capture: there are no guarantees. But the emerging literatures on

growth theory and the new economic geography offer some insights that may shape

jurisdictional advantage. This literature is informed by the microeconomics of innovation which




                                                                                                 13
suggests the importance of skilled labor and the mix or composition of activities within a

jurisdiction’s activity system. The success of a firm and the success of the region are interrelated

and endogenous in the terminology of economics and this is the basis of jurisdictional strategy

and advantage.

       Economists have long known that industries cluster spatially for a variety of reasons:

what is critical is that these clustered industries tend to be more innovative and have greater

productivity which is why we observe wage premia for such clusters. An important distinction is

between the geographic concentrations of production and the location of innovation. Whereas the

geographic concentrations of production is often due to the location or natural resources, ease of

transportation or historical inertia, the location of innovation is due to knowledge externalities

and subject to increasing returns. While innovation yields greater productivity and the increases

in wages that jurisdictions seek, jobs associated with routine production remain geographically in

place as long as the physical investments are economically viable.        Once physical assets are

depreciated or obsolete, if the market changes or costs become uncompetitive, these locations are

easily abandoned. As a result, property values fall and the jurisdiction suffers.

       The idea that location is beneficial to firms’ innovative success is central to theorizing in

economic geography about the benefits of cities. Certain locations supply localized knowledge

externalities or spillovers that provide positive economic value but are beyond the ability of

market mechanisms to price and efficiently allocate. The significance of localized knowledge

spillovers as inputs to firms’ innovative activities suggest that their most creative and highest

value-added activities do not proceed in isolation, but depend on access to new ideas. Location

mitigates the inherent uncertainty of innovative activity: proximity enhances the ability of firms

to exchange ideas and be cognizant of important incipient knowledge, hence reducing




                                                                                                 14
uncertainty for firms that work in new fields. Innovation clusters spatially where knowledge

externalities reduce the costs of scientific discovery and commercialization. In addition, firms

producing innovations tend to be located in areas where there are necessary resources: resources

that have accumulated due to a region’s past success with innovation. In this way, firm success

and city economic growth are endogenous and mutually dependent. The cumulative nature of

innovation manifests itself not just at firm and industry levels, but also at the geographic level,

creating an advantage for firms locating in areas of concentrated innovative activity. These

factors can generate positive feedback loops or virtuous cycles, as clusters attract additional

specialized labor and other inputs, as well as the greater exchanges of ideas.

       Economists and strategists are getting better at understanding the dynamics of path

dependence and increasing returns, both of which describe aspects of the dynamics of cluster

growth in a given jurisdiction.     Path dependency implies that the course of technological

development or technological trajectory of specific localities is historically determined and may

be the result of serendipity or small events. Krugman (1990) uses the example of candle-

wicking, a type of local craft, as a source of competitive advantage in the carpet industry and a

reason why the industry located in Alabama. Through such examples, the literature suggests that

clusters are seeded by a variety of methods; however, their growth can only be facilitated by

building upon existing resources. Clusters cannot be built just anywhere from scratch.

   Successful jurisdictions are characterized by a rich ecology of firms and institutions which

form a specialized activity set. A good example is Carlsson’s (2002) study of the polymer

cluster in Akron, Ohio which consists of a combination of numerous and diverse small firms as

well as larger, multinational firms.    Rosenthal and Strange (2003) find that agglomeration

benefits are greater with a larger number of small firms: the marginal effect of an employee at a




                                                                                                15
small establishment is greater than that of an employee at a large firm. This finding suggests that

small establishments make better neighbors and increase a nearby firm’s own productivity. In

addition, Carlsson (2002) found that while the multinationals have shifted their production

facilities elsewhere, they have kept their polymer R&D facilities and operation headquarters in

the area and close to the top three polymer research institutions in the United States from whom

they source research and hire skilled labor.

        Skilled workers, known in the literature as human capital, or alternatively as talent, are

important to geographic clustering. Baker and Trefler (2003) confirm that human capital is more

productive in cities. Cities act as magnets for human capital and individuals living in cities

receive a wage premium when compared to similar individuals. Labor is less mobile than capital

and workers become more skilled as they age but then correspondingly become more immobile

as they form relationships, raise families and become members of communities. One important

advantage of geographic clustering is that it provides pools of skilled labor which are mutually

beneficial as firms can easily find specialized skilled labor and workers can advance their careers

by moving between firms without incurring the costs of relocating.

       Within these pools of skilled labor there are potential entrepreneurs who may take ideas

out of established firms to form new enterprises.            An observed anecdote fact about

entrepreneurship is that individuals do not relocate to start firms but instead use existing local

contacts and networks to start their firms (Feldman 2001). This form of locational inertia

indicates that regions that hold stocks of potential entrepreneurs are more likely to be successful

at promoting new firm start-ups and establishing new industries. Innovative start-ups frequently

create new markets where no competition exists and demand is not sensitive to product costs.

Small firms frequently become the mechanism by which a new technology is commercialized




                                                                                                16
and their competitive advantage lies in being first to market or offer a higher-quality product.

Lacking the resources of their larger counterparts, small firms must leverage capabilities in their

local environments.

       The composition of activities in a jurisdictional activity system matters. Jacobs (1969)

argues that diversity is important for innovation and that cities are the source of considerable

innovation because the diversity of knowledge is greatest in cities. According to Jacobs, it is the

exchange of complementary knowledge across diverse firms and economic agents which yield a

greater return to economic activity. Feldman and Audretsch (1999) find that diversity across

complementary economic activities sharing a common science base is more conducive to

innovation than is local specialisation. In addition, their results indicate that the degree of local

competition for new ideas within a city is more conducive to innovative activity than in a local

monopoly. Indeed, we may expect that if a local economy becomes too dependent on one firm

or one industry it may drive out new ideas. Florida and Gates (2002) argue further that a rich

cultural environment in a jurisdiction is correlated with economic success of the city. They use

the share of workers in artistic industries such as writers, dancers, painters, and others as an

indicator of cultural richness and find a correlation with economic success. In addition, they also

find a link between the levels of open-mindedness in a jurisdiction to be correlated with

economic success.

       Porter (1990) studied clusters around the world and we now know the features of a

jurisdictional environment in which clusters grow. Porter described clusters as a local “diamond”

– representing the beneficial interaction of 1) demanding and sophisticated local customers; 2)

intense rivalry among local firms; 3) local presence of attractive factors of production; and 4)

local presence of relating and supporting industries.        These four factors interact to drive




                                                                                                  17
continuous innovation and upgrading of the nature of advantage by the firms in the cluster. We

are also learning how clusters interact with each other – that is, the clustering of clusters (Porter

2003). Certain clusters, for example, education and knowledge creation; analytical instruments,

aerospace vehicles and defense; communications equipment; information technology; and

medical devices appear to cluster with together. The synergies between these industries provide

unique activity sets, and areas with multiple and overlapping clusters of expertise facilitate the

emergence of new industries such as nanotechnology, bioinformatics and advanced

telecommunications.

       It is clear that jurisdictional strategy is not a winner-take-all phenomenon in which a

single city comes to dominate. No jurisdiction found on the planet is good at most industries.

Each jurisdictional activity system appears to be tuned for certain industries and not for others. .

Moreover, cities are part of the system of cities or what urban economists call an urban

hierarchy: every city has a unique niche that is interrelated to other cities. Puga and Duranton

(2001) find that new products tend to be developed in large, diversified cities which they term

nursery cities, the places where new products are incubated. Once an idea is refined, the firm

invests in more specialized, smaller cities where production costs are lower due to an emphasis

on process innovation and learning-by-doing. Each type of innovation requires a different mix

of skills; however, innovations are complementary and each has a role to play in competitive

advantage.

       However, it does appear in North America at least, that very large cities foster the

clustering of clusters, which produces even higher wage levels than would be expected under a

straight line regression (Institute for Competitiveness & Prosperity 2003). This also appears to

be the case in the U.K., with London emerging as a cluster of clusters. Very few cities will be at




                                                                                                  18
the top tier of the urban hierarchy; however, every jurisdictional activity set has a place in the

hierarchy. Understanding how a city is positioned relative to other cities, not in a competitive

sense but in terms of mutual dependence and differentiation offer a potential strategic lever.

       Uniqueness and adaptation, not uniformity and replication, provide jurisdictional

advantage. In corporate strategy, if all competitors simply benchmark against each other and

replicate what each other is doing, there will be no advantage and the benefits will flow to the

customers, who will simply play off the look-alike firms against each other to suppress prices.

Exactly the same principle may be expected to hold for jurisdictions. Competive advantage and

economic growth may come from the creation of unique activity systems, not from simply

replicating one another. Benchmarking is currently a very popular notion in economic

development policy, but the problem with benchmarking is that it appears to encourage

duplication and uniformity, not diversity and the exploration of unique advantage.


The Role of Firms in Jurisdictional Advantage

       There is a big question as to the role of firms in jurisdictional advantage. A firm can act

simply as a taker and exploiter of a jurisdiction. However, a firm is better served by being an

active partner in jurisdictional advantage rather than a passive taker. As soon as it has made

investments in a jurisdiction, it has an incentive to make the jurisdiction better so that the

jurisdiction provides more advantages in the future.

       Moreover, the existence of externalities suggests that firms are receiving benefits that are

outside of the market mechanism to price. While it may be argued that firms pay more taxes as a

result of the higher profits they earn as a result of externalities, it may also be argued that firms

may actively cultivate the sources of the agglomerative benefit by investing in local universities,

building infrastructure, etc. Moreover, these investments are tax deductible and provide a means



                                                                                                  19
to make targeted investments in jurisdictions rather than relying on the process of government

budgeting. This is to say that firms may actively build the external resources and infrastructure

that benefit their bottom line.

       There is case study evidence that in the process of building their firm expertise,

entrepreneurs also contribute to building external resources and institutions that promote their

business interest. In the process of building their firms, entrepreneurs contribute to growing the

cluster (Feldman 2001). Sponsoring research at local universities, endowing university training

programs and networking all benefit the initiating firm but also create externalities that will have

local benefit. As entrepreneurial businesses begin to thrive, resources such as money, networks,

experts, and related services develop in, and are attracted to, the region. With this infrastructure

in place, more entrepreneurial ventures locate and thrive in the region, which ultimately may

create a thriving cluster where none previously existed.

       In addition, there are interesting interplays between firms and the average wage level of

residents of the jurisdiction. In many senses, the better definition of advantage may be the total

utility of residents, which includes non-pecuniary benefits as well as monetary benefits. Firms

can positively influence the overall welfare of residents in the jurisdiction by showing aspects of

social responsibility which produce externalities that further enhance the jurisdiction and also

benefit the firm.

Corporate outsourcing is also interesting in its relation to jurisdictional advantage. Outsourcing is

not an issue of jurisdictional advantage or disadvantage per se.         Bangalore does not have

jurisdictional advantage over Silicon Valley. Bangalore is a price leader, not a cost leader. It

produces dramatically lower wage levels than Silicon Valley, so in this respect it is highly

disadvantaged. (Even as Bangalore is powerfully advantaged over other parts of India.)This is




                                                                                                  20
not jurisdictional as much as it is individual. It turns out that many rote programmers, call centre

attendants, etc. are learning to their dismay that thanks to falling telecommunications and

coordination costs, the clearing price for their skill-set in Silicon Valley is a fraction of what it

used to be.

       An issue, however, is whether the firm has a responsibility to its jurisdiction not to

outsource because of the dislocation costs that outsourcing causes. There is no clear answer on

this issue. What is clear is that as firms outsource jobs from Silicon Valley to Bangalore, they

are reducing the number of existing high wage jobs in Silicon Valley. The question is whether

they can create an equal number of new high paying jobs locally. If they can’t, the employment

base in Silicon Valley will drop. To the extent that the jurisdiction benefited from the economies

of scale associated with large numbers of skilled workers, firms that engage in the net export of

high-paying jobs may negatively impact the jurisdictional advantage of their home territory.

       We may ask what firms lose when they outsource. There are various historical examples,

such as semiconductors, where the countries that were the site of outsourcing became

competitors in subsequent rounds of product development. What is lost in outsourcing may be a

familiarity with production and product design that suggest the next round of innovation (Pisano

1995). Chesbrough and Teece (1996) argue that outsourcing may hamper the kind of complex,

systematic innovation that creates new generation valuable business breakthroughs.


Important Issues to Tackle in Jurisdictional Advantage

       The challenge for jurisdictional advantage is the translation of theory into practical policy

terms. Many existing recommendations are far too generic, emphasizing the desirability of

having an educated, creative, and productively efficient workforce, along with strong physical

infrastructure and great centers for research and teaching. Specific recommendations are usually



                                                                                                  21
based on reinforcing those activities that a location is currently specialized in – in other words,

those economic sectors and activities that make up a high share of a city’s activities.

        Jurisdictional advantage depends on an additional criterion:             those activities and

capabilities which, in combination, create a uniquely favorable jurisdiction for some set of

industries. While generic capabilities are important, there are far too many locations that satisfy

basic criteria: a highly educated workforce, by itself, is no guarantee for a city-specific

advantage.

        Similarly, simply being specialized in an activity does not mean that a region has a strong

advantage in that activity. As we have shown earlier, a jurisdiction can have a disproportionately

high number of jobs in a given cluster and still have below average wage levels in that cluster.

Instead, jurisdictional advantage could be established and maintained by implementing policies

that enhance unique and location-specific capabilities.

        In this context, a key question is in what practical, action-oriented ways can jurisdictions

build a coherent activity system?      Given the importance of the private choices of firms and

employees, it is unlikely that successful jurisdictional activity systems will be built exclusively

or even primarily by governments. Most likely, it will require the cooperation of governments

and firms.    An important responsibility for governments will be to create incentives that

encourage firms and talented employees to take positive cluster and jurisdiction-building

activities.

        Taxation policy is likely to be critical. It is unlikely that bidding wars based on targeted

tax relief to attract a firm to the jurisdiction may create a positive benefit because of the ability of

other jurisdictions to provide the same benefits.     A tax system that understands the needs of the

specific clusters of interest for the jurisdiction is most likely to produce beneficial results. For




                                                                                                     22
example, tradable tax credits allow start-up firms to sell their net operating losses and research

and development spending to profitable companies or selling the credits back to the state. Mintz

(2001) argues that the marginal tax burden on capital and labor prevalent in a jurisdiction

influences its prosperity. Therefore spending programs that are designed to attract firms (directly

or indirectly) may benefit from empirical analysis that quantifies the purported positive impacts

netted against their costs in terms of higher marginal tax burden in order to ascertain whether

these incentives produce net benefits or costs.

       One element that has no chance of being unique is the payment of cash incentives to

firms. Cash is completely fungible and for that reason, it is the easiest feature for another

jurisdiction to match. Further, cash used as an incentive has no effective leverage. It costs

residents of the jurisdiction dollar for dollar against potential personal after-tax income rather

than, for example, a badly needed bridge which has the prospect of earning a very high return on

the investment made.

       The evidence is that firm location decisions are not responsive to jurisdictional tax

differentials except at the intra-metropolitan area (Bartik 1991, Papke 1991). This suggests that

individual municipalities may gain if they drop their tax rates or offer special incentives. Of

course, this creates artificial competition. Individual municipalities may benefit if they view

themselves as subsidiaries or divisions of the larger city and cooperate to their mutual advantage.

       In the knowledge-based economy, social policy may not be discounted as something

alien to jurisdictional advantage. It appears to be an integral part of jurisdictional strategy

(Porter 1999, Florida and Gates 2002). Attributes that make a jurisdiction an attractive place for

talented workers to locate are powerful elements in the activity system of successful

jurisdictions. The question, as always in jurisdictional strategy, is whether a given social policy




                                                                                                23
creates more benefit in raising the psychic income and quality of life of residents than it takes

away in the taxation required to support it.

       In establishing policy, jurisdictions will have to find ways to be as nimble as the firms

they host. Successful firms are constantly remaking themselves and reinventing their core

businesses in response to changing market conditions. Many times it is easier for them to move

to a new location rather than work with the confines of an existing jurisdiction. It might be

incumbent on jurisdictions to change that equation by being responsive and open to working with

their resident firms. A frequent complaint is that local government only pay attention to a firm

when it threatens to leave, rather than cultivating an on-going relationship with the firm.

       Jurisdictional advantage is not simply the battle for high technology industries. In no

jurisdiction do high technology industries make up a majority of jobs. Even in high-technology

states such as Massachusetts and California, high-technology clusters account for less than 20%

of jobs (Institute for Competitiveness & Prosperity 2003). While high technology clusters may

be attractive, there is as much to be gained by creating a unique activity system for a non-high

technology cluster as to replicate the features of numerous other jurisdictions that are pining after

high technology industries.

       Cities remake themselves over time, reflecting structural change in the economy. Glaeser

(2003) shows how Boston has been able to remake its economy three times since the Colonial

period, due to the availability of local skilled capital. Of course, these transitions are costly to

individuals and their families when skill sets become obsolete and jobs disappear. This reiterates

the importance of social policy as a backbone of industrial competitiveness and economic

growth.




                                                                                                  24
        In corporate strategy, there is an immense variety of activity systems that provide

competitive advantage. It is likely to be the case with jurisdictional strategy. While many firms

look longingly at Walmart or Dell and decide they need to pursue a “Walmart strategy” or a

“Dell strategy”, they are much more likely to produce a successful strategy by pursuing an

approach that is tailored to particular circumstance and assets. Similarly, jurisdictions that try to

be the next Boston or Silicon Valley may be pursuing the wrong approach to jurisdictional

advantage.    Any commitments of resources to an activity involve trade-offs against other

opportunities.    We have suggested that building jurisdictional advantage necessitates an

understanding of what not to do and how investments detract from the coherence of the

jurisdictional activity set: policy-makers will be required to investigate further into just how to

do this at the particular sites they make decisions for.

        As with the multiplicity of outcomes of jurisdictional strategy, there are likely to be many

different models that emerge with respect to how jurisdictions organize themselves to facilitate

the creation and implementation of jurisdictional strategies. Cities are far from homogeneous

with different functional and industrial specialization, each with a unique position relative to

other cities in the economy. Even more so than with corporate strategy, jurisdictional strategy is

likely to only in part be an analytical, top-down exercise. It is also likely to be an intensely

social consensus-building exercise. As such, the role of political leadership in jurisdictional

strategy is likely to be crucial.

        At the national level, it will be increasingly important to understand the role of individual

city jurisdictions play in competitive advantage.          If a nation is comprised of individual

jurisdictions – each following copy-cat strategies of using cash incentives to attempt to attract the

currently vogue industries (e.g. biotechnology or nanotechnology) to their jurisdiction rather than




                                                                                                  25
another national jurisdiction – the nations’ prosperity potential will be diminished. If instead, the

nation is comprised of individual jurisdictions each attempting to create an activity system that is

uniquely beneficial to a particular cluster or agglomeration of clusters by investing in attributes

that make it particularly attractive to firms and talent in those clusters, the nation will have

increased prosperity potential. In this paper we have argued that jurisdictions may benefit from a

strategic orientation that considers 1) the unique and not easily replicated assets, resources and

skill set contained in a jurisdiction; 2) the position of the jurisdiction vis a vis the hierarchy of

cities in the national and world economy; and 3) maximizes wages and property values within

the juridiction. What we have suggested is that the role of jurisdictions and jurisdictional

advantage deserves a place on the policy agenda.




                                                                                                  26
References:

Arthur, B. 1996. “Increasing returns and the new world of business.” Harvard Business Review,

74: 100-110.


Baker, M., and D. Trefler. The Impact of Education and Urbanization on Productivity. From

Institute for Competitiveness and Prosperity. Copyright©2002 Institute for Competitiveness and

Prosperity. Cited March 15, 2004 from http://www.CompeteProsper.ca.


Bartik, T.J. 1991. Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies? Upjohn

Institute for Employment Research. Kalamazoo, Michigan.


Becherer, H.W. 2000. “A more cosmopolitan way of life: Why local economic development

matters.” Vital Speeches of the Day, 66, no. 15: 473.


Biotechnology Industry Organization. 2001. State Government Initiatives in Biotechnology 2001,

Washington, D.C. Cited March 15, 2004 from http://www.bio.org/tax/battelle.pdf.


Carlsson, B. 2002. “Institutions, entrepreneurship, and growth: Biomedicine and polymers in

Sweden and Ohio.” Small Business Economics, 19: 105-121.


Chen, D. and J.M. Mintz. 2004. “The 2004 business tax outlook: Lowering business taxes

would spur investment.” C.D. Howe Institute e-brief (February).

Chesbrough, H.W and D.J. Teece. 1996. “When is virtual virtuous? Organizing for

innovation.” Harvard Business Review, 74: 65-73.

Connecticut Center for a New Economy. 2004. “Incubating Biotech: Yale Prospers, New

Haven Waits.” March.



                                                                                            27
Cortright J. 2002. “The economic importance of being different: Regional variations in tastes,

increasing returns, and the dynamics of development.” Economic Development Quarterly,

(February) 16(1): 3-16.


Cortright, J. and H. Mayer. 2001. High Tech Specialization: A Comparison of High Technology

Centers. The Brookings Institution Survey Series, Washington D.C. (January).


Den H., P., E.M. Bergman, and D. Charles. 2001. “Creating and sustaining innovative clusters:

Towards a synthesis.” In Innovative Clusters: Drivers of National Innovation Systems. OECD

(Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development).


Duranton, G., and D. Puga. 2001. From Sectoral to Functional Urban Specialisation. CEPR

Discussion Paper 2971 (September). Revised, June 2003.


Duranton, G., and D. Puga. “Micro-foundations of Urban Agglomeration Economics.” Written

for eventual publication in the Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, J.V. Henderson and

J.Thisse (Eds.).


Duranton, G.and D. Puga. 2001. “Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and

the life cycle of products.” American Economic Review, 91: 1454-1477.

Feldman, M.P. 1994. The Geography of Innovation. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Feldman, M.P. 2001. “The entrepreneurial event revisited: An examination of new firm

formation in the regional context.” Industrial and Corporate Change, 10: 861-891.


Feldman, M.P. and Audretsch, D. (1999). “Innovation in Cities: Science-Based Diversity,

Specialization and Localized Competition.” European Economic Review, 43: 409-429.




                                                                                           28
Florida, R. and G. Gates. 2002. “Technology and tolerance.” The Brookings Review, 20: 32-64.


Glaeser, E.L., H.D. Kallal, J.A. Scheinkman, A. Shleifer. 1992. “Growth in Cities.” The Journal

of Political Economy. 100(6): 1126


Glaeser, E.L. 2003. “Reinventing Boston: 1640-2003.” NBER Working Paper No. 10166.

(December).

Henderson, J.V. 1994. “Externalities and Industrial Development.” Cityscape: A Journal of

Policy Development and Research, 1, no. 1: 75-93.

Henderson, J.V., A. Kuncoro and M. Turner. 1995. “Industrial Development in Cities.”

Journal of Political Economy, 103: 1067-1090.

Institute for Competitiveness and Prosperity. 2003. “Missing opportunities: Ontario's

urban prosperity gap.” Working Paper 3.

Jacobs, J. 1969. The Economy of Cities. New York: Random House.

Kenney, M. and U. von Burg. 1999. “Technology, entrepreneurship and path dependence:

Industrial clustering in Silicon Valley and Route 128.” Industrial and Corporate Change, 8: 67-

103.


Klepper, S. 2002. “The capabilities of new firms and the evolution of the US automobile

industry.” Industrial and Corporate Change, 11: 645- 666.


Krugman, P.1991. Geography and Trade. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Leslie. S. And R. Kargon. 1997. “Recreating Silicon Valley.” Business History Review.




                                                                                            29
Link, A.N. 1995. A Generosity of Spirit: The Early History of the Research Triangle Park.

Research Triangle Park: The Research Triangle Foundation of North Carolina.


Link, A.N. 2002. From Seed to Harvest: The History of the Growth of Research Triangle Park.

Research Triangle Park: NC: University of North Carolina Press for the Research Triangle

Foundation of North Carolina.


Locke, J. 1967. Two Treatise on Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Martin, R. L. 2002. “The virtue matrix: Calculating the return on corporate responsibility.”

Harvard Business Review, 80(3): 68.


Maskell, P. and A. Malmberg. 1999. “Localised Learning and Industrial Competitiveness.”

Cambridge Journal of Economics, 23(2): 167-186


Mintz, J. M. 2001. Most Favored Nation: Building a Framework for Smart Economic Policy.

C.D. Howe Institute Policy Study 36.

Morse, D. 2004. “Easy come, easy go: High-tech wooed, the fled Kentucky.” Wall Street

Journal, (March) 9P: A1- A12.


Orsenigo, L. 2001. “The (failed) development of a biotechnology cluster: The case of

Lombardy.” Small Business Economics, 17(1/2): 77-92.


Papke, L.E. 1991. “Interstate business tax differentials and new firm location: Evidence from

panel data.” Journal of Public Economics, 45: 47-68.


Pisano, G.P. 1994. “Knowledge, integration, and the locus of learning: An empirical analysis of

process development.” Strategic Management Journal, 15: 85-101.



                                                                                            30
Porter, M.E. 1987. “From competitive advantage to corporate strategy.” Harvard Business

Review. 65(3): 43.


Porter, M.E. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. New York: Free Press.


Porter, M.E. 1996. “What is strategy?” Harvard Business Review, 74(6): 61.


Porter, M.E. 1999. “The Competitive Advantages of Global City-Regions." Living with the

Global City Conference, UCLA.


Porter, M.E.., and M.R. Kramer. 2002. “The competitive advantage of corporate philanthropy.”

Harvard Business Review, 80(12): 56.


Porter, M.E. 1990. The Comparative Advantage of Nations. New York: Free Press.

Porter, M. E. 2003. “The economic performance of regions.” Regional Studies, 37: 549- 568.

Puga, D., and D. Trefler. 2002. Knowledge Creation and Control in Organizations. NBER

Working Paper (September). Revised, November 2003.


Rosenthal, S.S. and W.C. Strange. 2003. “Geography, industrial organization, and

agglomeration.” The Review of Economics and Statistic, Cambridge, (May) 85.


Saxenian, A. 1994. Regional Advantage. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press


Sorenson, O. and P.G. Audio 2000. “The social structure of entrepreneurial activity: Geographic

concentration    of   footwear     production    in    the    United    States,   1940-1989.”

The American Journal of Sociology, 106: 424-265.




                                                                                            31
                                                      Table 1:
                                                              2001
                                        2001 Share of    Employment    2001
                           2001 Total     National         Location   Average
  Metropolitan Area       Employment    Employment         Quotient    Wages           Industry Cluster
     Atlanta, GA             56,129          2.8               1.51   $59,783         Distribution Services
     Atlanta, GA            148,591          3              1.6       $56,152           Business Services
Augusta-Aiken, GA-SC        20,053          4.8            30.96      $50,352          Chemical Products
    Baltimore, MD           12,034          1.6            1.74       $61,459        Analytical Instruments
    Baltimore, MD           41,501          1.8            1.94       $45,903   Education and Knowledge Creation
  Bergen-Passaic, NJ        15,945          1.7            2.95       $57,345        Publishing and Printing
   Birmingham, AL           11,865          0.9            2.31       $44,210         Metal Manufacturing
        Boston              158,727         4.7            1.75       $92,432           Financial Services
        Boston              54,811           6             2.25       $77,380        Information Technology
        Boston              35,210          7.9            2.94       $75,875      Communications Equipment
        Boston              209,555         4.2            1.56       $67,853           Business Services
        Boston              76,299          3.8            1.42       $64,680         Distribution Services
        Boston              23,238          6.3            2.35       $59,361           Medical Devices
     Chicago, IL            158,055         4.7            1.37       $86,033           Financial Services
     Chicago, IL            214,430         4.3            1.25       $61,173           Business Services
     Chicago, IL            40,846          9.1            2.68       $59,679      Communications Equipment
     Chicago, IL            87,392          4.3            1.28       $58,551         Distribution Services
Cincinnati, OH-KY-IN        15,015          1.1            1.53       $36,603            Processed Food
Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria     20,876          3.2            3.46       $47,829        Production Technology
Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria     26,960          2.1            2.26       $46,692              Automotive
Cleveland-Lorain-Elyria     14,610          1.8            1.88       $38,754   Oil and Gas Products and Services
      Dallas, TX            29,052          6.5             3.9       $71,003      Communications Equipment
      Dallas, TX            10,253          2.6            1.54       $64,697   Oil and Gas Products and Services
      Dallas, TX            59,094          2.9            1.76       $61,521         Distribution Services
      Dallas, TX            121,056         2.4            1.45       $60,309           Business Services
     Denver, CO             73,909          1.5            1.57       $57,173           Business Services
      Detroit, MI           138,769         10.9           6.41       $54,082              Automotive
      Detroit, MI           20,831          3.2             1.9       $49,290        Production Technology
  Elkhart-Goshen, IN        16,833          5.9            62.03      $35,112       Prefabricated Enclosures
       Flint, MI            17,282          1.4            10.73      $48,404              Automotive
    Fort Wayne, IN          16,218          1.3            6.01       $49,399              Automotive
       Gary, IN             27,400           2             10.28      $52,849         Metal Manufacturing
     Grand Rapids           32,126           2.5           5.46       $46,289             Automotive
     Hartford, CT           14,207          15.8           32.02      $78,031          Aerospace Engines
     Hickory, NC            10,004          2.1            14.3       $39,128                Apparel
     Houston, TX            66,657          16.6           10.23      $66,786   Oil and Gas Products and Services
     Houston, TX            15,189          3.6            2.22       $65,260          Chemical Products
     Houston, TX            109,070         2.2            1.33       $58,980           Business Services
     Houston, TX            50,862          3.1            1.93       $45,766      Transportation and Logistics




                                                                                                              32
                                                     Table 1:
                                                             2001
                                       2001 Share of    Employment    2001
                          2001 Total     National         Location   Average
  Metropolitan Area      Employment    Employment         Quotient    Wages           Industry Cluster
    Houston, TX             69,832          3.8               2.32   $42,834      Heavy Construction Services
    Indianapolis, IN       12,831          0.9            1.34       $38,369          Metal Manufacturing
Los Angeles-Long Beach     18,517          4.1            1.22       $63,183       Communications Equipment
Los Angeles-Long Beach     51,679          13.8           4.09       $58,420           Aerospace Vehicles
Los Angeles-Long Beach     177,625         16.2           4.79       $57,800              Entertainment
Los Angeles-Long Beach     84,820          5.2            1.55       $45,397       Transportation and Logistics
Los Angeles-Long Beach     97,201          4.2            1.24       $36,133    Education and Knowledge Creation
Middlesex-Somerset, NJ     63,467          1.3            2.32       $66,985           Business Services
Middlesex-Somerset, NJ     27,685          1.4            2.52       $61,584          Distribution Services
Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI     19,002          2.9            4.34       $45,091         Production Technology
Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI     21,842          1.6            2.37       $38,835          Metal Manufacturing
  Minneapolis-St. Paul     18,683          2.5            1.75       $53,438         Analytical Instruments
  Minneapolis-St. Paul     20,065          5.4             3.8       $51,806            Medical Devices
  Minneapolis-St. Paul     13,622          2.1            1.48       $41,023         Production Technology
  Minneapolis-St. Paul     25,479          1.9            1.31       $40,637          Metal Manufacturing
  Nassau-Suffolk, NY       11,637          1.2            1.27       $46,353         Publishing and Printing
    New Haven, CT           29,699         1.3            1.86       $52,508    Education and Knowledge Creation
    New York, NY           316,922         9.4             2.8       $197,932           Financial Services
    New York, NY           74,939          7.8            2.33       $70,946         Publishing and Printing
    New York, NY           63,529          5.8            1.73       $62,215              Entertainment
    New York, NY           101,419          5             1.51       $60,767          Distribution Services
    New York, NY           75,249          4.6            1.39       $45,317       Transportation and Logistics
    New York, NY           29,807          24.6           7.34       $40,021       Jewelry and Precious Metals
    New York, NY           151,514         6.5            1.96       $39,511    Education and Knowledge Creation
      Newark, NJ           21,619          8.2            10.04      $67,911           Biopharmaceuticals
      Newark, NJ           31,830          1.6            1.93       $61,268          Distribution Services
      Newark, NJ           39,777          2.5            2.99       $43,270       Transportation and Logistics
     Oakland, CA           19,104          2.1            2.41       $100,139        Information Technology
     Oakland, CA           14,675           2             2.26       $69,869         Analytical Instruments
     Oakland, CA           71,694          1.4            1.64       $66,537            Business Services
  Orange County, CA        43,632          2.2            1.77       $55,800          Distribution Services
  Orange County, CA        84,540          1.7            1.37       $55,305            Business Services
  Orange County, CA        10,625          2.9            2.35       $51,700            Medical Devices
  Orange County, CA        12,326          1.5            1.21       $35,591    Oil and Gas Products and Services
  Philadelphia, PA-NJ       9,878          3.8            1.93       $86,730           Biopharmaceuticals
  Philadelphia, PA-NJ      126,249         2.5            1.29       $58,795            Business Services
  Philadelphia, PA-NJ      48,384          2.4            1.24       $56,805          Distribution Services
  Philadelphia, PA-NJ      27,268          2.8            1.46       $43,284         Publishing and Printing
  Philadelphia, PA-NJ      88,332          3.8            1.96       $38,504    Education and Knowledge Creation
   Phoenix-Mesa, AZ        15,331           2             1.68       $53,945         Analytical Instruments
     Pittsburgh, PA        26,910           2             2.19       $45,545          Metal Manufacturing




                                                                                                              33
                                                                     Table 1:
                                                                             2001
                                                       2001 Share of    Employment             2001
                                     2001 Total          National         Location            Average
      Metropolitan Area             Employment         Employment         Quotient             Wages                   Industry Cluster
       Pittsburgh, PA                  43,504               1.9               2.08            $32,817          Education and Knowledge Creation
           Portland-                    10,844               1.4                1.9            $65,845                 Analytical Instruments
       Raleigh-Durham                   32,349               1.4                2.62           $51,518         Education and Knowledge Creation
       San Antonio, TX                  26,285               1.4                2.57           $38,964               Heavy Construction Services
        San Diego, CA                   28,001               1.4                1.48           $83,345                  Distribution Services
        San Diego, CA                   42,826               1.8                1.97           $56,348         Education and Knowledge Creation
        San Diego, CA                   13,483               1.8                1.92           $56,319                 Analytical Instruments
      San Francisco, CA                 59,033               1.7                1.91          $140,797                    Financial Services
      San Francisco, CA                 26,325               2.9                3.17          $119,291                 Information Technology
      San Francisco, CA                104,749               2.1                2.29           $81,806                    Business Services
      San Francisco, CA                 25,564               1.3                1.39           $70,779                  Distribution Services
      San Francisco, CA                 11,389               1.2                1.3            $63,823                 Publishing and Printing
      San Francisco, CA                 27,322               1.2                1.29           $56,554         Education and Knowledge Creation
      San Francisco, CA                 34,604               2.1                2.34           $40,466               Transportation and Logistics
      San Francisco, CA                 16,227               1.5                1.62           $34,035                      Entertainment
         San Jose, CA                   52,982               2.6                2.9           $109,766                  Distribution Services
         San Jose, CA                   92,453              10.2                11.2          $108,801                 Information Technology
         San Jose, CA                  121,537               2.4                2.67           $89,569                    Business Services
         San Jose, CA                   40,001               1.7                1.91           $83,827         Education and Knowledge Creation
         San Jose, CA                   24,592               5.5                6.06           $81,775               Communications Equipment
         San Jose, CA                   12,536               3.4                3.74           $76,901                    Medical Devices
         San Jose, CA                   48,569               6.5                7.16           $74,991                 Analytical Instruments
          Seattle, WA                   37,469               4.1                3.72          $228,178                 Information Technology
          Seattle, WA                   29,856               1.5                1.34           $59,477                  Distribution Services
          Seattle WA                    38,166               2.4                2.13           $48,397               Transportation and Logistics
       St. Louis, MO-IL                 14,213               1.3                1.22           $85,875                      Entertainment
          Toledo, OH                    20,722               1.6                6.55           $49,607                       Automotive
       Washington, DC                  336,576               6.7                3.38           $69,438                    Business Services
       Washington, DC                   24,867               2.6                1.31           $54,645                 Publishing and Printing
       Washington, DC                   92,942                4                 2.03           $48,604         Education and Knowledge Creation
       West Palm Beach                  10,122               2.3                5.54           $67,379               Communications Equipment
Source: Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, Cluster Mapping Project: http://data.isc.hbs.edu/isc/index.jsp




                                                                                                                                                34
Table 2: Average wages differ greatly across and within industry clusters
                                                      (2)                    (3) Ratio of Wages to Average City
                                                 Average Wages                             Wage

                                               Financial Services
New Haven, CT                                        169,699                                3.46
Chattanooga, TN-GA                                   58,381                                 2.09
Salem, OR                                            48,628                                 1.84
Fargo-Moorhead, ND-MN                                42,882                                  1.6
                                                Medical Devices
Oakland, CA                                          82,855                                 1.88
Milwaukee, WI                                        55,676                                 1.58
Salt Lake City, UT                                   46,390                                 1.53
Riverside-San Bernardino, CA                         39,847                                 1.43
                                              Metal Manufacturing
Gary, IN                                             52,849                                 1.72
Buffalo, NY                                          38,291                                 1.27
Chattanooga, TN-GA                                   33,549                                  1.2
Scranton, PA                                         31,725                                 1.23
                                   Building Fixtures, Equipment and Services
Grand Rapids, MI                                     39,699                                 1.21
Cleveland , OH                                       37,271                                 1.11
Lancaster, PA                                        33,064                                 1.12
Oklahoma City, OK                                    30,532                                 1.13
Source: Institute for Strategy and Competitiveness, Cluster Mapping Project: http://data.isc.hbs.edu/isc/index.jsp




                                                                                                                     35
Endnotes


1
    We will use the term city to refer to the integrated economic entity such as the metropolitan statistical areas as

defined by the U.S. Bureau of the Census. Thus, we focus on the city as a focal point for economic activity as when

people say that they live in L.A. while their residence is in West Hollywood. This use of the term city typically

encompasses multiple political or administrative units. Rather than viewing themselves in competition these units

may be conceptualized as subsidiaries, divisions or subunits of a going concern.
2
    The location quotient is calculated as the percentage of activity in a city and industry normalized by the national

percentage of activity in the industry. A location quotient equal to one indicates that the activity is represented in

the city exactly as mirrored in the national economy. When the location quotient is greater than one the industry has

a greater representation in the city than would be expected and this is evidence of geographic concentration. The

larger the location quotient, the greater the concentration of the industry in the city.




                                                                                                                          36
