                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TRANSACTION COSTS:
             VALUATION DISPUTES, BI-LATERAL MONOPOLY BARGAINING
             AND THIRD-PARTY EFFECTS IN WATER RIGHTS EXCHANGES.
                 THE OWENS VALLEY TRANSFER TO LOS ANGELES

                                            Gary D. Libecap

                                         Working Paper 10801
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10801


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




Support was provided by NSF Grant 0317375, co PIs Alan Ker and Robert Glennon; the Julian Simon
Fellowship at the Political Economy Research Center (PERC), Bozeman, Montana; the Earhart Foundation;
and the International Center for Economic Research (ICER), Turin, Italy. Helpful comments were provided
by Zeynep Hansen, Alan Ker, Dean Lueck, Michael Hanemann, Ann Carlos, Robert Glennon, Lee Alston,
Terry Anderson P.J. Hill, Dan Benjamin, Claude Menard, Robert Fleck, Randy Rucker, Rick Stroup, Greg
Crawford, Stan Reynolds, and Nick Parker as well as by participants at workshops at Montana State
University, the Western Economics Association Meetings, Vancouver, BC, June 29-July 3, 2204; the NBER,
DAE, Summer Institute, July 2004, and the Economic History Association Meetings, San Jose, September
9-12, 2004. Able research assistance was provided by Jed Brewer and Travis Rust. Special thanks go to Paul
Soifer for graciously making the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power Archives available and
assisting in data location. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Gary D. Libecap. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Transaction Costs: Valuation Disputes, Bi-Lateral Monopoly Bargaining and Third-Party Effects
in Water Rights Exchanges. The Owens Valley Transfer to Los Angeles
Gary D. Libecap
NBER Working Paper No. 10801
September 2004
JEL No. N5, Q2

                                            ABSTRACT

Between 1905 and 1934 over 869 farmers in Owens Valley, California sold their land and associated

water rights to Los Angeles, 250 miles to the southwest. This agriculture-to-urban water transfer

increased Los Angeles' water supply by over 4 times, making the subsequent dramatic growth of the

semi-arid city possible, generating large economic returns. The exchange took water from a marginal

agricultural area and transferred it via the Los Angeles Aqueduct. No other sources of water became

available for the city until 1941 with the arrival of water from Hoover Dam via the California

Aqueduct. The Owens Valley transfer was the first and last, large-scale voluntary market exchange

of water from agriculture to urban. Despite gains to both parties from the re-allocation of water to

higher-valued uses, the Owens Valley transfer serves today as a metaphor, cautioning any

agricultural region against water sales to urban areas. In this paper I examine the bargaining involved

in the Owens Valley water transfer to determine why it was so contentious and became so notorious.

I focus on valuation disputes, bi-lateral monopoly, and third party effects. I also examine the impact

of the transfer on Owens Valley and Los Angeles land owners. The results suggest gains to both

groups. Broader conclusions for bargaining, when the aggregate gains from trade are enormous, but

distribution very skewed, are drawn.

Gary D. Libecap
Karl Eller Center, College of Business
McClelland Hall 202
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721-0108
and NBER
glibecap@eller.arizona.edu
“It seems to us that the importance of the Owens River Project to the City of Los Angeles
cannot be overestimated.” Los Angeles Board of Water Commissioners, Report on Water
                                     Supply (1906, 6).

“Do you have any idea what this land would be worth with a steady water supply—About
30 million more than they paid for it.” J.J. Gittes (Jack Nicholson) referring to land in the
                 San Fernando Valley, in the movie, Chinatown, 1974.

 “Probably nowhere in the history of any country has one community…adopted a policy
 …. which has wrought the havoc and produced the mental agony and suffering that the
    policy of the City of Los Angeles and their representatives has produced in a little
   community in which we live.” W.W. Yandell President, Ione Seymoure, Secretary,
                      Farmers Ditch Company, Owens Valley, 19241

   “….farmers remain suspicious of the ‘Owens valley syndrome’…The ‘theft’ of its
 water…in the early 20th century has become the most notorious water grab by any city
anywhere…the whole experience has poisoned subsequent attempts to persuade farmers
        to trade their water to thirsty cities.” The Economist, July 19, 2003, 15.

Introduction.

       The most rapid population growth in the U.S. is in the urban areas of the semi-

arid West. This growth is fueled by shifts from an economy based on agriculture and

extractive industries to ones based on service and technology. Most western cities, such

as Los Angeles, San Diego, Phoenix, Las Vegas, and Tucson, do not have sufficient local

water sources to supply this growth in urban demand. Accordingly, there are efforts to

acquire water from agriculture, where approximately 70-75 percent of western water is

allocated. But this process generally is slow and controversial, resulting in sharp

differences in urban and agricultural water prices.2 For instance, groundwater for farming

near Marana, Pima County, Arizona costs approximately $25 per acre-foot

(approximately 325,000 gallons), whereas the same water for urban use costs $200. In

recent efforts to secure Imperial Irrigation District water, San Diego offered $225 per

acre foot for water that farmers used for $15.50.3




                                             2
       This paper explores the problems of negotiating water transfers from agricultural

to urban uses by analyzing the Owens Valley water transfer to Los Angeles between 1905

and 1934. The Owens Valley transfer to Los Angeles is the first example of a large-scale,

market-based exchange of water rights in the American West. Unfortunately, it is also

unquestionably the most notorious. It is held up by critics as an example of water theft, as

the above quote from the Economist suggests, and of all that can go wrong from

transferring water from rural to urban areas.

       Between 1905 and 1934 representatives of the Los Angeles Board of Water and

Power Commissioners and some 869 farm and ranch owners and 825 town lot owners

negotiated the sale of land and appurtenant water rights. Under the appropriative water

rights doctrine that exists in the western U.S., water rights can be secured through land

purchases and the water transferred out of the drainage area. By 1934, the agency had

acquired 95 percent of the agricultural acreage and 88 percent of the town properties in

the Owens Valley to obtain the region’s water.4

       Owens Valley water was transported to Los Angeles via the Los Angeles

Aqueduct, which became one of the nation’s largest public works projects at the time,

second only to the Panama Canal.5 In 1920, seven years after the aqueduct was

completed, Owens Valley provided a flow of 283 cubic feet per second of water to the

city, whereas the entire local Los Angeles basin water supply provided a flow of just 68

cubic feet per second.6 The water brought about the growth of Los Angeles from 250,000

people in 1900 to 2,208,492 by 1930. The city became the largest on the West Coast and

hosted the Xth Olympic Games in 1932.7 The additional water also was the basis for

dramatic increases in land values in the San Fernando Valley, in some cases from $20 to




                                                3
$2,000 per acre. By 1920, Los Angeles County, for a time, became the nation’s largest

agricultural county in terms of value of production.8 The gravity flow of water from

Owens Valley to the city allowed for power generation, and the Los Angeles Department

of Water and Power became the largest municipal electric utility in the country.9

       Despite all of the apparent benefits of the water exchange, the standard

assessment is decidedly negative. It is generally viewed as an unequal exchange due to

an imbalanced struggle between representatives of a politically-powerful and wealthy city

against small, rural land owners. The alleged outcome was destruction of the valley’s

agricultural economy and the desertification of its lands (Wood, 1973, 8; Reisner, 1986,

60-107; Kahrl, 1982, 38; 387, Kahrl 2000, 255; Ewan, 2000, 42; Wheeler, 2002).10 Other

authors have a more balanced view of the transaction, noting the valley’s limited

agricultural potential and the impact of the water transfer on the growth of Los Angeles

(Nadeau, 1950, 126-28; Hoffman, 1982, xviii-xiv; Vorster, 1992; Walton, 1992, 192-97;

and Sauder, 1994, 124-34, 151-64).

        Although difficult to test, the legacy of the Owens Valley water transfer appears

to have been harmful for contemporary development of water markets. Ostrom (1971,

449) noted that the experience in Owens Valley deterred subsequent efforts to re-allocate

water from the Feather River and other areas in Northern California to urban centers in

the south, and Haddad (2000, xv) argued that the “Ghost of Owens Valley” inhibited all

proposed water transfers from rural areas to cities in the West. Hanak (2003, 5, 123)

pointed to the “devastation” to the Owens Valley economy as motivating county

restrictions on water transfers in California. The 1974 movie, “Chinatown,” staring Jack

Nicholson and Faye Dunaway, dramatized conspiracies involving Owens Valley water




                                            4
and land speculation in Los Angeles, adding to a popular notion that the outcome of the

exchange was not a positive one.11

       The questions that arise, then, are what were the sources of the bargaining

conflicts between land owners and the city of Los Angeles that raised the transaction

costs of agreement, delaying settlement and giving the land and water exchanges such

negative notoriety? What was the ultimate impact on the valley?

       Addressing these questions is the objective of this paper. The analysis focuses on

bargaining between Owens Valley land owners (mostly small farmers) and the Los

Angeles Board of Water and Power Commissioners (the Water Board). The five-member

board was appointed by the Mayor and charged with securing and distributing a

dependable water supply that would support the growth of the city. Most of the land

acquisitions were financed through bond sales. There were five bond issues between

1905 and 1934 to fund infrastructure construction and land and water rights purchases in

Owens Valley, and the Board was constrained by available funding and subject to

oversight by the Mayor and taxpayers for efficient fiscal management.12 The critical time

period is 1923-34, when most properties were purchased and when most of the

contentious negotiations took place.13 Although the Los Angeles Water Board sought to

buy most irrigated farm lands in1923, final agreement with the last and most valuable

properties did not take place until 11 years later, 1934. The task then is to explain why

the negotiations took so long to complete and why they were so rancorous, leaving such a

negative legacy.

       The analysis makes use of detailed records—letters, reports, memorandums from

1905 to 1934 between the Los Angeles Water Board, its land agents, and land owners in




                                             5
the Owens Valley as deposited in the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power

Archives.14 These documents describe the bargaining history between the Board and

farmers as they negotiated over land and water rights. Bargaining positions, strategies,

and key issues of contention are described in the data. Additionally, there is a

compilation of 869 farm land purchases, including year of purchase, amount paid,

location of property, name of owner, as well as other property characteristics. These data

are used in the statistical analysis. Other data sets exist for sellers’ pool membership and

for town lot sales.

       The information provides a rich basis for examining the bargaining conflicts that

occurred in Owens Valley in a manner that has not been done previously. The added

transaction costs of negotiating land and water rights sales in the early 20th century

centered on three issues: disputes over valuation of property, bi-lateral monopoly, and

third-party effects. Insights from the analysis not only explain why the Owens Valley

negotiations were so lengthy and rancorous, but also why current efforts in the early 21st

century to transfer water from agriculture to urban and environmental uses in the semi-

arid West likely will involve similar problems.

II. Background: An Overview of the Owens Valley Water Transfer: Valuation, Bi-
lateral Monopoly, and Third-Party Effects.

       Table 1 provides a brief, chronological summary of the Owens Valley water

transfer to Los Angeles and the negotiations between the Los Angeles Water Board and

land owners for land and water rights.

                                          Table 1

       The search for additional water in Los Angeles began early. Between 1880 and

1900, the population of Los Angeles grew five fold, from 50,393 people to 250,000, and



                                              6
given the city’s climate, links via the intercontinental railroads, and position as a major

West Coast port, prospects for continued growth seemed promising, except for the

absence of sufficient water.15 The city was in a semi-arid region where annual

precipitation not only was extremely variable, but averaged just 14.62 inches, whereas

Chicago, for example had mean rainfall of 34.12 inches.16 Los Angeles relied upon the

meager Los Angeles river watershed rather than rainfall for its water supply. But by the

turn of the century, there was growing concern among city boosters that more water had

to be found if the city were to achieve prominence on the west coast.17 And there was

water, 250 miles northeast in the Owens Valley on the eastern slopes of the Sierras.

Between the Owen River’s flow and ground sources in the valley, there was a supply of

some 37 million acre feet of water available, about the same as that held in Lake Mead

today.18

       The Owens Valley was approximately 120 miles by 2 to 6miles bisected by the

Owens River that eventually dumped into an alkaline, desert sump, Owens Lake. In 1920

prior to major land purchases by Los Angeles, there were 7,031 people in the area on

farms and in five towns—Bishop, Big Pine, Laws, Independence, and Lone Pine.19 There

were 140,000 acres of farm land in the valley, of which 65,163 acres were irrigated, and

20,906 acres were in crops in 1920, mostly alfalfa, some grains, and small orchards

(apple and pear).20Livestock was the principal agricultural product. The elevation of the

valley (ranging from 3,600 to 4,300 feet), short growing season (150 days), alkaline soil,

and limited access to markets constrained its agricultural potential, and its production was

more characteristic of Great Basin agriculture, than of elsewhere in California.21 Figure 1

indicates the location of Owens Valley northeast of Los Angeles.




                                              7
                                               Figure 1

       The lands of primary interest to the Water Board were those that carried the most

water and were either properties riparian to the Owens River and some feeder streams or

more importantly, organized as part of formal irrigation ditch companies. The major

ditches in Owens Valley were the McNally Ditch, Bishop Creek Ditch, the Owens River

Canal, the Big Pine Canal, the Rawson Ditch, and Farmers Ditch.22 Approximately

49,000 acres of land were associated with these ditches, about 77 percent of all farmland

in the region.23 In total, there were 110 miles of primary and secondary ditches lacing the

north valley where most agriculture took place.24 The construction of ditches required

cooperative investments so that farmers joined to incorporate ditch companies and to

place joint appropriative water claims. The amount of water held by each farmer

depended on the number of shares he owned in the ditch company. Once the Water

Board completed purchase of a farm located on a ditch, its allocation could be released to

flow instead down the river to the aqueduct.

       Between 1905 and 1921 the Water Board purchased land in the southern part of

Owens Valley to acquire the right of way for the aqueduct as well as riparian claims to

excess water that had not been diverted for irrigation in the northern, most agricultural

part of the valley. Through 1921, this water supply was thought sufficient to meet

anticipated demand in Los Angeles and to justify the construction of the aqueduct. These

land and water rights purchases did not interfere with irrigated farming. Southern Owens

Valley lands were mostly desert and average purchase prices ranged from $1.25 to

$23.86 per acre. By contrast, mean purchase price for lands bought later in the north was

$198 per acre. 25 Once the city’s purchases of land and water rights in the southern Owens




                                               8
Valley were announced, successful, but contentious elections for two bond issues for

$24.5 million to buy land and construct an aqueduct were held in 1905 and 1907.26 The

elections were controversial because of suspicions that land speculation in the San

Fernando Valley was the primary motivation for Owens Valley water, not impending

shortages.27

       The reallocation of water brought dramatic property value gains in Los Angeles.28

Although Los Angeles subsequently grew more rapidly than predicted, requiring more

water for urban demand, much of the initial water went to irrigate lands in the San

Fernando Valley.29When the aqueduct began flowing in 1913 it supplied 4 to 5 times

domestic urban demand, but under the appropriative water rights doctrine the water had

to be in beneficial use in order for Los Angeles to retain ownership.30 Accordingly, water

was made available for farming in the San Fernando Valley, and irrigated acreage in Los

Angeles County expanded by over 124,000 acres. The Board provided Owens Valley

water only to areas that agreed to be annexed by the city, and this provision led to the

dramatic increase in the size of the Los Angeles by over 325 square miles. Gradually, as

urban water demand increased, agricultural use of Owens Valley water in Los Angeles

declined.

       At the same time that Los Angeles was planning to acquire Owens Valley water,

its residents were seeking a federal Reclamation Service project for drainage and

increased irrigation. The Reclamation project would have increased agricultural

productivity in the valley by reducing the alkalinity of the soil and increasing the local

water supply for farming. Ultimately, however, the Reclamation project was in

competition with Los Angeles for Owens Valley water. The Reclamation Service




                                              9
investigated prospects in the valley beginning in 1903, but suspended activities in 1905

and the Interior Department cancelled the project in 1907.31 During that time, Los

Angeles’ officials moved aggressively to secure access to federal lands for right-of-way

and for reservoir storage sites for the aqueduct. The view in Owens Valley was that the

political influence of Los Angeles had doomed the project.32

       Much is made of this in the historical literature as evidence of the city’s political

power and lack of concern for the welfare of the valley’s residents.33 But recent research

indicates that the Reclamation Service’s decision not to invest in Owens Valley was

based on limited funds and more favorable sites elsewhere in the West.34 In any event,

the loss of the reclamation project and the diversion of Owens Valley water to irrigation

in the San Fernando Valley, where huge capital gains were earned, caused resentment

and reduced trust among Owens Valley farmers toward the Water Board, thereby raising

the transaction costs of subsequent bargaining.35

       Beginning in 1923 in the face of drought and rising population growth in Los

Angeles, the Water Board began to purchase lands in the more agricultural and densely

populated part of Owens Valley, and these negotiations are the source of the bargaining

conflicts that characterize the Owens Valley transfer. From1923 through 1934, the Board

moved aggressively, securing an additional 863 agricultural properties covering 145,867

acres.36 1,300 town parcels also were purchased beginning in February 1931 using bond

revenues.37

       Not all bond elections were successful, and the Water Board, charged with

supplying Los Angeles with dependable water, was under scrutiny by water ratepayers

and city voters.38 At least two proposed bond issues in 1917 and 1929 were defeated by




                                             10
Los Angeles voters, and as the situation in Owens Valley became more controversial,

funding of city purchases may have become more problematic politically.39 Accordingly,

throughout the period, the Board was concerned with securing as much land and water as

possible with available funds.

       In negotiations between land owners and the Water Board there were three

general classes of problems, although they overlapped: valuation disputes, bi-lateral

monopoly conflicts, and third-party effects.

       Valuation Disputes.

       There were two conflicts in determining prices for Owens Valley lands. One was

the basis for general valuation of farm properties--whether the estimated water supply on

a farm should be valued as an input in agricultural production in Owens Valley or as an

input to land value increases in Los Angeles. The second was the determination of the

value of any particular property when farms were heterogeneous. In terms of the first

issue, the Water Board wanted to use Owens Valley farm values in determining the prices

it offered land owners, whereas land owners wanted to use Los Angeles land and water

values in determining the prices they demanded for their properties. For example, before

the Board, one land owner claimed that she priced according to “the comparative value of

what that water is worth to you….because we know you want water and not the

land…that is what you want and all you want….”40 Given observed land values in Los

Angeles after the arrival of Owens Valley water, relative to those associated with

agriculture in Owens Valley, there were considerable gaps between offered (bid) and

demanded (ask) prices.




                                               11
       The valuation of particular properties was a continuing and important source of

contention because the value agreed to for a particular property determined the owners

“share” of the aggregate gains of the water exchange. As discussed in Section V, these

aggregate gains from trade, especially in Los Angeles, were extremely large, and each

farmer in Owens Valley wanted as large a portion of them as possible.

       Owens Valley properties varied in value according to inherent land fertility,

access to water, topography, other growing conditions, and farm size. Each land owner

had the most complete information about the agricultural potential of his property, but at

the same time, had incentive to exaggerate its value. Accordingly, to assemble offer

prices, the Board relied upon a committee of expert appraisers to assimilate local farm

price information. To reduce disputes with the land owners, the Water Board selected a

committee that would be viewed as credible and acceptable to both parties.

       In 1925, the Water Board assembled a special Appraisal Committee of “three of

the leading citizens of Owens Valley:” George W. Naylor, Chair of the Board of

Supervisors of Inyo County, V.L. Jones, Inyo Assessor, and U.G. Clark, former county

Assessor.41 Even so, since the appraisal committee was employed by the Board, it was

viewed with suspicion among land owners. During negotiations with some farmers in

1926, the credibility of the committee’s prices was questioned: “You hired that

committee; we had nothing to say about it…if you people hire these men, you expect

them to go into the field and do as you tell them don’t you?” Both the appraisals and the

committee often were rejected: “They have been your committee for a long time. Let us

forget them.”42




                                            12
       During the valuation process, Board land agents would collect information about

each farm—location, water rights, amount of irrigated land in cultivation, pasture,

“brush” land, orchards, improvements, and submit the information to the Appraisal

Committee. The Committee, in turn, would compare this information with that for

similar farms that had already been purchased to arrive at an “appraised value.” The

Water Board generally used a fixed multiple, usually 4.1 times appraisal value, to

determine its offer or bid price.43 The Board wanted its offer prices to be based “on the

fair average prices which the city had paid for substantially similar property in that

region.”44 It repeatedly resisted adjusting prices beyond what it had offered for

comparable lands in an area. Further, in 1926 in asking the Appraisal Committee to

determine offer values for properties under consideration, one of the Board’s land agents

stated: “It is also to be understood that these properties are to be appraised in the same

manner and on the same basis that you have appraised other properties of substantially

the same character and in accordance with previous values….”45

       Nevertheless, land owners challenged the committee’s appraised values, and

called instead for binding arbitration in price disputes, using outside arbitrators.

Challenges were based on disputes both regarding the relevant comparison properties, as

well as assessment of individual farm characteristics. For example, one owner, who had

been offered $3,100 for her property, complained that a neighbour had been offered

$10,500, even though he had 1.25 acres less than her, with only 2 inches of water from

the ditch, while she had 3 inches.46 Another wanted her land appraised against a different

group of properties, selecting five farms whose owners had received more than she had

been offered.47The gaps between the bid and ask prices could be sometimes be very large.




                                              13
Owners of the 160-acre Parker ranch asked for $30,000 for the property and

improvements. Land agents for the Water Board offered $11,496. At least part of the gap

was based on the absence of comparison purchases in the area of properties with similar

characteristics in order to arrive at an appraisal. Although the owners lowered their ask

price to approximately $23,000, negotiations languished for at least four years and there

is no record of the farm being purchased by the city.48

       In another case, in 1927 J.T. Otey rejected a bid of $11,200 for his 50-acre farm,

claiming that the Board’s assessment undervalued the water and improvements on his

property (“It cannot be denied that, after all, water is the chief factor which determines

that value of land”). Using prices paid by the Board for neighboring properties with and

without water, he estimated the added value of water, incorporated it into is calculation,

and countered with an ask price of $18,338.56. He then held out for two years, selling the

farm to the city for $19,000.49

       In 1925, farmers who were in conflict with the Board over price asked that the

two sides set up a “valuation commission” to resolve their valuation conflicts, saying that

“no more honest attitude can be taken by either party.” Even the special Appraisal

Committee agreed, but the Board rejected this offer, claiming that “valuation by third

party would mean abandonment of purchase plan adopted with concurrence of your

committee and thus far followed in dealing with your neighbors.”50

       Agreement on property valuation also was complicated by a lack of trust on both

sides. Board officials viewed land owners as attempting to fleece taxpayers with

exorbitant price demands. Land owners, by contrast, viewed the Board as attempting to

undervalue their lands while property values in the San Fernando Valley were rising




                                             14
rapidly. This limited trust meant that neither party held the other’s pricing claims as

credible or honest. This condition increased the transaction costs of negotiation and

lengthened the time necessary for agreement.

       Although much of the Owens Valley bargaining record involves conflicts over

price between the city and land owners, with the latter claiming that they were underpaid,

there is evidence of concern that the city was paying too much for land. For example, a

land buyer John Merrill asserted in 1927 that while the city had paid an average of $200

per acre for Owens Valley lands thus far, the lands could have been secured for $50 to

$75 per acre for a total expenditure of $5 million rather than $12 million.51 The

Hollywood Daily Citizen ran an editorial objecting to any payment for town properties

beyond appraised values.52 These allegations were of concern to the agency and its ability

within the political climate of Los Angeles to raise funds through additional bond issues.

       Bi-lateral Monopoly Disputes.

       Disputes over valuation took place, at least for some properties, within a bi-lateral

monopoly context. The Los Angeles Water Board generally was the only purchaser of

Owens Valley lands and water rights. Once the Los Angeles aqueduct was constructed

for over $23,000,000, the city had a large fixed, immobile investment that depended upon

Owens Valley water. After 1923 with drought depleting the original flow of the aqueduct

and urban demand growing rapidly, the Water Board was anxious to acquire properties in

northern Owens Valley for their water rights. Hence, while Board officials could walk

away from stalled negotiations with one land owner, they could not walk away from

Owens Valley as a whole. Land owners formed sellers’ pools to collude in their

negotiations with the Board. Although, these pools never included all of the farmers in




                                             15
Owens Valley, they did involve those with the most water. Under these circumstances,

bi-lateral monopoly conditions existed.

       Bi-lateral monopolies have indeterminate pricing outcomes because they depend

upon the relative bargaining power of the parties. Each party has incentive to

misrepresent its position in order to extract a greater share of the gains of trade in such

negotiations, and there is little competitive pressure to force more accurate information

revelation. According, bi-lateral monopoly negotiations often break down and take a

long time to complete.

       The farmers who held shares in ditch companies had a ready organizational tool

for colluding in their negotiations with the Los Angeles Water Board that was not

available to those who were not on ditches and were scattered across the valley. Three

sellers’ pools were formed along three of the ditches: the Keough pool on the Owens

River Canal with 23-30 members, the Watterson pool of about 20 members on Bishop

Creek Ditch, and the Cashbaugh pool of 43-48 members on Bishop Creek Ditch.53 These

pools were negotiating groups, dominated by the largest land owner. The pool leaders

were recognized as bargaining agents for all pool members by the Water Board.54

Members may have had to pay a commission to pool leaders for any higher prices they

received.55 At most, the pools involved about a quarter of the farms along the major

ditches in Owens Valley, but probably much of the irrigated acreage. The limited

numbers likely reflected efforts to maintain more homogeneous negotiating groups, as

well as the aggressive efforts of the Water Board to buy ditch properties before they

joined a pool.




                                              16
          The Keough pool was the most concentrated and tightly organized group with a

Herfindahl index (based on farm size) of 1,583. The Watterson pool had a Herfindahl

index of 1,163, the Cashbaugh, 410, and non-pool, ditch farmers, 216.56 Negotiations

between the Water Board and pool members, especially those in the Keough pool, were

among the most contentious and drawn out in the Owens Valley.

          The Board paid $1,389,364 to buy out the properties in the Cashbaugh pool

between 1924 and 1927. The largest land and share owner in the pool, however, William

Cashbaugh held out through 1927, and received a 21 percent premium over the city’s

initial offer price of $145,180 or $174,680.57 The most successful pool was led by Karl

Keough with 4,482 acres (60 percent) of the 7,862 acres on the Owens River Canal. In

1926, the Keough pool demanded $2,100,000 for its properties, and the Board first

offered $1,025,000 and then increased it to$1,250,000. The pool countered with a price

of $1,600,000, which was rejected by the Board.58 Price negotiations for Owens River

Canal properties, both in and out of the pool, continued on and between 1925 and 1931.

By the end of 1927, 60 percent of the 4,837 shares in the canal company were acquired

by the Board, but the remaining 40 percent held by pool members were not secured until

1931. G.L. Wallace offered his lands in 1926 for $417 per acre, while the city countered

with $254 per acre. Final agreement was not reached with him until 1931 at $466 per

acre.59

          Pool leaders resorted to violence to pressure the Board to meet their price

demands when negotiations broke down, threatening the security of the city’s water

supply. Between 1924 and 1931 the aqueduct and city wells were repeatedly dynamited,

although the aqueduct was never seriously damaged, which was never the objective.60




                                               17
These episodes of violence, labelled “California’s little Civil War” by the press, attracted

state and national attention, and compelled the Board to reach agreement with remaining

property owners on price.61 The Board correctly viewed the dynamiting as a negotiating

tactic, but at the same time, it was extremely worried about disruption of the aqueduct

flow.62Indeed, in November 1924, the Alabama Gates spillway was seized and opened,

dumping the water into the desert and leaving the aqueduct dry. The Board responded by

increasing its efforts to secure remaining Owens Valley lands.63

       By contrast, sales agreements with non-ditch, non-pool farm owners appear to

have gone smoothly. Many of the 869 farm properties purchased between 1916 and 1934

were not on ditches or in pools. In the data set used below of 595 farms, 228 were not on

ditches. These farms were purchased for their ground water, and the Board installed

pumps to access it. Non-ditch properties tended to be the least productive in the region

and they received the lowest prices. Even so, there is no evidence in the record of discord

in those negotiations. The Water Board reported that “the prices paid, with few

exceptions, have been entirely satisfactory to the seller.”64

       In some cases, the Board was forced to purchase non-ditch properties in order to

avoid a court ruling under Santa Barbara v. Riverside, 186 California, 7, 15 (1921) that

could stop all ground water pumping in the region for export of water. Under that ruling

any land owner who could demonstrate damage due to the drawdown of the water table

from pumping and export of water by another could secure an injunction halting all such

pumping. To maintain its pumps, the Board quickly purchased properties when pumping

injunctions were threatened by land owners.65




                                              18
       Once the Water Board completed purchase of a farm, its ditch water allocation,

riparian claim, or groundwater could be released to flow down the river to the aqueduct.

If Water Board land agents could not reach agreement with one land owner, they would

turn to another. Holdouts could receive higher prices, but if the Board concluded that

negotiations had reached an impasse, that there were no longer bond funds available to

complete further purchases, or that the city had sufficient water rights and no more were

required, then these holdouts could bear additional costs. Besides the opportunity cost of

the lost sale revenue, holdouts who were on ditches could be left isolated with higher

ditch maintenance and operating costs, since the city did not contribute once the ditch

water was released from its properties. Weeds and insects from no-longer cultivated

properties also could infect remaining neighboring farms.66It was alleged by some

farmers that the Board engaged in a checker boarding strategy, buying properties around

holdouts to force them to sell. There is no clear evidence of this or that this strategy made

holdouts worse off. As shown below, farmers who delayed sale to the city earned more,

all things equal. Moreover, throughout the negotiating period, the Board held to its

overall pricing strategy of paying the same prices for comparable properties.67

       Third-Party Effects.

       As Los Angeles purchased properties in Owens Valley and took them out of

irrigated agriculture, there were complaints that this action was hurting the local economy

and damaging property values within the five towns. The magnitudes of the effects were

disputed. Merchants claimed to have lost 1/3 of their trade due to the decline in the

agricultural economy.68 The general fall in agricultural commodity prices in the 1920s

also hurt the community, but this effect was difficult to separate from those resulting




                                             19
from the Water Board’s purchase of lands and export of water. For example, the value of

Inyo County crops fell from $1,503,195 to $791,257 between 1920 and 1924, a fall of 47

percent. This decline, however, occurred prior to most of the property purchases in the

valley by Los Angeles. Further during that same five-year period, the number of farms in

the valley fell only 7 ½ percent, from 521 to 482, unlikely enough to account for the

observed fall in the value of agricultural production.69 Nevertheless, town property

owners blamed the actions of the Water Board for the deterioration in economic

conditions. The Board countered by pointing to the beneficial effects of its investments in

the valley to develop water and power sites and the growth of recreational activities from

Los Angeles due to construction of new roads. Indeed, automobile registration and bank

deposits in the region increased.70

       California State Board of Equalization annual reports on the total value of all

property within municipalities (real estate, personal, monetary) support the claims of the

Water Board. In 1920, prior to major purchases in the agricultural part of the valley near

Bishop, the total value of property in Bishop was listed as $1,027,792. By 1929 it had

risen to $1,355,666 (a gain of 32 percent), and in 1930 with the onslaught of the

depression was $1,228,709, a gain of 20 percent over 1920.71 Any negative third-party

effects may have been quite small.

       Nevertheless, in 1925, the Owens Valley Reparations Committee demanded either

that the Board pay $5,500,000 in reparations for the loss in town lot value or that the city

purchase the properties for $12,000,000.72 Not only were the prices for town properties

well above what Los Angeles had been paying for other lands, but they carried few or no

water rights. Hence, the Board was uncertain that it had the legal authority under the city




                                             20
charter to purchase such lands, which did not “supply the City with an adequate supply of

pure water...”73 Members of the Los Angeles Water Board concluded that they would be

personally liable if they made such payments.74 There were disagreements over valuation

of the town lots, given both the export of water and the deterioration in the national

agricultural economy in the late 1920s.

       Legislation was enacted by the California Legislature in 1925, at the behest of

Inyo County and other rural legislators, requiring cities to compensate for damages to

businesses and property owners when water was taken from the drainage area.75 “An Act

Providing for and Relating to Damage Resulting from or Caused by the Acquisition of a

Water Supply or Taking, Diverting, and Transporting of Water from a Watershed…by a

Municipal Corporation…” passed overwhelmingly with 78 percent yes votes in the

Assembly and 88 percent in the state Senate. The greatest support came from legislators

from Northern California, who not only were more likely to represent rural areas, but also

were concerned about the growing political influence of Southern California. Support

from Southern California legislators was more tepid, with 50 percent voting no or

abstaining in the Assembly.76

       The statute added pressure on the Board to buy the town properties or be faced

with hard-to-measure-and-agree-upon reparations demands. Indeed, the Bishop and Big

Pine Reparations Committees presented the Board with 548 property damage claims for

$2,813,355.77 Los Angeles officials held off the purchase of town lots until there was a

state Supreme Court ruling in 1929 that authorized the purchase of town properties by the

Water Board. After that, negotiations between the city and town lot owners were

rancorous, requiring various appraisals, offers and counter offers.78 The Water Board was




                                             21
obligated to buy the properties and town owners knew that. The Board, however, was

constrained by available bond funds.

       A Committee of Ten was set up with five representatives each from the towns and

five members of a Special Owens Valley Committee of the Board to determine prices.

But the property value appraisals prepared by the Board’s land agents were rejected by

the town representatives. Negotiators for the towns offered counter appraisals that raised

proposed values in the towns of Laws and Independence by 45 to 50 percent, in Bishop

by 120 percent, and Big Pine by 60 percent. Members of the California legislature who

owned properties in the towns threatened new investigations of the city’s purchasing

practices unless the new appraisals were accepted.79 Ultimately, a compromise was

reached and Los Angeles paid $5,798,780 to 824 owners for 1,300 town parcels, most of

which brought little or no additional water to the city.80The prices paid were based on

1923 values that existed prior to major purchases by the city in the valley, and they did

not reflect the 1929 agricultural depression that was affecting rural land values

throughout the country.81 Funds to buy town lots and remaining agricultural properties in

Owens Valley required a special bond election for $38,800,000 that passed in 1930.82

       In the following section an analytical framework is provided to guide statistical

analysis of the purchase of farm properties. The data on individual town properties are

too limited to allow for the similar analysis.

III. Analytical Framework.

       Figure 2 illustrates the bargaining setting facing land owners in Owens Valley and

representatives of the Los Angeles Water Board. The vertical axis represents the price

per acre for land in Owens Valley and the horizontal axis represents acres of land in the




                                                 22
valley. Valley land is heterogeneous with respect to its agricultural potential, which is a

function of inherent soil fertility, local growing conditions, such as elevation, and access

to water. Along the horizontal axis, land ranges from the least productive at the origin to

more productive, moving to the right. The actual, value of true productivity of each acre

of land is shown by ST, which has a positive slope, reflecting rising agricultural potential,

and hence, greater farming value along the horizontal axis. The determinants of ST for a

particular acre of land are known by farmer, and this supply schedule represents the

minimum that an owner would have to receive from the Water Board in order to sell.

The Water Board in contrast, has less complete information about the true agricultural

value of the land. Its Appraisal Board infers the value of productivity from assembled

farm characteristics, observed output, and comparisons with similar properties. It also

projects the amount of water associated with any land from shares of irrigation ditch

water, any riparian rights to estimated stream flows, and anticipated potential to pump

groundwater.

       The Water Board uses information from the Board’s appraisal to prepare per-acre

offer prices S2. These offer prices rise for lands of greater expected inherent fertility and

water. The schedule represents the Board’s willingness to pay for land in Owens

Valley.83 Farmers, who do not accept the Board’s offer, counter with per-acre demand

prices S1, based on what they believe to be the value of water in Los Angeles.84

       This framework sets up the bargaining situation, with at least some land owners

demanding higher prices along S1 and Water Board officials offering lower prices along

S2.




                                              23
       In negotiations, land owners have the option of accepting the offer price or

rejecting it and holding out for their higher demand price. The expected return from

holding out is:

       (1) N = [Pr S1 + (1- Pr ) ST] - S2,

where Pr is the probability of successfully receiving the higher price. Pr varies across

owners and depends on the likelihood that during negotiations new information will

reveal the true value of productivity of their land, as well as the ability of owners to

collude.

       Equation (1) implies that each farmer compares the Board’s original offer price

with the expected value of holding out, which is determined by the probability of getting

the higher price plus the probability of getting a price based instead on the land’s true

productivity. Hence, the expected value of the holdout is a function of Pr and the gap

between S1 and ST.

       (2) If S2   Pr S1 + (1- Pr) ST, which applies for some farmers with land within the

range O AM in the Figure, then the Board’s offer is accepted. Whether or not (2) holds in

this region depends upon the value of Pr. For low values of Pr, which would be the case

for scattered, unorganized properties that could not easily collude and where production

is limited and easily observed (low valued, desert areas), (2) will describe the situation

facing farmers and the Board’s offer will be accepted. There is no hold out and no

negotiating conflict.85

       (3) If S2 < Pr S1 + (1- Pr) ST, there will be hold-outs and two bargaining

possibilities. Where ST > S1, beyond A* in the Figure, the farmer will never sell because

the value of the true agricultural productivity of the land exceeds any possible price that




                                              24
the Board would pay. Between AM and A*, however, farmers will bargain over price,

rejecting S2, but seeking S1. In the negotiations, there will be disagreements over

valuation, the difference between the land’s true productivity and the Board’s offer price,

EC, as well as battles over the rents received in Los Angeles from Owens Valley water,

DE. These properties will be the center of bargaining disputes in the valley. Since the

aqueduct’s capacity is reached with cumulative land purchases (and water) at AA,

negotiations to fill it will be in the contested region.

           In negotiations with farmers in the contested region, the Water Board would seek

to stay on S2, adhering to a pricing rule that pays the same price for similar properties, but

raising prices for lands of higher expected productivity. 86 The Board has two reasons for

this objective. One is that in negotiations with any farmer, the Board has to credibly

commit not to offer higher prices to others with similar properties. Failure to do so

would make it very difficult to complete negotiations with any owner. The second is that

the Board would not want to set precedents by raising prices for some properties above

those paid for other comparable lands. The former would provide a new valuation

baseline to be used land owners in subsequent price negotiations. The precedent of

raising baseline prices would push the Board’s payments higher, along a marginal supply

cost curve MSC in the Figure, more quickly exhausting its bond revenues, perhaps

without filling the aqueduct, which was its objective.

           If farmers in the region AM A* successfully colluded, then bi-lateral monopoly

conditions would prevail, making final prices indeterminate, higher than S2 and generally

higher than ST, but lower than S1, depending on the relative bargaining power of the two

parties.




                                               25
       This framework yields the following testable implications about the time of

purchase, reflecting hold out actions, and prices paid for land:

       A. The Water Board will seek to buy the most productive lands with the most
          water earliest to fill the aqueduct and offer the highest prices for such lands.
       B. At the same time, land owners with the most productive land and the most
          water will hold out, delaying purchase to receive higher prices.
       C. Land owners who collude will hold out the longest and receive the highest
          prices, all else equal.
       D. Land owners with the least productive land and least water will receive the
          lowest prices.

A related bargaining implication is that in negotiations with farmers, the Water Board

would seek to adhere to a pricing rule that paid the same price for all similar properties.

       These implications are used to guide the empirical analysis. The data include a).

final sales price/acre; b). cultivation share of total farm land—an indication of inherent

fertility and access to water because cultivation in this semi-arid region depends upon soil

quality, water, and local growing conditions; c). acre feet of water/acre transferred with

the land; d). existence of riparian water rights; e). location—whether or not the farm is

part of an organized ditch, and f). membership in a sellers’ pool.

IV. Empirical Analysis of Bargaining for the Transfer of Land and Water Rights:
Year of Purchase and Price Paid Per Acre.

       The data set of farm properties purchased between 1916 and 1934 by the Los

Angeles Water Board includes 869 observations. Dropping those properties less than ten

acres as not being farms, but town lots (analyzed separately elsewhere) as well as

dropping incomplete entries leaves 595 observations. Of those 367 farms were on ditches

and 228 were not on ditches, but scattered throughout Owens Valley. Table 2 provides

mean values for farm property owners in Owens Valley by various classifications.

                                              Table 2




                                             26
        As indicated by the mean values in the table, farms on ditches sold for higher

prices per acre than did those that were not on a ditch. They included a larger share of

more fertile, cultivated land, carried more water per acre sold, were more likely to have

riparian claims, and were more likely to be in a sellers’ pool. Those farmers who were in

the Keough pool also commanded the highest prices; sold the latest (held out the longest);

and had more water per acre to offer Los Angeles. Non-ditch properties sold for less.

They typically had less productive land, carried fewer water rights, and were

unorganized. Land owners not along ditches were more fragmented with no coordinating

organization, and they negotiated individually with the Water Board. These results are

consistent with the implications presented in Section III.

       Table 3 provides descriptive statistics for the variables used in the analysis and

Table 4 reports 2SLS regression analysis of the year of sale and sale price per acre.

Because some of the exogenous variables affecting year of purchase also likely

influenced the final per acre sales price, the year of purchase variable is estimated first

and then included in the price equation to address potential endogeneity.87 Two

instruments are included that affected the year of purchase, lagged precipitation deviation

from normal in Los Angeles (generally negative) and lagged Los Angeles population

change from the previous year. Past drought conditions and population growth pressured

the Water Board to subsequently acquire land and water rights.88

       Following the implications listed above, the year-of-sale analysis is aimed at

determining the characteristics of those farms that held out the longest to secure higher

prices (especially, the role of sellers’ pools). The sale-price-per-acre analysis is aimed at




                                              27
determining the factors that influenced the price paid, again with concern on the impact

of the pools.

       As suggested above, the productivity of a farm as indicated by the share in

cultivation will delay purchase for two reasons: Farms with more productive lands and

success in agriculture had the option to delay agreement with the Water Board if they

were dissatisfied with the offer price. Additionally, valuation conflicts were greater for

such farms because farmers and appraisers for the Water Board often had different

assessments of the value of agricultural potential of the farms. Farms with higher

cultivation shares will receive higher prices, all else equal. By contrast, low productivity

farms were less controversial because their limited cultivation could be observed. Owners

of such properties often were anxious to sell and would do so at lower prices. The Water

Board, however, will delay purchase of such lands because of their limited water.

        Since the Water Board was interested ultimately in water, the amount of water

acre feet per acre associated with the farm, as well as any riparian water rights will speed

sale and raise the price paid for the land, all else equal. Membership in sellers’ pools will

delay sale, because the pools were formed to coordinate negotiations and to hold out for

higher prices. Drought conditions, as reflected in annual precipitation deviation from the

mean in Los Angeles, also will speed sale because of demands on the Water Board to

secure Los Angeles’ water supply. Because drought conditions were more likely to

manifest by late summer, motivating the agency to more aggressively buy lands during

the next year, the variable is lagged. During the period of negotiations, the population of

Los Angeles was growing more rapidly than expected, forcing the agency to buy more

water-bearing lands. Because population data became available at the end of the year,




                                             28
this variable also is lagged. Farm size is included in the price-per-acre analysis as an

additional control variable. It should reduce the per-acre-sale price because smaller

farms tended to have more valuable improvements, including buildings and specialty

crops, such as orchards, that will drive up the price on small properties.

                                               Table 3

                                               Table 4

       As shown in panel 4a, as expected, farms with greater portions of their land in

cultivation were sold later. An additional 10 percent of land in cultivation delayed sale by

.14 year, or close to 2 months, relative to the mean year of purchase in the sample.

Controlling for ditch location and pool membership, farmers with more water associated

with their lands sold earlier, with every additional 10 acre feet of water per acre of land

reducing sales time by about 1 year. Riparian rights may have delayed sales, but the

variable is not significant. Unfortunately, the effect of riparian rights on purchase time is

not well captured in the regression because data on the amount of riparian water is not

available. Only a dummy variable is used to indicate whether there were also riparian

claims associated with the farm.

       Among the sellers’ pools, members of the Keough pool on average held out .8

year, or 10 months longer than did those farmers not on ditches, who comprise the

baseline. Members of the Watterson and Cashbaugh pools, however, sold to the city

earlier than did the Keough pool and earlier than non-ditch farmers who are the baseline

(about .7 and .5 of a year earlier, respectively). Farmers who were on ditches but not in

pools also sold about .8 year earlier than the baseline group. This outcome reflects the

aggressive actions of the Water Board to buy ditch properties as soon as possible since




                                              29
they contained the most water. For pools also, the Board attempted to entice members to

defect and for non-pool members, the Board sought to complete agreements before the

owners joined any pool. For example, the Board convinced the leaders and largest land

owners in the Watterson pool, Wilfred and Mark Watterson, to sell in 1926. All but three

of the other pool members followed, also selling in 1926. The remaining three holdouts

sold in 1927.

       Cashbaugh pool members held out somewhat longer, but then sold quickly in

1927 when the Board announced that it would subsequently be suspending further

purchases.89 As indicated below, Cashbaugh farmers earned somewhat less of a premium

relative to non-ditch farms than did other ditch properties (pool and non-pool members)

because they held out too long. This result reveals one of the hazards of holding out,

since there was always the possibility that the Board would conclude it had sufficient

water-bearing lands or that it did not have enough funds to complete further purchases.

As it turned out, the Board resumed land purchases in 1929 as city water demand grew,

but in 1927 there was uncertainty as to whether this would be the case.

       For non-pool ditch properties, the Board sought ownership as quickly as possible.

For example, the Water Board bought virtually all of the farms on the McNally and Big

Pine Ditches in 1923 and 1924 for $1,000,000 and $1,100,000, respectively to forestall

their joining pools associated with the proposed Owens Valley Irrigation District.90

       As shown in the table, previous precipitation shortfalls in Los Angeles below

normal also speeded sales as did last year’s population change. A 10-inch deviation in

rainfall from normal speeded sales by about 1 year. During the drought of 1924, for




                                            30
example, precipitation was almost 9 inches below normal. An additional 100,000 people

moved up sales by .1 of a year.

       Panel 4b reports regression estimates of the determinants of the price of land per

acre. As shown in the table, as predicted the price paid per acre increased over time, with

each year adding an average of about $32 per acre, reflecting the benefits of holding out

for later sales, all else equal. Farmers with a higher portion of their land in cultivation

also earned more, gaining about $0.85 per acre for every percentage point increase in

share of cultivated acreage. The available water acre feet/acre transferred with the

property raised the sale price by almost $27 per acre with every additional acre/foot of

water. As predicted, farm size reduced the per-acre sale price. Location of the farm on a

mutual irrigation ditch and hence, shareholder in a ditch company raised sale prices

relative to farms not located on ditches.

       Among ditch properties, members of the Keough pool earned about $200 more

per acre than did the 228 non-ditch property owners and $111 more per acre than those

farmers who were on ditches but not in pools. Members of the Watterson and Cashbaugh

pools earned approximately $ 97 and $77 more per acre respectively than non-ditch

farmers, with those in the Watterson pool earning about $8 more per acre than non-pool

ditch farmers, but those in the Cashbaugh pool receiving approximately $12 less.

Holding riparian water rights also appears to have had a positive effect on sales prices,

although the variable is not significant.

       There is additional information for 135 farms in Owens Valley on farmer ask

prices, Los Angeles bid prices, final prices paid, and appraisal values. Although the data

are not consistently provided for all the observations across the groups there is enough




                                              31
information for further assessment of the relative effectiveness of pool members in their

negotiations with the Water Board.

                                               Table 5

        The data in Table 5 are suggestive of the price adjustment process by the Board in

bargaining with pool members. For the less effective Cashbaugh pool (in terms of the

price premium shown in Table 4b), the price offered by the Water Board was virtually

equal to the adjusted appraisal values (4.1 times appraisal according to the pricing rule),

whereas for the more intransigent Keough pool members, the Board raised its offer by 45

percent on average from the appraisal value in an effort to secure the properties.

                                               Table 6

        Table 6 reports the results of a regression of the ratio of the ask-to-final purchase

price against a constant and a number of control variables, including pool membership for

135 farms. The results indicate that pool membership allowed those farm owners to get

more than they initially asked for. They were able to do so by successfully holding out

for an even higher price, whenever the Board rejected their initial demands. The results

confirm also that the Keough Pool was a stronger sellers’ group. The mean ask-to-

purchase ratio for the entire group was 1.19. The coefficient results suggest that a

Keough pool member had a ask-to-final price ratio of .86 and a Cashbaugh member had a

ratio of .98.

        All told, the analyses of the year of purchase, the purchase price per acre, and

price negotiations are consistent with the implications drawn from the analytical

framework outlined above. They explain which properties were purchased first, which

held out, which received the most per acre, and which gained the most in price




                                              32
negotiations. They also indicate which properties would involve the most contentious

negations in addressing valuation disputes and bi-lateral monopoly conditions in Owens

Valley. The negotiations over these properties helped to give the Owens Valley water

transfer its contentious history.

V. Impact of the Water Transfer: An Assessment.

       Los Angeles spent more than $18,580,000 through 1934 for agricultural

properties, and more that $5,800,000 for town parcels.91 As Owens Valley lands were

purchased by the Water Board and their water was sent down the aqueduct to Los

Angeles, irrigated agriculture was replaced by livestock raising. Farms and ranches were

leased from the Water Board and consolidated into larger ranches. The evidence suggests

that land owners in Owens Valley did better in selling their water than if they had stayed

in agriculture. This assessment is in contrast to the usual view of the water and land sale

as one of “theft” by Los Angeles.92

       Census data reveal that between 1900, before the aqueduct was planned or had

delivered any water, and 1930, when most farms were purchased, land values in Owens

Valley rose by around a factor of 11, increasing from an average of $13 per acre to

$143.93 By contrast, land values in Lassen County, California, a similar Great Basin

agricultural county, rose by a modest 2 times over the same 30-year period, from $10 per

acre to $21. These data suggest that most of the rise in land values in Inyo County

(Owens Valley) was due to land purchases by Los Angeles and not due to changes in

agricultural commodity and livestock prices.

       Census data also provide further evidence of the gains from trading Owens Valley

water. Between 1900 and 1930 the value of agricultural land and buildings in Los




                                             33
Angeles County rose by $407,051,000, an increase of nearly 600 percent, mostly due to

the increased migration and development opportunities made possible by arrival of

Owens Valley water. During that same time period, the value of agricultural land and

buildings in Inyo County rose by $11,568,000, also an increase of approximately 600

percent. By contrast, farm property values in Lassen County increased by $6,306,000, or

172 percent from 1900.94Again, the baseline Great Basin county does not do as well.

       The per capita gains are more startling. The per capita gain in the value of

agricultural land values in Los Angeles County in 1930 were $184 whereas those in Inyo

County were $1,652. Ignoring distributional effects, the residents of Owens Valley

benefited from the water trade relative to both the residents of Los Angeles County and

their counterparts in Lassen County, who remained in agriculture.

       If one uses property value data from the California State Board of Equalization a

similar picture emerges. Each year the Board of Equalization reported the “Grand Total

Value of All Property” by county and municipality. The data include the value of real

estate (farm and non-farm), improvements, personal property, money and solvent credits,

and railroad assessments.95 Between 1900 and 1930, the total value of all property in

Lassen County rose by 640 percent; Inyo County rose 917 percent; and in Los Angeles

County, by 4408 percent. While the growth in Los Angeles dwarfed that in the other two

rural counties, the value of all property in Inyo County grew by 43% more than in Lassen

County over the 10 year period of major Los Angeles land purchases in Owens Valley.

       An alternative way of assessing the impact of Owens Valley land sales is to

consider the counterfactual of no Los Angeles purchase or export of Owens Valley water,

the expansion of farm acreage in Inyo County at the same rate as occurred in Lassen




                                            34
County, and the same increase in land prices in Inyo as occurred in Lassen. Under this

plausible counterfactual, farm land values would have been $4,553,120 in 1930 in Owens

Valley.96 But this value is $7,000,000 less than what actually occurred.

       Regardless of how the gains are measured, Owens Valley land owners did better

by selling to Los Angeles than remaining in irrigated agriculture, using Lassen County as

a baseline. Owens Valley land owners captured part of the aggregate gains of trade as

did property owners in Los Angeles. These data are indicative of the dramatic size of the

aggregate benefits of this early water exchange, even when none of the increase in urban

land values in Los Angeles is included.

       A broader comparison of the economic history of Inyo County with four other

Great Basin counties also is instructive for examining the impact of the water transfer

from Owens Valley to Los Angeles. These counties were chosen because they have

similar agricultural characteristics common to the Great Basin (Figure 3): short growing

seasons, relatively high transportation costs, alkaline soil, and limited rainfall. Livestock

raising and alfalfa growing are the principal agricultural crops. All four of the other

counties have retained their water, and two, Churchill and Lyon, Nevada have received

additional irrigation water from the Newlands Project, constructed between 1903 and

1917. Lassen County, like Inyo, was denied a Bureau of Reclamation irrigation project.97

                                              Table 7

       Table 7 provides summary census data for two census periods, 1910 prior to the

Owens Valley water transfer and 1930, when most of the farm transactions had been

completed. As indicated in the table the purchase of farms by the Los Angeles Water

Board and the export of water reduced the number of farms in Inyo County and increased




                                             35
farm size relative to the other counties. The period corresponded with a small decline in

population. Of most interest is the value of land and buildings per farm acre. Notice the

run up in prices in Inyo County between 1910 and 1930 compared to what occurred

elsewhere. For instance, in 1930, per farm and per farm acre land values in Inyo County

were $62,200 and $143, respectively, up almost 5 fold from 1910 for per farm values and

almost 3 fold for 1910 per acre values. No other county had anything close to this

increase in value.98 This pattern most certainly reflects the purchases of farm properties

by the Water Board, since there are no other indications of productivity change. This

evidence supports the claim of the Board that it was paying well above market rates for

Owens Valley properties. These mean values also reflect the effects of the holdout

strategies of the sellers’ pools. In terms of the value of farm production, crop and

livestock production, Inyo grew less rapidly than did the other counties, and shifted more

dramatically from crops to livestock raising, a pattern consistent with a movement from

irrigated agriculture.

        In total, the census and state Board of Equalization data suggest a more positive

bargaining outcome than is commonly suggested for Owens Valley. The export of water

reduced crop production as a share of overall agricultural output and encouraged a shift

toward livestock. But this pattern also took place in the other counties. The comparative

advantage of the Great Basin ultimately was in livestock, so there would have been a

gradual shift from crops in Owens Valley, even had the aqueduct not been built. Owens

Valley was not left a wasteland as is sometimes alleged. Nor would its small orchards

and other crops that were grown through 1920 likely to have remained competitive for

the longer term had the water remained in the valley. The export of water did change




                                             36
agriculture and life in Owens Valley, but it was not dominantly a negative change, nor

was it decidedly different from that which occurred in agriculture throughout the Great

Basin.

V. Concluding Remarks: Lessons of Owens Valley for Understanding the
Transaction Costs of Water Transfers.

         The largest voluntary water exchange from agriculture to urban uses in U.S.

history was the Owens Valley water transfer to Los Angeles, negotiations for which

began almost 100 years ago. The purchase of private land and water rights by the city of

Los Angeles took about 30 years to complete after hotly-contested negotiations, periodic

episodes of violence, and occasional intervention by the California Governor’s office and

the State Legislature, all of which attracted national and international attention. The

benefits to Los Angeles of the exchange included an increase in the value of agricultural

land alone of over $400 million with aggregate urban land values likely rising several

multiples of this amount. Owens Valley water certainly made the subsequent growth of

Los Angeles possible. The benefits to Owens Valley land owners in terms of the increase

in agricultural land values were approximately $12 million, about $7 million more than

they likely would have received had the region stayed in irrigated agriculture. And on a

per capita basis, Owens Valley residents received about 10 times per person from the

water and land exchange as did the residents of Los Angeles County ($1,652 per person,

compared to $184).

         Nevertheless, the legacy of the transfer has been a very negative one, so much so

that Owens Valley has become a metaphor for opposing water markets and the transfer of

water from agriculture to urban and environmental uses.99One reason for the legacy is the

imbalance in the distribution of the total, if not per capita, returns that underscores the



                                              37
“theft” claim. The overall gains to Los Angeles were 40 times or more those of Owens

Valley from the redistribution of water. When the gains from trade are unexpectedly

enormous, distributional issues move to the forefront. Although the Los Angeles

aqueduct was constructed to augment the city’s water supply, no one in 1913 could have

anticipated the population growth that subsequently took place. The reallocation of

Owens Valley water was a huge windfall, with its magnitude perhaps unexpected. While

Owens Valley farmers were made better off than they otherwise would have been had

they remained in irrigated agriculture, as a group they did not capture the major portion

of the aggregate gains from trade. Ex post many of their advocates were bitter about this

distributional outcome. In general, it may be that trades are smooth when the gains are

generally known and the resulting returns reasonably equal. But they are less likely to be

completed, or result in real acrimony, when the gains turn out to be much larger than

anticipated with a distribution that is very skewed toward one party.100

       The bargaining framework also suggests why the Owens Valley negotiations were

so rancorous, with such a negative legacy. The lands were heterogeneous and there were

intense debates over valuation and hence, individual shares of the observed potential

gains from trade described above.101 The most contentious negotiations took place within

bi-lateral monopoly conditions. Neither party could leave the exchange, but both had

sharply different prices in mind, with the most valuable properties, carrying the most

water, holding out for higher prices than initially offered by the Water Board. The price

gaps also were not easily narrowed because of information limits and uncertainties about

the value of water in Owens Valley and Los Angeles, about the amount of water Los

Angeles ultimately would require, and about how much irrigated agriculture could be




                                            38
sustained in the valley. Further, the gaps could not be quickly narrowed because of a lack

of trust between the parties that made them suspicious of the offers of both sides with

little means of resolving the suspicion. And there were third-party effects on the towns

and uncertainty about their significance and the legality of purchases of those properties

by Los Angeles. Given the overall decline in agriculture in the Great Basin and the

country in the 1920s and 1930s, as well as the countering impact of Los Angeles’

investments in highways and recreation facilities, these third-party effects may have been

comparatively small in fact, although they played an important role in bargaining

posturing.

          The economic surpluses that new water generated in Los Angeles County were so

large that the Water Board might have taken a more liberal approach in its pricing

policies, allowing for more active use of binding arbitration. This of course, would have

driven the agency from its strict pricing rule and required additional bond issues. Had the

Board purchased farm and town properties more rapidly and at higher prices, the Owens

Valley transfer might not have the harmful reputation it enjoys today. But such a

counterfactual supposes that Los Angeles taxpayers would have supported higher bond

issues and that the Board agents could have resisted even higher price demands from

Owens Valley land owners, especially those with the greatest water to offer. Neither was

likely.

          To improve their bargaining position relative to that of the Los Angeles Water

Board, Owens Valley land owners appealed to the press and to the California legislature.

The image of rural farmers battling large urban interests fit well within the tradition of

progressive, muckraking news reporting, and it sold papers even if the story was not a




                                              39
balanced nor necessarily factual one. Further, political representatives of other rural

communities with a stake in the bargaining outcome, as well as those who represented

northern California jurisdictions with concerns about a political shift toward a rapidly

growing southern California, provided ready allies in condemning the negotiating tactics

of the Water Board.

       Allegations of water theft and desolation of Owens Valley began to take lives of

their own after 1930. They were repeated in Mayo’s 1933 history of Los Angeles, novels,

and later in the 1950s in other works on western water.102 Additionally, there were

environmental controversies beginning in the 1970s due to the drawdown of the water

levels of Mono Lake after the aqueduct was extended north to the Mono Basin in 1940

and from dust storms originating from the (now) dry Owens Lake bed.103 In these

environmental disputes critics of Los Angeles repeatedly returned to the ‘theft’ of Owens

Valley water as the source of the problem. All of these factors help explain the notoriety

of the Owens Valley water transfer and why the prevailing negative assessment of it casts

such a pall over current efforts to reallocate water to urban uses from agriculture.




                                             40
                                       Table 1
       Chronology of Los Angeles-Owens Valley Land and Water Negotiations
Year        Events
1898-1902    Concern about the water supply as a break on the growth of Los Angeles.
             Los Angeles population 250,000
1903-09     Los Angeles Water Board quietly buys 22,670 acres of land in southern Owens Valley.
            Later purchases more lands, mostly from federal government in southern Owens Valley.
            Owns 82,000 acres. Little controversy.
1903-07     Reclamation Service considers and then abandons irrigation project in Owens Valley.
            Los Angeles obtains federal right of way for aqueduct.
1907-10     Bond issues approved for aqueduct and power generation.
            Los Angeles population 319,187
1913-20     Aqueduct completed; most water directed to San Fernando Valley, which is annexed. Land
            values jump. Limited impact on agriculture in Owens Valley.
1920        Los Angeles population 576,637.
1922        Drought. Bond issue passes. Water Board begins buying land in northern Owens Valley.
1923-24     Conflict over price. Sellers’ prices reflect water value in LA, not local appraised values.
            Board’s offers based on local use. Sellers’ pools form: Keough Pool on Owens River
            Canal, and Cashbaugh and Watterson Pools on Bishop Creek Canal. Board focuses on non-
            pool lands, seeks defectors.
            Aqueduct dynamited; spillway opened, releasing water to desert; risk to water supply.
            State and national press coverage of “California’s Little Civil War.”
            Owens Valley and Big Pine Reparations Associations form to demand compensation as the
            agricultural economy declines. Appeal to state and national press
1925        Los Angeles population 1,192,000.
            When flowing, aqueduct at half capacity due to drought.
1925-29     Contentious negotiations for land and water rights continue. Board retains 4 times appraisal
            rule for setting prices and paying same price for comparable lands. Sellers object that
            properties are dissimilar and that prices do not reflect city water values.
            Aqueduct and city wells dynamited. Periodic diversion of city water.
            Board halts purchases of additional property in Owens Valley in 1927.
            Two sellers’ pools sell out, one remains.
            Taxpayer concerns about high payments for land in Owens Valley.
1930        Los Angeles population 2,208,492.
1931-33     Board begins to purchase town properties.
            Aqueduct dynamited.
            Los Angeles owns 95% of farm properties and 85% of town properties.
             Keough Pool purchases completed.




                                                 41
                                          Table 2
                   Owens Valley Farm Property Characteristics, Mean Values
 Property      Price/acre   Mean Year of         %           Water         Size     Riparian         #
 Type                        Purchase        Cultivated       Acre       (acres)     Rights
                                               Land         feet/acre                  %
 All            $198.22         1926             .17          3.66         154         .35          595
 Properties*
  Farms on         $270.65            1926             .21            5.18       121    .37       367
  Ditches
  Farms Not         $81.62            1927             .09            1.19       207    .31       228
  on Ditch
  Keough           $443.42            1928             .20            5.74       79     .96        23
  Pool1
  Cashbaug         $241.80            1927             .14            4.42       126    .19        43
  h Pool1
  Watterson        $237.00            1926             .21            3.86       147    .25        20
  Pool
*Properties 10 acres or larger purchased by Los Angeles between 1916 and 1934. Smaller properties were
not farms, but town lots and addressed separately: “Tabulation Showing Status of Ranch Land Purchases
Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens River Drainage Area from 1916 to April 1934,” Prepared in
Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence S. Hill, Right of Way and Land Agency, Compiled by E.H.
Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives.
1
  Records in the LADWP Archives indicate that the Keough pool had 30 members and the Cashbaugh pool,
48, but not all are in the data set for analysis because of missing information.

                                                 Table 3
                                           Descriptive Statistics
  Variable                                     Mean        Standard      Minimum        Maximum
   (595 observations)                                      Deviation
  Land Price/acre                             $198.22       $163.38        $3.00         $954.90
  Year of Purchase                             1926          1.87          1917           1932
  Cultivation Fraction                          0.17         0.26            0             1.00
  Farm Size (acres)                             154           267           10            3,502
  Water/acre (acre feet/acre)                   3.66         3.10            0             16.5
  Riparian Rights (Y/N)                         0.35         0.48            0               1
  Keough Pool (Y/N)                             0.04         0.19            0               1
  Cashbaugh Pool (Y/N)                          0.07         0.26            0               1
  Watterson Pool (Y/N)                          0.03         0.18            0               1
  Other Ditch (non-pool) (Y/N)                  0.47         0.50            0               1
  LA Annual Population Change (000)             123            75           23             283
  1916-1934
  LA Annual Precipitation Deviation             0.11          4.98         -8.51             4.25
  from Mean in inches (1910-40)




                                                 42
                                            Table 4
                  Determinants of Year of Purchase and Price Received Per Acre
a.) First Stage Results
DV = Year of Purchase
Variable                                                Coefficient                        SE
Constant                                                 1928.28*                         0.21
% of Farm Cultivatedt                                       1.43*                         0.26
Water Acre Feet /Acret                                     -0.10*                         0.03
Total Farm Acrest                                         -0.0001                        0.0002
Riparian Rightst                                            0.15                          0.14
Member of Keough Poolt                                     0.79**                         0.37
Member of Cashbaugh Poolt                                -0.46***                         0.27
Member of Watterson Poolt                                -0.66***                         0.37
Farms on Ditches but not in Poolt                          -0.84*                         0.18
Precipitation Deviationt-1                                  0.10*                         0.01
LA Annual Population Growtht-1                             -0.01*                        0.002
                                                      2
                                          595 obs. , R = .33, F(10,584) = 29.62
*significant at the 1% level or better.
**significant at the 5% level
***significant at the 10% level

b.) Second Stage Results
DV = price per acre
Variable                                                Coefficient                         SE
Constant                                                -61,473.46*                     10,957.97
Estimated Year of Purchaset                                31.93*                          5.69
% of Farm Cultivatedt                                      85.07*                         19.74
Water Acre Feet /Acret                                     27.99*                          1.91
Total Farm Acrest                                          -0.05*                          0.02
Riparian Rightst                                            -0.92                          9.63
Member of Keough Poolt                                    199.62*                         24.75
Member of Cashbaugh Poolt                                  77.03*                         18.18
Member of Watterson Poolt                                  96.61*                         24.96
Farms on Ditches but not in Poolt                          89.25*                         13.30
                                                      2
                                          595 obs. , R = .61, F(9,585) = 100.61
*significant at the 1% level or better.

                                              Table 5
                   Analysis of Bid Prices and Appraisal Values by Owner Group
                                          Cashbaugh Pool                  Keough Pool
                                            Properties                     Properties
          Mean Ratio of LA                      .99                           1.45
          Bid Prices to LA                    (N=35)                         (N=8)
          Appraisal Values
         Source: LADWP Archives, Tape GX0008, Appraisal Files, “McNally Ditch Stockholders;” Tape
         GX0004, “Sale of Lands, 1920-27 File,” Keough Pool, Owens River Canal; Miscellaneous File,
         Appraisal and Ask Values; 1927 Appraisal Values; Tape GX0001, “Fish Slough File,” Cashbaugh
         Pool; Tape GX0002 McNally Ditch.




                                                       43
                                         Table 6
                Analysis of Ask to Final Purchase Price by Owner Group
D.V.=Ratio of Ask Price to Final Purchase Price
      Variable                       Coefficient                             SE
Constant                                -86.37                             28.56
Total Farm Acres                       -0.0002                             0.0002
Year of Purchase                         0.05                               0.01
Keough Pool                              -0.33                              0.12
Cashbaugh Pool                           -0.21                              0.11
                         135 Obs. , R2 = .07, F(4,130) = .3.66




                                               Table 7
                              Census Data for Five Great Basin Counties
                        Number of           Average Farm           Population       Value of Land and
                          Farms              Size (acres)                             Buildings/Acre
                                                                                        (Current $)
County                 1910     1930        1910        1930     1910     1930      1910        1930
Inyo                    438     218         251          434     6,974    6,555      52         143

Lassen                 502      472          589        1,003    4,802   12,589         24      21

Churchill              354      614          320        144      2,811    5,075         27      80

Douglas                132      135          638        1,084    1,895    1,840         36      41

Lyon                   208      339          508        554      3,568    3,810         32      40

Source: U.S. Census, Land and Building Values per Acre from Barnard and Jones (1987).




                                                   44
  Figure 1
Owens Valley




  45
                     Figure 2
             The Bargaining Framework



                                MSC
    $/acre
                                        ST

                                         S1


                        D

                                             S2
                            E

        G                C

         F



        H

        O
              AM       AA        A*
               Acres of Land
:




                        46
                            Figure 3
                         The Great Basin




Source: Hart, 1996, 9.




                               47
                                      Bibliography

Anderson, Terry L., & Pamela Snyder. Water Markets: Priming the Invisible Pump.
      Washington, D.C.: Cato Institute, 1997.

Barnard, Charles and John Jones, Farm Real Estate Values in the United States By
       Counties, 1850-1982, Washington DC: USDA, ERS, Government Printing Office,
       1987.

Baugh, Ruth E., “Land Use Changes in the Bishop Area of Owens Valley,” Economic
       Geography 13 (1), 17-34, January 1937.

Burt, Ronald S. “A Note on Social Capital and Network Content,” Social Networks, 19:
       355-73, 1997.

City of Los Angeles Board of Public Service Commissioners. Owens Valley and the Los
        Angeles Water Supply. Los Angeles, 1925.

Coase, R.H., 1972, “Durability and Monopoly,” The Journal of Law and Economics XV
       (1): 143-49.

Colby, Bonnie, & David Bush. Water Markets in Theory and Practice. Boulder:
       Westview Press, 1987.

Coleman, James, “Introducing Social Structure into Economic Analysis,” American
      Economic Review, 74 (2): 84-8, 1984.

Delameter, Charles Ellis, “The Owens Valley, City of Los Angeles Water Controversy:
      An Oral History Examination of the Events of the 1920’s and the 1970’s,”
      Masters Thesis, California State University Fullerton, Environmental Sciences,
      1977.

Gill, Thomas E. and Thomas A. Cahill, “Playa-generated Dust Storms from Owens
        Lake,” in Clarence A. Hall, Jr., Victoria Doyle-Jones, and Barbara Widawski, eds.
        The History of Water: Eastern Sierra Nevada, Owens Valley, White-Inyo
        Mountains, Los Angeles: White Mountain Research Station Symposium Volume
        4, 63-73, 1992.

Glaeser, Edward L., David I. Laibson, Jose A. Scheinkman, Christine L. Soutter,
       “Measuring Trust,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3): 811-46, 2000.

Glennon, Robert Jerome. Water Follies: Groundwater Pumping and the Fate of
      America’s Fresh Waters. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2002.

Haddad, Brent M. Rivers of Gold: Designing Markets to Allocate Water in California.
      Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 2000.



                                           48
Hanak, Ellen, Who Should Be Allowed to Sell Water in California? Third-Party Issues
       and the Water Market, San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California, 2003.

Hart, John. Storm over Mono: The Mono Lake Battle and the California Water Future.
        Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996.

Hoffman, Abraham. Vision or Villainy: Origins of the Owens Valley-Los Angeles Water
      Controversy. TAMU Press, 1981.

Hundley, Norris Jr. The Great Thirst, Californians and Water: A History. Revised
      edition. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001.

Johnson, Ronald N., Micha Gisser, and Michael Werner, “The Definition of a Surface
      Water Right and Transferability,” Journal of Law and Economics, 24: 273-88,
      1981.

Just, Richard E. and Wen S. Chern, “Tomatoes, Technology, and Oligopsony,” The Bell
        Journal of Economics, 11(2), 584-602, 1980.

Kahrl, William L., Water and Power: The Conflict over Los Angeles’ Water Supply in
       the Owens Valley, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.

Kanazawa, Mark T., “Origins of Common-Law Restrictions on Water Transfers:
      Groundwater Law in Early California,” Journal of Legal Studies, 32: 153-80,
      2003.

Kennan, John and Robert B. Wilson, “Bargaining with Private Information,” Journal of
      Economic Literature, 31 (1): 45-104, 1993.

Literary Digest, “California’s Little Civil War,” December 6, 1924, 13-14.

Los Angeles, Department of Public Service, Complete Report on the Construction of the
      Los Angeles Aqueduct, Los Angeles, 1916.

Los Angeles Department of Water and Power, Archives.

Mayo, Marrow, Los Angeles, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1933.

Miller, Gordon R. Los Angeles and the Owens River Aqueduct, PhD Dissertation,
        Claremont Graduate School, 1977.

Miller, Kathleen A. “The Right to Use Versus the Right to Sell: Spillover Effects and
        Constraints on the Water Rights of Irrigation Organization Members,” Water
        Resources Research 23 (12): 2166-2174, 1987.




                                           49
Nadeau, Remi A. The Water Seekers. Garden City: Doubleday, 1950.

Osborne, Henry Z, “The Completion of the Los Angeles Aqueduct,” Scientific American,
      CIX (10), November 6, 1913.

Ostrom, Vincent, Water and Politics: A Study of Water Policies and Administration in
      the Development of Los Angeles, Los Angeles: Haynes Foundation, 1953.

Ostrom, Vincent, Institutional Arrangements for Water Resource Development: The
      Choice of Institutional Arrangements for Water Resource Development,
      Arlington, VA.: National Water Commission, 1971.

Pisani, Donald J., From the Family Farm to Agribusiness: The Irrigation Crusade in
        California and the West, 1850-1931, Berkeley: University of California Press,
        1984.

Reisner, Marc. Cadillac Desert: The American West and its Disappearing Water. New
       York: Viking, 1986.

Rose, Carol, “Energy and Efficiency in the Realignment of Common-Law Water Rights,
       Journal of Legal Studies, 19: 261-94, 1990.

Sauder, Robert A. The Lost Frontier: Water Diversion in the Growth and Destruction of
       Owens Valley Agriculture. Tucson: University of Arizona Press , 1994.

U.S. Department of Commerce, Census of Agriculture, various years.

Vorster, Peter. “The Development and Decline of Agriculture in the Owens Valley.” In
       The History of Water. Clarence A. Hall, Victoria Doyle-Jones, and Barbara
       Widawski, eds. Eastern Sierra Nevada, Owens Valley, White-Inyo Mountains,
       White Mountain Research Station Symposium, Volume 4, 1992.

Walton, John. Western Times and Water Wars: State, Culture, and Rebellion in
      California. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1992.

Wheeler, Mark, “California Scheming,” Smithsonian, 33(7), October 2002, 104-113).

Wiggins, Steven N. and Gary D. Libecap, “Oil Field Unitization: Contractual Failure in
      the Presence of Imperfect Information,” American Economic Review, 75: 368-85,
      1985.

Williamson, Oliver, 1993, “Calculativeness, Trust, and Economic Organization,” Journal
       of Law and Economics, 36: 453-502, 1993.




                                           50
Wood, Richard Coke, 1973, The Owens Valley and the Los Angeles Water Controversy,
      Owens Valley as I Knew It, Pacific Center for Western Historical Studies,
      Stockton, University of Pacific.




                                        51
1
  Letter, September 22, 1924 to the Grand Jury of Inyo County from WW. Yandell and Ione Seymoure of
the Farmers Ditch Company regarding Los Angeles purchase of McNally Ditch. Tape GX0007, Town
Properties File, LADWP Archives
2
  For discussion of contemporary water problems, especially groundwater drawdown, see Glennon (2002).
Water transfer issues are discussed in a larger literature. It includes, among others, Anderson and Snyder
(1997), Rose (1990), Johnson, Gisser, and Werner (1981), and Kanazawa (2003).
3
  See, Dean E. Murphy, “Pact in West will Send Farms’ Water to Cities, New York Times.com, October
17, 2003.
4
  Ostrom (1953, 127). Some of the farms had riparian water rights as well, which were acquired with the
properties.
5
  See for example, article by Henry Osborne in the Scientific American 1913, as well as Nadeau (1950, 45-
60), Ostrom (1971, 447-8), Department of Public Service, 1916, Complete Report on Construction of the
Los Angeles Aqueduct. 17-29.
6
  Ostrom (1953, 23).
7
  Los Angeles’ growth might have occurred later with advent of Colorado River water beginning in the
early 1940s. But with a much smaller Los Angeles, the political negotiations behind construction of
Hoover Dam and the California and Colorado Canals, bringing Colorado River water to California, might
have been quite different.
8
  For discussion of the impact of Owens Valley water on Los Angeles, see Kahrl (1982, 227-230).
9
  Kahrl (1982, 230).
10
   A search of the Westlaw “ALLNEWS” data base of Owens Valley provides large and negative press
accounts, generally repeating assertions of transforming a verdant agricultural valley into a waste land. The
articles are usually in the context of more recent environmental conflicts between Los Angeles and
advocates for more water for Mono Lake.
11
   The perception of land theft and community destruction continues in the press. For example, see New
York Times, August 8, 2004, p. 14, “Los Angeles Mayor Seeks to Freeze Valley Growth. Centry-Old Land
Grab Still Contentious,” by John M. Broder.
12
   Bond issues: 1905 for right of way; 1907 for the aqueduct; 1925, $1,150,000 of $8,000,000 for Owens
Valley 1926, $6,000,000 of $10,000,000 for Owens Valley, 1930 where $6 million of $38,800,000 was for
Owens Valley. See John S. Myers, Controller, History of Bonded Indebtedness of the City of Los Angeles
California, May 1895 to December 31, 1927 and Tape EJ00083, Reports 1931-32, May 20, 1930,
tabulation of $38,800,000 bond issue.
13
   Beginning in 1903, the Los Angeles Board of Water and Power Commissioners was made up of five
members, appointed by the mayor to staggered terms and confirmed by the City Council. The Board had
authority to set water rates, purchase properties, and manage water bond funds, among other
responsibilities. There also was a permanent staff that included the Chief Engineer. Throughout the
discussion the reference is to the Los Angeles Water Board. The Board had several designations over the
period, ranging from the Water and Public Service Commission to the Water and Power Commission to the
Department of Water and Power. See Kahrl (1982, 17)
14
   The analysis also relies on the existing literature, especially Hoffman (1982), Kahrl (1982), Ostrom
(1953), Miller (1977), Nadeau (1950), Walton (1992) and Sauder (1994).
15
   The Los Angeles Board of Water Commissioners in its Annual Report for 1904 noted that local sources
beyond the Los Angeles river were too limited to be of much help and that the city would have to find more
remote supplies of water (1904, 25).
16
   Mean precipitation for Los Angeles, 1921-2002 from
www.nwsla.noaa.gov/climate/data/cqt_monthprecip_cy.txt and mean for Chicago, 1871-2003 from
home.att.net/~chicago_climo/CHIPRCP.gif .
17
   Ostrom (1953, 23) provides data on the various sources of water for Los Angeles, 1920-1950.
18
   Miller (1977, 49-50).
19
   1920 U.S. Census.
20
   1925 U.S. Agricultural Census; Ostrom (1953, 118) for irrigation acreage in1910. See also, Walter
Packard, “The Future Agricultural Development of Owens Valley,” January 22, 1925, Tape GX0004,
Special Owens Valley File, LADWP Archives.




                                                     52
21
   Miller (1977, 53-55). The agricultural potential of Owens Valley generally is exaggerated in the
literature. Kahrl (1982, 38) for example, inappropriately compares it to the Imperial Valley, which has
good soil, better drainage, and at sea level, virtually year-round growing conditions.
22
   “Classified Acreage of Lands Under Ditch, Bishop-Big Pine Region of Owens Valley, Based on Surveys
by City of Los Angeles, 1922 to 1926" Tape GX0004, Misc. File, LADWP Archives. Water was
apportioned among farmers on a ditch in proportion to their shares in the ditch company. For discussion of
ditch companies, see Israelsen, Maughan, and South (1946). Mutual ditch companies were organized by
farmers who held stock in them and the companies generally held the water rights of the stockowners.
Expenses were met by annual assessments. See also By-laws of the McNally Ditch Company, GX0008,
McNally Ditch File, LADWP Archives.
23
   Tape GX0004, Miscellaneous File, “Classified Acreage of Lands Under Ditch…1922-1926.” LADWP
Archives.
24
   Miller (1977, 44-56).
25
   Tape GX0007, Owens Valley Lands file, Report to Ralph Criswell of Owen Valley Lands, August 6,
1927 from John T. Martin, Right of Way and Land Agent and “Tabulation Showing Status of Ranch Land
Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens River Drainage Area from 1916 to April 1934,”
Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence S. Hill, Right of Way and Land Agency,
Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, Tape GX0004, LADWP Archives.
26
   Hoffman (1982, 141-54), Kahrl (1982, 90-103), Ostrom (1953, 149-54) describes bond issues in 1907,
sources of opposition, outrage over land speculation in San Fernando Valley, conflict over annexation, and
disputes between the city and private power and water companies over compensation for their properties.
27
   As dramatized in the movie, “Chinatown. A short summary of the scandal over insider land purchases is
provided in Ostrom (1953, 58,149-51), Kahrl (1982, 195) and Nadeau (1950, 29-41).
28
   Nadeau (1950, 29) noted that property values in much of Los Angeles doubled in price in 1905 when the
Owens Valley project was announced.
29
   Kahrl (1982, 170), Hoffman (1982, 154-53), and Ostrom (153, 149-51) describe early water distribution.
30
   Sauder (1994, 122), Ostrom (1953, 148). Quinton, Code, and Hamlin outlined the proposed distribution
of Owens Valley water (Los Angeles Board of Public Service Commissioners (1911). The beneficial use
requirement meant that water had to be used and not stored (hoarded) for future use.
31
   Hoffman (1981, 50-71), Nadeau (1950, 38).
32
   This apparent deception is stressed in all historical discussions of the Owens Valley controversy, for
instance, see Ostrom (1953, 116-18).
33
   Details on Lippincott’s alleged conflict of interest are provided in Hoffman, 1982, 68-79, 136-41) and
Kahrl (1982, 39-79, 85-140).
34
   Conflict of interest is charged by Nadeau (1950, 28-31). Miller (1977, 66-79) reported concerns about
high water table, need for drainage, and high elevation in Owens Valley. Pisani (1984, 302) describes the
problems with Owens Valley relative to other more promising sites in the West.
35
   See for example the lingering resentment on this issue in a letter, September 22, 1924 to the Grand Jury
of Inyo County from WW. Yandell and Ione Seymoure of the Farmers Ditch Company regarding Los
Angeles purchase of McNally Ditch, Tape GX0007, Town Properties File, LADWP Archives. See also
discussion of the legacy of the Reclamation Service project cancellation in Hoffman (1982, 105, 112-19).
Details on the Owens River watershed are provided in Ostrom (1953, 11).
36
   “Tabulation Showing Status of Ranch Land Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens
River Drainage Area from 1916 to April 1934,” Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence
S. Hill, Right of Way and Land Agency, Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives.
37
   Memo by land agent, AJ Ford for the Investigation file, March 11, 1931, Tape GX0002, Investigating
Committee File, LADWP.
38
   Ostrom (1953, 59-62). In 1925, under a new City Charter, the Water Board was required to cover all
interest and principal charges on outstanding bond debt from its revenues, not from taxpayers. “Water
Bonds” advertisement, Tape DS0010, Power and Water Bond Election File, August 31, 1926, LADWP
Archives.
39
   Ostrom (1953, 50, 63).
40
   Tape GX0003 Owens River and Big Pine Canal File, Transcript of Proceedings, August 13, 1926 Ladies
Committee to Board of Water and Power Commissioners, testimony by Mrs. Wallace. LADWP Archives.



                                                    53
41
   Tape GX0004, Sale of Lands File, Letter from Board of Public Service Commission to land owners, C.P.
Crowell and S.F. Zombro, LADWP Archives.
42
   Testimony from Mrs. G.L. Wallace, Transcript of Proceedings, August 13, 1926, Ladies Committee to
Board of Water and Power Commissioners, Tape GX0003, Owens River and Big Pine Canal File, LADWP
Archives.
43
   Tape GX0004 Special Owens Valley Committee File, Resolution, July 20, 1925, Board of Water and
Power Commissioners. LADWP Archives.
44
   Tape GX0004, Special Owens Valley Committee File, Memo July 21, 1926 Board of Water and Public
Service Commissioners, LADWP Archives.
45
   Tape GX0003 Owens River and Big Pine Canal File, letter to the Owens Valley Appraisal Committee
from E.F. Leahey, September 10, 1926, LADWP Archives.
46
   Tape GX0003 Owens River and Big Pine Canal File, Transcript of Proceedings, August 13, 1926 Ladies
Committee to Board of Water and Power Commissioners, testimony by Mrs. R. C. Clapp. LADWP
Archives.
47
   Tape GX0003 Owens River and Big Pine Canal File, Transcript of Proceedings, August 13, 1926 Ladies
Committee to Board of Water and Power Commissioners, testimony by Mrs. Wallace. LADWP Archives.
48
   Tape GX0006, George W. Parker File, LADWP Archives. Search of the “Tabulation Showing Status of
Ranch Land Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens River Drainage Area from 1916 to
April 1934,” Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence S. Hill, Right of Way and Land
Agency, Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives, shows no entry for the Parker ranch.
49
   Tape GX0004, Sale of Lands file, Letter to E.F. Leahey, Water Board land agent from J.T. Otey,
February 4, 1927 and Tape GX0004, Sale of Lands File and “Tabulation Showing Status of Ranch Land
Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens River Drainage Area from 1916 to April 1934,”
Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence S. Hill, Right of Way and Land Agency,
Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives.
50
   Tape GX0004, Special Owens Valley Committee file, telegram 7/22/25 to W.B. Mathews, Special
Counsel, from the Keough Pool committee and telegram from Board President R.F. Del Valle to Karl
Keough, 7/28/25. LADWP Archives.
51
   Tape EJ00086, Correspondence June to September 1927, letter John A Merrill to Board of Public Service
Commissioners, August 15, 1927, LADWP Archives.
52
   Tape GX0001, Clippings File, Hollywood Daily Citizen editorial, n.d. probably late 1929. LADWP
Archives.
53
   The land purchase data set used here has 23 farmers in the Keough pool, 43 in Cashbaugh, and 20 in the
Watterson pool. Other files, however, indicate somewhat larger numbers of members, but details on those
farms are not included.
54
   Tape GX0002, Memo, July 26, 1928, E.F. Lahey, DWP Land Agent, to W.B. Mathews, DWP, E.F.
Leahey File, LADWP Archives.
55
   Tape GX0004, Special Owens Valley Committee File, Letter 9/15/25 to WB Mathews, EF Leahey, and
HA Van Norman, from Bishop Cr Committee regarding complaints about commissions charged
landowners from pool. LADWP Archives.
56
   Herfindahl indices based on water acre feet give similar relative values.
57
   Tape GX0001, Fish Slough File “Cashbaugh Pool,” LADWP Archives.
58
   Memo, July 21, 1926 by Board of Water and Public Service Commissioners, Tape GX0004, Special
Owens Valley Committee File, “Owens River Canal Properties,” Tape GX0004, Sale of Lands File, and
Letter, July 21, 1925 to the Board of Water and Power Commissioners from the Purchasing Committee,
Tape GX0003, Owens River and Big Pine Canal File, LADWP Archives.
59
   “Owens River Canal Properties” and “Letter,” February 24, 1926 from various individuals to F. Del
Valle, President, Los Angeles Water Board, Tape GX0004, Sale of Lands File and “Tabulation Showing
Status of Ranch Land Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens River Drainage Area from
1916 to April 1934,” Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence S. Hill, Right of Way and
Land Agency, Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives.
60
   Wood (1973, 30-37), Ostrom (1953, 121-27).
61
   Literary Digest December 6, 1924, 13-4. Tape GX00086, Letter May 9, 1924 from land agent John
Martin to William Mulholland claiming that the dynamiting was an effort to force the city to buy at
“exorbitant prices.”



                                                   54
62
   Tape GX0001, Miscellaneous File, “The Dynamite Holdup,” Statement by the Board of Water and
Power Commissioners, LADWP Archives.
63
   Ostrom (1953, 84-93), Hoffman (1982, 185-8).
64
   Tape GX0004, Sale of Lands File, Letter from LADWP to two land owners, C.P. Crowell and S.F.
Zombro reporting on the status of land purchases in Owens Valley. “Tabulation Showing Status of Ranch
Land Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens River Drainage Area from 1916 to April
1934,” Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence S. Hill, Right of Way and Land Agency,
Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives.
65
   Miller (1977, 161). Katz v. Walkinshaw 141 Calif 116, 140 (1903) also protected correlative rights by
limiting draw down through pumping.
66
   Miller (1977, 164); Mrs. G.L. Wallace and Mrs. J.H. Stofflet in “Transcript of Proceedings, August 13,
1926, Ladies Committee to Board of Water and Power Commissioners,” Tape GX0003, Owens River and
Big Pine Canal File, LADWP Archives. Miller (1987) discusses the spillover effects among ditch users
when some parties sell their water for export, raising the costs for remaining ditch members. Concerns
about these costs may have motivated owners to sell.
67
   As argued below, it was in the Board’s interest to follow such a strict pricing rule. The Board was anxious
to complete purchases as quickly as possible for water bearing lands. See Tape GX0004, Telegram, August
14, 1925, W.A. Lamar, DWP Land Agent to W.B. Mathews, LADWP Archives. Absent detailed maps of
property location, it is hard to determine whether there was deliberate checker boarding.
68
   Nadeau (1950, 96).
69
   Miller (1977, 164, footnote 20).
70
   Kahrl (1982, 144, 297) claimed that the economy had been devastated but presents the city’s counter
claims.
71
   Schedules E and F, Annual Reports of the California State Board of Equalization, Sacramento: State
Printing Office, 1920-1930.
72
   Ostrom (1953, 123-27).
73
   Statement to Mayor’s Advisory Committee Prepared by the Special Owens Valley Committee of the
Board of Public Service Commissioners, December 16, 1924, Tape GX0004, Special Owens Valley
Committee.
74
   Hoffman (1982, 284-301), August 30, 1927 Report of the Special Owens Valley Committee to the Board
of Directors of the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce, Tape GX0086, Correspondence, June-October
,1927 File,
75
   Chapter 109 of the Statutes and Amendments to the Codes of California, 1925; 1925Laws of California,
251, enacted and approved by the Governor, May 1, 1925.
76
   Most opposition was shown through abstentions. In the Assembly, there were only 3 “no” votes, all from
Los Angeles, but 15 abstentions. Southern California, where opposition was greatest, included Los
Angeles, Santa Barbara, Riverside, San Bernadino, San Diego, Orange, Imperial and Ventura Counties.
Overall representation in the Legislatures still heavily favored Northern California with 56 of the 80
members of the Assembly and 28 of the 40 members of the Senate. Votes from the California Assembly
and Senate Journals, 46th Legislature, 1925.
77
   Tape GX0004, Miscellaneous File, “Facts Concerning the Ovens Valley Reparation Claims for the
Information of the People of California,” Department of Water and Power, City of Los Angeles. LADWP
Archives.
78
   Ostrom (1953, 126).Town representatives ask that 1929 town lot appraisals be increased by 45 to 50%
for Laws and Independence, 120 percent for Bishop and 60% for Big Pine to compensate for depreciation
due to the city’s farm purchase program. A compromise is reached and LA pays $2,975,833 for Bishop
lots, $772,635 for Big Pine, $730306 for Independence, $102,446 for Laws, and $1,217,560 for Lone Pine
for a total of $5,798,780.
79
   Tape GX0002, Investigating Committee File, see demands by Senators Joe Riley and Dan Williams from
Inyo County regarding their properties, and resolution by Senator Herbert Johnson Evans, March 9, 1931,
Chair of the Conservation Committee, LADWP Archives.
80
   Ostrom (1953, 126), Tape EJ0086, Correspondence January-March 1929 File, “Owens Valley Situation,
Synopsis,” Tape GX0002, Investigating Committee File, Memo by A.J. Ford, land agent for the
investigating file, March 11, 1931, LADWP Archives.
81
   Nadeau (1950, 125-130).


                                                     55
82
   Hoffman (1982, 253).Only part of the funds were for Owens Valley.
83
   ST = FA / FM S2, where FA = actual fertility and FM = mean fertility for land in the area.
84
   S1 = S2 VL / VO, where VL = value of water in Los Angeles and VO = value of water in Owens Valley.
85
   The land owner with property at AM is indifferent to selling at the offer price or holding out for more.
86
   Oligopsony is discussed by Just and Chern (1980). For problems facing a monopolist when the product is
durable, see Coase (1972). See also Kennan and Wilson (1993) for other discussions of bargaining
problems.
87
   A Hausman test suggests endogeneity with a Chi-square test statistic of 5.08, 1 df, and a p value of .0242.
88
   The instruments are relevant and an OIR test indicates that the instruments are valid. Annual
precipitation data from 1910 to 1940 are for Long Beach from http://climvis.ncdc.noaa.gov/cgi-
bin/ghcn/precp.chcncgi. Long Beach data are virtually the same as those for Los Angeles for which the data
were more limited. Annual Los Angeles population is estimated and provided at
http://www.laep.org/target/science/population/table.html. The estimations are based on decennial census
data and estimates provided by the California Taxpayers Association, the Los Angeles Chamber of
Commerce, and those compiled by the Los Angeles County Regional Planning Commission.
89
   Nadeau (1950, 104).
90
    The role of the purchase of the McNally and Big Pine Ditches in thwarting the effective organization of
the Owens Valley Irrigation District is described in a letter, September 22, 1924 to the Grand Jury of Inyo
County from W.W. Yandell and Ione Seymoure of the Farmers Ditch Company regarding Los Angeles
purchase of McNally Ditch. Tape GX0007, Town Properties File. Tape GX0001, Ditches File, “Percentage
of Water Stock Owned by City of Los Angeles in Private Ownership in the Following Ditch Companies,”
LADWP Archives. See also, Kahrl (1982, 279), Nadeau (1950, 95), Sauder (1994, 140-43).
91
   “Tabulation Showing Status of Ranch Land Purchases Made by the City of Los Angeles in the Owens
River Drainage Area from 1916 to April 1934,” Prepared in Right of Way and Land Division by Clarence
S. Hill, Right of Way and Land Agency, Compiled by E.H. Porter, April 16, 1934, LADWP Archives.
Memo by land agent, AJ Ford for the Investigation file, March 11, 1931, Tape GX0002, Investigating
Committee File, LADWP Archives.
92
   Most recently, see New York Times, August 8, 2004, p. 14 where the Owens Valley transfer is labeled a
“Century-Old Land Grab.”
93
   Inyo County. Barnard and Jones (1987, 10-12).
94
   Census data are from http://fisher.lib.virginia.edu/cgi-local/censusbin/census/cen.pl. These figures are
only representative of the actual gains from trade. The data for Los Angeles do not include increases in
urban land values and the amount of agricultural land in Los Angeles declined by 369,000 acres between
1900 and 1930. Similarly, the amount of farm land in Inyo County declined by 46,000 acres, whereas in
Lassen County, farm land grew by 94,000 acres. Nevertheless, the data are indicative of the values
involved.
95
   Schedules E and F, Annual Reports of the California State Board of Equalization, Sacramento: State
Printing Office, 1900-1935.
96
   These values are calculated as follows: Using census data for 1900 and 1930, Inyo County had 141,059
acres in farms in 1900 and Lassen 381,109 acres. In 1930, Lassen had 473,268 acres, an increase of 24%.
Had Inyo farm acreage grown in the same way, then in 1930 there would have been 175,120 farm acres.
Lassen farm acreage values doubled over the 30 years, and 1900 Inyo per acre values were $13. Using the
Lassen increase, gives a 1930 per acre value in 1930 of $26 and multiplying this times the 1930 estimated
acreage gives a value of farm acreage of $4,553,120.
97
   Pisani (1984, 303).
98
   For example, 1910 per acre land and building values were$52 in Inyo, $24 in Lassen, $27 in Churchill,
$36 in Douglas, and $32 in Lyon County. By 1930 the relative values were $143, $21, $80, $40, and $41.
1930 per farm values were $62,200 for Inyo, $21,109 for Lassen, $11,565 for Churchill, $44,658 for
Douglas and $21,891 for Lyon. Source, U.S. Agricultural Censuses.
99
   For discussion of water markets, see Anderson and Snyder (1997), Colby and Bush (1987).
100
    P.J. Hill made this point in assessing the results of the Owens Valley transfer.
101
    This is similar to efforts to define unitization shares in oil fields. See Wiggins and Libecap (1985).
102
    See discussion on the persistence of the notion of water theft in Hoffman (1982, 208-42). Another
discussion of the myth of Owens Valley is by John Walton “Film Mystery as Urban History: The Case of
Chinatown” http://sociology_ucdavis.edu/jt.walton/walton pdf/Dublin_paper.pdf See also Williams (1951)



                                                     56
and Mayo’s (1933, 220-46) chapter, “The Rape of Owens Valley.” One novel is Golden Valley by Gragg
and Putnam (1950). One reason that the negative allegations were never challenged is that once Los
Angeles had the water, it was not in the Board’s interest to mount a rebuttal. Allegations regarding Owens
Valley water theft are presented in web searches regarding environmental concerns, issues of urban sprawl,
rural versus urban values, etc.
103
    Nadeau (1950, 132); Hart (1996); Gill and Cahill (1991).




                                                    57
