                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           WHO MAKES ACQUISITIONS?
                 CEO OVERCONFIDENCE AND THE MARKET’S REACTION

                                          Ulrike Malmendier
                                            Geoffrey Tate

                                         Working Paper 10813
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10813


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Who Makes Acquisitions? CEO Overconfidence and the Market’s Reaction
Ulrike Malmendier and Geoffrey Tate
NBER Working Paper No. 10813
September 2004
JEL No. G34, G14, G32, D80

                                           ABSTRACT

Overconfident CEOs over-estimate their ability to generate returns. Thus, on the margin, they

undertake mergers that destroy value. They also perceive outside finance to be over-priced. We

classify CEOs as overconfident when, despite their under-diversification, they hold options on

company stock until expiration. We find that these CEOs are more acquisitive on average,

particularly via diversifying deals. The effects are largest in firms with abundant cash and untapped

debt capacity. Using press coverage as "confident" or "optimistic" to measure overconfidence

confirms these results. We also find that the market reacts significantly more negatively to takeover

bids by overconfident managers.

Ulrike Malmendier
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
urikem@stanford.edu

Geoffrey Tate
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
tate@wharton.upenn.edu
         “Many managements apparently were overexposed in impressionable childhood
     years to the story in which the imprisoned handsome prince is released from a toad’s
     body by a kiss from a beautiful princess. Consequently, they are certain their man-
     agerial kiss will do wonders for the profitability of Company T[arget]...We’ve ob-
     served many kisses but very few miracles. Nevertheless, many managerial princesses
     remain serenely confident about the future potency of their kisses-even after their
     corporate backyards are knee-deep in unresponsive toads.”
                        -Warren Buﬀet, Berkshire Hathaway Inc. Annual Report, 19811


Mergers and acquisitions are among the most significant and disruptive activities undertaken
by large corporations. The staggering economic magnitude of these deals has inspired a myriad
of research on their causes and consequences. Most theories focus on the eﬃciency gains that
motivate takeover activity, often for specific epochs. The empirical results on returns to merg-
ers, however, are mixed, suggesting that mergers may not create value on average.2 Moreover,
even if there are gains from mergers, they do not appear to accrue to the shareholders of the
acquiring company. There is a significant positive gain in target value upon the announcement
of a bid, and a significant loss to the acquiror.3 These findings suggest that mergers are often
not in the interest of the shareholders of the acquiring company.

In this paper, we argue that overconfidence among acquiring CEOs is an important explana-
tion of merger activity. We develop a model of CEO overconfidence that shows the impact
of overconfidence on merger decisions. We test the predictions on a data set of large US
companies from 1980 to 1994. Using the CEOs’ personal portfolio decisions to measure over-
confidence, we find that overconfident CEOs conduct more mergers and, in particular, more
value-destroying mergers. As predicted, these eﬀects are most pronounced in firms with abun-
dant cash or untapped debt capacity. Furthermore, the market’s assessment of overconfident
CEOs, reflected by press coverage in major business publications and the stock price reaction
to merger announcements, corroborates the overconfidence theory.

The idea that mergers may be driven by biases of the acquiring manager has long had popu-
lar appeal, as evidenced by our introductory quote. In the finance literature, Roll (1986) first
introduced the “hubris hypothesis” of corporate takeovers.4 Subsequent studies have found ex-
perimental evidence on overconfidence in market entry decisions (Camerer and Lovallo, 1999)
and on the underestimation of cultural conflicts in mergers (Weber and Camerer, 2003). Build-
ing on this literature, we propose that overconfident CEOs overestimate the positive impact of

                                               1
their leadership and their ability to select profitable future projects, whether in their current
company or in a merged company. They may also overestimate the synergies between their
company and a potential target, or underestimate how disruptive a merger will be. As a result,
overconfidence induces mergers that are, on the margin, value-destroying. At the same time,
overconfident CEOs view their company as undervalued by outside investors who are less op-
timistic about the prospects of the firm. This perceived undervaluation makes overconfident
CEOs reluctant to issue equity, e.g. to finance a merger.

The trade-oﬀ between (perceived) undervaluation and (perceived) high returns from acquisi-
tions leaves the question of whether overconfident CEOs are more likely, on average, to conduct
mergers an empirical matter. However, the model makes the unambiguous prediction that over-
confident managers are more likely to conduct value-destroying mergers. They are also more
likely to conduct mergers if their firm has abundant sources of internal finance and they do not
need to issue “undervalued” equity to finance the deal. Moreover, the lower average quality
of mergers undertaken by overconfident CEOs should be reflected in a (more) negative market
reaction to the merger announcement. This negative announcement eﬀect is reinforced by the
tendency of overconfident CEOs to overpay for their acquisitions in the face of competition.

We test these predictions empirically on a sample of Forbes 500 firms from 1980 to 1994. Our
main empirical measure of overconfidence employs time series data on the CEOs’ holdings
of company stock options in their private portfolios. Previous literature in corporate finance
shows that risk averse CEOs should exercise stock options well before expiration due to the
suboptimal concentration of their portfolio in company-specific risk.5 As in Malmendier and
Tate (2003), we classify CEOs as overconfident when they display the opposite behavior, i.e. if
they hold company stock options until the last year before expiration. This behavior suggests
that the CEO is persistently bullish about his company’s future prospects.

We find that overconfident CEOs are more likely to conduct mergers than rational CEOs at
any point in time. The higher acquisitiveness of overconfident CEOs — even “on average” —
suggests that overconfidence is an important determinant of merger activity. Moreover, the
eﬀect of overconfidence on merger activity comes primarily from an increased likelihood of
conducting diversifying acquisitions. Previous literature suggests that diversifying mergers are
unlikely to create value in the acquiring firm.6 Thus, it is consistent with our theory that
overconfident managers are particularly likely to undertake them. Second, we find that the
relationship between overconfidence and the likelihood of doing a merger is strongest when


                                               2
CEOs can avoid equity-financing., i.e. in the least equity dependent firms. Overconfident
CEOs strongly prefer cash- or debt-financed mergers to stock deals unless their firm appears
to be overvalued by the market.

Additional empirical tests corroborate our results. We show that the observed diﬀerences in
option exercises and merger decisions are not due to inside information. Instead, the hypo-
thetical returns CEOs could have obtained by exercising their options earlier are positive on
average. In addition, the acquisitions of overconfident managers are distributed uniformly over
their tenures suggesting that the eﬀect of overconfidence is a true managerial fixed eﬀect. To
bolster our portfolio measure of overconfidence, we construct an alternative measure based on
how a CEO is characterized in the press. We analyze the diﬀerence in merger activity between
CEOs who are portrayed in the business press as “confident” and “optimistic” and CEOs
who are portrayed instead as “reliable,” “cautious,” “conservative,” “practical,” “frugal,” or
“steady.” Controlling for the total number of press mentions, we perform the same empirical
analysis as with the portfolio overconfidence measure. The results replicate. Furthermore, the
two measures are highly correlated.

Finally, we look directly at the market’s perception of the merger decisions made by overcon-
fident CEOs. Using standard event study methodology, we show that outside investors react
more negatively to the announcement of a bid if the CEO is overconfident. This result holds
even controlling for relatedness of the target and acquiror, ownership stake of the acquiring
CEO, corporate governance of the acquiror, and method of financing the merger. Our results
suggest that, even if overconfident CEOs create firm value along some dimensions7 , mergers
and acquisitions are not among them.

Our theory of managerial overconfidence provides a natural complement to standard agency
theory. Both “empire-building preferences” and overconfidence predict heightened managerial
acquisitiveness — especially given abundant internal resources — and, as shown in Malmendier
and Tate (2003), a heightened sensitivity of corporate investment to cash flow. Unlike empire-
builders, however, overconfident CEOs, believe that they are acting in the interest of the
shareholders. Thus, overconfidence, cast as an agency problem, challenges the eﬀectiveness of
stock and option grants to top executives as an incentive mechanism. On the other hand, it
provides additional underpinning for models of debt overhang. High leverage may eﬀectively
counterbalance an overconfident CEO’s eagerness to invest and acquire, given his reluctance
to issue equity he perceives as undervalued. In addition, the failure of traditional incentives to


                                                3
mitigate overconfidence underscores the importance of an independent board of directors.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section I we present a simple model of managerial
overconfidence. In Section II we introduce the data. Section III describes the empirical strategy
and provides evidence that overconfidence can explain managerial acquisitiveness. We also
discuss alternative explanations and explore the robustness of our results to changes in the
empirical specification. In Section IV, we study the market reaction to mergers by overconfident
CEOs. Section V concludes and provides some broad directions for future research.



I    Theory

A    Setting and Psychological Foundations

We construct a simple model of managerial overconfidence. The model demonstrates the
harmful eﬀects of overconfidence on merger decisions in an otherwise frictionless market. In
particular, we assume symmetric information between corporate insiders and outside investors.
Moreover, management acts in the interests of current shareholders. We first consider the case
of limited debt capacity. A firm with scarce cash reserves and high leverage must issue equity
in order to finance a suﬃciently costly acquisition. We will show later that the introduction of
additional internal funds and untapped debt capacity only increases the incentives of overcon-
fident managers to conduct acquisitions. Risky debt, on the other hand, has similar properties
to equity since managers and financiers might disagree on the appropriate risk-adjusted rate.

Our analysis focuses on one type of heterogeneity among managers, overconfidence in their
own abilities. The hypothesis of managerial overconfidence has a foundation in the psychology
literature on self-enhancement. Psychologists find that individuals tend to overestimate their
abilities when comparing themselves to an anonymous benchmark or to their peers (Larwood
and Whittaker, 1977; Svenson, 1981; Alicke et al. 1995; Weinstein and Klein, 2002;).8 The
“better than average eﬀect” also aﬀects the attribution of causality. Because individuals expect
their behavior to produce success, they attribute good outcomes to their actions, but bad
outcomes to chance (Miller and Ross, 1975). This self-serving attribution of outcomes reinforces
individual overconfidence.9

Psychologists have found that executives are particularly prone to display overconfidence (Kidd,
1970; Larwood and Whittaker, 1977; Moore, 1977; Kahneman and Lovallo, 1993). Baron

                                               4
(2000) surveys related literature on “cognitive factors in entrepreneurship,” noting prominently
the tendency of entrepreneurs to be overconfident in their own judgements. Individuals are
especially overconfident about outcomes that they believe are under their control and about
outcomes to which they are highly committed (Weinstein, 1980; Weinstein and Klein, 2002).
Both scenarios apply to the merger decisions of CEOs. First, a CEO who conducts a merger
is ostensibly replacing the current management of the target firm with himself. Therefore, he
is likely to feel the illusion of control over the outcome and to underestimate the likelihood of
eventual failure (Langer, 1975; March and Shapira 1987). Second, a successful merger enhances
the CEO’s professional standing and his future employment prospects. In addition, the typical
compensation contract of a CEO ties his personal wealth to the company’s stock price and,
hence, to the outcomes of his acquisition decisions.

In our theoretical framework, overconfidence manifests itself in two forms. First, an overconfi-
dent manager overestimates the value of the potential merger, either due to the belief that his
leadership skills are “better than average” (and, by implication, better than the target’s current
management) or due to an underestimation of the downside to the merger. Second, he believes
that his company’s equity is undervalued by the market, again due to the overestimation of
his leadership skills and his ability to “hand-pick” profitable investment projects.

The basic notation of the model is as follows. There are two companies, Acquiror A and Target
T , which have market values of VA and VT respectively. The manager of A chooses whether
or not to acquire T . We denote by c the total internal resources (cash and riskless debt)
available to the manager of A and by c the amount of cash he pays to the target shareholders
as part of the merger financing. V (c) is the market value of the combination of A and T , Vb (c)
the A manager’s valuation of the combination of A and T , and VbA his perception of his own
company’s value if he does not pursue the merger. We call a CEO overconfident when VbA > VA
and Vb (c) − V (c) > VbA − VA for some c. The first condition is that the CEO overvalues his own
company. The second condition is that the CEO overvalues the merger.

We examine the impact of overconfidence on several dimensions: the decision to undertake
an acquisition, the means of finance, and the ultimate payment oﬀered to target sharehold-
ers. First, we explore the tradeoﬀ between heightened acquisitiveness and perceived financing
constraints in a world with a single bidder for the target company. However, in this simplified
framework, only an assumption on the relative bargaining power of the target and the acquiror
can uniquely identify the amount of the transfer from the acquiror to the target shareholders.


                                                5
Later, we consider a more general model with multiple bidders in which we endogenously derive
potential over-payment by overconfident acquirors.


B     Acquisition Decision of a Rational CEO

We first consider the takeover decision of a single rational bidder. For simplicity, we assume
the acquiror has all bargaining power and, thus, must pay VT for the target.10 If he oﬀers an
amount c < VT of cash financing (or other non-diluting assets), target shareholders demand a
share s of the merged company such that sV (c) = VT − c. Since the CEO acts in the interest
of current shareholders, he chooses to conduct the takeover if and only if V (c) − (VT − c) > VA .
Denoting the merger synergies as e ∈ R , we can decompose V (c) into

(1)                                  V (c) = VA + VT + e − c

Thus the manager decides to acquire whenever e > 0. Not surprisingly, the rational CEO
makes the first best acquisition decision. Moreover, his decision is independent of c. Since the
capital market is fully eﬃcient, there is no extra cost of raising external capital to finance the
merger and the CEO is indiﬀerent among cash, equity, or a combination.


C     Acquisition Decision of an Overconfident CEO

An overconfident CEO overestimates the future value he can generate. In terms of our model,
overconfidence implies VbA > VA and Vb (c) − V (c) > VbA − VA for some cash payment c. As a
result, the value of a merger to an overconfident manager depends on the means of financing. In
particular, an overconfident manager perceives a cost to financing with undervalued shares.11
Since the target shareholders, like the market, believe that the merged company will be worth
V (c), they demand a share s of the merged company such that sV (c) = VT − c. Whenever
Vb (c) > V (c), the acquiring CEO believes that issuing new equity entails a loss to current
shareholders of ( VT −c − VT −c )Vb (c). He undertakes the merger despite this perceived cost if
                  V (c)    Ve (c)
he believes the value of the diluted shares in the merged company to A’s current shareholders
is greater than the value of A forsaking the merger. That is, he undertakes the merger if and
only if (1 − s)Vb (c) > VbA for some c ≤ c̄. Substituting for s, he acquires T iﬀ Vb (c) − (VT − c) −
[Ve (c)−V (c)](VT −c)
        V (c)         > VbA for some c. That is, the manager’s perceived valuation of the merged
company minus what he must give to target shareholders minus the perceived loss due to


                                                 6
dilution must exceed his perceived value of A without the merger. Denoting the “perceived”
additional merger synergies as eb ∈ R++ ,12 we can decompose Vb (c) into

(2)                                      Vb (c) = VbA + VT + e + eb − c

Then, using (1) and (2), the overconfident manager’s decision rule is to merge whenever e+b
                                                                                          e>
(VeA −VA +e
          e)(VT −c)
       V (c)        .   That is, he merges whenever total perceived merger synergies exceed the
perceived loss due to dilution. Combining these results with the results of the prior section
yields the following propositions.


Proposition 1 An overconfident CEO exhausts his supply of internal (non-diluting) assets
before issuing equity to finance a merger.


Proof: An overconfident CEO perceives the post-acquisition value of the firm to current share-
                                                    (VA +e)(VeA +VT +e+e
                                                                       e−c)
holders as G = (1 − s)Vb (c) = V (c)−VT +c Vb (c) =
                                          V (c)                             , where the last equality
                                                                  VA +VT +e−c
                                       (VA +e)(VeA −VA +e
                                                        e)
uses (1) and (2). Then        ∂G
                              ∂c   =         (V (c))2
                                                             > 0 (as VbA > VA and eb > 0 by assumption).
Post-merger value is maximized on c ∈ [0, VT ] by setting c as high as possible.


Proposition 2 A rational CEO never conducts a value-destroying merger. An overconfident
CEO conducts a value-destroying merger if the perceived synergies ê are suﬃciently large
relative to the perceived undervaluation (VbA − VA ) and the portion of the deal financed by
         VT −c
equity     V .



Proof: The claim that a rational CEO does not conduct a value-destroying merger follows
directly from his first-best decision rule (see Section B). In Section C, we showed that an
                                                           (VeA −VA +ee)(VT −c)
overconfident CEO conducts a merger whenever e + eb >              V (c)        . Thus,if e ≤ 0, he
                                                  b
still conducts the merger as long as eb > |e| and VA − VA and   VT −c
                                                                       are suﬃciently small.
                                                                          V (c)



Proposition 3 Suppose c ≥ VT , i.e. internal resources exceed the value of the target. Then,
an overconfident CEO will conduct all mergers a rational CEO would conduct and some value-
destroying mergers that a rational CEO would not conduct.


Proof: Since the overconfident manager has internal resources in excess of VT , he will set
c = VT by Proposition 1. Then, the condition for conducting the merger becomes e + eb > 0.

                                                         7
Since the rational CEO merges whenever e > 0 (see Section B) and eb > 0, the first part of
Proposition 3 follows. The last statement of the proposition follows directly from Proposition
2.


Proposition 4 Suppose c < VT . Then, an overconfident CEO does some value-destroying
mergers that a rational CEO would not and a rational CEO does some value-creating mergers
that the overconfident CEO would not.


Proof: The first statement follows from Proposition 2. To show the second statement, suppose
e > 0. Then, the rational CEO always does the merger (see Section B). From Section C, the
                                                                 (VeA −VA +ee)(VT −c)
overconfident CEO will not do the merger if and only if e + eb <        V (c)         , i.e. if eb is
suﬃciently small and VbA − VA or T
                                V  −c
                                      are suﬃciently large.
                                           V (c)



D      Competing Bidders

So far, we have determined the transfer from the acquiror to the target shareholders by our
allocation of bargaining power to the acquiror. Next, we endogenize this payment by allowing
the possibility of competition. Suppose that there are I companies, denoted Ai , i = 1, ..., I,
that compete for control of T in an English auction. Denote by Wi the Ai manager’s maximal
willingness to pay for T . Since Wi is simply the market value of the target plus the (perceived)
surplus to Ai ’s current shareholders as a result of the merger, we can quantify Wi as follows:


     1. Wi = VT + ei if the Ai manager is rational.
                                           (VeAi −VAi +eei )(Wi −c̄i )
     2. Wi = VT + ei + ebi − 1{c̄i <Wi }       VAi +VT +ei −c̄i          if the Ai manager is overconfident.


Then, the equilibrium outcome is the following.13 For max Wi ≥ VT ,


     1. the winning bidder is Ai∗ , where i∗ = arg maxi Wi ;

     2. the winning bid is b∗ = max{(maxi6=i∗ Wi ), VT }.


It is interesting to note that, contrary to Roll’s theory, an overconfident bidder does not always
bid higher than a rational bidder, even if the actual synergies of the merger are smaller for the

                                                           8
rational bidder. In particular, an overconfident bidder who is considerably more overconfident
about the value of his own company than about the merger may lose the takeover contest.
Most importantly, heterogeneity in the merger synergies can increase the transfer to target
shareholders and, when interacted with overconfidence, can lead to over-payment. Formally,
we have the following proposition.


Proposition 5 Suppose an overconfident manager (i∗ ) wins the takeover contest. Then, he
will over-pay if maxi6=i∗ Wi ∈ (VT + ei∗ , Wi∗ ).


Before turning to the empirical predictions of the model, we briefly discuss two important
extensions. First, overconfident CEOs might not only overvalue their potential leadership in
other companies, but also the returns from their hand-selected internal investment projects
(Malmendier and Tate 2003). This eﬀect could counteract their increased acquisitiveness if
resources are scarce. An extended model of corporate decision-making would include the menus
of both potential acquisitions and internal projects. When new resources become available to
the CEO, he would initiate the next project on either or both menus. While relative returns
would determine which project he chooses first, for a suﬃcient influx of resources, we would
expect the CEO to increase the number of projects of both types.14

Second, we have focused exclusively on overconfidence in acquiring managers. Indeed, overcon-
fidence may be an important force in distinguishing acquirors from targets. However, target
managers may be overconfident as well. While overconfidence of target managers will not
change the qualitative predictions of our model, it yields many interesting comparative statics.
For example, acquisitions of target firms with overconfident management are more likely to be
hostile takeovers. The overconfident target management might believe they can create at least
as much value as the potential acquirors and, hence, view all but the most lucrative bids as too
low. Similarly, we would expect acquirors to pay a higher premium for targets with overcon-
fident managers, even in friendly deals. As a result, the acquirors of firms with overconfident
managers are likely to be among the most overconfident managers. In both cases, overcon-
fidence on the side of the target management can be beneficial to the target shareholders.
Unfortunately, we cannot test any of these implications due to data limitations.15




                                                    9
E   Empirical Predictions

In the remainder of the paper, we test the empirical implications of our model. To facili-
tate the translation of the model into predictions about a cross-section of CEOs, we suppose
that e is drawn independently from the same distribution for all potential mergers. That is,
overconfident and rational CEOs do not have systematically diﬀerent merger opportunities.

The first quantity of interest is the diﬀerence in the average probability of conducting a merger
for overconfident and rational CEOs. As noted above, overconfidence does not imply an un-
ambiguous prediction about this quantity. However, higher average acquisitiveness of overcon-
fident managers would indicate the importance of overconfidence as a general explanation of
observed merger activity. Moreover, the model delivers three testable predictions. Proposition
2 and Proposition 3 imply (respectively):

Prediction 1. Overconfident CEOs are more likely to conduct mergers that ex ante have a
high probability of failure (and negative expected return).

Prediction 2. Among CEOs with abundant internal resources (e.g. large cash reserves and
low leverage), overconfident CEOs are more likely to conduct acquisitions.

Finally, Proposition 2 and Proposition 4 together imply that mergers conducted by overconfi-
dent CEOs will be worse on average than mergers conducted by rational CEOs. In addition,
Proposition 5 shows that overconfident managers are prone to overpay for their acquisitions in
the face of potential competition. Since we have maintained the assumption that the market
is eﬃcient, all information about the quality and terms of the deal will be incorporated at the
announcement date and we have the following prediction.

Prediction 3. The diﬀerence between the average stock price reaction to the announcement
of a merger bid by an overconfident CEO and the average stock price reaction for a rational
CEO is negative.

Note that the assumption of symmetric information implies that the merger announcement does
not convey any information about the fundamentals of the acquiring company. In practice,
information revelation will have an impact on the announcement eﬀect (e.g. in Hietala et al.,
2002). For simplicity, we assume that the average eﬀect of such information revelation is the
same among overconfident and rational CEOs.



                                               10
II    Data

We analyze a sample of 477 large publicly-traded United States firms from the years 1980 to
1994. To be included in the sample, a firm must appear at least four times on one of the lists
of largest US companies compiled by Forbes magazine in the period from 1984 to 1994. This
criterion essentially excludes IPOs from our sample. Thus, the more stringent restrictions on
insider trading associated with such firms, such as lockup periods, do not apply. The core of
the data set is described in detail in Hall and Liebman (1998) and Yermack (1995). The virtue
of this data is that it provides us with detailed information on the stock ownership and set
of option packages — including exercise price, remaining duration, and number of underlying
shares — for the CEO of each company in each year. From this data we obtain a fairly detailed
picture of the CEO’s portfolio rebalancing over his tenure.

We also collect data on how the press portrays each of the CEOs during the sample period. We
search for articles referring to the CEOs in The New York Times, Business Week, Financial
Times, and The Economist using LexisNexis and for articles in the The Wall Street Journal
using Factiva.com. For each CEO, we record four statistics: the total number of articles; the
number of articles containing the words “confident” or “confidence;” the number of articles
containing the words “optimistic” or “optimism;” and the number of articles containing the
words “reliable,” “cautious,” “conservative,” “practical,” “frugal,” or “steady.” We hand-check
each article to be sure that the terms are used to describe the CEO in question. In the process
of scanning the search output, we separate out any articles specifically describing the CEO as
“not confident” or “not optimistic.”

We supplement this CEO-level data with merger data from the SDC and CRSP merger data-
bases. Both data sets give us the announcement date and means of financing for mergers
conducted by our sample of firms. The CRSP data set covers only mergers with CRSP-listed
target firms. We use the SDC data to supplement the set of mergers with acquisitions of pri-
vate firms and large subsidiaries. We include only successful merger bids and, following Morck
et al., (1990), we omit mergers in which the value of the target is less than five percent of the
value of the acquiror.16 We supplement the data with various items from the COMPUSTAT
database. We measure firm size as the natural logarithm of assets (item 6) at the beginning
of the year. We measure investment as capital expenditures (item 128), cash flow as earn-
ings before extraordinary items (item 18) plus depreciation (item 14), and capital as property,



                                               11
plants and equipment (item 8). We normalize investment and cash flow with beginning of the
year capital. Given that our sample is not limited to manufacturing firms (though it mainly
consists of large, nonfinancial firms), we check the robustness of our results to normalization
by assets (item 6). We measure Q as the ratio of market value of assets to book value of assets.
Market value of assets is defined as total assets (item6) plus market equity minus book equity.
Market equity is defined as common shares outstanding (item 25) times fiscal year closing
price (item 199). Book equity is calculated as total assets (item 6) minus total liabilities (item
181) minus preferred stock (item 10) plus deferred taxes (item 35) plus convertible debt (item
79). When preferred stock is missing, we replace it with the redemption value of preferred
stock. Book value of assets is total assets (item 6).17 Further, we use fiscal year closing prices
(item 199) adjusted for stock splits (item 27) to calculate annual stock returns. We also use
CRSP to gather stock prices and 2 and 4 digit SIC codes for the companies in our sample and
the target firms in CRSP acquisitions. Missing accounting data (largely from financial firms)
leaves us with a final sample of 320 firms. As in Malmendier and Tate (2003), we trim cash
flow at the 1% level to deal with several extreme outliers. However, all results of the paper can
be replicated with the full data set. The outliers only influence the estimates at all when we
run regressions on quintiles of the data set in Subsection E and only in the quintiles of lesser
interest.

In addition, we collected personal information about the CEOs in our sample using Dun and
Bradstreet and Who’s Who in Finance and Industry. We broadly classify a CEO’s educational
background as technical, financial, or miscellaneous. We consider an MBA, a Ph.D. in eco-
nomics or finance, an undergraduate degree in finance, or similar educational backgrounds to
constitute a finance education. Similarly, undergraduate or graduate degrees in engineering,
physics, operations research, chemistry, mathematics, biology, pharmacy, and other applied
sciences constitute technical education.

Table 1 presents summary statistics of the data, divided into firm-specific variables (Panel A)
and CEO-specific variables (Panel B). The mean, median and standard deviation of all variables
are remarkably similar for overconfident and non-overconfident CEOs; only the number of
vested options that have not been exercised is considerably higher among overconfident CEOs.
This diﬀerence could stem from overconfidence, as we will see later, but, regardless, we will
control for the level of vested options in all of our regressions. Table 2 provides information
about the mergers. Panel A presents summary statistics of the mergers undertaken by CEOs
in our sample; panel B summarizes merger financing, both for our sample and for all U.S.

                                               12
mergers during the sample period.



III    The Impact of Overconfidence on Acquisitiveness

A     Measure of Overconfidence

We use the timing of option exercises to identify overconfidence. Previous literature shows
that it is typically not optimal for risk-averse, underdiversified executives to hold their options
until expiration (Lambert et al., 1991; Carpenter, 1998; Hall and Murphy, 2002). CEO com-
pensation contracts regularly contain large quantities of stock and option grants in lieu of cash
compensation. While diversified investors should value options as if they were risk-neutral and,
therefore, never forgo option value by exercising an option early (Black and Scholes, 1973),
CEOs cannot trade their options or hedge the risk by short-selling company stock. Employ-
ment contracts can also limit the frequency and quantity of divestitures CEOs may undertake
in any given year. As a result, CEOs’ personal portfolios are likely to include too much of their
own companies’ idiosyncratic risks. In addition, their human capital is invested in their firm,
further increasing their exposure to company-specific risk. Thus, the Black-Scholes formula
will not apply. Instead, a CEO must trade-oﬀ the option-value of holding stock options against
the costs of underdiversification. Though the optimal exercise schedule depends on individual
wealth, diversification, and risk-aversion, a risk-averse CEO should generally exercise options
early given a suﬃciently high stock price.

In our data, the behavior of a subset of CEOs cannot be reconciled with any reasonable
calibration of a model of rational option exercise. The typical option in our sample has a
duration of ten years and is fully vested after four years. 13% of the CEOs in our sample hold
an option at least once until the year of expiration. These options are typically highly in the
money, with a median of 278% at the beginning of the final year. As a frame of reference, Hall
and Murphy (2002) find that a CEO should exercise an option during year 9 if it reaches 40%
in the money (given a constant coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion of 3 and 67% of wealth in
company stock). Holding an option until its final year, even when it is highly in the money,
indicates that the CEO has been consistently “bullish” about the company’s prospects. Rather
than taking the current value of the option and investing in a diversified portfolio, the CEO
is repeatedly betting his personal wealth on the company’s future returns. Thus, we classify a



                                                13
CEO as overconfident (and set the dummy variable “longholder” equal to 1) if he ever during
his tenure as CEO holds an option until the last year before expiration. Though large stock
or option holdings (ownership levels) might also indicate suboptimal exposure to company-
specific risk, they are not entirely under the CEO’s control (e.g. they are adjusted by the
board to confer incentives) and are, therefore, inappropriate as overconfidence measures. Table
3 presents the correlation of our longholder measure with various firm and CEO characteristics.

There are a number of potential alternative interpretations of this measure of overconfidence.
In the remainder of this section, we will first apply our measure of overconfidence and show
that overconfident CEOs are significantly more likely to undertake mergers. We will then show
that none of the alternative explanations can explain both the option-exercise behavior and
the merger decisions of these CEOs.


B     Empirical Specification

To test the eﬀect of managerial overconfidence on acquisitiveness, we use the following general
regression specification:

(3)                         Pr{Yit = 1|Oit , Xit } = G(β 1 + β 2 Oit + Xit0 B)

O is the “longholder” overconfidence measure. The set of controls X includes Tobin’s Q,
cash flow, size, a measure of corporate governance, ownership, unexercised vested options
(normalized by total number of shares outstanding) and year fixed eﬀects. Y is a binary
variable that, unless otherwise specified, takes the value 1 if the CEO made at least one
successful merger bid in a particular firm year. Throughout the paper, we assume that G is
the logistic distribution.18 The null hypothesis is that β 2 , the coeﬃcient on overconfidence, is
equal to zero.

There are two kinds of variation we can use to identify the eﬀect of overconfidence on ac-
quisitiveness, cross-sectional and within-company variation. As an example for the first type,
consider the case of Wayne Huizenga, CEO of Blockbuster Entertainment Group for all 7 years
the firm appears in our data. Since he holds some options until the year of expiration, we clas-
sify him as overconfident. He also, during those 7 years, conducts 6 acquisitions. Similarly,
David Farrell is CEO of May Department Stores — the holding company of Lord & Taylor,
Filene’s, and Robinsons-May, among others — for the 15 years it appears in our sample and
is classified as overconfident. He conducts 5 mergers during those 15 years. By contrast, J.

                                                   14
Willard Marriott of Marriott International is CEO of his company for all 15 years of our sam-
ple, but never holds an option until expiration. He also never conducts an acquisition. By
comparing these two types of CEOs, we can identify a cross-sectional eﬀect of overconfidence
on acquisitiveness. As an example of within-company variation, consider Colgate Palmolive.
For the first 4 years, the CEO is Keith Crane. Crane never holds an option until expiration
and he never conducts an acquisition. Reuben Mark succeeds him as CEO in 1984. Over
the next 11 years, he holds some options until the year of expiration and he also conducts
4 acquisitions. So, by comparing overconfident and rational CEOs within the same firm, we
might also identify a positive eﬀect of overconfidence on acquisitiveness.

We estimate Equation (3) using three estimation procedures. The first specification, a logit
regression, makes use of both types of variation. The second, a logit regression with random
eﬀects, also makes use of both types of variation. But, it explicitly models the eﬀect of the firm,
rather than the CEO, on acquisitiveness. Note that if the estimated eﬀects of overconfidence
in the logit specification were due to firm eﬀects, we would expect to see a decline in our
estimates when we include random eﬀects. Finally, we estimate Equation (3) using a logit
regression with fixed eﬀects. This specification makes use only of the second type of variation.
That is, we estimate the eﬀect of overconfidence on acquisitiveness using only variation between
overconfident and rational CEOs within a particular firm. To estimate the fixed eﬀects model
consistently, we use conditional logit. Conditioning the likelihood on the number of successes
in each panel, we avoid estimating the coeﬃcients of the fixed eﬀects themselves and obtain
consistent estimates of the remaining coeﬃcients. The fixed eﬀects approach eliminates any
time-invariant firm eﬀect on average acquisitiveness. The disadvantage of the procedure is
that it induces sample-selection bias. Only firms that conduct at least one merger during the
sample period and that had at least one overconfident and one non-overconfident CEO are
included in the fixed-eﬀects estimation. In Table 4, for example, the number of observations
drops from 3690 to 2261 and the number of firms from 327 to 184 when we move from the
logit to the fixed eﬀects logit specification. To show that neither cross-sectional variation nor
sample selection are biasing our results, we present the results of all three specifications.


C    Overall Impact of Overconfidence

We first estimate Equation (3) on our entire sample of firm years. A positive eﬀect of overcon-
fidence on average is not necessary to confirm the predictions of our overconfidence model (see


                                                15
Section I). However, such a finding would indicate that overconfidence explains a significant
amount of observed merger activity.

Table 4 contains the results. All coeﬃcients are presented as odds ratios. The first column is a
logit estimation on only our longholder overconfidence measure. We find a positive and strongly
significant coeﬃcient, where standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and unspecified
within-firm correlation. Standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and unspecified
within-year correlation are even smaller, suggesting that within-firm serial correlation is the
more serious concern. The magnitude of the coeﬃcient is quite large. We find an odds ratio of
1.68; that is, the odds of an overconfident manager making a successful takeover bid are 1.68
times the odds of a rational manager. More specifically, the odds of a rational CEO are 0.095
(or nearly 1 in 10) and the odds for an overconfident CEO are roughly 0.159.

In the remaining columns of Table 4, we modify the analysis to account for other potential
factors in the decision to conduct a merger. In column 2, we include the logarithm of assets
at the beginning of the year as a control for firm size, Tobin’s Q at the beginning of the year
as a control for investment opportunities, an indicator for eﬃcient board size as a measure of
corporate governance19 , and cash flow as a measure of internal resources. We also include two
controls for the incentive eﬀects of holding company stock and options: the percent of company
equity held by the CEO at the beginning of the year and the number of options exercisable
within six months of the beginning of the year, normalized by total shares outstanding.

The eﬀects of these controls appear to be largely orthogonal to the eﬀect of overconfidence.
CEOs who persistently hold options are still significantly more acquisitive on average. On the
surface, it appears that smaller firms are more likely to conduct a merger; however, much of
this result may be mechanical within-firm variation. That is, the assets of a firm are necessarily
larger after a merger. Because our sample already selects firms based on size, this eﬀect can
overwhelm the cross-sectional variation. It does not aﬀect the remaining coeﬃcients, though;
running the regressions without size yields the same results. We also find that firms with lower
values of Tobin’s Q are more likely to conduct mergers, suggesting that acquisitions may be
a substitute for profitable investment opportunities.20 Further, more cash flow leads to more
acquisition activity, as expected if cash eases financing constraints. Eﬀective corporate gov-
ernance strongly mitigates CEO acquisitiveness. Stock ownership and higher levels of vested
options appear to have a positive (though mostly insignificant) eﬀect on acquisitiveness in the
cross-section, but the eﬀect reverses when we restrict attention to within-firm variation (Col-


                                               16
umn 6). The positive cross-sectional eﬀect is consistent with (high) stock and option holdings
being a noisy proxy for overconfidence; however, we are reluctant to make this interpretation
since the CEO does not have full control over ownership levels. The negative within-firm eﬀect
is consistent with an incentive interpretation since mergers destroy value for the acquiror, on
average.

Column 3 adds year fixed eﬀects to the regression. As noted in the introduction, the literature
has identified a myriad of epoch-specific explanations for merger activity. Controlling for
this variation, however, does not impact our estimates of the overconfidence eﬀect. Similarly,
Column 4 adds industry fixed eﬀects and the interaction of industry eﬀects with the year eﬀects
to the regression.21 This specification allows us to control for the possibility that mergers
cluster within industries over time, as argued by Andrade et al., (2001). Again, there is only a
negligible impact on the results. Thus, overconfidence appears to be an explanation of merger
activity that generalizes across merger waves.

Finally, Columns 5 and 6 control for unspecified firm-specific variation in the probability of
conducting a merger. Though the regressions in the previous columns explicitly address the
most natural firm characteristics that might aﬀect acquisitiveness, there may be an omitted,
or even unobservable, firm-specific variable that leads to more acquisitiveness and positively
correlates with our overconfidence measure. To rule out this possibility, we first explicitly
model the average probability of conducting a merger within each firm as a random draw from
a normal distribution. The random eﬀects specification controls for potential firm-specific
eﬀects on merger activity without eliminating all between firm variation from the analysis. As
reported in Column 5, taking this step actually increases both the magnitude and significance of
our estimate of the eﬀect of overconfidence on acquisitiveness. In Column 6, we eliminate firm
fixed eﬀects and identify the overconfidence eﬀect using only cases in which an overconfident
manager either precedes or follows a rational manager within a firm. Here the magnitude of
the overconfidence eﬀect substantially increases. An overconfident manager now has 2.53 times
the odds of doing a merger compared to a rational manager.22

Thus, all of the regressions confirm that overconfidence is an important determinant of merger
activity, even on average.


Alternative Explanations. Before examining the specific predictions of our model, we
discuss some alternative interpretations of our measure of overconfidence.


                                                 17
1. Inside information. An important determinant of option exercise is private information.
CEOs may delay the exercise of vested options beyond the rational benchmark when they
have positive inside information about the prospects of their company. However, in order to
explain repeated delay of option-exercise over a multi-year horizon, inside information has to be
persistently positive, rather than random (i.e. sometimes positive and sometimes negative) over
time. Most importantly, to explain both the persistent delay and the increased acquisitiveness
of CEOs, the positive inside information must be related to upcoming or recently completed
mergers. Thus, we should observe insider trades right around mergers, which does not seem to
be the case empirically (Boehmer and Netter, 1997). Nevertheless, we perform two additional
tests to distinguish between inside information and overconfidence.

First, if inside information were the main explanation of our findings, we should see a con-
centration of mergers in the years following the vesting date of those options that the CEO
holds until expiration. To test for evidence on the joint timing of option exercise and mergers,
we estimate Equation (3), splitting longholder into two dummies: an indicator for the last 3
(4 or 5) years23 of an option that is held until expiration and an indicator for the remaining
years of the overconfident CEO’s tenure (Table 5). We do not find a significant diﬀerence
between the eﬀect of overconfidence on acquisitiveness for years in which the CEO is holding
the vested option (i.e. when he is identified as overconfident) and when he is not. If anything,
we find weak evidence that the eﬀect on acquisitiveness is smaller while the CEO is holding the
option.24 We also run random eﬀects logit regressions of (3) in the subsample of overconfident
CEOs, i.e. we condition on longholder being equal to 1. Again, we include dummies for the
last 3, 4, or 5 years of an option that is held until expiration. As before, we find no evidence
that overconfident CEOs are more likely to conduct mergers in the particular period we use to
identify them as overconfident, i.e. in the last 3, 4 or 5 years of the duration of an option that
is held until expiration, relative to the rest of their tenures.

We also test directly whether inside information influences the decision to hold an option to
expiration. In particular, the CEO may have held the option due to private information about
the company’s prospects unrelated to his merger projects. Though it is diﬃcult to explain how
this form of private information would lead to heightened acquisitiveness, we can nevertheless
address its potential impact on our overconfidence measure. In Panel A of Table 6, we calculate
the hypothetical returns that longholder CEOs could have realized had they exercised their
options even one year before expiration and invested the proceeds in the S&P 500. We make
this calculation for all CEOs whose options were at least 40% in the money at the start of the

                                                 18
final year, again using Hall and Murphy (2002) as a benchmark. We assume that both the
hypothetical exercise and actual exercise occur at the maximum stock price during the fiscal
year. We find that, on average, longholder CEOs did not profit by holding until expiration
compared to this alternative strategy. Indeed, the average return to exercising a year earlier
is positive, though statistically insignificant. Moreover, the heightened acquisitiveness among
longholder CEOs is due almost entirely to CEOs who more often than not lost money by
holding their options until expiration (Table 6, Panel B). Thus, inside information appears to
have little power to explain the properties of our longholder measure. We also replicate these
results assuming hypothetical exercise 2, 3, 4, and 5 years before expiration.25 The average
CEO would have done better under all four alternative strategies than by holding to expiration.
And, in all cases the heightened acquisitiveness of longholder CEOs is stronger for the “losing”
CEOs. For example, looking 5 years before expiration, the odds ratio on the “loser” portion of
longholder is 1.7, but only 1.27 for those CEOs who, more often than not, profited by holding.

2. Signalling. A closely related story, that also derives from an information asymmetry about
the merger, is that longholder CEOs are holding their options until expiration as a signal to
the market about the merger. Again, the evidence that mergers do not cluster in time when
the CEO fails to exercise options speaks strongly against this alternative story. Further, as
we will see in Section IV, the market responds more negatively to the mergers conducted by
“longholder” CEOs than by their peers. Thus, holding options until expiration does not convey
positive information about the merger to the market.

3. Stock price bubbles. Another explanation for merger activity is that CEOs exploit stock
price bubbles and trade their overvalued equity for the assets of the target company (Shleifer
and Vishny, 2002; Dong et al., 2002). This story can incorporate the observed (non-)exercise
behavior if managers want to reap the benefits of the bubble or to avoid “popping” it with a
negative signal. However, to the extent that “overvaluation” is a market-wide phenomenon, the
time fixed eﬀects already control for it. In addition, our conditional logit estimation eliminates
all cross-sectional variation. What remains to be checked is whether the probability of doing
a merger moves with the stock price of a particular firm. To test whether lagged stock returns
can explain both the probability of doing a merger and our longholder indicator, we estimate
Equation (3) adding five lags of stock returns to our set of controls. We find that our estimates
of the eﬀect of longholder on acquisitiveness are unaﬀected (Table 7). In addition, the lags of
returns have no significant eﬀect on merger decisions.



                                               19
4. Stock price volatility. Another reason why some CEOs may hold their options longer than
their peers is that their companies’ stocks are more volatile. High volatility of the underlying
asset increases option value and the threshold for exercise. We can link this behavior to
increased acquisitiveness if these CEOs conduct mergers to diversify the corporate account
(Amihud and Lev, 1981). Indeed, we will show in Section D that much of the acquisitiveness of
overconfident CEOs is due to diversifying mergers. However, the fact that we find a significant
positive eﬀect of overconfidence using a fixed eﬀects logit specification implies that cross-
sectional variation in volatility among firms cannot explain our results. Only variation in
volatility across the tenures of CEOs in the same company could potentially confound the
estimation. So, we estimate Equation (3) including our usual controls and adding the volatility
of returns over the prior year as a control. We find that volatility has no explanatory power for
the time series of merger activity within a firm and our estimate of the overconfidence eﬀect
is virtually unchanged (2.72 with fixed eﬀects).

5. Risk Neutrality. CEOs might hold options until expiration if they are risk neutral or if they
manage to perfectly hedge the risk of their options, despite the prohibition of trading and
short sales. However, shareholders should prefer a risk neutral CEO over a risk-averse CEO
since they are not prevented from diversifying their portfolios. So, if risk aversion dampens
acquisitiveness and longholder measures risk neutrality, the market should react positively to
the extra bids of longholders. In Section IV, we show that, instead, the market reacts more
negatively on average to the bids of longholder CEOs than other acquirors.

6. Finance Education and Other Personal Characteristics. To test whether educational back-
ground determines both the option exercise and the merger behavior of CEOs, we estimate
Equation (3) including an indicator of financial education. Finance education has a positive
impact on acquisitiveness, but the eﬀect is orthogonal to overconfidence. Similarly, other CEO
characteristics (being president and chairman, age, tenure) do not impact the estimated eﬀect
of overconfidence on acquisitiveness (and are not individually significant). Thus, it is unlikely
that longholder captures an observable CEO characteristic other than overconfidence.

There are other explanations of why CEOs may hold options until expiration (like procrastina-
tion) or conduct more mergers than their peers. These stories, however, cannot simultaneously
explain takeovers and excessive option holding.




                                               20
D    Overconfidence and Diversifying Mergers

We have found that overconfident managers, on average, are more likely to make a successful
merger bid than their rational peers. The empirical results suggest that exuberance about
potential merger synergies dominates the countervailing eﬀect of perceived undervaluation,
even on average. We now test the specific predictions of our model of overconfidence.

According to our model, overconfident managers are more likely than rational managers to
undertake a merger project that, ex ante, is unlikely to increase value (Prediction 1). To test
this prediction, we attempt to identify a subset of mergers that, ex ante, is unlikely to create
value. We hypothesize that diversifying mergers are such a subset. Not only is there ample
support in the academic literature for this assumption, but the market also seems to recognize
in advance that many diversifying bids are unwise. Morck et al., (1990) document a negative
market reaction when a firm announces a diversifying deal, an eﬀect we confirm in our data in
Section IV.26

Using diversification as a proxy for mergers with negative expected value, we estimate Equation
(3) with a dependent variable that indicates a successful diversifying bid in a particular firm
year. Bids are defined as diversifying if the acquiror and target firms are not members of the
same Fama-French 48 industry group. We also estimate Equation (3) with a dependent variable
that indicates a successful intra-industry bid. Table 8 shows that overconfident managers
are far more likely to do diversifying mergers than rational managers. In the fixed eﬀects
logit specification, the odds ratio on the longholder measure of overconfidence is 3.15. By
comparison, the eﬀect of overconfidence on all mergers, reported in Table 4, is 2.53. And,
though the eﬀect of overconfidence on the likelihood of making a related bid appears to be
positive (1.51), the z-statistic of 0.75 is far below conventional standards of significance.

Thus, the economically large and statistically significant eﬀect of overconfidence on acquisi-
tiveness is due mainly to overconfident managers conducting more destructive mergers. This
finding confirms Prediction 1 of our model.


E   Overconfidence and Internal Resources

Our second prediction is that overconfidence matters most in firms with abundant internal
resources. If a firm can finance an acquisition without issuing equity, perceived undervaluation


                                                21
by the capital market will have less of an eﬀect on the CEO’s enthusiasm for the merger. Cash
and safe debt allow the CEO and current shareholders to remain the residual claimants on all
of the merger’s future value. Furthermore, an overconfident CEO might prefer risky debt to
equity. While he may disagree with the market about the probability of bankruptcy and, thus,
view debt as too expensive, he retains more rights to the (perceived) upside with risky debt
than with equity. Thus, we predict that the eﬀect of overconfidence on acquisition decisions is
most pronounced in firms with large cash resources and untapped debt capacity.

To test this prediction, we employ the Kaplan-Zingales index. Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
use information from annual reports and company executives to measure financing constraints
directly. They then estimate an ordered logit of this classification on five accounting ratios
related to financial constraints. These variables are cash flow to total capital, Q, debt to total
capital, dividends to total capital, and cash holdings to capital. Recent research (Baker et al.
(2001), Lamont et al., (2001), Malmendier and Tate (2003)) uses the estimates to construct
an index of financial constraints (or equity dependence) as follows:
                                  CFit
           KZit = −1.001909 ∗           + 0.2826389 ∗ Qit + 3.139193 ∗ Leverageit
                                  Kit−1
                                 Dividendit                Cit
                      −39.3678 ∗            − 1.314759 ∗
                                   Kit−1                 Kit−1
Higher values of the linear combination of the five ratios implies a higher degree of equity
dependence27 . Prediction 2 would be confirmed if the eﬀect of overconfidence is strongest for
the subsample of firms that have the lowest values of the Kaplan-Zingales index.

We divide our sample into quintiles of the Kaplan-Zingales index and estimate random eﬀects
logit regressions of Equation (3) separately on each quintile.28 Since the capital structure of a
firm may change endogenously in anticipation of (or preparation for) a merger, we use the value
of the index at the beginning of the year preceding the merger. The results of our estimation
are in Table 9. In Panel A, the dependent variable indicates that the firm made at least one
successful bid in a particular firm year. We find, as predicted, a positive and significant eﬀect
of overconfidence in the “least constrained” quintile (the odds ratio on overconfidence is 2.29)
and no significant eﬀect in the “most constrained” quintile. The large diﬀerence is not due to
a lack of suﬃcient mergers to identify the eﬀect in the most constrained quintile: the number
of successful bids is virtually identical in the top and bottom quintiles (70 versus 66).

In Section D, we show that overconfident managers are particularly prone to make diversifying
bids, which are, from an ex-ante perspective, less likely to generate future returns. Thus, the

                                               22
discrepancy in beliefs (between the market and an overconfident CEO) about the profitability
of a diversifying merger is likely to be particularly high. In other words, the undervaluation
eﬀect when making a diversifying bid is likely to be particularly acute because the contribution
of eb to Vb (c) − V (c) will be particularly large. As a result, we expect to find an even starker
demonstration of Prediction 2 when we limit our attention to diversifying mergers. The results
are in Panel B of Table 9. As in Panel A, we find a strong and significant eﬀect of over-
confidence among the least constrained managers (the odds ratio on overconfidence is 2.55)
and no significant eﬀect among the most constrained managers. Notably, the eﬀect among
unconstrained managers is larger here than in Panel A. The eﬀect of overconfidence appears
to decline monotonically as we move progressively to more constrained quintiles of the index.

The data confirms Prediction 2 of our model: the eﬀects of overconfidence on acquisitiveness are
strongest for managers with abundant internal resources. This eﬀect is most pronounced when
we restrict attention to a class of value-destroying mergers most prevalent among overconfident
managers. The data also confirms the financing implications of our model. We find that
overconfident CEOs are more likely, conditional on conducting a merger, to finance it using cash
and debt (Table 10). The eﬀect is strongest if we control for market over- and undervaluation.
In Panel C, we run a logit regression to estimate the probability of conducting a cash acquisition
conditional on overconfidence, stock and option ownership, size of the target as a fraction of the
acquiror’s value, and over- or undervaluation. We find that overconfident CEOs are far more
likely than rational managers to conduct a cash acquisition when the eﬀects of undervaluation
are acute, as captured by Tobin’s Q being less than 1. Interestingly, CEOs do fewer cash
deals when they are overvalued by the market. These result confirm both that overconfident
managers are particularly sensitive to (perceived) market undervaluation and that investor
sentiment aﬀects merger financing decisions, as in Shleifer and Vishny (2002).


F   Robustness

We briefly discuss the robustness of our results to changes in the empirical specification. We
focus on the baseline estimates of Equation (3).

1. Is the Option in the Money? Our longholder measure of overconfidence is appealing in its
simplicity: we classify a CEO as overconfident if he ever holds an option until expiration. Of
course, the less an option is in the money, the less delayed exercise indicates likely overcon-



                                               23
fidence. As a robustness check of our measure, then, we require that the option that is held
until expiration be at least x% in the money at the beginning of its final year. We vary x
between 0 and 100 by increments of 10. As we increase x, the classification as overconfident
becomes more restrictive. At the same time, we hold the definition of “rational” option ex-
ercise behavior constant, i.e. we require that the CEO never holds an option until the final
year. This restriction keeps the comparison group the same across all regressions.29 Figure
1 presents the coeﬃcients on these modified proxies for overconfidence in estimates of Equa-
tion (3). In the logit and random eﬀects logit specifications, the overconfidence coeﬃcient is
roughly constant as we vary x. In the fixed eﬀects logit specification, the coeﬃcient appears to
modestly increase. We conclude that the eﬀect of longholder on acquisitiveness is not driven
by CEOs with out-of-the money options.

2. Consistency of behavior. Thus far, we have classified CEOs as overconfident if they ever
held an option until expiration. A natural alternative is to require that they always hold their
option packages until expiration. Similarly, we can require the non-overconfident CEOs to be
“habitual” early exercisers. Of course, the restrictions these tests impose on sample size are
severe. For example, when we require that an overconfident CEO never exercises an entire
option package before expiration, we reduce our sample of overconfident CEO years from 742
to 259. Or, comparing overconfident CEOs to early exercisers decreases total firm years in
the regression from 3690 to 1181. Nevertheless, our results hold. When we require that CEOs
always hold options to expiration to be overconfident, we find a significant odds ratio of 1.81 on
overconfidence in the random eﬀects estimation of Equation (3). Similarly, when we compare
overconfident CEOs, measured by longholder, only to CEOs who always exercise options while
they still have 6 or more years of remaining duration (the average remaining duration at
exercise is 5.2 years in our sample), we find an odds ratio of 1.57 on longholder. Finally, if we
impose both restrictions, i.e. require that overconfident CEOs always hold to expiration and
that rational CEOs always exercise early, we find an odds ratio of 1.69 on overconfidence.


G    Overconfidence and the Press

So far, we have used CEOs’ personal portfolio decisions to identify diﬀerences in beliefs between
managers and outsiders about the firms’ future prospects. To confirm that our measure is iden-
tifying overconfident CEOs, we now construct an alternative measure. Rather than identifying
diﬀerences in beliefs from the managerial side, we identify them from the perspective of corpo-


                                               24
rate outsiders. In particular, we classify CEOs as overconfident if the market perceives them
as “confident” and “optimistic.” Our proxy for market perception is press coverage in leading
business publications: The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times, Business Week, Finan-
cial Times, and The Economist. Using the press data described in Section II, we record the
number of articles from the Factiva.com and LexisNexis searches that refer to the CEO using
the terms (a) “confident” or “confidence,” (b) “optimistic” or “optimism,” (c) “not confident,”
(d) “not optimistic,” and (e) “reliable,” “cautious,” “conservative,” “practical,” “frugal,” or
“steady.” We construct the alternative overconfidence measure by comparing the number of
articles that portray the CEO as confident and optimistic to the number of articles that por-
tray him as not confident, not optimistic, reliable, cautious, conservative, practical, frugal, or
steady. That is, we define the following indicator of overconfidence:
                                              (
                                                 1 if a + b > c + d + e
                        T OT ALconfident =
                                                 0 otherwise

We choose a measure that removes coverage frequency for two reasons. First, conducting
mergers may lead to heightened press coverage. This eﬀect could ultimately trigger reverse
causality if total coverage creeps into our overconfidence measure. Second, some CEOs are
simply mentioned more often in the press than others, regardless of context. As a result, they
are more likely to be mentioned as “confident” or “optimistic.” A potential shortcoming of this
overconfidence measure is that managers might try to convey confidence and optimism to the
press as a way to keep their share price high. It is unlikely that managers consistently follow
this strategy through their tenure since we would not expect them to be able to perpetually
fool the market. However, it is possible that CEOs try to convey (false) confidence to the media
around large events, like merger announcements, that can have deleterious eﬀects on the share
price. In order for such “hyping” to be successful, the CEO would require a wide audience.
Thus, we can partially address this concern by controlling for the total number of articles
referring to the CEO. Further, Table 12 reports a statistically significant positive correlation
(ρ = 0.11, significant at 1%) between TOTALconfident and our longholder overconfidence
measure (which is not susceptible to this critique). Moreover, if we split the longholder variable
into “winners” and “losers” as in Section C, we find that the “loser” portion is positively and
significantly correlated with the press measure (ρ = 0.15), but the “winner” portion is not
(ρ = −0.01). If managerial hyping were the primary determinant of our press measure, we
might expect CEOs to personally profit from portrayal as confident or optimistic. But, on
average, it appears that a 1 under the TOTALconfident classification is more associated with

                                               25
negative30 personal returns.31 And, TOTALconfident picks up the component of longholder
most likely to represent overconfidence.

Our press measure of overconfidence not only positively correlates with the longholder measure
of overconfidence, but also performs remarkably similarly in the acquisitiveness regressions.32
First, we can replicate the overall acquisitiveness regressions of Table 4, using TOTALconfident
as our proxy for O and the total number of mentions in the press as an additional control. In the
random eﬀects specification, for example, we find an odds ratio of 1.33, which is significant at
the 5% level. We can also replicate the test of Prediction 1 from Section D, using diversification
as a proxy for negative expected value. Table 13 presents the results. TOTALconfident, like
longholder, predicts a heightened probability of conducting a diversifying deal. The odds ratio
in the random eﬀects specification is 1.78 (significant at the 1% level). And, as with longholder,
we find that TOTALconfident does not predict heightened acquisitiveness via within industry
deals. Here, the eﬀect of TOTALconfident is virtually zero in all three specifications.

We also re-measure the eﬀect of overconfidence conditioning on internal resources (Prediction
2). As in Section E, we estimate Equation (3) separately on quintiles of the Kaplan-Zingales
index. We find a strong positive impact of overconfidence on acquisitiveness in the least
constrained quintile and no significant impact in the most constrained quintile. As with long-
holder, the eﬀect is most pronounced for “bad” (diversifying) acquisitions. The largest eﬀect,
a 2.90 odds ratio (significant at 5%), occurs among the least constrained firms and there is an
insignificant 1.64 odds ratio among the most constrained firms.

Finally, we note that the TOTALconfident measure of overconfidence not only predicts acquis-
itiveness, but also strongly predicts increased sensitivity of corporate investment to cash flow,
particularly among the most equity dependent firms. Malmendier and Tate (2003) present
similar results for portfolio measures of overconfidence, including longholder. All results repli-
cate with the TOTALconfident measure. This is a final piece of evidence against the hyping
interpretation of the TOTALconfident results since the hyping argument is less relevant for
investment decisions. Investment is measured annually as the aggregate capital expenditure at
the end of the fiscal year. CEOs cannot consistently hype every element that goes into their
firms’ capex. Thus, the strong evidence that confidence in the press correlates with investment
distortions further assuages our concern about this issue.33

These results bolster the overconfidence story in several ways. First, they provide an important
confirmation that our personal portfolio approach indeed captures managerial overconfidence.

                                               26
Whether we measure diﬀerences in beliefs between the manager and the market using man-
agerial portfolio decisions or market perception, the results are the same. Second, our theory
assumes that outside financiers are less optimistic about the firm’s future performance and will
not provide capital at the rates the CEO believes are appropriate. Our press results confirm
that the market recognizes managerial overconfidence. Finally, the press results provide further
evidence that our overconfidence measures capture aspects of the CEOs’ personalities rather
than an omitted firm eﬀect. While we address this possibility for the portfolio measures using
controls and firm fixed eﬀects, the press measure provides direct evidence: the searches are for
executive personality features. Framed diﬀerently, the press results provide a crucial insight
into the type of executive captured by our portfolio measures of overconfidence.



IV     Market Reaction to Overconfidence

Studying mergers and acquisitions provides the opportunity to identify the market’s reaction
to the announcement of the deal. Because many other corporate decisions, like investment,
must be studied in aggregate due to data limitations, we cannot deduce the reaction of the
market to any particular project. With mergers, we know the exact date of announcement.
This allows us to measure market response using daily stock returns.

Our theory predicts that the market will react more negatively to the announced bids of
overconfident CEOs than to the bids of other CEOs (Prediction 3). The negative impact of
overconfidence reflects that overconfident CEOs do some value-destroying mergers and that
they forego some value-creating ones when perceived financing costs are too high. Further,
competition can induce overconfident CEOs to overpay for their mergers.

We apply event study methodology (Brown and Warner, 1980 and 1985, and MacKinlay, 1997)
to measure the eﬀect of overconfidence on announcement returns. The event window is the
three days surrounding the announcement of the bid, starting at day −1 and ending on day
+1 where day 0 is the day of the announcement.34 We calculate the cumulative abnormal
return to the acquiring firm’s stock over this window. Following Fuller et al., (2002), we use
market returns as our proxy for expected returns. This approach is appropriate since our
sample consists of large U.S. companies that compose a substantial portion of market returns.
Moreover, we avoid having to drop overlapping events (as is common in alternative event study
methodologies using estimation periods). In fact, rapid succession of multiple acquisitions may


                                              27
indicate a particularly high level of overconfidence. Since merging companies is often highly
disruptive — labor forces must be consolidated, corporate cultures must be adapted, etc. — it
may be the height of hubris to juggle several such projects at once.35 So, assuming that α = 0
and β = 1 for the firms in our sample, abnormal returns are given by

                                         ARit = rit − rtm

where rit is firm i’s return on day t of the event window and rtm is the return on the S&P 500
index that day. Cumulative abnormal returns are
                                                  X
                                        CARi =           ARit
                                                     t

To test whether overconfidence has a negative contribution to the mean cumulative abnormal
return during the event window, we run the following cross-sectional regression:

(4)                              CARi = γ 1 + γ 2 Oi + Xi0 G + εi

where O indicates an overconfident manager and X is the set of controls. The null hypothesis
is γ 2 < 0. Table 14 presents the results. We estimate five specifications of the regression. First,
we include only stock ownership and vested options in our set of controls, X.36 Second, we add
an indicator of relatedness (equal to 1 if the acquiror and target share a Fama-French industry
group), an indicator of corporate governance (eﬃcient board size), and an indicator of cash
financed deals as additional controls. Third, we add controls for year fixed eﬀects. Fourth,
we add controls for industry fixed eﬀects (measured using Fama-French industry groups) and
their interaction with the year eﬀects. And, fifth, we add age and an indicator of whether the
CEO is also chairman of the board and president to the analysis.

The corporate governance control has the expected eﬀect: good corporate governance is asso-
ciated with higher cumulative abnormal returns. The same is true for high managerial stock
ownership and vested option holdings (at least until they reach extreme levels). The market
views related mergers and cash financed deals more favorably, although the eﬀect of relatedness
is often just under conventional significance levels. Interestingly, the market discounts deals
of older CEOs by 5 basis points per additional year. Most importantly, overconfidence has a
significant negative eﬀect on cumulative abnormal returns across specifications. The market
discounts overconfident bids by 60 to 100 basis points over the three day window relative to
the average merger of a non-overconfident CEO.37 Given a baseline negative announcement
eﬀect of 50 basis points, the additional discount for mergers of overconfident CEOs is large.

                                                28
V     Conclusion

The goal of this paper is twofold. First, we establish the eﬀect of overconfidence on managerial
acquisitiveness and, second, we explore the market’s response. We develop a simple model of
the acquisition decision of an overconfident CEO. The model shows that overconfident CEOs
are more eager to make acquisitions, but that perceived financing constraints can prevent
them from doing so. Overconfident CEOs are unambiguously more likely than rational CEOs
to undertake value-destroying acquisitions. And they are more likely to make acquisitions when
their firm has abundant internal resources. Because they do lower quality deals, on average,
and tend to overpay, the market discounts their acquisitions relative to other CEOs.

We test these predictions using data on a sample of Forbes 500 firms. We find strong evidence in
support of the overconfidence hypothesis. Overconfidence positively impacts the acquisitiveness
of CEOs over our entire sample of firm years. That is, overconfidence boosts the number of
takeovers on average, despite the mitigating impact of cash constraints. Further, as predicted
by our theory, overconfident CEOs undertake more diversifying mergers, which are unlikely to
create value. In addition, overconfidence has a strong positive impact on the probability of
conducting mergers (and particularly of diversifying mergers) among the least equity dependent
firms and no eﬀect among the most equity dependent firms. These results hold using both
option exercise and press coverage to measure overconfidence. Finally, the market prefers the
bids of rational managers: cumulative abnormal returns around overconfident bids are roughly
100 basis points lower on average than for rational bids.

Our results have important implications for contracting practices and organizational design.
Overconfidence provides an alternative explanation for certain agency problems in firms and for
the origin of private benefits. Indeed, overconfidence may be a more attractive assumption than
empire-building preferences, under which CEOs are perpetually and consciously disregarding
the interests of the shareholders. Because overconfident CEOs believe they are maximizing
value, standard incentives are unlikely to correct their suboptimal decisions. However, over-
confident CEOs do respond to financing constraints. Thus, overconfidence further motivates
the constraining role of capital structure In addition, independent directors may need to play
a more active role in project assessment and selection to counterbalance CEO overconfidence.




                                              29
References

 [1] Alicke, Mark D; Klotz, M. L; Breitenbecher, David L; Yurak, Tricia J; et al.
    “Personal contact, individuation, and the better-than-average eﬀect.” Journal of Person-
    ality & Social Psychology, May 1995, 68(5), pp. 804-825.

 [2] Alpert, Marc and Raiﬀa, Howard. “A progress report on the training of probability
    assessors.” In: D. Kahneman, P. Slovic, and A. Tversky, Judgement Under Uncertainty:
    Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge 1982, pp. 294-305.

 [3] Amihud, Yakov and Lev, Baruch. “Risk reduction as a managerial motive for con-
    glomerate mergers.” Bell Journal of Economics, 1981, 12, pp. 605-617.

 [4] Andrade, Gregor; Mitchell, Mark and Staﬀord, Erik. “New evidence and perspec-
    tives on mergers?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring 2001, 15(2), pp. 103-120.

 [5] Asquith, P. “Merger bids, uncertainty, and stockholder returns.” Journal of Financial
    Economics, April 1983, 11, pp. 51-83.

 [6] Baker, Malcolm; Stein, Jeremy C. and Wurgler, Jeﬀrey. “When does the market
    matter? Stock prices and the investment of equity-dependent firms.” Working Paper,
    Harvard University, October 2001.

 [7] Baron, Robert A. “Psychological perspectives on entrepreneurship: cognitive and social
    factors in entrepreneurs’ success.” Current Directions in Psychological Science, February
    2000, 9(1), pp. 15-18.

 [8] Bazerman, Max H. Judgment in Managerial Decision Making (5th Edition), Hoboken,
    NJ: John Wiley & Sons,Inc., 2002.

 [9] Berger, Philip G. and Ofek, Eli. “Diversification’s eﬀect on firm value.” Journal of
    Financial Economics, 1995, 37, pp. 39-66.

[10] Bernardo, Antonio E. and Welch, Ivo. “On the evolution of overconfidence and
    entrepreneurs.” Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, 2001, 10(3), pp. 301-
    330.

[11] Black, Fischer and Scholes, Myron. “The pricing of options and corporate liabilities.”
    Journal of Political Economy, May-June 1973, 81(3), pp. 637-654.

                                            30
[12] Boehmer, Ekkehart and Netter, Jeﬀrey M. “Management optimism and corpo-
    rate acquisitions: evidence from insider trading.” Managerial & Decision Economics,
    November-December 1997, 18(7-8), pp. 693-708.

[13] Bradley, M.; Desai, A. and Kim, E. H. “The rationale behind interfirm tender oﬀers:
    information or synergy?” Journal of Financial Economics, April 1983, 11, pp. 183-206.

[14] Brown, Stephen J. and Warner, Jerold B. “Measuring security price performance.”
    Journal of Financial Economics, 1980, 8, pp. 205-258.

[15] Brown, Stephen J. and Warner, Jerold B. “Using daily stock returns: the case of
    event studies.” Journal of Financial Economics, 1985, 14, pp. 3-31.

[16] Camerer, Colin and Lovallo, Dan. “Overconfidence and excess entry: an experimental
    approach.” American Economic Review, March 1999, 89(1), pp. 306-318.

[17] Carpenter, Jennifer. “The exercise and valuation of executive stock options.” Journal
    of Financial Economics, 1998, 48(2), pp. 127-158.

[18] Dodd, P. “Merger proposals, managerial discretion and stockholder wealth.” Journal of
    Financial Economics, June 1980, 8, pp. 105-138.

[19] Donaldson, G. Managing Corporate Wealth. NewYork: Praeger 1984.

[20] Dong, Ming; Hirshleifer, David; Richardson, Scott and Teoh, Siew Hong. “Does
    investor misvaluation drive the takeover market?” Working Paper, 2002.

[21] Dun & Bradstreet Reference Book of Corporate Managements. Bethlehem PA, Dun &
    Bradstreet, Inc. 1997.

[22] Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. “Industry costs of equity.” Journal of
    Financial Economics, 1997, 43, pp. 153-193.

[23] Fama, Eugene F. and French, Kenneth R. “Testing tradeoﬀ and pecking order
    predictions about dividends and debt.” Review of Financial Studies, Spring 2002, 15(1),
    p 1-33.

[24] Feather, N. T. and Simon, J. G. “Attribution of responsibility and valence of outcome
    in relation to initial confidence and success and failure of self and other.” Journal of
    Personality & Social Psychology, May 1971, 18(2), pp. 173-188.

                                            31
[25] Firth, M. “Takeovers, Shareholder Returns and the Theory of the Firm.” Journal of
    Economics, March 1980, pp. 235-260.

[26] Fischhoﬀ, Baruch; Slovic, Paul and Lichtenstein, Sarah. “Knowing with cer-
    tainty.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 1977,
    3, pp. 552-564.

[27] Fuller, Kathleen; Netter, Jeﬀrey and Stegemoller, Mike. “What do returns to
    acquiring firms tell us? Evidence from firms that make many acquisitions.” Journal of
    Finance, August 2002, 57(4), pp. 1763-1793.

[28] Goel, Anand Mohan and Thakor, Anjan. “Rationality, overconfidence and leader-
    ship.” University of Michigan Business School Faculty Working Paper No. 00-022, 2000.

[29] Hall, Brian J. and Liebman, Jeﬀrey B. “Are CEOs really paid like bureaucrats?”
    Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1998, 113(3), pp. 653-691.

[30] Hall, Brian J. and Murphy, Kevin J. “Stock options for undiversified executives.”
    Journal of Accounting and Economics, February 2002, 33(1), pp. 3-42.

[31] Hayward, Mathew L. A. and Hambrick, Donald D. “Explaining the premiums
    paid for large acquisitions: evidence of CEO hubris.” Administrative Science Quarterly,
    1997, 42, pp. 103-127.

[32] Heaton, J. B. “Managerial optimism and corporate finance.” Financial Management,
    2002, 31, pp. 33-45.

[33] Hey, John D. “The economics of optimism and pessimism.” Kyklos, 1984, 37(2), pp.
    181-205.

[34] Hietala, Pekka; Kaplan, Steven N. and Robinson, David T. “What is the price
    of hubris? Using takeover battles to infer overpayments and synergies.” NBER Working
    Paper 9264, 2002.

[35] Jensen, M. C. and Ruback, R. S. “The market for corporate control.” Journal of
    Financial Economics, April 1983, 11, pp. 5-50.

[36] Kahneman, Daniel and Lovallo, Dan. “Timid choices and bold forecasts: a cognitive
    perspective on risk taking.” Management Science, January 1993, 39(1), pp. 17-31.


                                            32
[37] Kaplan, Steven N. and Zingales, Luigi. “Do investment-cash flow sensitivities provide
    useful measures of financing constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1997, 112, pp.
    169-215.

[38] Kidd, John B. “The utilization of subjective probabilities in production planning.” Acta
    Psychologica, 1970, 34, pp. 338-347.

[39] Lambert, Richard A.; Larcker, David F. and Verrecchia, Robert E. “Portfolio
    Considerations in Valuing Executive Compensation,” Journal of Accounting Research,
    1991, 29(1), pp. 129-149.

[40] Lamont, Owen and Polk, Christopher. “Does diversification destroy value? Evidence
    from industry shocks.” Journal of Financial Economics, January 2002, 63(1), pp. 57-77.

[41] Lamont, Owen; Polk, Christopher and Saá-Requejo, Jesus. “Financial constraints
    and stock returns.” Review of Financial Studies, 2001, 14, pp. 529-554.

[42] Lang, Larry and Stulz, René. “Tobin’s Q, corporate diversification, and firm perfor-
    mance.” Journal of Political Economy, 1994, 102, pp. 1248-1280.

[43] Langer, Ellen J. “The illusion of control.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
    1975, 32, pp. 311-328.

[44] Larwood, Laurie and Whittaker, William. “Managerial myopia: self-serving biases
    in organizational planning.” Journal of Applied Psychology, 1977, 62, pp. 194-198.

[45] Lys, Thomas and Vincent, Linda. “An analysis of value destruction in AT&T’s ac-
    quisition of NCR.” Journal of Financial Economics, 1995, 39, pp. 353-378.

[46] MacKinlay, A. Craig. “Event studies in economics and finance.” Journal of Economic
    Literature, 1997, 35, pp. 13-39.

[47] Malmendier, Ulrike and Tate, Geoﬀrey A. “CEO overconfidence and corporate
    investment.” Working Paper, 2003.

[48] March, J. G. and Shapira, Z. “Managerial perspectives on risk and risk taking.”
    Management Science, 1987, 33, pp. 1404-18.

[49] Milburn, Michael A. “Sources of bias in the prediction of future events.” Organizational
    Behavior and Human Performance, 1978, 21, pp. 17-26.

                                             33
[50] Miller, Dale T. and Ross, Michael. “Self-serving biases in the attribution of causality:
    Fact or fiction?” Psychological Bulletin, 1975, 82(2), pp. 213-225.

[51] Moore, P. G. “The manager’s struggle with uncertainty.” Journal of The Royal Statis-
    tical Society Series A, 1977, 149, pp. 129-165.

[52] Morck, Randall; Shleifer, Andrei and Vishny, Robert W. “Do managerial objec-
    tives drive bad acquisitions?” Journal of Finance, March 1990, 45(1), pp. 31-48.

[53] Roll, Richard. “The hubris hypothesis of corporate takeovers.” Journal of Business,
    April 1986, 59(2), part 1, pp. 197-216.

[54] Ruback, R. S. and Mikkelson, W. H. “Corporate investments in common stock.”
    Proceedings of the Seminar on the Analysis of Security Prices November 1984, 29(2), pp.
    179-209.

[55] Schelling, Thomas. The Strategy of Conflict. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press
    1960.

[56] Servaes, Henri. “The value of diversification during the conglommerate merger wave.”
    Journal of Finance, 1996, 51, pp. 1201-1225.

[57] Shefrin, Hersh. Beyond Greed and Fear : Understanding Behavioral Finance and the
    Psychology of Investing. Cambridge: Harvard Business School Press 2000.

[58] Shleifer, Andrei and Vishny, Robert W. “Stock market driven acquisitions.” Work-
    ing Paper, June 2002.

[59] Svenson, Ola. “Are we all less risky and more skillful than our fellow drivers?” Acta
    Psychologica, 1981, 47, pp. 143-148.

[60] Weber, Roberto A. and Camerer, Colin..“Cultural conflict and merger failure: An
    experimental approach.” Management Science, 2003, 49(4), pp. 400-415.

[61] Van den Steen, Eric. “Organizations beliefs and managerial vision.” Mimeo, Stanford
    2001.

[62] Weinstein, Neil D. “Unrealistic optimism about future life events.” Journal of Person-
    ality and Social Psychology, 1980, 39, pp. 806-820.



                                              34
[63] Weinstein, Neil D. and Klein, William M. “Resistance of personal risk perceptions to
    debiasing interventions.” in Thomas Gilovich, Dale Griﬃn, and Daniel Kahneman (eds.),
    Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
    University Press, 2002, pp. 313-323.

[64] Weston, J. Fred; Chung, Kwang S. and Sui, Juan A. Takeovers, Restructuring,
    and Corporate Governance. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall 1998.

[65] Who’s Who in Finance and Industry. Chicago, Marquis Who’s Who 1980/81-1995/96.

[66] Yermack, David. “Do corporations award CEO stock options eﬀectively?” Journal of
    Financial Economics, October 1995, 39(2-3), pp. 237-269.




                                           35
Notes

   ∗
       We are indebted to Brian Hall, Kenneth Froot, Mark Mitchell and David Yermack for providing us with
essential parts of the data. We are very grateful to Jeremy Stein and Andrei Shleifer for their invaluable sup-
port and comments. We also would like to thank Gary Chamberlain, David Laibson and various participants in
seminars at Harvard University, Stanford University, University of Chicago, Northwestern University, Wharton,
Duke University, University of Illinois, Emory University, Carnegie Mellon University, INSEAD and Humboldt
University of Berlin for helpful comments. Becky Brunson, Justin Fernandez, Camelia Kuhnen, and Felix Mom-
sen provided excellent research assistance. Malmendier acknowledges support from the Russell Sage Foundation
and the Division of Research of the Harvard Business School. Tate acknowledges support from the Russell Sage
Foundation and the Center for Basic Research in the Social Sciences (Harvard University).

   1
       Quote taken from Weston et al., (1998).

   2
       Andrade et al., (2001) suggest a small positive, but statistically insignificant combined abnormal return
during the announcement period. Jensen and Ruback (1983) and Roll (1986) present surveys of many earlier
studies.

   3
       See, e.g. Asquith (1983), Bradley et al. (1983), and Andrade et al., (2001) for target gains and Dodd (1980),
Firth (1980), and Ruback and Mikkelson (1984) for acquiror losses. Andrade et al. (2001) find a negative, but
insignificant eﬀect on the acquiror’s value, and Asquith (1983) finds no significant pattern.

   4
       Hayward and Hambrick (1997) and Hietala et al., (2002) also relate acquisitiveness to CEO hubris. Heaton
(2002) provides a modelling framework for overconfidence and corporate investment.

   5
       See e.g. Lambert et al., (1991).

   6
       Lang and Stulz (1994), Berger and Ofek (1995), Servaes (1996), and Lamont and Polk (2002), e.g., show
that diversified firms trade at a disount relative to stand-alones in the same line of business.

   7
       Schelling (1960), Goel and Thakor (2000), Bernardo and Welch (2001), and Van den Steen (2001) explore
positive eﬀects of overconfidence.

   8
       A diﬀerent form of overconfidence is analyzed in the calibration literature; i.e., individuals also tend to
overestimate the accuracy of their beliefs (Fischhoﬀ et al., 1977; Alpert and Raiﬀa, 1982).

   9
       We follow the literature on self-serving attribution and on the “illusion of control” and assign the labels
“overconfidence” to the overestimation of one’s own abilities (such as IQ or driving skill; see Feather and Simon
1971, Langer 1975) and “overoptimism” to the overestimation of exogenous outcomes (such as the outbreak of
a war, see Milburn 1978, Hey 1984, and Bazerman 2002).

  10
       Variation in bargaining power, coupled with overconfidence, can give rise to over-payment. Over-payment
arises endogenously in a multi-bidder framework, see Subsection D.

  11
       As noted above, risky debt has similar properties: mangers view the demanded interest rate as too high.



                                                          36
  12
       More generally, the perceived synergies ee might depend on the outflow of cash c. In particular, allowing ee
to decrease with c is a way to capture the dynamic eﬀects of cash constraints (perceived undervaluation) on an
overconfident CEO’s future merger and investment decisions. As long as ee(·) > 0, the results of the section go
through.

  13
       We ignore the knife-edge case of a tie.

  14
       Another potential use of internal resources is to repurchase shares the overconfident CEO perceives to be
undervalued. However, since any gain to remaining shareholders by repurchasing undervalued shares must be
oﬀset by a loss to the former shareholders, a CEO who maximizes current shareholder value will not undertake
such a transaction.

  15
       Few of our 477 sample firms are targets; fewer are acquired by another sample firm.

  16
       This selection criterion is especially important here since we merge data from the SDC database with the
CRSP merger data. Acquisitions of small units of another company diﬀer substantially from the acquisition of
large NYSE firms and may not require the direct involvement of the acquiring company’s CEO.

  17
       Definitions as in Fama and French (2002).

  18
       Wherever econometrically possible, we confirmed the robustness of the estimates to the assumption that G
is normal.

  19
       The corporate governance literature suggests that an eﬀective board should have no more than 12 members.
The results are robust to the using the logarithm of board size or the number (or percentage) of CEOs of other
companies sitting on the board as alternative measures of governance.

  20
       This eﬀect appears to be non-monotonic. For example, we find a positive and marginally significant coeﬃ-
cient when we include a dummy variable for “high Tobin’s Q.” (Q > 1) Alternatively, including the square of
Tobin’s Q reverses the direction of the level eﬀect (though it remains insignificant).

  21
       Here standard errors are adjusted for clustering within industry, rather than firm.

  22
       In the fixed eﬀects (or conditional) logit specification, standard errors are not robust to clustering at the
firm level. However, in a traditional logit specification with firm dummies, the errors with firm-level clustering
are actually slightly smaller than the errors from the conditional logit specification.

  23
       If we look beyond the last 5 years before expiration, we risk entering the vesting period (during which the
CEO could not have exercised the option).

  24
       Note that this test also assuages reverse causality and endogeneity concerns.

  25
       We also increase the threshold for inclusion in the profits calculation by 0.05 per year to account for the
increase in the Hall-Murphy threshold as remaining duration on the option increases.

  26
       Further suggestive evidence comes from Lys and Vincent (1995) and Shefrin (2000), who chronicle AT&T’s
1990 acquisition of NCR using exactly this paradigm. Reassuringly, the longholder measure identifies AT&T’s



                                                          37
CEO (Robert Allen) as overconfident.

  27
       For this test, we use the definition of Q employed by Kaplan and Zingales (1997) to avoid rendering the
weights meaningless. The COMPUSTAT data items are: cash flow to capital = (item 18 + item 14) / item 8 ;
Q = [item 6 + (item24 * item 25) - item 60 - item 74] / item 6 ; debt to capital (leverage) = (item 9 + item
34) / (item 9 + item 34 + item 216) ; dividends to capital = item21 + item 19) / item 8 ; cash to capital =
item 1 / item 8. Item 8, capital, is always taken at the beginning of the year (lagged).

  28
       The eﬀects of a simple logit are similar. Fixed eﬀects logit is not feasible since quintiling the sample leaves
us with too few identifiable cases in some subsamples.

  29
       The results are similar if we instead group longholders who do not meet the more stringent requirements
together with the “rational” CEOs.

  30
       Negative here means relative to the S&P 500 and not necessarily < 0.

  31
       In addition, we do not find a positive impact on the announcement eﬀect around merger announcements for
TOTALconfident CEOs, again suggesting that the incentive to hype projects in the press may not be very strong
(on average). This interpretation (and the intepretation of the personal returns from holding options) comes
with the caveat that we cannot observe how the market would have reacted to these merger announcements (or
firm performance in general) if the same CEOs had not been portrayed as optimistic or confident in the press.

  32
       For the sake of brevity, we only tabulate selected results.

  33
       While total press coverage has strong positive predictive power for acquisitions, it has none for investment
cash flow sensitivity. This confirms that hyping is more important for merger projects than investment, but
also suggests that it is not driving our results.

  34
       While the three-day window minimizes the eﬀect of any noise in our proxy for expected returns, we find
similar results using a window of five days (−2 to +2).

  35
       Nevertheless, the market-model results are almost identical.

  36
       For these regressions, we omit the 7 observations in the upper 1% tail of vested options. These CEOs
have holdings (as a fraction of shares outstanding) as high as 0.32 (the mean holding is 0.0034 with a standard
deviation of 0.014). Including these observations destroys the strong positive relationship between vested options
and CAR. As a result, our overconfidence proxy must capture this relationship (recall the positive correlation
between longholder and vested options), mitigating somewhat the estimated coeﬃcient. The results are similar
if, instead, we winsorize option holdings.

  37
       The results are slightly stronger when we estimate this diﬀerence in market reaction only using overconfident
bids that come after the first time the overconfident CEO holds an option until the last year before expiration.




                                                          38
                                                                                                 Table 1.
Number of firms = 327. Financial variables are reported in $ millions. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation. Stock
ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the
beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable
where 1 signifies that the board of directors has between four and twelve members. Assets, capital, and Q are at the beginning of the fiscal year; all other variables are at the end.
Technical Education is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO has "technical education," i.e. an undergraduate or graduate degree in engineering, physics, operations research, chemistry, mathematics, biology,
pharmacy, and other applied sciences. Press data comes from Business Week , The New York Times , Financial Times , The Economist and The Wall Street Journal using LexisNexis and Factiva.com .
Panel A. Summary Statistics of Firm Data
Variable                                                        Observations            Mean           Median                 Standard                                 SIC codes
Assets                                                                3,690          4,800.46         2,106.54               10,348.56
Capital (PPE)                                                         3,690          2,146.37           905.75                4,022.94
Investment (CAPX)                                                     3,610            357.47           150.95                  785.07
Cash Flow                                                             3,690            420.80           187.71                  837.98
Cash Flow normalized by lagged capital (CF/k)                         3,690              0.34             0.25                    0.32
Cash Flow normalized by lagged assets (CF/a)                          3,690              0.11             0.10                    0.07
Q                                                                     3,690              1.41             1.12                    0.87
Corporate Governance                                                  3,690              0.57                1                    0.50
Technical Industry                                                    3,676              0.04                0                    0.20           1000-1799,2800-2999,3300-3699,4900-4999,8711
Manufacturing Industry                                                3,676              0.50                0                    0.50                                          600-6799,8721
Transportation Industry                                               3,676              0.25                0                    0.43                          2000-2799,3000-3299,3700-3999
Trade Industry                                                        3,676              0.11                0                    0.31                                              4100-4999
Financial Industry                                                    3,676              0.06                0                    0.24                                              5000-5999
Service Industry                                                      3,676              0.04                0                    0.21                          7000-8699,8712-8713,8730-8999
Panel B. Summary Statistics of CEO Data
                                                                          Full Sample: Number of CEOs=661                                           Overconfident CEOs: Number=85
Variable                                                        Observations       Mean       Median                            St. Dev.     Observations     Mean      Median                       St. Dev.
Age                                                                   3,689       57.53            58                               6.80             742      57.01         57                           6.49
Years as CEO                                                          3,664         8.51            6                               7.42             719       9.99          8                           6.85
President and Chairman                                                3,690         0.38            0                               0.49             742       0.38          0                           0.49
Founder                                                               3,143         0.17            0                               0.38             652       0.14          0                           0.34
Stock Ownership                                                       3,690         2.30         0.12                               7.04             742       1.81       0.24                           5.05
Vested Options                                                        3,690         0.02         0.00                               0.11             742       0.06       0.02                           0.24
Finance Education                                                     2,164         0.34            0                               0.47             478       0.39          0                           0.49
Technical Education                                                   2,164         0.55            1                               0.50             478       0.53          1                           0.50

Panel C. Summary Statistics for Press Data for Merger Sample
                                                      Number of Firms = 327; Number of CEOs = 661
Variable                                                                      Observations   Mean Median                                            St. Dev.     Minimum        Maximum
Total Mentions                                                                      3,669    92.19   39                                              178.62            0           2,447
"Confident" Mentions                                                                3,669     0.82     0                                                1.95           0              25
"Optimistic" Mentions                                                               3,669     0.73     0                                                1.74           0              20
"Not Confident" Mentions                                                            3,669     0.02     0                                                0.20           0               3
"Not Optimistic" Mentions                                                           3,669     0.06     0                                                0.29           0               3
"Reliable, Cautious, Conservative, Practical, Steady, Frugal" Mentions              3,647     0.53     0                                                1.36           0              12
* The maximum number returned from LexisNexis is 1000.
                                                                                        Table 2.
Relatedness is a dummy variable which takes the value 1 when the acquiror and target share a Fama-French 48 industry group. Cumulative abnormal returns to the acquiror are calculated for an
event window of -1 to +1 using a modified market model. The modified market model takes the daily S&P 500 return as the expected return in computing abnormal returns. Industry variables
are defined on Table 1. The sample consists of 869 completed mergers.
                                    Panel A. Summary Statistics of Completed Mergers
                            Variable                          Observations     Mean                                   Median          Standard Deviation
Relatedness                                                            839     0.415                                        0                     0.493
Cumulative abnormal return to acquiror [-1,+1]                         843    -0.005                                   -0.005                     0.044
Acquiror in Technical Industry                                         850     0.022                                        0                     0.148
Acquiror in Manufacturing Industry                                     850     0.332                                        0                     0.471
Acquiror in Transportation Industry                                    850     0.071                                        0                     0.256
Acquiror in Trade Industry                                             850     0.085                                        0                     0.279
Acquiror in Financial Industry                                         850     0.444                                        0                     0.497
Acquiror in Service Industry                                           850     0.047                                        0                     0.212
                                                               Panel B. Merger Financing: Summary Statistics
              Number of Mergers with
  Year      Disclosed Method of Payment                         Cash and Debt                                    Stock                                      Combination
                                                              Sample                        US              Sample                        US             Sample                         US
    1980                     23                                 7      30%                 48%                9      39%                 31%               7      30%                  21%
    1981                     42                                 5      12%                 43%               22      52%                 34%              15      36%                  23%
    1982                     46                                 8      17%                 40%               23      50%                 29%              15      33%                  31%
    1983                     52                                11      21%                 32%               21      40%                 35%              20      38%                  33%
    1984                     53                                22      42%                 44%               12      23%                 26%              19      36%                  30%
    1985                     70                                41      59%                 51%               15      21%                 23%              14      20%                  26%
    1986                     90                                57      63%                 42%               23      26%                 32%              10      11%                  26%
    1987                     71                                34      48%                 42%               28      39%                 34%               9      13%                  24%
    1988                     62                                48      77%                 57%                7      11%                  2%               7      11%                  22%
    1989                     68                                34      50%                 47%               24      35%                 30%              10      15%                  23%
    1990                     27                                12      44%                 41%               11      41%                 31%               4      15%                  28%
    1991                     49                                21      43%                 35%               20      41%                 34%               8      16%                  31%
    1992                     46                                16      35%                 23%               22      48%                 40%               8      17%                  37%
    1993                     56                                19      34%                 25%               28      50%                 40%               9      16%                  35%
    1994                     50                                26      52%                 27%               15      30%                 39%               9      18%                  34%

Total                        805                             361           45%                             280           35%                             164           20%
Source: Mergerstat Review 1996 and 2002 and authors' calculations. Years are calendar years of the announcement (in our sample).
                                  Table 3. Correlations with Overconfidence Measure
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before
expiration. Size is the log of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets at the beginning of the
year. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is
the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of
options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied
by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of
directors has between four and twelve members.
Technical Education is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO has "technical education," i.e. an undergraduate or graduate degree in engineering,
physics, operations research, chemistry, mathematics, biology, pharmacy, and other applied sciences.

Panel A. Correlations with Firm Characterisitcs (N =3690)
                                                                                                       Stock     Vested                 Corporate
                                   Longholder          Size             Q             Cash Flow        Ownership Options                Governance
Longholder                          1.00

Size                                  -0.09            1.00

Q                                     0.09             -0.31            1.00

Cash Flow                             0.13             -0.25            0.46            1.00

Stock Ownership                       -0.03            -0.19            0.11            0.16             1.00

Vested Options                        0.18             -0.18            0.09            0.18             0.10             1.00

Corporate Governance                  0.04             -0.37            0.12            0.12             0.20             0.08             1.00



Panel B. Correlations with CEO Characteristics (I) (N =3663)
                                                     Pres &
                          Longholder  Age            Chm                              Tenure
Longholder                  1.00

Age                                   -0.04            1.00

President and Chairman                0.00             -0.03            1.00

Tenure                                0.10             0.39             0.01            1.00



Panel C. Correlations with CEO Characteristics (II): Educational Background (N =2164)
                          Longholder  Fin. Ed. Tech. Ed.
Longholder                  1.00

Finance Education                     0.06             1.00

Technical Education                   -0.02            -0.09            1.00
                          Table 4. Do Overconfident CEOs Complete More Mergers?
The dependent variable is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made at least one merger bid that was eventually successful in a particular firm
year. Size is the log of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is earnings
before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company
stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are
exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that
the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of directors has
between four and twelve members.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before
expiration. The fixed effects logit model is estimated consistently using a conditional logit specification. Standard errors in columns 1-3 are
robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation. Standard errors in column 4 are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary
within-industry correlation, where industries are measured using the 48 Fama and French industry groups (1997). Coefficients are presented as
odds ratios.

                                                                                                                 Random            Fixed Effects
                                        logit             logit               logit              logit          Effects logit          logit
                                         (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)               (5)                 (6)
Size                                                     0.9046              0.8733             0.8683            0.8600              0.6234
                                                          (1.80)*            (1.95)*             (1.60)            (2.05)**           (2.60)***
Qt-1                                                     0.7719              0.7296             0.6651             0.7316              0.8291
                                                         (2.85)***          (2.97)***           (2.37)**           (2.70)***            (1.11)
Cash Flow                                                1.9631              2.0534             2.1712             2.1816              2.6724
                                                         (3.75)***          (3.93)***           (2.35)**           (3.68)***          (2.70)***
Stock Ownership                                          1.1212              1.2905             0.4126             1.3482              0.8208
                                                           (0.13)             (0.30)             (0.67)              (0.28)             (0.11)
Vested Options                                           1.5912              1.5059             1.9596             0.9217              0.2802
                                                          (2.56)**           (1.96)*             (1.46)              (0.19)            (2.36)**
Corporate Governance                                     0.6697              0.6556             0.6125             0.7192              1.0428
                                                         (3.02)***          (3.08)***           (2.89)***          (2.17)**             (0.21)
Longholder                            1.6831             1.5904              1.5557             1.5423             1.7006              2.5303
                                      (2.98)***          (2.72)***          (2.58)***            (1.90)*           (3.09)***          (2.67)***
Industry Fixed Effects                   no                 no                 no                 yes                 no                 no
Year Fixed Effects                       no                 no                 yes                yes                 yes                yes
Industry*Year Effects                    no                 no                 no                 yes                 no                 no
Observations                     3690           3690            3690                             2192                3690               2261
Number of Firms                                                                                                       327                184
Robust z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                              Table 5. Timing of Mergers and Inside Information
All firm years included. The dependent variable is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made at least one merger bid that was eventually
successful in a particular firm year. Size is the log of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value
of assets. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Stock
ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the
CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding.
Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable
where 1 signifies that the board of directors has between four and twelve members.
 'x' Final Years of a Longheld Option is a binary variable where 1 signifies the last 'x' years of the duration of one of the longholder CEO's
longheld options. Remaining longholder CEO years are the years of a longholder CEO's tenure that do not fall in the 'x' final years of a
longheld option. Regressions are logit with random effects. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.


                                                                           (1)                (2)                (3)
                   Size                                                  0.8599             0.8600             0.8600
                                                                         (2.05)**           (2.05)**           (2.05)**
                   Qt-1                                                  0.7303             0.7313             0.7317
                                                                        (2.71)***           (2.70)***          (2.69)***
                   Cash Flow                                             2.1713             2.1767             2.1827
                                                                        (3.65)***           (3.66)***          (3.67)***
                   Stock Ownership                                       1.3454             1.3465             1.3486
                                                                          (0.28)             (0.28)              (0.28)
                   Vested Options                                        0.9108             0.9189             0.9223
                                                                          (0.22)             (0.20)              (0.19)
                   Corporate Governance                                  0.7189             0.7192             0.7192
                                                                         (2.17)**           (2.17)**           (2.17)**
                   3 Final Years of a Longheld Option                    1.5399
                                                                         (1.86)*
                   4 Final Years of a Longheld Option                                       1.6626
                                                                                            (2.41)**
                   5 Final Years of a Longheld Option                                                          1.7072
                                                                                                               (2.68)***
                   Remaining Longholder CEO years                        1.8045             1.7371             1.6916
                                                                        (3.04)***           (2.68)***          (2.39)**
                   Year Fixed Effects                            yes            yes                               yes
                   Observations                                 3690           3690                              3690
                   Number of Firms                               327            327                               327
                   z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
                   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                      Table 6. Are Overconfident CEOs Right to Hold their Options?
                                                              Panel A. Returns
For each option that is held until expiration and that is at least 40% in the money at the beginning of its final year, we calculate the return the
CEO would have gotten from instead exercising the option a year sooner and investing in the S&P 500. We assume exercise both in the final year
and in the hypothetical year occur at the maximum stock price during that year.

                                    Percentile                                                Return
                                       10th                                                   -0.24
                                       20th                                                   -0.15
                                       30th                                                   -0.10
                                       40th                                                   -0.05
                                       50th                                                   -0.03
                                       60th                                                    0.03
                                       70th                                                    0.10
                                       80th                                                    0.19
                                       90th                                                    0.39
                                      Mean                                                     0.03
                                Standard Deviation                                             0.27

                            Panel B. Do "Mistaken" Holders Drive the Acquisitiveness Result?
The dependent variable is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made at least one merger bid that was eventually successful in a particular firm
year. Size is the log of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is earnings
before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of
company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that
are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so
that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of directors
has between four and twelve members.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before
expiration. Longholder: Did OK is 1 for CEOs for whom Longholder is 1 and who did better by holding at least as many times as they would
have done better by exercising longheld options a year earlier. Longholder: Should Have Exercised is 1 for CEOs for whom Longholder is 1 and
who would have done better by exercising a year earlier more times than they did better by holding. The fixed effects logit model is estimated
consistently using a conditional logit specification. Standard errors in column 1 are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial
correlation. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios. Longholders whose longheld options were not at least 40% in the money at the beginning
of their final year are excluded.

                                                                                            Random            Fixed Effects
                                                                            logit          Effects logit          logit
                                                                             (1)               (2)                 (3)
                   Size                                                    0.8721            0.8598              0.6251
                                                                            (1.93)*           (1.99)**            (2.46)**
                   Qt-1                                                    0.7259             0.7347              0.8806
                                                                          (2.86)***           (2.54)**             (0.74)
                   Cash Flow                                               2.0042             2.1030              2.8787
                                                                          (3.49)***           (3.22)***          (2.64)***
                   Stock Ownership                                         1.5555             1.5853              0.7498
                                                                            (0.51)              (0.42)             (0.15)
                   Vested Options                                          2.8574             1.7361              0.4921
                                                                            (1.36)              (0.53)             (0.51)
                   Corporate Governance                                    0.6220             0.6823              1.0343
                                                                          (3.31)***           (2.45)**             (0.16)
                   Longholder: Did OK                                      1.2015             1.2082              1.1555
                                                                            (0.74)             (0.80)              (0.27)
                   Longholder: Should Have Exercised                       1.8277             1.9591              4.4648
                                                                            (1.95)*           (2.32)**            (2.32)**
                   Year Fixed Effects                              yes              yes                             yes
                   Observations                                   3532             3532                            2111
                   Number of Firms                                                  318                             172
                   Robust z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
                   * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                Table 7. Control for Returns
The dependent variable is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made at least one merger bid that was eventually successful in a particular
firm year. Size is the log of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is
earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the
fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings
of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are
multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies
that the board of directors has between four and twelve members. Returns are the natural logarithm of 1 plus the annual return on company
equity.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year
before expiration. The fixed effects logit model is estimated consistently using a conditional logit specification. Standard errors in column 1
are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.


                                                                                     Random       Fixed Effects
                                                                     logit          Effects logit     logit
                                                                      (1)               (2)            (3)
                      Size                                          0.9125            0.9047         0.5940
                                                                     (1.31)*             (1.36)           (2.65)***
                      Qt-1                                          0.7234             0.7302              0.8434
                                                                    (2.63)***           (2.38)**            (0.85)
                      Cash Flow                                     1.7670             1.8825              2.0624
                                                                    (2.83)***          (2.79)***           (2.27)**
                      Stock Ownership                               0.6436             0.7004              0.5843
                                                                     (0.49)              (0.29)             (0.21)
                      Vested Options                                3.8995             2.4668              0.2675
                                                                    (2.16)**             (1.09)             (1.06)
                      Corporate Governance                          0.6494             0.7049              1.0718
                                                                    (3.04)***           (2.29)**            (0.34)
                      Returnst-1                                    1.4801             1.4467              1.1424
                                                                     (1.61)              (1.62)             (0.54)
                      Returnst-2                                    1.2539             1.2391              1.0474
                                                                     (1.15)              (1.01)             (0.20)
                      Returnst-3                                    1.0635             1.0405              0.9262
                                                                     (0.31)              (0.19)             (0.35)
                      Returnst-4                                    1.3548             1.3452              1.2513
                                                                     (1.40)              (1.37)             (0.98)
                      Returnst-5                                    1.2334             1.2202              1.1539
                                                                     (1.03)              (0.95)             (0.66)
                      Longholder                                    1.5048             1.6184              2.4628
                                                                    (2.33)**           (2.83)***           (2.56)**
                      Year Fixed Effects                       yes            yes                            yes
                      Observations                            3479           3479                           2157
                      Number of Firms                                         305                            173
                      Robust z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
                      * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                 Table 8. Diversifying and Same-Industry Mergers
The dependent variable in panel 1 is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made a diversifying merger bid that was eventually successful in a
particular firm year. The dependent variable in panel 2 is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made a within-industry merger bid that was
eventually successful in a particular firm year. Industries are the 48 Fama and French industry groups (1997). Size is the log of assets at the
beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus
depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and
his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the
beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to
stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of directors has between four and twelve members.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before
expiration. The fixed effects logit model is estimated consistently using a conditional logit specification. Standard errors in columns 1 and 4 are
robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.
                                      Panel 1. Diversifying Mergers                                Panel 2. Within Industry Mergers

                                                    Random          Fixed                                          Random          Fixed
                                     logit         Effects logit Effects logit                      logit         Effects logit Effects logit
                                      (1)              (2)           (3)                             (4)              (5)           (6)
Size                                1.0153           1.0227        0.8466                          0.6915           0.6555        0.3879
                                     (0.20)            (0.25)           (0.70)                    (3.73)***         (3.75)***        (3.43)***
Qt-1                                0.7341            0.7293           0.8643                      0.6998            0.7097           0.7516
                                    (2.33)**          (2.00)**          (0.59)                     (2.39)**          (2.13)**          (1.15)
Cash Flow                           1.9730            2.2331           3.1159                      2.1259            2.0717           2.7895
                                   (3.03)***         (3.10)***        (2.65)***                   (3.17)***          (2.40)**          (1.80)*
Stock Ownership                     2.4749            2.1750           0.1895                      0.6328            0.7951           2.5200
                                     (0.84)            (0.58)           (0.64)                      (0.34)            (0.15)           (0.37)
Vested Options                      1.6428            1.2012           0.5975                      0.8585            0.5298           0.1630
                                   (3.31)***           (0.41)           (0.94)                      (0.61)            (1.06)          (2.00)**
Corporate Governance                0.5342            0.5726           0.8255                      0.8411            0.9331           1.3414
                                   (3.49)***         (2.90)***          (0.74)                      (0.85)            (0.31)           (1.03)
Longholder                          1.6008            1.7763           3.1494                      1.3762            1.4498           1.5067
                                    (2.40)**         (2.70)***        (2.59)***                     (1.36)            (1.47)           (0.75)
Year Fixed Effects               yes           yes            yes                                    yes               yes              yes
Observations                    3690          3690           1577                                   3690              3690             1227
Number of Firms                                327            128                                                      327              100
Robust z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                                                   Table 9. Overconfidence and Acquisitivenss by Equity Dependence
The dependent variable in panel 1 is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made at least one merger bid that was eventually successful in a particular firm year. The dependent variable in panel 2 is binary
where 1 signifies that the firm made at least one diversifying merger bid that was eventually successful in a particular firm year. Industries are the 48 Fama and French industry groups (1997). Size is the log
of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by capital at the
beginning of the year. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are
exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership.
Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of directors has between four and twelve members.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before expiration. The sample is split into quintiles using values of the
Kaplan-Zingales index at the beginning of the prior year. All regressions are logit with random effects. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.

                                                                 Panel A. All Mergers                                                               Panel B. Diversifying Mergers

                                 Least Equity                                                          Most Equity           Least Equity                                                         Most Equity
                                  Dependent          --------------------------------->                Dependent              Dependent          --------------------------------->               Dependent
                                  Random        Random           Random           Random    Random                            Random        Random           Random           Random    Random
                                 Effects logit Effects logit Effects logit Effects logit Effects logit                       Effects logit Effects logit Effects logit Effects logit Effects logit
                                  Quintile 1    Quintile 2      Quintile 3       Quintile 4 Quintile 5                        Quintile 1    Quintile 2      Quintile 3       Quintile 4 Quintile 5
Size                               0.8516        1.2721           0.8755          0.7721     0.8669                            1.1788        1.4193           0.9989          0.9243     1.0159
                                      (1.15)           (1.66)*           (0.78)           (1.34)           (0.88)                (0.84)           (2.06)**          (0.01)            (0.29)           (0.07)
Qt-1                                 0.5255           1.1147           0.6670            0.6790           0.5420                0.6203            1.2163           0.4624           0.8078            0.2205
                                    (2.66)***          (0.50)            (1.45)           (0.91)           (1.54)                (1.49)            (0.63)           (1.71)*           (0.39)          (2.17)**
Cash Flow                            1.3135           3.0960           11.4727           7.2486           6.3325                0.8742            5.2611          17.3604           11.2920          25.8691
                                      (0.75)           (1.90)*         (3.27)***         (1.78)*          (2.54)**               (0.24)           (2.22)**        (3.49)***           (1.60)         (3.29)***
Stock Ownership                      0.0976           0.0000           7.8124            0.0546           2.3618                7.8331            0.0000          42.4903           0.1995            1.0701
                                      (0.79)           (1.83)*           (0.85)           (0.68)           (0.62)                (0.63)           (1.65)*           (1.50)            (0.28)           (0.03)
Vested Options                       1.1400          83.7247           1.6643           70.1940           2.3858                0.8060            0.0003           2.9815        20953.4373           8.7639
                                      (0.20)           (1.76)*           (0.51)           (1.54)           (0.55)                (0.19)            (1.17)           (0.81)          (2.60)***          (1.05)
Corporate Governance                 0.7322           0.8544           0.5226            0.6143           0.8863                0.6021            0.9693           0.2216           0.4310            0.9572
                                      (0.91)           (0.48)           (1.78)*           (1.41)           (0.37)                (1.08)            (0.08)         (3.43)***          (1.69)*           (0.10)
Longholder                           2.2861           1.6792           1.7756            1.9533           0.8858                2.5462            1.8852           1.7297           1.0075            1.0865
                                     (2.46)**          (1.48)            (1.54)           (1.50)           (0.33)                (1.89)*           (1.51)           (1.36)            (0.01)           (0.18)
Year Fixed Effects              yes           yes            yes                           yes              yes                   yes               yes              yes              yes               yes
Observations                    718           719           719                            719              718                   718               719              719              719               718
Number of Firms                 125           156           168                            165              152                   125               156              168              165               152
z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                             Table 10. Merger Financing and Overconfidence
                          Panel A. All Mergers with Disclosed Method of Payment
                       Cash and                           odds (cash odds (cash odds ratio                             odds ratio
                         Debt      Stock      Comb.        v. stock)  v. other) (v stock)                               (v other)
Overconfident
CEOs                     46.95%         36.15%          16.90%             1.30            0.88           1.01            1.12
Non-
overconfident
CEOs                     44.05%         34.34%          21.61%             1.28            0.79

                  Panel B. Mergers where Target Value is at Least 25% of Acquiror Value
                     Cash and                            odds (cash odds (cash odds ratio                              odds ratio
                        Debt       Stock     Comb.        v. stock)  v. other) (v stock)                                (v other)
Overconfident
CEOs                     45.59%         41.18%          13.24%             1.11            0.84           1.12            1.55
Non-
overconfident
CEOs                     35.03%         35.53%          29.44%             0.99            0.54
                                                    Panel C. Regressions
Sample includes all merger bids that were eventually successful. The dependent variable is binary where 1 signifies that the bid was
financed using only cash and debt. Undervalued is a binary variable where 1 indicates that Q at the beginning of the year was less
than or equal to 1. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Stock ownership is the fraction of company stock
owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are
exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied
by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Merger size is the amount the acquiror paid for the target as a
fraction of acquiror value (for SDC mergers, amount paid is the value of the transaction; for CRSP mergers, it is the market value of
the target the day after the announcement. When both variables are present, we use the minimum).
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last
year before expiration. UV * Longholder is the interaction of those two variables. Standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity
and arbitrary within-firm serial correlation. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.


                                                          logit           logit            logit          logit
                                                           (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)
                      Undervalued (UV)                   1.1016          0.6976           0.7037         1.0911
                                                          (0.39)          (1.31)           (1.17)         (0.25)
                      Qt-1                                               0.5218           0.5201         0.5025
                                                                        (3.61)***        (3.22)***      (3.38)***
                      Stock Ownership                                                     1.7834         1.1349
                                                                                           (0.35)         (0.06)
                      Vested Options                                                      0.7112         0.5941
                                                                                           (0.84)         (1.27)
                      Merger Size                                                         1.0011         1.0012
                                                                                           (1.24)         (0.95)
                      Longholder                         0.7653          0.7820           0.6909         0.6456
                                                          (1.14)          (1.09)           (1.52)        (1.70)*
                      UV * Longholder                    4.2664          4.2177           3.9958         2.4728
                                                        (2.71)***       (2.72)***         (2.57)**        (1.61)
                      Year Fixed Effects              no           no            no                       yes
                      Observations                   441          441           394                       394
                      Robust z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
                      * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
                           Table 11. Overconfidence and Completed Mergers for Different % in the Money
Percentage in the money calculated at the beginning of the last year of duration. To keep the same comparison group across regressions (and limit attenuation for high % in the
money), we omit observations where a CEO goes from overconfident to not overconfident as we increase the required % in the money to be overconfident. Regressions are
specified as in Columns 3, 5, and 6 of Table 4.

                                           logit                                    Random Effects logit                                 Fixed Effects logit
  % in money               observations   odds ratio        p-value          observations odds ratio p-value                    observations odds ratio p-value
        0                     3690           1.49            0.03               3613        1.65         0.01                      2191          2.26        0.02
       10                     3613           1.53            0.02               3613        1.65         0.01                      2191          2.26        0.02
       20                     3603           1.50            0.03               3603        1.61         0.01                      2171          2.15        0.04
       30                     3581           1.40            0.08               3581        1.47         0.04                      2142          1.94        0.08
       40                     3567           1.44            0.06               3567        1.51         0.03                      2135          1.94        0.08
       50                     3558           1.39            0.10               3558        1.46         0.05                      2126          1.99        0.07
       60                     3551           1.41            0.09               3551        1.49         0.04                      2119          2.21        0.05
       70                     3534           1.43            0.08               3534        1.53         0.03                      2108          2.63        0.03
       80                     3534           1.43            0.08               3534        1.53         0.03                      2108          2.63        0.03
       90                     3531           1.43            0.08               3531        1.54         0.03                      2105          2.78        0.02
      100                     3510           1.48            0.06               3510        1.59         0.02                      2090          2.79        0.02


                            Figure 1. Odds Ratios for Different % in the Money

                 3.0
                 2.5
                                                                                                                              Logit Odds Ratio
    Odds Ratio




                 2.0
                 1.5                                                                                                          Random Effects Logit
                 1.0                                                                                                          Odds Ratio
                 0.5                                                                                                          Fixed Effects Logit
                                                                                                                              Odds Ratio
                 0.0
                       0




                                                                                                  0
                            10
                                   20
                                          30
                                                   40
                                                            50
                                                                     60
                                                                             70
                                                                                      80
                                                                                                90
                                                                                               10




                                                    % in the money
                                                                       Table 12.
TOTALconfident is a dummy variable equal to 1 when the number of "confident" and "optimistic" mentions in the LexisNexis and Factiva.com searches
exceeds the number of "not confident", "not optimistic", and "reliable, cautious, practical, conservative, steady, frugal" mentions. TOTALmentions is the
total number of articles mentioning the CEO in the two search sets. Size is the natural logarithm of assets at the beginning of the year. Q is the market value
of assets over the book value of assets at the beginning of the year. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus depreciation and is normalized by
capital at the beginning of the year. CEO ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the
year. CEO vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common
shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is the number of
directors who currently serve as CEOs of other companies.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option package until the last year before expiration.
Technical Education is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the CEO has "technical education," i.e. an undergraduate or graduate degree in engineering, physics,
operations research, chemistry, mathematics, biology, pharmacy, and other applied sciences.



Panel A. Press Confidence Measures with Longholder. (N = 3448)

                                              TOTAL- TOTAL-
                                   Longholder confident mentions
Longholder                         1.00
TOTALconfident                     0.11              1.00
TOTALmentions                      0.04              0.26          1.00

Panel B. Correlations of Press Coverage with Firm Characteristics. (N = 3448)
                                                                                                           CEO                CEO
                                   TOTAL-            TOTAL-                                                Owner-             Vested         Corporate
                                   confident         mentions Size                Q              Cash Flow ship               Options        Governance
TOTALconfident                     1.00
TOTALmentions                      0.26              1.00
Size                               0.13              0.31          1.00
Q                                  0.04              0.03          -0.31          1.00
Cash Flow                          0.00              0.14          -0.25          0.46           1.00
CEO Ownership                      0.04              0.17          -0.19          0.11           0.16           1.00
CEO Vested Options                 0.05              0.04          -0.18          0.09           0.18           0.10          1.00
Corporate Governance               -0.10             -0.10         -0.37          0.12           0.12           0.20          0.08           1.00

Panel C. Press Confidence Measures with CEO Characteristics. (N = 3525)
                          TOTAL-     TOTAL-              Pres &
                          confident  mentions Age        Chm         Tenure
TOTALconfident            1.00
TOTALmentions                      0.26              1.00
Age                                -0.11             0.03          1.00
President and Chairman             0.03              0.00          -0.03          1.00
Tenure                             -0.02             0.09          0.39           0.01           1.00

Panel D. Press Confidence Measures with CEO Education. (N = 2110)
                          TOTAL-     TOTAL- Finance      Technical
                          confident  mentions Education Education
TOTALconfident            1.00
TOTALmentions                      0.26              1.00
Finance Education                  0.11              -0.04         1.00
Technical Education                -0.05             0.05          -0.09          1.00
               Table 13. Press Coverage and Diversifying and Same-Industry Mergers
The dependent variable in panel 1 is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made a diversifying merger bid that was eventually successful in a
particular firm year. The dependent variable in panel 2 is binary where 1 signifies that the firm made a within-industry merger bid that was
eventually successful in a particular firm year. Industries are the 48 Fama and French industry groups (1997). Size is the log of assets at the
beginning of the year. Q is the market value of assets over the book value of assets. Cash flow is earnings before extraordinary items plus
depreciation and is normalized by capital at the beginning of the year. CEO ownership is the fraction of company stock owned by the CEO
and his immediate family at the beginning of the year. CEO vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6
months of the beginning of the year, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is
roughly comparable to stock ownership. Corporate governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of directors has between
four and twelve members.
TOTALconfident is a dummy variable equal to 1 when the number of "confident" and "optimistic" mentions in the LexisNexis and Wall Street
Journal searches exceeds the number of "not confident", "not optimistic", and "reliable, cautious, practical, conservative, steady, frugal"
mentions. TOTAL mentions is the total number of articles mentioning the CEO in both sets of searches. The fixed effects logit model is
estimated consistently using a conditional logit specification. Standard errors in columns 1 and 4 are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary
within-firm serial correlation. All regressions include year fixed effects. Coefficients are presented as odds ratios.

                                      Panel 1. Diversifying Mergers                              Panel 2. Within Industry Mergers
                                                Random          Fixed                                        Random         Fixed
                                     logit     Effects logit Effects logit                        logit    Effects logit Effects logit
                                      (1)          (2)           (3)                               (4)          (5)          (6)
Size                                0.9270       0.9385        0.8585                            0.6044      0.5605        0.3788
                                     (0.88)           (0.66)           (0.64)                    (4.88)***        (4.74)***        (3.53)***
Qt-1                                0.7185           0.7126           0.8728                     0.6842            0.6852           0.7563
                                    (2.56)**         (2.20)**          (0.56)                    (2.54)**          (2.36)**          (1.13)
Cash Flow                           1.9805           2.2542           3.3917                     1.9001            1.9073           2.8360
                                   (2.92)***        (3.14)***         (2.80)***                  (2.55)**          (2.12)**         (1.85)*
CEO ownership [in %]                1.0711           1.0020           0.5056                     0.1814            0.1103           0.1693
                                     (0.06)           (0.00)           (0.26)                      (1.42)           (1.32)           (0.55)
CEO vested options                  1.6016           1.2355           0.5813                     0.8717            0.5415           0.1773
                                   (3.30)***          (0.48)           (1.01)                      (0.53)           (1.01)          (1.80)*
Corporate Governance                0.5633           0.5904           0.8135                     0.8470            0.9292           1.3037
                                   (3.14)***        (2.75)***          (0.79)                      (0.81)           (0.33)           (0.93)
TOTALmentions                       1.0005           1.0005           0.9995                     1.0014            1.0019           1.0094
                                    (2.07)**          (1.18)           (0.55)                    (5.69)***        (3.44)***         (2.03)**
TOTALconfident                      1.6971           1.7826           1.5077                     1.0424            1.0368           0.8856
                                   (2.95)***        (3.21)***          (1.48)                      (0.20)           (0.16)           (0.31)
Observations                   3647          3647          1559                                   3647              3647             1226
Number of Firms                               326           128                                                      326              100
z statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
Table 14. How Does the Market Respond to Overconfident CEOs' Mergers?
The event window is the day before through the day after the announcement of the (eventually successful) bid. The
dependent variable is the cumulative abnormal return on the bidder's stock from the day before the announcement of the
bid through the day after. Abnormal returns are calculated by taking the daily return on the bidder's common equity and
subtracting expected returns. Expected returns are the daily return on the S&P 500 index. Stock ownership is the fraction
of company stock owned by the CEO and his immediate family at the beginning of the year in which the bid occurs.
Vested options are the CEO's holdings of options that are exercisable within 6 months of the beginning of the year of the
bid, as a fraction of common shares outstanding. Vested options are multiplied by 10 so that the mean is roughly
comparable to stock ownership. Relatedness is 1 for acquisitions in which the bidder and target firms are in the same
industry. Industries are the 48 Fama and French industry groups (1997). Cash financing is a binary variable where 1
indicates that the acquisition was financed using some combination of cash and debt.
Boss is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO is also the president and chairman of the board. Corporate
governance is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the board of directors has between four and twelve members.
Longholder is a binary variable where 1 signifies that the CEO at some point during his tenure held an option until the
last year before expiration. Standard errors in columns 1-3 and 5 are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-
firm correlation. Standard errors in column 4 are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-industry correlation,
where industries are measured using the 48 Fama and French industry groups (1997).

                                     OLS               OLS               OLS               OLS               OLS
                                      (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
Stock Ownership                     0.0703            0.0331            0.0362            0.1113            0.0291
                                    (2.15)**           (0.82)            (0.86)           (1.68)*            (0.68)
CEO Vested Options                  0.1415            0.1360            0.1416           -0.0517            0.1505
                                    (2.43)**          (2.34)**          (2.41)**           (0.80)           (2.49)**
Relatedness                                           0.0045            0.0048            0.0062            0.0043
                                                       (1.29)            (1.37)            (1.24)            (1.24)
Corporate Governance                                  0.0071            0.0079            0.0036            0.0073
                                                       (1.96)*          (2.18)**           (0.64)           (1.98)**
Cash Financing                                        0.0121             0.014            0.0127            0.0145
                                                     (3.67)***         (3.91)***         (2.60)***         (3.99)***
Age                                                                                                        -0.0005
                                                                                                             (1.46)
Boss                                                                                                       0.0001
                                                                                                             (0.04)
Longholder                          -0.0061           -0.0066          -0.0067           -0.0099           -0.0079
                                     (1.73)*           (1.79)*           (1.81)*          (2.33)**          (2.00)**
Industry Fixed Effects                 no                no               no                yes               no
Year Fixed Effects                     no                no               yes               yes               yes
Industry*Year Effects                  no                no               no                yes               no
Observations                      759           687            687                         687               687
R-squared                        0.03          0.06           0.10                         0.58              0.10
Absolute value of t statistics in parentheses. Constant included.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%
