NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION TARGETING AND JAPAN:
WHY HAS THE BANK OF JAPAN NOT ADOPTED INFLATION TARGETING?
Takatoshi Ito
Working Paper 10818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10818
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2004

Paper to be presented at Conference on the Future of Inflation Targeting,Reserve Bank of Australia, August
9-10, 2004. The author is grateful for comments by Governor Ian MacFarlane, Robert McCauley, Frederic
Mishkin, Warwick McKibbin, and other participants of the Conference. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Takatoshi Ito. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Inflation Targeting and Japan: Why has the Bank of Japan not Adopted Inflation Targeting?
Takatoshi Ito
NBER Working Paper No. 10818
September 2004
JEL No. E42, E52, E58

ABSTRACT
The paper aims at explaining why the Bank of Japan has not adopted inflation targeting, despite calls
for such a policy. Disclosed minutes of the Monetary Policy Meetings of the Bank of Japan, after
March 1998, as well as Speeches by its members give clues to changing reasons against inflation
targeting. Inflation targeting was not adopted in Japan in the early years (the first wave of interest
in1999-2000) because the Board members were not sure about an appropriate price index, and a
specific number for an appropriate inflation rate. A Bank of Japan study, completed in October 2000,
did not give any clear answers. Inflation targeting was not adopted in later years (2001-2003), despite
the inflation-targeting-like commitment strategy adopted in March 2001, because the Board members
thought that conventional tools to increase the inflation rate were not available. As such, they
thought that announcing a target with a positive inflation rate would damage confidence. In terms
of introducing unconventional measures, the Bank of Japan worried about the transmission channels
and the damage to its balance sheet. Towards the end of Governor Hayami

fs term, the views

against inflation targeting turned sharply negative, as news reports suggested that it may be linked
to the new Governor fs appointment. Therefore, , why inflation targeting was not adopted, can be
explained and understood from a political economy perspective.
Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
itointokyo@aol.com

1. Introduction
By any historical or cross-sectional standard, the Japanese economic slump
from 1992 to 2004 (as of this writing) has been quite unusual. The economy that was
once regarded as “number one” fell into a state of low growth, falling prices, and
chronic banking crises for more than a decade.1 The average growth rate from 1993 to
2003 was just above 1 percent, in contrast to the average growth rate of 4 percent
between 1975 and 1992. Slow growth was accompanied by disinflation in the first
half of the 1990s, and, eventually, deflation since the mid-1990s. The stagnation in
output and deflation in prices caused the Japanese economy to shrink – a rare
phenomenon among advanced economies. From 1997 to 2002, Japanese nominal
GDP (in yen) shrank by 4 per cent, while the nominal GDP of the United States (in
US dollars) increased by 25 per cent.
Many factors have contributed to the stagnation of the Japanese economy
since 1992. The long stagnation reflects the adverse combination of the negative
wealth effects from the crash in asset prices, external shocks like the Asian currency
crisis, and policy errors in bank supervision, fiscal policy, and monetary policy. In the
early to mid-1990s, the burst bubble – a decline of stock prices by 50 to 60 per cent
and the beginning of a long slide in real estate prices – meant that many corporations
and households suffered from capital losses, and consumption and investment
spending was curtailed. The most severely affected companies stopped interest and
principal payments to banks. Non-performing loans became a serious policy problem
by 1995. Large fiscal stimulus packages were implemented in the mid-1990s, and the
call interest rate was lowered to an unprecedentedly low level of 0.5 per cent in the
fall of 1995. The stagnation of the Japanese economy from 1990 to 1995 can be
largely explained by the extraordinary negative shocks to asset markets and the
subsequent damage to the balance sheets of households and corporations.
After the mid-1990s, policy errors prevented the Japanese economy from
returning to a firm recovery track. The two opportunities for recovery in 1996 and in
2000 were followed by negative growth and a (near) banking crisis. After a long
stagnation, the Japanese economy began to recover in 1996, partly due to the large
fiscal stimulus in 1995, and partly because of an increase in exports. As part of the
1995 “tax-reduction-now, tax-increase-later” package, an increase in the consumption
tax in April 1997 had been planned. The expected increase in the consumption tax
rate stimulated consumption in the second half of 1996 and the first quarter of 1997. It
was difficult to see how much of the growth was due to a genuine recovery and how
much was due to the intertemporal substitution of consumption. The planned tax rate
increase was carried out, and consumption decreased as predicted in the second
quarter of 1997.
The consumption tax rate increase and repeal of the income tax cut in April
1997 is often regarded as a mistake, in that fiscal tightening was applied to an
economy in a nascent recovery. But, in evaluating the cause of sharp decline in the
Japanese economic growth in 1998, it is difficult to separate the effects of the fiscal
tightening of April 1997 from those of the Asian currency crisis, from July 1997 to
the spring of 1998, and the banking crisis of 1997-98. The financial markets suddenly
shrank due to the failures of one large bank and two securities companies (one large
and one medium-sized)
in November 1997. As a result of this incident, the
government undertook a capital injection for the major banks in March 1998.
1 “Japan as Number One” was the title of a book written by Ezra Vogel (1979). A comprehensive
description and analysis of the Japanese economy up to 1990 is available in Ito (1992).
1

However, the additional capital proved insufficient, and two large banks failed in
1998. The second round of fiscal support in March 1999 put an end to the
undercapitalization and fragility of Japanese banks, but only for a few years, as it later
turned out.2
From 1995 to 2000, the US economy grew strongly without inflation; the
“new economy” was believed to be supported by the widespread use of information
and communication technology (ICT), as well as the growth in the ICT sector itself.
This was not happening in Japan (or Europe), and one reason, I believe, is that
regulatory barriers and the protection of jobs prevented the widespread use of ICT
technology. Even without strong economic growth, ICT stock prices soared
worldwide. The Japanese economy was partly helped by the stock price boom, and in
2000 the economy expanded by 3 per cent. However, the economy slumped again in
2001, and it went into another recession in 2002.
The extent of deflation increased from 2000 to 2003. The rate of CPI deflation
reached around 1 per cent and the GDP deflator declined even more rapidly, at a rate
of 3.5 per cent at one point. How to fight deflation became the top priority of
monetary policy. Since many economists believe that inflation and deflation are
ultimately monetary phenomenon, there was increased attention on the Bank of Japan.
The Bank of Japan Act was revised in 1997 after an intense debate in the
public and in the parliament, and the new law became effective in April 1998.3 The
legal and institutional independence of the Bank of Japan was enhanced: the Governor
and Board members could not be dismissed for differences in opinions with the
government, or any other reason other than physical and mental incapacitation. The
newly enhanced Monetary Policy Board, consisting of the Governor, two Deputy
Governors, and six fulltime members who must be recruited from outside the Bank,
became fully responsible for setting monetary policy. Mr. Hayami, aged 72 and longretired from the Bank, was appointed as Governor. Some Board members from the
old regime were retained, to be replaced at the expiration of their respective terms,
and some vacancies were filled by new appointments with the new qualifications for
Board members in mind. For example, Mr. Yamaguchi, a long-time Bank economist,
and Mr. Fujiwara, a journalist, were appointed as Board members. Previously, the
Board members represented different kinds of businesses – agriculture, large financial
and regional financial institutions, and trade and industry – but under the new law,
Board members had to have expertise in finance and banking. Two professors were
also appointed as Board members: Professor Ueda of the University of Tokyo and
Professor Shinotsuka of Ochanomizu University. 4 Minutes of discussions (without
names) and voting records (with names) were to be disclosed with a delay of about
one month, as a part of enhanced transparency. The mandate of the new Bank of
Japan was clearly price stability, while the mandate of the Bank under the old law was
to help maximize the potential growth of the economy.5
2 For the failure of bank supervision and crisis management in the 1990s, see Cargill, Hutchison
and Ito (1997, 2002). Ito and Harada (2000) showed that the Japanese premium, the spread
charged by the western banks on interbank lending rate to Japanese banks, virtually disappeared
after April 1999.
3 See Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (2000) for comparison of the legal language of the old and new
Bank of Japan law, the change in the independence index, and an assessment of experiences of the
Bank operations during the early years.
4 These professors had to resign from their respective universities, as the Board member position
required full time employment at the Bank of Japan.
5 The word “potential” was probably meant to be the war power as the old law was enacted in
1942.
2

With independence, the Bank of Japan became accountable to the public for
its actions and their consequences. Deflation, many critics argued, was the proof of its
failure. As deflation became worse, critics argued that there was a danger of a
deflationary cycle: deflation generates deflationary expectations, which raises the real
interest rate and depresses investment and consumption; and lower aggregate demand
results in more deflation. The Bank should have done everything it could to prevent
deflation from worsening. The Bank – both Board members and staff economists –
initially argued that deflation was not so serious and, moreover, deflation that resulted
from technological innovation and cheaper imports could be desirable. The Bank
lowered the policy interest rate (the call rate) to virtually zero in February 1999. As
the nominal interest rate cannot become negative, the zero interest rate policy was the
ultimate conventional monetary policy instrument available to the Bank. However,
from mid-1999 to 2000, calls for additional action to fight deflation increased among
policy makers and academics. The list of additional or unconventional (from the
perspective of standard textbook central banking) policies included quantitative
easing (expanding the monetary base); an increase in the purchase of long-term
government bonds; the purchase of riskier assets including commercial paper,
corporate bonds, equities, and foreign bonds; and, the adoption of inflation targeting.
The arguments raised by proponents of inflation targeting included greater
accountability, instrument independence, better communication with the market, and
an influence on inflation expectations to break the deflationary cycle.
In fact, inflation targeting became somewhat symbolic of the additional
unconventional steps that many argued the Bank of Japan should take to achieve a
positive inflation rate. Most of the Bank’s Board members and staff economists were
publicly dismissive of inflation targeting. Several reasons were mentioned. First,
inflation targeting was a simple-minded reflation policy. Second, no country had
adopted inflation targeting to move from deflation to inflation. Third, there were no
available policy measures to lift the inflation rate to positive territory, given that the
interest rate was zero, so the announcement of inflation targeting, without tools to
achieve a positive inflation rate, would damage the Bank’s credibility. Fourth, the
mere announcement of an inflation target would not change expectations. Fifth, if the
public believes in the inflation target, the long-term interest rate would increase and
this would damage the economy.
The Bank not only rejected calls for additional ways of easing monetary policy
but tightened monetary policy, by 0.25 percentage points, in August 2000, citing a
brighter outlook of the economy. However, the inflation rate was still in negative
territory. This turned out to be a costly mistake: the ICT stock bubble had already
burst and the US economic outlook was deteriorating; the peak of the cycle was near
in Japan too. Sure enough, the economy started to contract from October 2000. The
economy deteriorated to such an extent that the Bank of Japan had to change course in
March 2001, and return to the zero interest rate policy. At the same time, the policy
instrument was changed to the current account at the Bank of Japan (basically excess
reserves at the Bank of Japan). By targeting excess reserves, a regime of quantitative
easing had started. In March 2001, the target for current account balances was set at 5
trillion yen, at the time when required reserves was about 4 trillion yen. The target
amount has since been raised in several steps, and reached the range of 30-35 trillion
yen in January 2004. The Bank also expanded its purchase of long-term bonds. The
amount of monthly purchases was raised from 400 billion yen to 600 billion yen in
August 2001, and in several steps to 1,200 billion yen in October 2002. Thus, since

3

March 2001, the Bank has adopted some unconventional policy measures, but not
inflation targeting.
The term of Governor Hayami expired in March 2003. He was replaced by Mr
Fukui, employed in the private sector for the five years prior to his appointment, but
an earlier Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan. The tone of statements and
communication with the public became much better than under Governor Hayami.
Under Governor Fukui, the confrontational style with the government has melted
away, and the fixation on raising interest rates as soon as possible has also
disappeared. However, Governor Fukui has not adopted inflation targeting. The
economy started to recover in the second half of 2003 and the growth rate has climbed
up to above 3 per cent in 2003, and is expected to remain around this level in 2004.
The degree of deflation has shrunk to near zero, and economic expansion is spreading
from the electronic machinery and export sectors to consumption.
As the economy continues to expand, some observers have started to speculate
about when the zero interest rate policy will be lifted. In October 2003, the Board
refined the necessary conditions for lifting the zero interest rate policy: the CPI
inflation rate (excluding fresh food) has to be zero or above, on average, in the past
few months; and the inflation rate has to be projected to stay above zero in the near
future. Many private-sector forecasters predict that if the economic growth continues
to accelerate in the second half of 2004 and the first half of 2005, the necessary
conditions to end the zero interest rate policy will be achieved sometime in 2005.
There is a growing call for adopting the inflation targeting as a part of the exit strategy
from the zero interest rate regime.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews experiences of
deflation and monetary policy actions from 1998 to 2004. Section 3 examines the pros
and cons of inflation targeting. Why the Bank of Japan did not adopt inflation
targeting will also be explained. Section 4 concludes the paper.
2. Deflation and Monetary Policy
2.1. Deflation: Measurement and Effects
Measured by the CPI (excluding fresh food) , Japan has experienced deflation
for much of the period since July 1998 and measured by the GDP deflator, Japan has
been in deflation for nearly all of the period since the third quarter of 1994.6 The level
of the CPI in 2003:4 is 2.5 per cent lower than in 1998:4, and the GDP deflator in
2003:4 is 10.8 per cent lower than that in 1993:4. This is deflation.
The changes in the CPI and GDP deflator are shown in Figure 1. Prior to
1995, the series moved in parallel most of the time, but have since deviated. The CPI,
calculated using the Laspayres index formula, has an upward bias, while the GDP
deflator, calculated using the Paasche index formula, has a downward bias. Quality
changes that are not fully captured in price measurement, in either the CPI or GDP
deflator, would create an upward bias.7 That explains part of the deviation. However,
the reason for the widening of the bias is not immediately clear. It is also puzzling that
even the directions of changes from 1998 to 2003 are different. For example, from
6 Since 1994:1 to the present (2004:1), the change in the GDP deflator was continuously negative,
except for the period from 1997:2 to 1998:1. This period was possibly influenced by the increase
in the VAT rate from 3 per cent to 5 per cent. Theoretically, the GDP deflator should not be
affected by the VAT, but the numbers are suspiciously higher for one year. An adjustment for the
VAT tax increase is made in the following analysis.
7 Shiratsuka (1999) estimated the bias in the Japanese CPI to be 0.9 per cent.
4

2000 to 2002, CPI deflation worsened, while GDP deflation moderated; and from
2002 to 2003, CPI deflation disappeared, while GDP deflation worsened. At the time
of this writing the CPI is showing about zero inflation, while the GDP deflator is
indicating 2 to 3 per cent deflation.
Whether this magnitude of deflation is a serious problem is debatable; Bank of
Japan economists tend to take the optimistic view. Moreover, in 1999 and 2000 many
Board members, including Governor Hayami, strongly argued that a decline in prices
due to technological innovation, such as in computers, and cheap imports, is “good
deflation” and is not a concern for policy-makers.8 However, as the duration of the
deflation increases, the decline in prices becomes large, and this has an impact on the
real side of the economy. The impact of technological advancement and cheap
imports on the price level raises the question of whether deflation occurred due to
supply side factors (that is, the aggregate supply curve shifted right) or to demand side
factors (that is, the aggregate demand curve shifted left).9
Since technological innovation and cheap imports from China are a global
phenomenon, and not just a Japan-specific phenomenon, it would be incorrect to think
that this is a major reason for the Japanese deflation. In the case of the US, where the
“new economy” (high growth, low unemployment and stable prices) was observed, it
could be argued that the supply side effects, namely productivity increases, made
possible an output expansion without accelerating inflation.
It should also be noted that computers and other ICT-related produces and
services, and imports from China, are only a small fraction of consumer prices. The
gross import to GDP ratio is around 10 per cent in Japan, and the Chinese share in
imports is about 20 per cent. So, the direct impact of China on the GDP should be
about 2 per cent. Even if the import prices from China dropped by a large margin, the
direct impact would be limited. However, those who emphasize the impact from
China argue that indirect effects on Japanese made products are important. Many
Japanese goods, including food, CDs, electronics, and even machinery, have become
“contestable”, due to potential supply from China. The direct share of imports is thus
argued to underestimate the impact of globalization on the Japanese prices.
Relative prices are certainly affected by innovation and globalization, but it
does not follow that the general price level, such as that measured by the CPI, should
follow the trend of a small category of goods and services. We expect that general
price inflation is a monetary phenomenon, rather than the accumulation of relative
prices changes.

8 “Though it is true that prices of a number of products have been declining, this is against the
backdrop of various revolutionary changes including the so-called IT revolution, that is, the
progress of technological innovation in information and telecommunications, as well as the
revolution in distribution networks represented by the emergence of so-called ‘category killers’.
Such phenomena cannot necessarily be regarded as pernicious price declines” (speech by Masaru
Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, to the Research Institute of Japan in Tokyo on March 21,
2000).
9 Hayashi and Prescott (2002) argued that the economic stagnation of Japan in the 1990s was
largely due to the slowdown in productivity growth, resulting from a reduction in the work week
and other supply-side factors, such as capital deepening, which resulted in low returns to capital.
The basic methodology assumes that actual GDP was tracing potential GDP most of the time, a
tradition of real business cycle theory. This view sharply contrasts with the dominant view that
aggregate demand growth was far less than potential, although estimates of the GDP gap vary
from one researcher to another. See McKibbin (2001) for a simulation analysis of the Japanese
economy, where inflation targeting was shown to be beneficial to the Japanese economy.
5

2.2. Cost of Deflation
In the case of Japan, unlike the US, disinflation and eventual deflation were
the result of recession (a shift in the aggregate demand curve) rather than output
expansion (a shift of the aggregate supply curve). In order to see the relationships
between inflation and growth, and between inflation and unemployment, Phillips
curve figures can be used. Figure 2 shows the relationship between the rate of CPI
inflation and GDP growth (both measured as the four-quarter ended percentage
change). The figure shows a non-linear, although generally positive, relationship
between the two variables: namely, lower inflation is associated with lower growth,
suggesting that demand shocks are more dominant than supply shocks. However, the
relationship is less robust if the sample is limited to the stagnation period (19932004).
Figure 3 shows the traditional Phillips curve relationship between the inflation
rate and the unemployment rate. It used to be the case in Japan, say in the 1950s and
1960s, that the Phillips curve was more or less vertical (that is, there was little
variation in the unemployment rate). This is no longer true. A typical downward
sloping curve, with a strong nonlinearity around 2 per cent inflation, can now be
observed. The kink at around 2 per cent seems consistent with the predictions of
Akerlof, Dickens and Perry (1996). Although the long-run Phillips curve is more or
less vertical above the 2 per cent level of inflation, it is strongly downward sloping
below the 2 per cent level. Akerlof, Dickens and Perry attribute such a result to the
downward rigidity of nominal wages, providing evidence in support of this
proposition. At a very low inflation rate, the adjustment of relative wages between
different sectors becomes difficult thereby increasing unemployment.
However, the extent of wage rigidity is smaller in Japan, because a substantial
part (typically from 2 to 5 months equivalent) of annual earnings are paid in the form
of bonuses for regular workers (not only executives, but also rank and file
employees), and bonuses respond quite flexibly to company performance. Kuroda and
Yamamoto (2003a, b), using Japanese longitudinal data from 1993 to 1998, argued
that the impact of wage rigidity on unemployment is quite small in Japan, at least
among regular workers. Although downward nominal wage rigidity does exist in
Japan, it is most prevalent among hourly-wage, part-time female employees, and is of
limited importance for the regular monthly salaries and annual earnings of full-time
employees.10 Kuroda and Yamamoto (2003c) simulated the impact of downward
rigidity on the male unemployment rate. Using the estimated rigidity for the full-time
male workers (which is smaller than for other type of workers) from their previous
studies, they fit the data to the Akerlof, Dickens and Perry model. The simulation
showed that downward rigidity would raise the unemployment rate by as much as 1.8
percentage points under the baseline parameters. Downward wage rigidity does not
cause unemployment as long as the inflation rate is approximately 2.4 per cent or
higher, whereas rigidity effects tend to increase gradually as the inflation rate falls
10 Kuroda and Yamamoto (2003a, b) established the existence of downward rigidity of wages,
and quantified the extent of this downward rigidity by applying econometric methods to control
for the individual characteristics and the measurement errors. They argued that the rigidity in
regular monthly salaries of full-time male and female employees were subject to a threshold: the
monthly salary will not be cut as long as the notional (desirable from the employers’ point of
view) wages do not decline by more than about 7.7 percent and 4.0 percent, respectively.
However, when the notional wage change rates exceed these threshold values, nominal wage cuts
do occur.
6

below 2.4 percent. This is consistent with Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996). One of
Kuroda and Yamamoto’s more interesting conclusions is that when inflation is below
approximately 1 per cent, the marginal increase in unemployment attributable to
downward rigidity becomes small, since bonus adjustments and extensive wage cuts
would be triggered at that point. However, the unemployment rate rose to 5.3 per cent
in 2003, which was five years after their data set stopped. It would be interesting to
see whether the same conclusion holds at the right-end tail of the Phillips curve.
Taking Kuroda and Yamamoto (2000a, b, c) literally, the cost of deflation was
not evident through the wage rigidity channel in Japan.11 Another channel from
deflation to output and employment is through corporate activities that suffer from
unexpected disinflation and deflation. In general, unexpected disinflation leads to
income redistribution from borrowers to lenders.12 Borrowers that borrowed longterm funds at high interest rates suffer from low profits, and would not raise wages.
Lower wages depress consumption and therefore output.
The number of corporate bankruptcies in Japan rose from about 6,500 in 1990
to about 19,000 in 2001, an almost three-fold increase. Not only did small and
medium size firms go bankrupt, but large corporations also started to fall victim of
stagnation toward the end of the 1990s. The total amount of bankrupt companies’ debt
increased form 2 trillion yen in 1990 to 26 trillion yen in 2000, a 13-fold increase.
While unexpected disinflation is not the sole cause of bankruptcies, the combined
impact of weak economic activity and disinflation does explain a major part of the
dramatic increase in corporate bankruptcies. When many corporations go bankrupt,
unemployment will increase, which is likely to be sustained for some time.
What makes the Japanese case more complex is that asset prices have fallen
much faster than the general price level. Asset price deflation hit the construction and
real estate sectors hard. The non-performing loans common in these sectors by the
mid-1990s, dragged some financial institutions into insolvency. Deteriorating
collateral values made recovery of loans more difficult. As the balance sheets of
banks started to deteriorate quickly in the mid-1990s, the economic problem spread
through the financial system. Large and medium-sized financial institutions failed in
1997-98 and again in 2003. The protracted systemic instability also damaged potential
growth. The general deflation and asset price deflation were obviously intertwined
and reinforced each other.13
If asset values fall below the nominal amount of debt, those who borrowed and
invested in assets (such as real estates, equities, paintings, etc.) will find it difficult to
11 The literature that questions the Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry mechanism includes Lebow,
Stockton, and Wascher (1995), Card and Hyslop (1997), Lebow, Saks and Wilson (1999),
Crawford and Harrison (2000), Fares and Lemieux (2000), and Groshen and Schweitzer (1996,
1999).
12 Corporations that borrowed long-term funds expecting that their product prices would rise at a
constant positive rate, and planned nominally-contracted repayment to banks based on the growth
in nominal revenues, would suffer from an increasing real burden of repayments if an increase in
product prices falls short of expectation. For example, think of a firm that contracted a 10-year
loan in 1990 at a 6 percent interest rate, hoping that the prices would continue to rise at 3 percent
for the following ten years. Prices rose only 10 percent from 1990 to 2000, instead of 30 percent.
If product prices behave similarly, revenues are lower than expected by 20 percent by the end of
borrowing period. However, the amount of interest and principal payment to the bank would not
change. Corporations may go bankrupt if the revenue shortfalls becomes serious or if interest
payments cannot be made. Deflation is definitely bad for borrowers.
13 Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (1997, 2000) and Hoshi and Kashyap (2001) discuss the structural
problems in the corporate-bank relationship and bank and corporate governance in Japan.
7

repay debts. Unexpected disinflation or deflation is a mechanism for unintended
transfers of wealth from borrowers to lenders. This is quite harmful to the
macroeconomy – just like unexpected inflation – and also to the functioning of capital
markets. If investors are unable to sell their property, payments to banks would cease,
creating non-performing loans. The fall in asset prices also discourages investment in
assets, until new buyers are convinced of a bottoming out in the market; in the process,
prices will fall further. The banks with nonperforming loans will become reluctant to
extend any kind of bank loans and a credit crunch would result. The debt problem
arising from asset price deflation and nominal debt contracts is known in the literature
as debt deflation, especially in the context of the Great Depression.14
In addition to the costs of lost output, deflation may have other negative
consequences for the economy. Deflation now may cause people to expect further
deflation in the future. With expectations of deflation, if interest rates have already
reached zero, monetary policy loses its potency, because the nominal interest rate is
bound at zero. With a zero nominal interest rate, the real interest rate increases as the
expected inflation rate becomes lower. A high real interest rate in a stagnant economy
reduces corporations’ incentives to invest to expand production. In a sense, companies
burned once by unexpected disinflation will not invest, say in additional plant and
machinery, until the inflation rate is stabilized at a positive level. Deflation will
therefore cause more deflation by generating deflationary expectations. This is the
mechanism of a deflationary spiral.
Although Bank of Japan economists tended to argue that deflation was mild,
and a deflationary spiral never happened, there is some evidence that deflation and
deflationary expectations deteriorated from 1999 to 2002. The Bank of Japan
Monetary Policy Board has published a semi-annual Outlook since October 2000. In
the Outlook, Board members express their expected inflation rate for the fiscal year
(where fiscal year t runs from April of year t to March of year t+1). In October 2000,
the Board members’ inflation expectation, taking out the most optimistic and most
pessimistic forecasts, for FY 2000 (note that the time of poll was already in the
middle of the FY) ranged from -0.4 to -0.2. The expectation of FY 2001, at the
beginning of that FY (April 2001) ranged from -0.8 to -0.4. One year later, at the time
of April 2002 in FY 2002, the expectation was for further deflation, ranging from -1.0
to -0.8. It would therefore seem that deflationary expectations increased from 2000 to
2002.
In Japan, one additional consideration is the impact of deflation on fiscal
settings. One of the largest borrowers at fixed interest rates is the Japanese
government, with outstanding long-term debts of 550 trillion yen, more than 100 per
cent of GDP. The Japanese government has regularly issued long-term government
bonds with fixed interest rates. (Only in 2003, did the Japanese government start to
issue inflation-indexed bonds, where the principal is protected from deflation.)
Unexpected deflation during the 1990s meant that the Japanese government had an
increased real debt burden – that is, more taxes in real terms have to be collected than
otherwise to repay debt. In addition, since tax brackets are not adjusted for inflation,
deflation meant that the government had less tax revenues due to the reverse of the
well-known bracket creep phenomenon.
14 Irving Fisher (1933) was the first to note the debt deflation process. The Great Depression is
often used as an example of very negative consequences of debt deflation. See Bernanke (1983)
and Mishkin (1978, 1991, 1997), and Mishkin (1998) for application to Japan.

8

2.3. Policy Responses in Chronology
As the economic slump continued, the Bank of Japan has changed its position
on whether and how to fight deflation. This sub-section examines the Bank of Japan’s
actions to fight deflation from 1998 (the birth of new Bank of Japan) to mid-2004. I
identify four stages of action in the period from 1998 to 2004:
Stage 1. Cautiously lowering interest rates to ZIRP: April 1998 – February 1999.
Stage 2. ZIRP, lifting ZIRP and return to ZIRP: February 1999 – March 2001.
ZIRP “until deflationary concerns are dispelled”.
Stage 3. Quantitative easing (QE), phase 1: March 2001 – March 2003.
QE until CPI inflation rate becomes “stably above zero”.
Stage 4. QE, phase 2: March 2003 – present. QE until CPI (excluding fresh food) is
positive for a few months and is expected to remain positive in the future.
Stage 1. April 1998 – February 1999
When a new team took over the newly-independent Bank of Japan, there was a
high hope that proactive actions would be taken and that the Bank would take
accountability for its actions. Price stability became the stated mandate, rather than
the de facto mandate. The Bank does not have to listen to, or try to guess the
judgement of, the government on how monetary policy should be conducted, so that
price stability should be genuinely pursued. However, in retrospect, the timing of
independence was less than perfect or even unfortunate. The economic outlook was
quickly deteriorating, due to the banking crisis and the lingering aftershocks of the
Asian currency crisis. The yen was depreciating, reflecting a pessimistic mood
towards prospects for the Japanese economy and the financial sector. Additional
policy measures, both monetary and fiscal, had to be prepared.
In many MPMs, Mr. Nakahara proposed to lower the call rate. For example, in
July, he proposed that the Bank lower the interest rate to 0.35 per cent, and in the
August 11 meeting, he proposed 0.25 per cent. On both occasions his proposal was
defeated, with 1 vote in favour and 8 against.15
On 9 September 1998, the Bank of Japan decided to lower the policy interest
rate (the uncollateralized overnight call rate) to, on average, around 0.25 per cent.16
However, negative growth was recorded in the second half of 1998, and the Bank
finally decided to adopt the zero interest rate policy in February 1999.
Stage 2. ZIRP, lifting ZIRP and Return to ZIRP: February 1999 – February 2001
The statement of the monetary policy decision on 12 February 1999 read as
follows:
The Bank of Japan will provide more ample funds and encourage the
uncollateralized overnight call rate to move as low as possible.
15 In the description of discussions in the minutes, individual names are not disclosed. However,
the name of the Board member who proposed a vote and the names of those who voted in favour
and against are disclosed. So, in the case relating to 1-8 votes, one can guess who expressed the
minority opinion in the discussion prior to the vote. By this process of deduction, we know that
Mr. N. Nakahara has been consistently the “dove”, and Ms. E. Shinotsuka the “hawk”.
16 Mr. Nakahara voted with the majority in favour of the proposal, but Ms. Shinotsuka voted
against, insisting that the interest rate should not be lowered.
9

To avoid excessive volatility in the short-term financial markets, the Bank of
Japan will, by paying due consideration to maintaining market function,
initially aim to guide the above call rate to move around 0.15%, and
subsequently induce further decline in view of the market developments (The
Bank of Japan, Announcement of the Board Decision, 12 February 1999).
This was the beginning of the zero interest rate policy (ZIRP). It was clear that the
economy was in a very weak state. At the time it was thought that GDP had recorded
five consecutive quarters of negative growth since 1997:4. (In later revisions to the
GDP data, the consecutive quarters of negative growth disappeared.17)
No additional actions were taken between February 1999 and the fall of 1999.
From the summer to the fall of 1999, output remained basically flat. The government
and business circles started to voice their concern with deteriorating conditions and
called for the Bank of Japan to adopt a more aggressive monetary policy, dubbed
quantitative easing. Just before the 21 September 1999 meeting of the Policy Board,
some press speculated that the Board would decide to take some actions, most likely
non-sterilized intervention in the foreign exchange market in cooperation with the
Ministry of Finance. The market regarded non-sterilized intervention as a signal by
the Bank of Japan for further action.
The Policy Board reacted strongly to the press speculation. The Board issued
its statement at the conclusion of the meeting. At the time, the Governor’s press
conference was scheduled only two days after the Board meeting, so that the
immediate response itself was a message. In the announcement, the Board
emphasized that monetary policy would not respond to exchange rate movements and
that non-sterilized intervention was not a useful policy. The Board strongly warned
that the press was greatly mistaken in engaging in speculative reporting before the
meeting: “In the past few days, the market has substantially fluctuated by speculations
on monetary policy. What should be clear is that the conduct of monetary policy is
exclusively decided by majority vote at the Monetary Policy Meeting, a regular
meeting of the Policy Board. It is never the case that our policy is determined in
advance or in consultation with outside bodies. We would like to emphasize this
point” (Bank of Japan, “On the Current Monetary Policy”, 21 September 1999). The
comment seemed to show the irritation and frustration that was felt by the Board. Any
prior reporting of the expected decision was considered to be a challenge to
independence. The Board successfully extinguished any expectation in the market that
policy would accommodate the desires of the government or the markets. Any doubt
about independence was thus clearly erased. However, such a strong statement might
also have indicated a sense of insecurity on the part of the new Bank of Japan. The
Bank’s assertion of its righteousness, and its shutting out any external suggestions ,
prompted increased calls for accountability.
The Board took the view that the exchange rate was one of the variables that
should be monitored, but that monetary policy should not respond to exchange rate
movements per se.18 The Board then explained that non-sterilized intervention was
17 At the time of spring 1999, the growth rate for the five quarters from 1997:4 to 1998:4 was
estimated as negative. The current (spring of 2004) estimates for the same period are 0.7, -1.0, -1.1,
0.8 and 0.1.
18 “The foreign exchange rate in itself is not a direct objective of monetary policy. One of the
precious lessons we learned from the experience of policy operations during the bubble period is
that, monetary policy operations linked with control of the foreign exchange rate runs a risk of
10

not a useful concept for the central bank that watches total funds in the market,
whatever various sources they came from.19
The Board indicated that it had done enough to ease monetary conditions,
and it even cited the “side-effects” of ZIRP. The Board also challenged the market
expectation that non-sterilized intervention would be pursued. This was indicative of
their desire to end the ZIRP as soon as possible.20
No additional easing was adopted between the fall of 1999 and the summer
of 2000, except for liquidity injections to deal with Y2K concerns. In the spring of
2000, Governor Hayami started to suggest that the ZIRP may end soon, as the
economy showed some signs of recovery. Stock prices in particular were suggesting a
rosier situation: ICT-related stock prices had soared, some tripling in a year, and the
Nikkei 225 index had increased by 30 per cent between March 1999 and March 2000.
Corporate profits rose and corporate investment started to increase. Some Bank
economists suggested that these corporate earnings would trickle down to households
to stimulate consumption sooner or later.21 This argument was dubbed the “dam
theory”: water (profits) was filling up the corporate dam and would overflow to
downstream (household’s income) sooner or later.
By June, Governor Hayami was frequently suggesting that there were bright
signs in the economy so that the ZIRP can and should be ended soon. Yet many
economists thought that ending ZIRP would be premature. They called for an easing
of monetary policy, or quantitative easing, while the Bank of Japan was looking at
tightening of monetary policy – not a healthy situation.
The ZIRP was indeed lifted on 11 August 2000, as the Board decided that the
deflationary concern was over.22 However, it was realised at this time that the further
leading to erroneous policy decisions. Having said this, it does not mean that monetary policy is
pursued without any consideration to the development of the foreign exchange rate. The Bank
considers it important to carefully monitor the development of the foreign exchange rate from the
viewpoint of how it affects the economy and prices” (Bank of Japan, “On the Current Monetary
Policy” 21 September 1999).
19 “In relation to the foreign exchange rate policy, we have heard arguments in favor of nonsterilized intervention. In the reserve market, however, there are various flows of funds such as
currency in circulation and Treasury funds other than those resulting from the intervention. The
Bank conducts its daily market operations taking into account all the money flows, in order to
create ample reserves to such an extent as described above. This strong commitment of fund
provision is consistent with the government'
s current foreign exchange rate policy” (Bank of Japan,
“On the Current Monetary Policy” 21 September 1999).
20 “The Bank views the current state of the Japanese economy as having stopped deteriorating
with some bright signs, though a clear and sustainable recovery of private demand has yet to be
seen. In pursuing the zero interest rate policy, we need to carefully examine its adverse sideeffects, but deem it important to support the economic recovery by continuing easy monetary
policy for the periods ahead” (Bank of Japan, “On the Current Monetary Policy”, September 21,
1999).
21 “Currently, it is our judgment that Japan’s economy is at the stage where the number of firms
taking the offensive has started increasing, that is, the economy is moderately recovering parallel
with structural adjustment. …with respect to the recovery of private demand, it seems natural that
the corporate sector, which has regained profitability as a result of restructuring, should take the
lead by increasing investment followed by the household sector as income conditions gradually
improve. This is the development we are now witnessing” (speech given by Masaru Hayami,
Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Center for Economic Research on May 29, 2000,
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/press/00/ko0005b.htm#0103 ).
22 Governor Hayami intended to raise the interest rate in July. However, a large department store,
Sogo, failed and the economy showed some weakness. The plan of lifting the interest rate was
postponed without being submitted to the meeting.
11

recovery of the Japanese economy was in doubt. First, the ICT bubble had already
burst, and ICT stock prices in the US and Japan had already crashed, suggesting
investment and consumption would be adversely affected in the near future. Second,
the US economy was decelerating. Third, and most importantly, the inflation rate was
still negative and projected to be negative for at least a year. How could the Bank of
Japan tighten policy when the inflation rate was negative?
The government disagreed with the Bank on the outlook for the economy and
appropriateness of raising the interest rate, and motioned that the vote to repeal ZIRP
should be delayed. Putting forward a proposal of delay in voting by the government
representative is allowed in the Bank of Japan law. The government motion was
overruled by the Board by an 8 to 1 vote. The lifting of the zero interest rate policy
was then decided by a 7 to 2 decision.
Immediately after the ZIRP was ended, the Japanese economy entered
recession. The growth rate in 2000:3 turned negative, which was offset to some extent
by a brief recovery in 2000:4. The peak of the business cycle was later dated as
October 2000. As the economy entered recession, the criticism of the Bank of Japan’s
actions increased once more.
Many indicators were showing weakness in the last quarter of 2000, and the
Bank started to examine ways to ease monetary policy. In February 2001, the Bank
introduced the so-called Lombard lending facility and also cut the official discount
rate from 0.5 per cent to 0.35 per cent. The Lombard lending facility facilitated
automatically lending to banks with collateral at the official discount rate, so that the
interest rate would be capped at 0.35 per cent. But the call rate was around 0.2 to 0.25
per cent, and consequently there seemed to be little impact from the introduction of
the Lombard facility. A dramatic switch in monetary policy followed.
Stage 3. Quantitative Easing, phase 1: March 2001 – March 2003
The MPM of 19 March 2001 turned out to be significant in several respects.
First, it effectively restored ZIRP by adding liquidity to the inter-bank market for
excess reserves. The target inter-bank rate was lowered immediately to 0.15 per cent,
and would go down to zero, as conditions warranted. The official discount rate was
also cut to 0.25 per cent. Second, the announcement of the instrument switch from the
interest rate to the current account balance (the sum of required and excess reserves)
at the Bank of Japan suggested that further steps expanding the monetary base, as part
of a quantitative easing policy, would be taken in the future if they were considered
necessary. Third, the new relaxed monetary policy was to continue until the CPI
(excluding fresh food) inflation rate would stabilise above zero.
The target of the current account was set at 5 trillion yen. However, by
targeting an amount beyond required reserves (about 4 trillion yen) it effectively
meant that the inter-bank rate (i.e., the call rate) would go to zero, and so it did.
Targeting the current account beyond 4 trillion yen meant targeting excess reserves.23
From March 2001 to March 2003, quantitative easing was expanded in several
steps. In August 2001, another measure of quantitative easing was employed. The
amount of BOJ outright purchases of long-term government bonds was raised from
400 billion yen per month to 600 billion yen per month. At the same time, the current
23 In March 2001, before it was adopted, BOJ economist, Mr. Okina (1999b) reviewed the excess
reserve targeting as a possible next step in monetary easing. He pointed out a few problems with
this option. First, “what kind of function can be expected of excess reserves” is not known with
certainty and it was identified as a problem. Second, excess reserves is not reliable “as an indicator
for monetary easing”. Third, Dr. Okina pointed to an operational hurdle.
12

account target was raised to 6 trillion yen (or about 2 trillion yen excess reserves). In
September 2001, the official discount rate was cut to 0.1 per cent, but this did not
have any impact given that there was ample liquidity in the form of excess reserves.
In December 2001, the monthly purchase of long-term bonds was increased from 600
billion yen to 800 billion yen and the current account target was raised to 10-15
trillion yen. In February 2002, the monthly purchase of long-term bonds was
increased from 800 billion yen to 1 trillion yen. In October 2002, the monthly
purchase of long-term bonds was raised to 1.2 trillion yen from 800 billion yen, and
the current account target was raised to 15-20 trillion yen.
Stage 4. Quantitative Easing, phase 2: March 2003 – present
In March 2003, at the time of the expiration of terms, a new team of Bank
Governor and Deputy Governors were appointed. The new Governor Fukui was a
former Deputy Governor, before he resigned in March 1998. An ex Ministry of
Finance official, Mr. Muto, and a professor of economics, Mr. Iwata, were appointed
as the two Deputy Governors. Mr. Iwata was known to have advocated inflation
targeting while he was the Director General of the Cabinet Office.
Almost from the beginning the new team gave a sign that it would work with
the government in fighting deflation: Governor Fukui was sending a message that he
would continue ZIRP for a long period of time. His tone was much more supportive
of ZIRP than his predecessor. The market was thus much more assured of sustained
ZIRP in the future.
In his speech to the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Governor Fukui
(2003) explained the effects of the monetary policy framework he inherited in a way
that was much closer to mainstream economists’ thinking outside the Bank of Japan.
The increase in the quantitative easing was aimed at the portfolio balance effect: as
“the marginal value of liquidity services became zero, people would start to rebalance
their portfolios by investing in assets with higher marginal values whether these were
real or financial assets, if the Bank increased further its position of liquidity. The aim
of this process was thus to generate positive economic momentum, acting, for
example, to push up asset prices. So far, however, the effect has not been widely
observed”. This is quite consistent with the view outside the Bank, but different from
discussions in the Policy Board under the previous regime, in which even the slightest
inflation was considered to be bad because, by helping debtors, it delayed structural
reform. Governor Fukui also described the increase in long-term bonds as a successful
operation, contributing to “the smooth implementation of quantitative easing”. He
also explained the commitment to continuing ZIRP and quantitative easing as a strong
one, because even if the future inflation rate was expected to be positive, the ZIRP
would continue as long as the current CPI (excluding fresh food) inflation rate is
below zero. Considering the lag in the effects of monetary policy, he suggested that
the policy could end up tolerating inflation. This kind of presentation also sounds
close to what was being advocated by supporters of inflation targeting, although
Governor Fukui stopped short of embracing inflation targeting.
After Mr. Fukui became Governor, the target amount of the current account
was raised in several steps from 17 to 22 trillion, to 30 to 35 trillion between March
2003 and January 2004. In October 2003, the Board elaborated on the two necessary
conditions to end the ZIRP. Essentially, these are: (1) the CPI (excluding fresh food)
inflation rate is “zero percent or above” as a trend “for a few months”; and (2), the

13

prospective CPI is not expected to be “below zero percent” according to forecasts of
“many Policy Board members”.24
In the next few subsections, the changes in monetary policy actions are
summarized according to the instruments of monetary policy.
2.4. Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy
As mentioned above, the Bank adopted quantitative easing in March 2001, and
increased its amount of outright purchases of long-term government bonds. The
monthly purchase was raised from 400 billion yen before March 2001, to 12 trillion
yen in October 2002. It is somewhat remarkable that Governor Hayami, who seemed
to have opposed easing and also led the move to lift the ZIRP in August 2000, had
changed the position and implemented the increase in government bond purchases
after March 2001. Although excess reserve targeting was introduced in March 2001, it
was increased from 5 trillion to 15-20 trillion in October 2002. Most of the jump in
excess reserves came under the Governor Fukui’s leadership after March 2003. The
measures of long-bond purchases and the Bank of Japan’s target for current account
balances are summarized in Figure 4. The chart shows the increase in purchases of
long-term bonds and the current account balances target over time.
In terms of the two options of increasing the purchase of long bonds and
increasing excess reserves, the former is believed to have an immediate impact on the
economy, through lowering (or preventing the increase in) the long-term interest rate,
and forcing portfolio shifts among private-sector investors. An increase in the
purchase of long bonds had been implemented between April 2001 and October 2002,
the last two years of the Hayami regime, and the amount of monthly purchases has
remained the same since Mr. Fukui became Governor. Mr. Fukui was more
aggressive in increasing the target for current account balances at the Bank of Japan.
2.5. ZIRP and Exit Conditions
The ZIRP was adopted on 12 February 1999, and Governor Hayami
elaborated on the conditions when it would be ended in his speech two month later (in
the press interview of the Governor, on April 13, 1999, available in Japanese only on
BOJ homepage). But, neither he nor the Board defined what “deflationary concerns”
meant or when and under what conditions they would be judged to be “dispelled”.
24 The announcements on October 10, 2003 read as follows: “With the aim of laying the
foundation for sustainable growth of Japan'
s economy, the Bank is currently committed to
maintaining the quantitative easing policy until the consumer price index (excluding fresh food, on
a nationwide basis, hereafter the core CPI) registers stably a zero percent or an increase year on
year. Such commitment is underpinned by the following two conditions. (Para.) First, it requires
not only that the most recently published core CPI should register a zero per cent or above, but
also that such tendency should be confirmed over a few months. (Para) Second, the Bank needs to
be convinced that the prospective core CPI will not be expected to register below a zero per cent.
This point will be described in such materials as the analysis and the forecasts of Policy Board
members in the Outlook Report. To be more specific, many Policy Board members need to make
the forecasts that the core CPI will register above a zero per cent during the forecasting period.
(Para.) The above conditions are the necessary condition. There may be cases, however, that the
Bank will judge it appropriate to continue with quantitative easing even if these two conditions are
fulfilled”. Calling the CPI excluding fresh food as core CPI may be misleading because it still
contains energy prices.

14

The Bank had also not decided which price indicator should be used to define
inflation/deflation or the number that would be a threshold of inflation/deflation.25
The word “deflation concerns” left room for an interpretation that the
economic conditions at the time may not be in the state of deflation. Many economists
contended that the economy was already in the state of deflation. But the Bank, and
the Governor, was perhaps indicating that the problem was concern about, rather than
the reality of, deflation.
In 2000, the ZIRP was lifted, as the exit condition was met, as judged by
majority of the Board members. In the Minutes of August 11, 2000, the reason for
judgement is explained as follows:
On the current economic situation, members shared the view that the economy
was recovering gradually, with corporate profits and business fixed investment
continuing to increase. As for the outlook for the economy, many members
expressed the view that the economy was likely to recover gradually, led
mainly by business fixed investment. Accordingly, the majority of members
agreed that the economy had reached the stage where deflationary concern had
been dispelled.
It is surprising that the above paragraph does not mention any price movements in the
past or future. Deflationary concern was judged to have been dispelled, because of
economic recovery (real GDP movement), corporate profits, and business fixed
investment. Although one could interpret the paragraph as a forward-looking inflation
judgement – economic recovery results in price increases – there is no explicit
mention of this linkage. A more likely interpretation was that the Board members at
that point were not using the price movement as the guide to their policy, because
price declines due to “supply side factors”; that is, technological innovations and
cheap imports are a good thing.
The Bank of Japan was also responding to new calls for a more careful
definition of price stability. On 13 October 2000, two months after raising interest
rates, the Policy Board issued a report called “On Price Stability”. In the document,
price stability was defined as a state that is neither deflation nor inflation. This
apparent tautology did not help settle the debate.
When the ZIRP was effectively reintroduced in March 2001, the condition
became more concrete: the CPI index excluding fresh food was identified as the right
price index on which to focus. The relaxed monetary policy would continue until the
inflation rate measured by the CPI excluding food would become “stably above zero”.
However, what “stably above zero” meant was not defined. But, at least, it specified
that the inflation rate had to be positive at the time of ending ZIRP.
Clearly, if this condition had been applied from the beginning, the ZIRP
would not have been lifted in August 2000. Therefore, it can be understood that
introducing such a condition was a tacit admission that the action of August 2000 was
a mistake. The condition was further clarified in October 2003.
In October 2003, “stably” was further defined as above zero for a few months
and when there would be no risk of falling back into deflation. Also, while these two
25 “Price indicators such as the GDP deflator, CPI, and Wholesale Price Index (WPI) often move
differently. Even when these indicators exhibit the same movement, the extent to which the sound
development of the national economy will be achieved may depend on such factors as whether
property prices are stable or rising sharply” (Okina, 1999, p.164).
15

conditions were explicitly mentioned as necessary conditions, they may not be
sufficient.
In summary, the exit conditions from ZIRP and the definition of price stability
have changed over time, as follows:
(1) February 1999. Adoption of de facto ZIRP.
(2) April 1999. Exit condition was “until deflationary concerns are dispelled”.
(3) August 2000. Exit from ZIRP.
(4) October 2000. A document on “On Price Stability” was issued. Price stability was
defined as a condition where there is no inflation or deflation.
(5) March 2001. Return to ZIRP with a new exit condition: “until the CPI (excluding
perishables, on a nationwide basis) registers stably a zero percent or an increase
year on year”.
(6) October 2003. Elaboration of exit conditions as the two necessary conditions, a
backward-looking one, the inflation rate has to be, on average, at a zero percent
or above for a few months, and a forward-looking one, the inflation rate should
be projected not to fall back to deflation.
One might ask whether these exit conditions constitute de facto inflation
targeting. As the inflation indicator is specified and at least the inflation target floor
rate is mentioned, the commitment seems to be a half step toward inflation targeting.
But there are four important reasons why we should not regard the exit conditions as a
full-fledged inflation targeting. First, the inflation target ceiling rate is not specified.
Second, the projected date when the Bank would like to achieve its target is not
specified. Third, the conditions are more reactive than proactive: the Bank is not
expressing that it would do everything it takes to achieve the inflation rate. Instead, it
reads that the conditions may occur with luck or some forces external to the Bank’s
actions. Fourth, no accountability mechanism is attached to the current exit condition.
2.6. Purchases of Equities and REITs
Some economists outside the Bank advocated that the Bank purchase riskier
assets than government bonds, including the listed market-based stock index funds
and the listed real-estate investment trust funds (REITs). The Bank has refused to take
these unconventional policy actions on several grounds. It was argued that these are
risky assets that the central bank would not normally purchase, and that they are also
more like fiscal operations rather than monetary operations. Piling up risky assets in
the central bank balance sheet was also suggested to be a bad idea, since it may result
in a situation in which the Bank would run huge losses and lose the confidence of the
people.
However, in September 2002, the Bank of Japan started to purchase equities
held by commercial banks. This policy was introduced to reduce the risks of stock
price fluctuations on commercial banks’ balance sheets and, as a result, their riskbased capital ratios. The policy was intended to contribute to financial market
stability. The Bank of Japan was careful to discuss this in the regular MPM, as
opposed to the Monetary Policy Meeting. The ceiling for purchases was set at 2
trillion yen initially, but expanded later to 4 trillion yen. As stock prices dropped from
the time of implementation (October 2002) to May 2003, a lot of purchases were
made, but after stock prices started to recover from the trough, commercial banks held
on to equities.
2.7. Unsterilized Intervention

16

A number of economists have advocated foreign exchange interventions as
one expansionary measure that the central bank and the Ministry of Finance could
undertake at the zero interest rate. Two explicit benefits have been cited. First,
intervention would lead to a depreciation that would stimulate the export sector and
increase imported prices (which is good for an economy suffering from deflation).
Second, foreign bonds purchased could be used as assets against which monetary base
can be provided to the market. Increasing the monetary base by buying foreign bonds
is essentially unsterilized intervention. In normal circumstances, when the interest rate
is positive, the standard textbook story is that sterilized intervention may not work,
because the interest rate would not change, and unsterilized intervention would work,
because the increased monetary base would lower the interest rate. However, at a
zero interest rate, the interest rate channel disappears. Whether one thinks that
unsterilized intervention has a greater effect than sterilized intervention, even at a zero
interest rate, then becomes equivalent to a question of whether quantitative easing, in
terms of increasing monetary base, is effective or not.
Svensson (2001) was explicit in recommending unlimited unsterilized
intervention to peg the yen/dollar rate at a depreciated level to stimulate export
demand. There are some complications to this kind of proposal. First, Japan is a large
economy that is already running current account surpluses. An explicit depreciation
policy and more exports may not be politically acceptable, as argued in Ito and
Mishkin (2004). Another complication is that foreign exchange interventions are
conducted by the Ministry of Finance in Japan, so that unsterilized intervention has to
be coordinated between the Ministry of Finance and the Bank of Japan.
When several proposals were made for interventions during the zero interest
rate policy in 2000-2002, interventions were rare events (see Ito (2003) for discussion
of the effectiveness of sterilized interventions from 1991 to 2002). However, from
January 2003 to March 2004, interventions suddenly became quite frequent and of a
large size. In 2003, periodically intervention looked unsterilized, as the amount of
intervention and changes in monetary base were running neck to neck (see Ito 2004).
For example, the accumulated intervention and increase in money supply were,
respectively, 2.3 trillion yen and 1.7 trillion yen for 2003:1; 4.5 trillion yen and 6.1
trillion yen for 2003:2; 7.5 trillion yen and 0.9 trillion yen for 2003:3; and 5.9 trillion
yen and 3.9 trillion yen for 2003:4. For the calendar year 2003, accumulated
intervention was 20 trillion yen and the increase in monetary base was 12.6 trillion
yen. But, if the increase in the monetary base of 9.2 trillion for 2002:4 (when there
was no intervention) was added to the increase in the monetary base, the two figures
become about equal for the period from 2002:4 through 2003:4. Although the
correspondence was most likely a coincidence rather than planned, it did provide a
signal of the Bank’s willingness to cooperate. (In 2004:1, there was another 15 trillion
yen worth of intervention, while the monetary base increased by less than 1 trillion
yen.) In September 1999, any suggestion of unsterilized intervention was strongly
rejected by the Bank, while in 2003, Deputy Governor Iwata himself pointed out the
correspondence, although he concluded that “it must be a coincidence”.26
3. Inflation Targeting
In this section, the pros and cons of adopting Inflation Targeting (IT) in
general, and under the deflationary environment in Japan in particular, are considered.
26 Iwata, Press interview, October 1, 2003 in Sendai. The original is in Japanese,
http://www.boj.or.jp/press/03/kk0310a.htm.
17

The Bank of Japan (including most Board members and staff economists) has
consistently argued against the adoption of IT, and that is a major reason why IT has
not been introduced. Reasons that have been expressed by the Bank of Japan for not
adopting IT are examined in the discussion below.
In the following, I will not make sharp distinctions between inflation targeting
and price-level targeting, unless necessary.
3.1. Inflation Targeting Proposals from Academics
Inflation targeting was proposed in Japan in the context of fighting deflation
and the (near-) zero interest rate. One of the problems associated with the (near-) zero
interest rate bound is that as deflationary expectations deepen, the real interest rate
increases. The higher real interest rate discourages investment and consumption and
exacerbates the deflation problem. Therefore, in order to break the deflationary cycle,
many economists thought that managing expectations was very important.
Krugman (1998) was probably the first to suggest some sort of inflation
targeting. The essence of his argument was that the Bank of Japan had to promise a
high inflation rate later to influence inflation expectations. Raising expectations
regarding inflation helps to stimulate current economic activity by reducing the real
interest rate, As the commitment device, he proposed an inflation target. After some
calibration, he called for 4 per cent inflation for 15 years.
Ito (1999, 2001) proposed that the Bank of Japan adopt inflation targeting. As
an independent central bank, accountability is needed, and inflation targeting is
beneficial in that regard. It would also enhance instrument independence. Moreover,
inflation targeting is an effective way to influence inflation expectations. With a zero
interest rate, changing inflation expectations is the most effective way to avoid high
real interest rates.27
Svensson (2001) presented his foolproof way of escaping the liquidity trap at
the Bank of Japan conference in July 2000. The paper recommended fixing the
exchange rate at the depreciated yen/dollar rate until the price level catches up with
the target, and then allowing the yen to float again. The kick start for inflation comes
from depreciation of the yen, and price-level targeting spells out the exit condition.
Bernanke (2003), McCallum (2000, 2003), Eggertsson and Woodford (2003),
and Meltzer (2001) also offer advices to the Bank of Japan in line with monetary base
expansion with resulting depreciation of the yen, and/or some form of inflation
targeting or price-level targeting. See Svensson (2003) and Ito and Mishkin (2004)
for the literature survey.
Ito and Hayashi (2004) argued for the desirability of adopting inflation
targeting. Ito and Mishkin (2004), among other things, advocated a particular type of
inflation target, namely the price level target in order to make monetary policy more
history-dependent.
Many economists recommended that the Bank of Japan announce a low but
positive target range, such as a 1 to 3 per cent CPI inflation rate, and the Bank also
announce its willingness to adopt policy to achieve the target in the medium run, say
in two years. The positive inflation target is consistent with the legal mandate of price
stability, because: (1) the price index has an upward bias; (2) having a buffer to zero
is important given a combination of deflation and zero bound interest rate is a serious
27 The Op-ed piece by Ito (1999) was answered by the Bank economist, Okina (1999) in the same
space. The Board member, Ueda (2000), supported the Okina’s view several months later in
another Op-ed piece.
18

problem; and (3) a positive inflation rate makes it easier to realize necessary relative
price and relative wage adjustments (recall the Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry argument).
3.2. Why the Bank of Japan Should Have Adopted Inflation Targeting
The arguments of inflation targeting advocates in Japan can be summarized as
follows.
(1) Accountability and Transparency. Since the Bank of Japan became legally
independent in April 1998, it has needed to be accountable for its actions. The
mandate was clearly price stability, as mentioned in Article 2. But without a concrete
definition of price stability, it is hard to assess whether the Bank has acted
appropriately. A numerical target – either a point with tolerance band around it like
the United Kingdom or a range like New Zealand – would help to clarify the meaning
of price stability. Once a target, either a point or a range, is clarified, policy actions
can be easily explained, in the context of trying to achieve the target in the medium
run. Actions become transparent, and communication with the market becomes easier.
(2) Instrument Independence. If and when the Bank of Japan commits to the specific
goal of an inflation target, how to achieve it should be completely left to the Bank.
This is called instrument independence. As the Bank will be accountable for the
consequences of its actions, the government would not need to pressure the Bank on
specific policy measures. The Bank would also not have to respond to criticism or
pressure and would not need to become so defensive about critics’ arguments on what
kind of policy actions should be taken. In other words, the situation like September
1999 would be avoided, or even if pressure comes, the Bank could divorce itself from
the controversy.
(3) Impacts on Inflation Expectation. The fundamental problem faced by the
Japanese economy since mid-1990s (recall section 1) has been a cyclical problem of
deflation, combined with the interaction between deflationary expectations and the
zero interest rate bound. The more pessimistic outlook on deflation meant higher real
interest rates and depressed economic activity. Available policy tools, monetary and
fiscal, are limited, and the best bet for breaking deflationary expectations is to adopt
and commit to a positive rate of inflation target. Combined with adopting
unconventional monetary policy, an inflation target will also help influence the
public’s expectations. It may not have an immediate, tangible impact on inflation
expectations, but with continued reference to it and policy measures implemented to
achieve it, the impact would become stronger. The UK experience shows that the
combination of independence and an inflation target would be a powerful weapon to
stabilise inflation expectations at around the target inflation rate.28
3.3. Political Economy of Why the Bank of Japan Did Not Adopt Inflation Targeting
According to the minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) discussions
(disclosed about one month after the meeting), inflation targeting was sometimes
discussed quite intensively, but, in general, there was an intermittent level of interest.
In order to quantify the interest of the Board in inflation targeting, I have counted the
number of times “inflation target[ing]” or “target of inflation rate” was mentioned in
the recorded minutes for the period of 26 March 1998 to June 2004. Figure 5 shows
28 See HM Treasury (1999, p.29).
19

the number for each MPM discussion. The minutes from March 1998 highlight the
waves of interest in inflation targeting. A detailed examination of each MPM meeting
when inflation targeting was significantly discussed and my comments on the
discussion are in the Appendix.
The first wave was from the mid-1999 to the spring of 2000. At this stage, Mr.
Nobuyuki Nakahara, a Board member, consistently proposed adopting inflation
targeting, but was always voted down by 1 to 8 votes. According to discussions at the
Monetary Policy Meetings and speeches of Board members, the majority of the Board
held the following view. Deflation was not that undesirable as long as reflected
technological innovation and cheap imports. Moreover, when technological
innovation puts downward pressure on prices, it is difficult to select an appropriate
price index and to define price stability, let alone the numerical target of inflation.
However, there was growing pressure from the academic community for the Bank to
adopt inflation targeting. According to the minutes of various meetings, the majority
of Board members remained sceptical about the merits of adopting inflation targeting.
But the increasing interest in inflation targeting inside and outside the Bank led to the
decision, on 9 March 2000, to conduct a comprehensive study on price stability. Until
the study was done, discussions on inflation targeting were shelved.
The study, “On Price Stability”, was discussed on 11 October 2000. The study
was not conclusive on any of the issues debated earlier. The report described price
stability “as a situation which is neither inflationary nor deflationary”. Defining price
stability as a state that is neither inflation nor deflation is not a definition, but a
tautology. The report acknowledged that a price index had biases, but concluded that
it is not easy to obtain a reliable estimate of the magnitude of bias, and that the
magnitude can vary. With regard to the question of whether a quantitative definition
of price stability was possible, the overall conclusion was negative. The Report was as
follows:
(1) In view of the current movement of prices in Japan, an inflation rate which
is consistent with the sound development of the economy is likely to be lower
in the short term than in the long term.
(2) If some numerical values are adopted as the definition of price stability,
they are expected to be valid for a very long period of time. In view of the
current development of prices in Japan, it is difficult to set specific numerical
values to the definition of price stability that are consistent with the sound
development of the economy. Furthermore, even if some numerical values
were announced, they would not serve as a reliable guidepost in the conduct of
monetary policy, and the exercise would not likely contribute to enhancing
transparency of the conduct of monetary policy. Therefore, it is not deemed
appropriate to define price stability by numerical values.
(3) While paying due attention to changes in the economy, the Bank of Japan
will nevertheless continue to explore whether price stability can be expressed
by some numerical values.
After a six-month study, the report basically rejected inflation targeting. It is also
notable that in the same MPM meeting, the Outlook with Board members’ forecasts
of prices and the GDP growth rates in the future was approved. This was intended to
enhance transparency.

20

The second wave of interest in inflation targeting, between March 2001 and
the early 2002, was somewhat intermittent. In March 2001, the Bank re-adopted the
ZIRP with quantitative easing. The policy switch was also accompanied by a new
commitment strategy that the ZIRP and quantitative easing would continue until the
CPI (excluding fresh food) inflation rate stabilized above zero. A comprehensive
study reported just six months earlier did not name the CPI excluding fresh food as an
appropriate index, but it became the price index to watch after this meeting. The
number zero was considered to be inappropriate due to the bias in the price index and
the zero nominal bound. Still, the zero became a part of the commitment strategy.
There seems to be a distinct change, although in the right direction, from the Report
of October 2000 to the commitment strategy of March 2001. Although the March 9,
2001 minutes clearly stated that the commitment strategy was not inflation targeting,
mentioning the numerical value prompted a further discussion on inflation targeting in
the following months. However, no concrete progress was made, and discussion died
out in the early 2002.
The third wave of interest in inflation targeting occurred between October
2002 and January 2003, probably in response to an increasing call for inflation
targeting outside the Bank, in anticipation of the expiration of the term of the
Governor and two Deputy Governors in March 2003.29 There were substantial
discussions on inflation targeting on October 10, 2002 and January 21, 2003. A
number of reasons against adopting inflation targeting were mentioned. These
included: (1) no inflation targeting countrieshad not adopted inflation targeting to
increase the inflation rate (January 21, 2003); and, (2), the main benefit of inflation
targeting would be to increase inflationary expectations, but since there are no
credible policy tools to achieve this, setting a target would impair public confidence in
economic policy as a whole. One extreme opinion was recorded as follows: “negative
effects on the economy and the financial system, such as damage to the credibility of
economic policy and to financial markets, would exceed the positive effects” (MPM
10 October 2002). The Bank of Japan successfully lobbied politicians sympathetic to
the Bank’s view to have the previous Deputy Governor, Mr. Fukui, who was in the
private sector and not voicing any opinions on monetary policy at the time, as the new
Governor.30
One possibility is that the Bank of Japan, using the term of Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito (2000), fell into an “independence trap”. According to these
authors, the Bank of Japan was afraid to take bold actions after it had just gained
independence. Theoretically, flexible adjustments and bold actions were supposed to
have become possible under independence, since actions were at the sole discretion of
the Bank Board. On the contrary, the Bank became much more conservative and rigid
in taking actions, especially unprecedented ones. They feared that action might be
judged a failure later and damage credibility. If this is the case, the Bank of Japan was
29 Some politicians and government officials recommended candidates for Governor who were in
favor of inflation targeting to the Prime Ministers’ Office. In Governor Hayami’s press conference
on January 24, 2003, a reporter asked the Governor for his view on inflation targeting, from the
background of the political movement that the support for inflation targeting should be a
prerequisite for the next Governor. In his reply, Governor Hayami branded inflation targeting as a
“reckless bet”, which “might make the economy extremely unstable and have side effects and
risk”. He emphasized that the Bank had expanded the monetary base and taken other actions, and
was confident that the economy would recover from deflation without such a bet (press conference,
only in Japanese, http://www.boj.or.jp/press/04/press_f.htm).
30 See Fujii (2004; p.283) for an account of the lobbying.
21

given independence precisely at the wrong moment because the economy called for
unprecedented monetary policy actions.
3.4. The Economics of the Pros and Cons of Inflation Targeting
As documented above, and in more detail in the Appendix, most Board
members, including Governor Hayami and Deputy Governor Yamaguchi, as well as
staff economists at the Bank of Japan, opposed inflation targeting. The arguments
against inflation targeting, mostly presented during the Hayami period, will be
presented and discussed here. The specific arguments have shifted over time
somewhat, but the following seems to be a complete list. Rebuttals from advocates of
inflation targeting are also considered.31
(1) Reflation Policy is bad, and the inflation rate cannot be controlled.
In the early stage of arguments for inflation targeting, the Bank of Japan
contended that inflation was not a solution to Japan’s economic problems, and
policies to raise the inflation rate may end up achieving a very high inflation rate,
even if the aim is a moderate inflation rate. The reasons why moderate inflation was
regarded as impossible seem to be two-fold: (1) it was technically impossible; and (2)
it was politically irresistible.
One of the early criticisms of inflation targeting was a reaction to the proposal
from Krugman (1998) of 4 per cent inflation for 15 years. Inflation targeting was
characterized as a simple-minded reflation policy and thus rejected. As it came to be
understood that inflation targeting is a flexible framework for monetary policy and
that the most likely target range would be somewhere between 1 and 3 per cent, this
particular criticism disappeared.
Governor Hayami (2000) categorized inflation targeting proposals in two
ways: an inflation policy, as advocated by Krugman, of aiming at 4 to 5 percent; and,
a variation of inflation policy, tolerating “a moderate inflation rate of 2 to 3 per cent”.
He assessed the latter policy as follows:
“it may vitalize economic activity. However, given the current situation in
Japan where prices are almost level, such a proposal is tantamount to
artificially creating inflation. Furthermore, to implement such a proposal,
many have suggested that the Bank of Japan should increase its outright
purchase of government bonds or underwrite them. Some even advocate that
the Bank of Japan should purchase stocks or real estate. Thus, what started as
a proposal aiming at a moderate inflation rate of 2 to 3 per cent under the
disguise of inflation targeting for price stability has ended up being the same
as inflation policy in that inflation should be artificially created at any cost”
(emphasis added by the author).(Section 2)
It is not clear from Hayami’s speech what prevents the Bank of Japan from stopping
inflation at around 2 to 3 per cent, and why it is technically impossible or politically
impossible.
Hayami (2000) argued that “inflation is most likely uncontrollable once
triggered”. Many argued at that time that it would be possible to pursue a policy
aiming at a moderate inflation rate of 1 to 3 per cent. However, in response, Hayami
31 The list is compiled predominantly from MPM Board discussions, summarized in the
Appendix, but also press interviews, speeches and articles of the Governor, Deputy Governors,
Board members, and staff economists. For the Bank economists’ views on related issues see, for
example, Okina (1999a, b) Fujiki, Okina and Shiratsuka (2001), Okina and Shiratsuka (2002,
2004), and Okina, Shirakawa, and Shiratsuka (2001).
22

commented: “if we tried to contain inflation after it had gained momentum, we would
need very strong monetary tightening, which might result in a substantial deterioration
of economic activity and a steep climb in unemployment”. He seems to be arguing
that the optimal and stable inflation rate is zero, and any deviation from it, even a
modest amount, would end up in an inflationary spiral that would need strong restraint
to end. This might be a reflection of the literature of the early1980s. Indeed, Hayami
cited the experiences of the 1970s, where tolerating a small inflation rate triggered a
further round of wage and price increases, which spiralled into a higher inflation rate.
It was unfortunate that, in the early stage of deflation in Japan, the argument for
moderate inflation targeting was dismissed on the ground of a quite dated argument.
The experience in the 1990s proved that inflation targeting could anchor expectations,
so that it is possible to avoid the wage-price spiral.
(2) No good price indicator.
Inflation targeting is not possible if there is no agreement on which price index
should be used and what numbers should be looked at in defining deflation. Some
form of the CPI is commonly used by inflation targeters. The menu of choices
includes the headline CPI, core CPI excluding fresh food and energy prices, CPI
excluding fresh food, or CPI excluding fresh food and rents. In most cases, the
difference between the choices is not great, and a reasonably wide band would make
the differences among these indices a secondary issue. A possible alternative for a
price indicator is the GDP deflator. But it suffers from delayed and infrequent
reporting (quarterly instead of monthly), and constant revisions. No inflation targeter
has used the GDP deflator. Some form of the CPI would be an appropriate price
indicator. However, it took until March 2001 for the Bank of Japan to recognize that
point.
The Bank of Japan was hesitant to name a price indicator for judging
deflation/inflation. Okina (1999b, p 164) argued that “[p]rice indicators such as the
GDP deflator, CPI, and Wholesale Price Index (WPI) often move differently. Even
when these indicators exhibit the same movement, the extent to which the sound
development of the national economy will be achieved may depend on such factors as
whether property prices are stable or rising sharply”. Similarly, the “On Price
Stability” document, issued in October 2000, did not identify any price indicator as a
possible price index. However, the debate was over on 19 March, 2001, when the
Bank of Japan decided to use the CPI excluding fresh food as an indicator for a
necessary condition to terminate the zero interest rate policy.
(3) No optimal inflation rate can be identified.
When deflation is caused by supply side factors, such as technological
innovation and cheap imports, then deflation may be desirable and can be tolerated.
This argument was commonplace in 1999 and 2000 (recall earlier discussions in
section 2.1).
Advocates of inflation targeting have pointed out that this argument confuses
the relative price phenomenon – prices of goods subject to technological innovation
would fall relative to other goods and services, but the average price level would
remain predominantly a monetary phenomenon. In addition, a combination of low
growth with declining prices is better explained by demand factors than supply
factors.
Advocates of inflation targeting insist that price stability can be defined as a
reasonable range, such as a medium-term range of 1 to 3 per cent, which allows for

23

sufficient flexibility if prices are influenced by supply side factors and temporal
shocks. The 1 to 3 per cent target has been popular among inflation targeters, such as
Canada and Sweden. The United Kingdom now has a target of 2 per cent in CPI with
a tolerance range of plus/minus 1 per cent.32 The floor of the target, 1 percent, is
designed to allow for the upward bias of the price index and to provide a buffer
against deflation. The buffer also helps to ensure that the economy would not instantly
fall into deflation if it was hit by negative demand shocks, and thereby exhaust the
conventional instrument (the interest rate) too quickly.
Economists at the Bank of Japan for a long time have argued that it is difficult
to identify a specific number as a target inflation rate (or range). In short, they argue
that the optimal inflation rate would vary depending on the type of shocks to the
economy. Hayami (2000) basically argued that a desirable inflation rate varies from
country to country, and it was probably lower in Japan than other countries. He
provided two reasons for this. First, deflation in Japan reflected supply side shocks,
and when such shocks lead to lower prices, deflation may be desirable. Second, since
wages are flexible in Japan, output losses a la Akerlof, Dicken and Perry (1996)
would be small. Moreover, in terms of the lower end of the range as a buffer against
deflation, Hayami (2000) stated that “[t]he idea of tolerating a certain positive rate of
inflation to ensure a cushion for monetary policy seems to be something like putting
the cart before the horse”.
On October 13, 2000, two months after raising interest rates, the Policy Board
issued a report called “On Price Stability”. In the document, price stability was
defined as a state that is neither deflation nor inflation. The document did not mention
any numerical number that would define deflation or inflation, and as a consequence,
price stability.
The debate moved to a new phase on March 19, 2000, since a zero per cent
inflation rate was mentioned as a necessary condition to terminate ZIRP. It seems that
the Bank of Japan still regards a zero per cent inflation rate as price stability, but
mentioning a particular number was still a sign of some progress. However, while the
Bank of Japan still prefers zero per cent as a magic number, other central banks are
moving away from zero per cent, precisely due to the buffer argument. New Zealand
revised its target range from 0 to 3 per cent to 1 to 3 per cent in September 2002.
(4) Inflation targeting in deflation is unprecedented.
Another popular argument against inflation targeting was that no country had
adopted inflation targeting to return to inflation from a state of deflation.33 However,
no other major country has faced sustained deflation in the post-war period. As such,
the fact that “no country has done it” is not a valid argument against the proposal.
During the Depression of the 1930s, many countries suffered from deflation.
Sweden adopted a kind of inflation targeting (to be precise, the price level targeting),
when it departed from the Gold Standard. It was an attempt to seek a nominal anchor
to avoid deflation (see Berg and Jonung 1999).
(5) Announcement alone will not be credible.
It is often argued that the mere announcement of an inflation target would not
change expectations. 34 In response, advocates of inflation targeting would contend
32 Until December 2003, the target rate was 2.5%, measured in RPIX index, that is constructed
differently and includes costs of owner-occupied housing.

33 The view was expressed in the MPM on January 21, 2003, see the Appendix.
34 The view was expressed in the MPM on January 12, 2001, see the Appendix.
24

that, although expectations are the most important and unique channel of inflation
targeting, the effects may not be immediate. Having a target, in combination with the
use of other measures, such as some degree of unconventional monetary policy,
would certainly raise the probability of anchoring expectation faster than otherwise.
The loss of credibility, if the inflation target was not achieved – often insisted on by
the Bank economists and Board members – has to be balanced against the loss of
credibility by not forcibly acting on the deflation problem.
It is certainly true that a mere announcement would not significantly change
the public’s inflation expectations. The introduction of inflation targets among
advanced countries tends to be accompanied by an institutional framework that makes
inflation targeting credible and accountable. In several countries, including New
Zealand and Australia, inflation targeting is an agreement between the government
(typically the Ministry of Finance or Treasury) and the central bank, and both are
committed to policy that is consistent with the inflation target. In several countries,
including New Zealand and UK, when inflation exceeds the target by a wide margin,
the Governor is required to provide an explanation to the parliament. With
accountability and commitment, inflation targeting does become credible.
(6) The long-term interest rate will go up.
Another argument against inflation targeting is based on the possibility that
inflation targeting could be instantly believed – the opposite scenario to the preceding
point. If the public believes in the inflation target of, say, 2 per cent, then the longterm interest rate would increase by 2 per cent, before the economy recovers, which
would damage the economy.35
Since the long-term interest rate is a compound of future (expected) short-term
rates, a belief that inflation targeting would lead to an average 2 per cent inflation rate
would raise the long-term interest rate. However, if the amount of a rise in the
nominal interest rate is less than the amount of a rise in inflation expectations, then
the real long-term rate will fall. Therefore, the nominal interest rate hike per se is not
damaging, but the real interest rate hike is. When the economy is in a depressed state,
it is more likely that the increase in inflation expectations at the long end of the yield
curve would result in a reduction, not an increase, in the real interest rate.
(7) No additional instruments at the zero interest rate.
The opposition to inflation targeting in Japan boils down to the feasibility of
adopting available instruments. Those who oppose inflation targeting always raise the
issue of no tools being available at the zero interest rate.36 Given that the interest rate
is zero, no policy measures are available to lift the inflation rate to positive territory,
so that the announcement of inflation targeting, without tools to achieve the target,
would damage the credibility of the Bank. Therefore, committing to a target when the
Bank did not have the tools to achieve it would cause the Bank to lose credibility.37
35 This view was frequently mentioned in MPMs and also in speeches. For example, see the
MPMs on June 28, 1999 and October 10, 2002. The view was also expressed by Hayami (2000).
36 This view was expressed throughout the period of the Hayami regime by Board members and
Bank economists. Early citations include the MPMs on October 13, 2000, and July 12, 2001. See
also Oda and Okina (2001: pp. 352-356).
37 “[T]he BOJ argues, as is recorded in the minutes of Monetary Policy Meetings, that ‘since we
cannot explicitly show the way to achieve the desired inflation rate, such action would most likely
result in the BOJ losing credibility’” (Okina, 1999, p.165). In response, critics argued that as nonconventional monetary policy measures exist that could achieve a positive rate of inflation, the
credibility argument is based on incorrect assumptions.
25

Advocates have argued that several unconventional instruments, including
quantitative easing and aggressive purchases of riskier assets, are available, even at
the zero interest rate. Under the guise of quantitative easing, long-bond purchases and
increasing the monetary base have been implemented since March 2001. Prior to this,
Board members were sceptical about the effectiveness of quantitative easing. In
addition, buying foreign bonds, market-based stock index funds, and listed real-estate
trust funds, are frequently mentioned as potential measures. The debate would then
shift to the appropriateness of unconventional measures. This debate is not covered
here, but Ito and Mishkin (2004) provide a survey of the literature, and Ahearne et al
(2002) and Bernanke (2002) discuss unconventional instruments in the context of the
Federal Reserve Board.38
One of the concerns with unconventional policy – purchasing stocks, foreign
bonds and real estates – was the possible damage to the Bank of Japan’s balance
sheet. Prices of risky assets may go down, and the Bank’s capital may be depleted and
credibility would be lost. Advocates of unconventional policies argued that the Bank
balance sheet was not a concern; if the Bank is regarded as a part of the public sector,
the consolidated balance sheet with the government would not show a problem. In the
extreme case, a capital injection from the government is possible. If inflation targeting
had been adopted, it would also be easier to justify the Bank’s action of purchasing
risky assets. The government would inject capital, as long as the inflation target is
met, without asking questions. Thus an additional benefit of inflation targeting, from
the accountability viewpoint, is that it would enable the Bank to take bold actions.39
Some of these instruments, as they are in the realm of fiscal policy, need the
cooperation of the Ministry of Finance.40 Foreign exchange intervention is decided
and conducted by the Ministry of Finance in Japan.41 Most of the foreign reserves in
Japan are held in the special account of the government. So, the central bank purchase
of foreign bonds can only be achieved by intervention by the Ministry of Finance with
an equivalent increase in monetary base. Any short-term government bonds are
essentially absorbed by the Bank of Japan, so long as the zero interest rate policy is
maintained. As such, so-called “helicopter money” can be dropped into the economy
by way of a tax cut financed by the government issuing short-term government bonds.
So, at the zero interest rate, the line between monetary policy and fiscal policy is
blurred. It is thus essential that the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance
cooperate in achieving a common goal, namely getting out of deflation.
4. Concluding Remarks
Advocates of inflation targeting have put forward basically three reasons why
inflation targeting was a good idea: accountability and transparency; instrument
independence; and, effects on inflation expectations. For the third reason, it is
particularly desirable for the Bank of Japan to adopt inflation targeting in a
38 See Fujiki, Okina, and Shiratsuka (2001) for the Bank of Japan’s view. Views from the US on
the Japanese experience are available in Aherne et al (2002) and Clouse (2000).
39 Currently, most of the risk in the Bank’s balance sheet arises from the long-term government
bonds it holds. An increase in the long-term interest rate would cause unrealized capital losses in
these long bonds. Bernanke (2003) proposed that the government substitute the straight bonds that
the Bank of Japan holds with floating rate government bonds, in order to protect the Bank’s
balance sheet from the interest rate risk.
40 This point was made by Robert McCauley during the conference.
41 See Ito (2003) for the institutions of foreign exchange intervention in Japan, and Ito (2004) for
intervention records in 2003-2004.
26

deflationary environment, as advocates have argued. However, inflation targeting has
not been adopted, although some quantitative easing measures that were resisted in
early years have been. In examining the reasons put forward by opponents of inflation
targeting, it has been shown that, for each item of opposition, there are good rebuttals.
Opponents of inflation targeting seem to have prevailed for political economy reasons.
Inflation targeting was not adopted in Japan in the early years (the first wave,
1999-2000) because the Board members were not sure which price index would be
best, and whether a specific number for an appropriate inflation rate could be
determined. A study, commissioned in March 2000, and completed in October 2000,
did not give any clear answers to this, and the Bank missed the opportunity. Inflation
targeting was not adopted in later years (2001-2003), despite the inflation-targetinglike commitment strategy adopted in March 2001, because the Board members
thought that conventional tools to increase the inflation rate were not available. As
such, announcing a target with a positive inflation rate would damage confidence –
just announcing inflation targeting would not increase the inflation rate. In terms of
introducing unconventional measures, the Bank of Japan worried about the
transmission channels and the damage to its balance sheet. Towards the end of
Governor Hayami’s term, the views against inflation targeting turned sharply negative,
as news reports suggested that it may be linked to the new Governor’s appointment.
Therefore, , why inflation targeting was not adopted, can be explained and understood
from a political economy perspective.
This paper explained why the Bank of Japan hesitated to adopt inflation
targeting. In other countries, the adoption of inflation targeting and the setting of a
specific numerical target is often done by the Treasury (Ministry of Finance) or by
consultation between the Treasury and the central bank. Another question is why the
Ministry of Finance did not formally propose the adoption of inflation targeting to the
Bank of Japan. One possible explanation is that officials at the Ministry of Finance
thought that if the government set the goal that would be viewed as a violation of
central bank independence. However, the literature and practice in other countries,
such as the United Kingdom, New Zealand, and Australia, shows that goal
independence is not an essential part of central bank independence. On the contrary,
government involvement in setting the target is considered to be a good way of
achieving coordination between fiscal and monetary policy. Another possible
explanation why the Ministry of Finance was not pushing the Bank of Japan to
introduce inflation targeting was that the Ministry feared that the long-term interest
rate would go up sharply by adopting inflation targeting (see Section 3.4.(6)).
As of writing this paper, the Japanese economy seems finally to be getting out
of its long stagnation. If the current strength in the economy continues, there is a
chance that deflation could be overcome in coming months, rather than years. The
necessary conditions to exit from ZIRP – that is, positive inflation rates backward and
forward – have been clearly stated since October 2003. When the exit from deflation
and ZIRP is achieved, that will be the beginning of a new regime for the Bank of
Japan. One of the obstacles to adopting inflation targeting – that is, there are no
instruments to achieve positive inflation rates at the zero interest rate policy – will be
gone. In order to facilitate accountability in the post-ZIRP area, inflation targeting
should be given serious thought. Preparation should be started sooner rather than later.

27

References
Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, Steve Kamin, and others, "Preventing
Deflation: Lessons from Japan'
s Experiences in the 1990s," Board of Governors,
International Finance Discussion Paper No. 729, June 2002.
Akerlof, George, Dickens, William, and George Perry, 1996. "The Macroeconomics
of Low Inflation," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 1-59.
Berg, Claes and Lars Jonung (1999). “Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The
Swedish Experience 1931-1937,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 43: 525-551.
Bernanke, Ben.S. (1983). "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review 73: 257-76.
Bernanke, Ben.S. (1983). "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review 73: 257-76.
Bernanke, Ben. S. (2002). “Deflation: Making Sure “It” Doesn’t Happen Here,”
Before the National Economists Club, Washington, D.C. November 21, 2002
Bernanke, Ben S. (2003). “Some Thoughts on Monetary Policy in Japan,” Speech
before the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Tokyo, Japan, May 31.
Card, D. and D. Hyslop (1997) “Does Inflation ‘Grease the Wheels of the Labor
Market’?” in Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, edited by C.D. Romer and
H.D. Romer pp. 71-114, Chicago: University of Chicago Press
Cargill, Thomas; Michael Hutchison; and Takatoshi Ito, (1997). The Political
Economy of Japanese Monetary Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cargill, Thomas; Michael Hutchison; and Takatoshi Ito, (2000). Financial Policy and
Central Banking in Japan, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clouse, James; Dale Henderson; Athanasios Orphanides; David Small; and Peter
Tinsley, (2000). “Monetary Policy When the Nominal Short-term Interest Rate is
Zero”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance
Discussion Papers, number 729.
Crawford A. and A. Harrison (2000) “Testing for Downward Rigidity in Nominal
Wage Rates,” in Price Stability, Inflation Targets and Monetary Policy pp. 179-218
Proceedings of a conference held by the Bank of Canada, May 1997 Ottawa: Bank of
Canada
Eggertsson, Gauti B. and Michael Woodford (2003), “Optimal Monetary Policy in a
Liquidity Trap,” NBER working paper, no. 9968.
Fares Jean and Thomas Lemieux (2000) “Downward Nominal-Wage Rigidity: A
critical Assessment and Some New Evidence from Canada,” in Price Stability and the

28

Long-Run Target for Monetary Policy proceedings of a seminar held by the Bank of
Canada, June 2000 Ottawa: Bank of Canada.
Fischer, Irving, (1933). "The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions",
Econometrica, Vol. 1: 337-57.
Fukui, Toshihiko, (2003). “Challenges for Monetary Policy in Japan,” Speech at the
Spring Meeting of the Japan Society of Monetary Economics, June 1.
Fujii, Yoshihiro (2004). Shibarareta Kin-yu Seisaku, (in Japanese, trans. Bounded
Monetary Policy), Tokyo; Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha.
Fujiki, Hiroshi; Kunio Okina; and Shigenori Shiratsuka, (2001). “Monetary Policy
under Zero Interest Rate: Viewpoints of Central Bank Economists,” Bank of Japan,
Monetary and Economic Studies, February: 89-130.
Groshen, Erica L. and Schweitzer, Mark E. 1996. "The Effects of Inflation on Wage
Adjustments in Firm-Level Data: Grease or Sand?" Federal Reserve Bank of New
York Staff Reports, No. 9.
Groshen, Erica L. and Schweitzer, Mark E. 1999. "Identifying Inflation'
s Grease and
Sand Effects in the Labor Market," in Martin Feldstein, ed., The Costs and Benefits of
Price Stability University of Chicago Press, Chicago: 273-308
Hayami, Masaru, (2000). “Price Stability and Monetary Policy,” Speech to the
Research Institute of Japan in Tokyo, March 21.
(http://www.boj.or.jp/en/press/00/ko0003b.htm)
Hayashi, Fumio and Edward C. Prescott (2001). “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost
Decade” Review of Economic Dynamics, vol. 5: 206-235.
Hoshi, Takeo, and Anil K. Kashyap, (2001). Corporate Financing and Governance in
Japan: The Road to the Future. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Ito, Takatoshi (1992). The Japanese Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ito, Takatoshi (1999). “A Target for the Bank of Japan,” Financial Times, October 19.
Ito, Takatoshi (2001). Inflation Targeting (in Japanese) Tokyo: Nihon Keizai
Shinbunsha.
Ito, Takatoshi (2003). “Is Foreign Exchange Intervention Effective? The Japanese
Experiences in the 1990s” in Paul Mizen (ed.) Monetary History, Exchange Rates,
and Financial Markets, Essays in Honour of Charles Goodhart, vol. 2, Cheltenham,
U.K.: Edward Elgar: 126-153.
Ito, Takatoshi (2004). “The Yen and the Japanese Economy, 2004,” in a conference
volume edited by John Williamson, Washington D.C.: Institute for International
Economics.

29

Ito, Takatoshi and Kimie Harada, (2000) “Japan Premium and Stock Prices: Two
Mirrors of Japanese Banking Crises” NBER working paper no 7997, November.
Ito, Takatoshi and Frederic Mishkin (2004). “Two Decades of Japanese Monetary
Policy and the Deflation Problem,” presented at the NBER 15th East Asian Seminar
on Economics, Tokyo, June.
Kuroda, Sachiko and Isamu Yamamoto, (2003a). “Are Japanese Nominal Wages
Downwardly Rigid? (Part I): Examinations of Nominal Wage Change Distributions,”
Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic Studies, vol 21, no.2. August: 1-30.
Kuroda, Sachiko and Isamu Yamamoto, (2003b). “Are Japanese Nominal Wages
Downwardly Rigid? (Part II): Examinations Using a Friction Model,” Bank of Japan,
Monetary and Economic Studies, vol 21, no.2. August: 31-68.
Kuroda, Sachiko and Isamu Yamamoto, (2003c). “The Impact of Downward Nominal
Wage Rigidity on the Unemployment Rate: Quantitative Evidence from Japan,” Bank
of Japan, Monetary and Economic Studies, vol 21, no.4, December: 57-85.
Lebow, David E., Brian Saks, and Beth A. Wilson (1999), “Downward Nominal
Wage Rigidity: Evidence from the Employment Cost Index,” FEDS Working Paper
1999-31, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Lebow, David E., David J. Stockton and W. L. Wascher (1995) “Inflation, Nominal
Wage Rigidity and the Efficiency of the Labor Market,” Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve Working Paper 94-45, October 1995.
McCallum, Bennett T. (2000), “Alternative Monetary Policy Rules: A Comparison
with Historical Settings for the United States, the United Kingdom, and Japan,”
Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 86, no.1 Winter: 4979.
McCallum, Bennett T. (2003), “Japanese Monetary Policy, 1991-2001” Federal
Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol. 89, no.1 Winter: 1-30.
McKibbin, Warwick J. (2001). “Macroeconomic Policy in Japan,” presented for the
Harvard University Asian Economic Panel Meeting, Korea, mimeo dated October 16.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1978. "The Household Balance-Sheet and the Great Depression,"
Journal of Economic History 38, December: 918-937.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1991. "Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: A
Historical Perspective," in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial
Crises, University of Chicago Press: Chicago: 69-108.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1996. "The Channels of Monetary Transmission: Lessons for
Monetary Policy," Banque De France Bulletin Digest No. 27: 33-44.

30

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1997. "The Causes and Propagation of Financial Instability:
Lessons for Policymakers," Maintaining Financial Stability in a Global Economy,
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, MO.: 55-96.
Mishkin, Frederic S., 1998. "Promoting Japanese Recovery," in Kenichi Ishigaki and
Hiroyuki Hino, eds., Towards the Restoration of Sound Banking Systems in Japan -the Global Implications (Kobe University Press and International Monetary Fund:
Kobe 1998). 130-161.
Oda, Nobuyuki and Kunio Okina (2001). “Further Monetary Easing Policies under
the Non-Negativity Constraints of Nominal Interest Rates: Summary of the
Discussion Based on Japan’s Experience,” Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic
Studies, Special Edition, February: 323-369.
Okina, Kunio, (1999a). “The Risks of Single-minded Targeting”, Financial Times,
November 10.
Okina, Kunio (1999b). “Monetary Policy under Zero Inflation: A Response to
Criticisms and Questions Regarding Monetary Policy,” Bank of Japan, Monetary and
Economic Studies, December: 157-197.
Okina, Kunio and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2002). “Asset Price Bubbles, Price Stability,
and Monetary Policy: Japan’s experience,” Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic
Studies, October: 35-76.
Okina, Kunio and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2004). “Policy Commitment and Expectation
Formation: Japan’s Experience under Zero Interest Rates,” North American Journal of
Economics and Finance, vol. 15: 75-100.
Okina, Kunio; Masaaki Shirakawa, and Shigenori Shiratsuka (2001), “The Asset Price
Bubble and Monetary Policy: Japan’s Experience in the Late 1980s and the Lessons”
Background Paper for the conference: Monetary and Economic Studies (special
edition) February: 395-450.
Shiratsuka, Shigenori, 1999. “Measurement Errors and Quality-Adjustement
Methodology: Lessons from the Japanese CPI,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
Economic Perspectives, 2nd Quarter: 2-13.
Svensson, L.O. (2001), “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way of
Escaping from a Liquidity Trap,” Monetary and Economic Studies, vol. 19, no. S-1,
February: 277-312
Svensson, Lars E.O., 2003. “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The
Foolproof Way and Others,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 17, no.4, Fall:
145-166.
Treasury (United Kingdom), (1999). “The New Monetary Policy Framework,”
London, H.M. Treasury.

31

Ueda, Kazuo (1999). “Why the Bank of Japan Won’t Target Inflation”, Wall Street
Journal, March 6.
Vogel, Ezra F. (1979). Japan As No. 1: Lessons for America, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1979.

32

Appendix: Inflation Targeting as discussed in Monetary Policy Meetings (MPM),
A Chronological Review42
Inflation targeting was first discussed by the Board on 16 July 1998. One
member “remarked that inflation targeting was worth considering as it could work on
people’s expectation. … in an extremely severe economic situation in which an
optimal monetary policy was to realize negative real interest rates, targeting inflation
at a moderate rate, for example at 1.0-1.5 percent, would be worth considering as an
effective way of dispelling deflation”. The need for positive inflation expectations to
overcome the problem of the zero-bound of the nominal interest rate was correctly
recognized, and the Board member noted that inflation targeting was a means to
achieve positive inflation expectations.43 According to the minutes, no substantial
discussion followed.
The next discussion of inflation targeting did not occur for four months. The
minutes of 27 November 1998 recorded discussion of the pros and cons of
introducing inflation targeting and also some technical questions. According to the
minutes, one member proposed that “the Bank would encourage the uncollateralized
overnight call rate to move on average around 0.15 percent, aiming at raising the
annual average rate of increase in the consumer price index (all items) to zero in the
medium term”. Other members commented on this proposal. One member asked three
technical points: “(1) How could a situation that is neither inflationary nor
deflationary be described over price indicators, ‘rate of increase at zero’ or ‘an
increase by a small margin’? (2) What indicators should be used in measuring prices,
the consumer price index (all items) as suggested in the proposal or other alternative
price indicators? (3) How long the target period could be to achieve certain results”?
These are essential questions, and if they had been seriously discussed, the
introduction of inflation targeting might have been feasible as early as end-1998.
However, there seemed to be some objections and scepticism towards inflation
targeting in this meeting. One member doubted that announcing an inflation target
“could have effects on the activities of people expecting deflation”. Another member
questioned the need for an announcement altogether, since it was known that the Bank
was pursuing price stability.44
42 The minutes record a detailed summary of discussion of the MPM, and are made public after
they are approved in the MPM meeting of one to two months later. Names of discussants are not
disclosed, except for those who propose a motion for voting decision and voting records.
Transcripts with names will be disclosed in the distant future.
43 “Another member remarked that inflation targeting was worth considering as it could work on
people’s expectations, an opinion that the member had been expressing publicly. … The member
had advocated that in an extremely severe economic situation in which an optimal monetary
policy was to realize negative real interest rates, targeting inflation at a moderate rate, for example
at 1.0-1.5 percent, would be worth considering as an effective way of dispelling deflation
concerns” (Minutes of the Board on July 16, 1998).
44 “Some members questioned the consistency between setting a price target and reducing the
uncollateralized overnight call rate by 0.1 percent. In addition, one of the above members doubted
that announcing such a target could have effects on the activities of people expecting deflation.
(Para.) Another member expressed an opinion that the Bank did not need to indicate a specific
target figure because it had already been widely known that the Bank has responsibility for
stabilizing prices, that is to avoid inflation and deflation, as stipulated in Article 2 of the Bank of
Japan Law. (Para.) Another member expressed a view that, in implementing monetary policy, it
was natural that a central bank has a will to avoid genuine deflation. The member was, however,
of the opinion that it was not appropriate to declare such a will in the form of inflation targeting,
33

In 1999, inflation targeting was discussed fairly regularly. Inflation target(ing),
or the target (range) of inflation rate, was mentioned at least once from February 1999
to February 2000. In several of the meetings, a substantial discussion took place
(evidenced by comments of more than two persons, and more than five counts of
“inflation target” recorded in the minutes). In particular, discussion on 28 June 1999,
27 October 1999, and 20 February 2000 seems to have been very interesting.
At the 28 June 1999 meeting, “One of the members, who considered that
deflationary concern persisted, advocated further monetary easing through inflation
targeting and expansion of the monetary base”. He gave six reasons for this proposal,
including its effects on expected inflation. The rise in expected inflation greater than
the nominal long-term interest rate would lower the real long-term interest rate.
Several members commented on this assertion and proposal. Some were sceptical of
the “argument that a rise in nominal interest rates would be acceptable as long as real interest rates
declined, saying that economic activities were affected by both nominal and real interest rates. “The
criticism of inflation targeting based on a scare of rising long-term interest rate was
debated without a firm conclusion.
In the MPM of 27 October 1999, the minutes recorded a lengthy summary of
discussions. This was probably the first Board discussion that contained serious
debates between advocates and sceptics of inflation targeting.45 There were two or
more advocates of inflation targeting and others who were sceptical. Advocates
argued that “inflation targeting had the merit that it enabled the Bank to indicate a
medium- to long-term commitment”. Sceptics argued that “it was too simple to think
that setting a numerical target would increase the transparency of monetary policy,
and it was necessary to discuss the pros and cons as well as the feasibility of inflation
targeting giving due consideration to its basic nature”. One member compared “a
medium-term inflation target”, which allows short-term flexibility, and a rule-like
inflation targeting policy, “where every possible measure was employed to create a
certain level of inflation”, and preferred the former, “although it involved technical
difficulties”. These comments suggest a deeper understanding of the different types of
inflation targeting, the reasons why such a policy was advocated, and the cautions
involved in setting a target.
The MPM of 10 February 2000 provided another instance of detailed
discussion on inflation targeting. The following was recorded as the “consensus” of
the Board on inflation targeting: “First, they were against inflation targeting that
aimed at creating a certain level of inflation – a reflation policy – and had no intention
of adopting such a policy. And second, inflation targeting that aimed at making
monetary policy more transparent and expressing a strong commitment to price
stability was worth considering, although it had some technical difficulties”. Many
members “shared the opinion that, in deliberating inflation targeting in the latter
sense, it was necessary to go over in further depth the various points of consideration
that had been revealed at previous MPMs. Also, it was important to examine not only
the pros and cons of inflation targeting but also various issues related to enhancing the
transparency of monetary policy – for example, what was meant by price stability and
whether to disclose the Bank’s forecasts of prices and the economy”.
and in addition, it was difficult to include the declaration of the will in the directive on money
market operations, and the will should rather be expressed in some other forms and styles”
(Minutes of the Board, November 27, 1998).
45 Coincidentally, this was the first MPM after Ito’s (1999) Financial Times article.
34

This almost sounds as if the Board would examine technical issues in
preparation for the introduction of inflation targeting to enhance transparency and
commitment. However, there was a cautious remark by one member: “First, it could
pave the way for a policy that aimed at creating a certain level of inflation as hopes
were strong that inflation would lighten the burden of debts. And second, the degree
of the upward bias of price indexes changed as structural reform progressed. The
member continued that it was preferable to enhance transparency by disclosing
economic forecasts and thereby realize constructive dialogue with financial markets”.
What happened in the subsequent months was that this cautious person’s view carried
the meeting. From the spring to the summer of 2000, many members of the Board
were busy debating whether and when the ZIRP policy would be ended, and no
discussion on inflation targeting took place. The Board also carried out, or asked the
staff to prepare, a study “on price stability”, which would be made public in October
2000. At this time, individual Board members would also issue personal forecasts for
prices and economic activity. So it seems that a series of debates from mid-1999 to
February 2000 resulted in more basic study, which would take more than six months,
and alternative ways of achieving “transparency”. Effectively, the Board rejected the
adoption of inflation targeting in 1999 and early 2000.
On 9 March 2000, the Board decided to conduct a comprehensive review of
the price stability. The Chairman (Governor) proposed that the staff conduct the study
on price stability as follows:
(1) The Bank’s staff would study the following issues taking account of the
points discussed at MPMs: (a) the Bank'
s basic thinking regarding price
stability; (b) issues regarding price indices; (c) the evaluation of recent price
developments in Japan; and (d) issues related to the numerical quantification
of price stability (including setting a target and projecting the movement of a
specific numerical indicator).
(2) The Board would discuss price stability on the basis of the staff’s report,
and issue a comprehensive report on its thinking on price stability.
(3) During this process, the Bank could release information compiled by the
staff that was appropriate for disclosure.
(4) The Bank would issue a report by around the end of summer 2000.
It was advantageous that a comprehensive study would be conducted, but in retrospect,
this action put off, or at least put aside, any further discussions of inflation targeting,
until the study’s completion. In the meantime, in the meeting of 11 August 2000, the
ZIRP was ended on the majority’s judgement that deflationary concern was dispelled.
In fact, at that point, “deflation” was not defined by the Board, since it was under
study. Although it was planned to be released by “the end of summer 2000”, the study
was not issued until October 2000.
On 13 October 2000, the long-awaited document “On Price Stability” was
released, along with the “Release of Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy
and Prices”. Both documents were discussed by the Board. The discussion reveals the
thinking of Board members at the time quite well. Below are excerpts from the
minutes and my comments on them.

35

[D]iscussions centered on the issue of expressing price stability by a numerical
value. A few members expressed the view that the optimal rate of increase in
price indexes over the medium and long term was small but positive
considering issues such as the upward bias of price indexes and the zero
constraint on nominal interest rates.
This view on “optimal rate of increase in price indexes” expressed by “the few
members” seems quite appropriate and completely non-controversial from the view of
mainstream monetary economics. What is surprising is the discussion that follows.
However, many members including those above agreed with the conclusion of
the report that it was not appropriate to define price stability by numerical
values at this point for the following reasons. First, supply-side factors such as
technological innovation were exerting downward pressure on prices at
present. And second, the available orthodox monetary policy measures were
limited. At the same time, these members shared the view that the Bank
should continue to explore whether price stability could be expressed by
numerical values, taking account of actual changes in the market and the
economy.
This paragraph summarizes why the Bank of Japan did not adopt inflation targeting in
2000. First, it was thought that if supply-side factors were affecting price levels,
inflation targeting was inappropriate. However, as was discussed earlier in this paper,
demand, not supply, factors were dominant, since output was sluggish in Japan, but
not in the United States. Also, supply side factors mostly affect relative prices, and
average prices are more affected by macroeconomic factors and policies. Second, the
Board recognized that the room for maneuver with conventional policy measures, that
is, the interest rate, was limited. At this time, the Bank had just raised the interest rate
to 0.25 per cent, and the majority of the Board was not considering lowering it back to
zero.
Board members asked for a number of further issues to be studied: (1) the
relationship between price stability and financial system stability; (2) whether it
would be inappropriate to use numerical values to express a price stability objective,
as long as downward pressure on prices from the supply side remained; (3) ways to
improve data on the supply side that were essential for assessing prices; and (4) ways
that countries that had adopted inflation targeting would deal with issues related to
technological innovation, which made compilation of reliable price statistics more
difficult, and asset prices, which were becoming increasingly important for the
conduct of monetary policy.
These issues reveal that the majority of Board members thought either that
setting a numerical target was a bad idea, when supply side factors are having a large
impact, or that more research was needed on the issue. The following paragraph
seems to give a summary view of the majority of the Board:
[A]nother member said that it would be difficult to define price stability in
terms of numerical values in view of structural changes that Japan was
undergoing, bias in price indexes, and Japan'
s economic situation which was
subject to strong influence from external developments. Therefore, the
member thought that the issue should be studied further and would, at this
36

point in time, prefer to give only a qualitative or conceptual definition of price
stability. The member further commented as follows. The discussions on the
issue of quantifying price stability had been initiated in response to public
criticism that the goal of monetary policy was unclear. Therefore, the
discussion started from the very fundamental question of the significance of
price stability, but some issues required further study. In that sense, the
member would like to emphasize that the conclusion was not fully
satisfactory.
In contrast, one member in favor of inflation targeting gave the case for immediate
adoption:
One member, while supporting the Bank'
s plan to make public its thinking on
price stability, disagreed with the contents of the report as the member
believed that the Bank should immediately set a numerical target for the
inflation rate. The member expressed the following opinions. First, without a
numerical target, the Bank would not be able to assess its performance and
would not be accountable to the public as a central bank. Second, it was
natural that an inflation target should be adjusted in line with structural
changes and this would make the adoption of an inflation target viable. And
third, the European Central Bank (ECB) had defined price stability as year-onyear price increases of below 2 percent, and some central banks in
industrialized countries, such the United Kingdom and New Zealand, had
adopted inflation targeting. In view of this, the report should explain
convincingly and in depth why Japan did not have a numerical target for
prices.
After the discussion on the document of 13 October 2000, there was no significant
discussion on inflation targeting or price indices until 19 March 2001, when the Board
decided to the change the monetary policy instrument from the interest rate to the
current account at the Bank of Japan, effectively restoring ZIRP.
The minutes of the 19 March 2001 meeting contain interesting discussions on
adopting a condition for continuing ZIRP. The Board members agreed to ease
monetary policy, given the deteriorating economic conditions. Members agreed that
“(1) it was necessary to make a strong commitment in terms of policy duration in
order to ensure the ‘commitment effect’, and (2) it was desirable to make the
commitment clearer than ‘until deflationary concern was dispelled’, the phrase the
Bank had used under the zero interest rate policy”. In a sense, they admitted that this
time the Bank had to explain ZIRP better than it had when it was previously used
(from February 1999 to August 2000). Thus, a clearer expression than “until
deflationary concern was dispelled” was sought. The change in the policy instrument
and the exit conditions were decided as follows:
1. The Bank will change its main operating target for money market operations
to the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan.
2. The Bank will continue the new framework for money market operations
prescribed in 1. until the CPI (excluding perishables, on a nationwide basis)
registers stably a zero per cent or an increase year on year.
It is remarkable that the Board agreed on: (1) the particular price index, CPI excluding
fresh food, that it was going to focus on as a condition of monetary policy; and (2),
37

the numerical number, zero. The zero was chosen because the Board members “were
in agreement that a situation that was neither inflationary nor deflationary was
desirable, and thus, it was appropriate to make a commitment to continue the policy
until the rate of increase in the CPI recovered to zero percent”. One member, citing a
study that suggested the upward bias in the CPI in Japan was 0.9 per cent, insisted that
a higher number was chosen, but did not prevail. Instead, “[o]ne member added that,
although the Policy Board should further discuss the desirable rate of increase in
prices, it would be appropriate to use a phrase such as “stably a zero percent or an
increase year on year” and imply that it would conduct policy “aiming at a small but
positive inflation rate”. In the end, the vote was taken to endorse a new policy: “(1)
change the main operating target for money market operations to the outstanding
balance of the current accounts at the Bank of Japan; and (2), make a commitment to
continue this new framework until the CPI registered stably a year-on-year increase of
zero percent or more”.
This meeting finally put to end the discussion of what was the appropriate
price index. The discussion had persisted for almost three years. Even in the major
document “On Price Stability”, which was released just six months earlier, the
question was not settled. But, suddenly, in this MPM, the question of appropriate
price index was resolved.
This MPM is also remarkable in the sense that the Board endorsed what was
considered to be quantitative easing that had long been resisted. Specifically, the
Board voted in favor (8 in favor, 1 against): “(3) change the main operating target for
money market operations to the outstanding balance of the current accounts at the
Bank of Japan, (4) make a commitment to continue this new framework until the CPI
registered stably a year-on-year increase of zero percent or more, (5) increase the
amount of the Bank'
s outright purchases of government bonds when it was considered
necessary in order to provide liquidity smoothly, (6) establish a clear ceiling for the
Bank'
s government bond holdings, set at the outstanding amount of banknotes issued,
and (7) increase the outstanding balance of current accounts at the Bank to around
5 trillion yen for the time being”.
What was curious about this MPM discussion is that the Board members
denied any link of this new commitment strategy to inflation targeting.
Many members agreed that such a commitment differed from inflation
targeting in that under the latter a desirable inflation rate from a medium- to
long-term perspective was set as a target and monetary policy was changed
when the inflation rate was expected to deviate from the target.
From the viewpoint of inflation targeting advocates, these measures, including
deciding on the price index to measure inflation, mentioning the number zero, and
taking actions on quantitative easing, were more than a half step towards fully-fledged
inflation targeting. It is quite puzzling to the advocates of inflation targeting why the
Board members still had to deny the resemblance of the new policy to inflation
targeting. If one wants “commitment”, inflation targeting is the better way. Perhaps
“target” was a word that was disliked by the Board members, as it would make the
Board accountable for the consequences of its actions.
At the 19 March 2002 meeting, an advocate of inflation targeting made a
proposal that the numerical target should be made in consultation with the
government: “[O]ne member said that it was not appropriate to introduce a numerical
target with a specific time frame without having any concrete means to achieve the

38

target, but it would be meaningful if the Bank shared a numerical target for prices
with the Government in some way as a policy framework. In response to this, one
member said that in setting a numerical target with the Government, the Government'
s
policy commitment in achieving the target would be another important factor, but
there could be a contradiction in the current deflationary situation between
implementing fiscal consolidation and setting an inflation target”.
From the fall of 2002 to the beginning of 2003, an interest in inflation
targeting re-emerged. The Board had two intensive discussions, on 10 October 2002,
and 21 January 2003. During this time, discussions on inflation targeting were also
gathering pace outside the Bank of Japan, as the end of the terms of Governor Hayami
and the two Deputy Governors were approaching, and interest was raised in whom the
government would appoint as replacements. The Bank felt defensive at first, but
subsequently presented arguments to convince the public about the correctness of the
policy. They emphasized the importance of explaining what they had been doing in
one of the MPMs.46
In the MPM of 10 October 2002, several negative opinions on adopting
inflation targeting were mentioned. Inflation targeting was characterized by some
members as inappropriate because it has “negative effects on the economy and the
financial system, such as damage to the credibility of economic policy and to financial
markets, would exceed the positive effects”. The implication seems to be that inflation
helps debtors. Another member commented that given that quantitative easing did not
stop prices declining, and as more negative shocks were expected from an accelerated
resolution of the problems of non-performing loans, inflation targeting was not
appropriate due to a lack of instruments to achieve it.
Members who commented on inflation targeting expressed the view that if
inflation targeting were to be adopted in the current economic situation, the
mechanism to achieve the target would rely mostly on an upward shift in
inflationary expectations, unless public expenditures were substantially
increased. These members then said that it was theoretically not possible to
shift inflationary expectations upward unless there were sufficient and credible
policy tools and transmission mechanisms to achieve the target, and that
setting a target in the absence of such tools and mechanisms would impair
public confidence in economic policy as a whole.
This summarises the negative opinion at the time quite well. Concern about the
implications for the long-term bond rate was also expressed: “if inflationary
expectations were to shift upward, it was the bond markets that would be most likely
to be affected”.47 One member countered that “effects of a rise in long-term interest

46 In connection with the critics’ call for taking more drastic policy, the Board member remarked
that “it was vital to explain the risks and the possible side effects of individual policy tools as
concretely as possible, in order to gain greater public understanding of the Bank'
s conduct of
monetary policy” (January 21, 2003).
47 “Based on the above discussion, these members said that if long-term interest rates rose before
economic activity was sufficiently stimulated, this was likely to cause the economy to make a hard
landing, the opposite result to an easing of the pain arising from NPL reduction. This was because
a rise in long-term interest rates would substantially increase the interest burden on the
Government and firms and would negatively affect the financial position of banks since they held
a huge amount of JGBs” (October 10, 2002).
39

rates on banks’ balance sheets, … might be smaller than expected, … because banks
had been controlling risks”.48
It is interesting that some members suggested that the Bank was essentially
running an inflation targeting policy without saying so.
“the Bank’s current monetary easing was already aimed at incorporating the
advantages of inflation targeting, given the monetary policy measures the
Bank could adopt in the current situation. … One of these members said that
the Bank had already adopted inflation targeting policy in a broad sense, in
that it made a commitment to continue the quantitative easing measure until
the consumer price index registered stably zero percent or an increase year on
year. On this basis, this member pointed out that the difference between the
Bank'
s current easing policy and inflation targeting in a strict sense was
mainly whether the specific period within which the target was to be achieved
was indicated. This member added that the latter policy would inevitably
require extreme measures that would have serious risks or adverse effects”.
Given that in the 19 March 2001 meeting, a sharp dissociation of the new policy from
inflation targeting had been recorded, this kind of assessment is very interesting. It is
not clear whether more Board members became favorable to inflation targeting or
Board members wanted to counter the call for inflation targeting by saying that it had
already been adopted.
The MPM of 21 January 2003 turned out to be the last MPM that discussed
inflation targeting at length, and probably the longest discussion to date under the
regime of Governor Hayami. Again, the dominant view rejected the adoption of
inflation targeting. First, “[o]ne member pointed out that inflation targeting had never
been adopted for the purpose of overcoming deflation by any central bank overseas,
including those in New Zealand and Sweden”. Second, without having conventional
monetary easing measures, setting an inflation target with a specific time limit is
different from situations of other inflation targeting countries. They were implying
that there are no measures to achieve inflation target: “First, there was a large output
gap and a financial system problem. Second, short-term interest rates were at the zero
lower bound. Third, fiscal consolidation and structural reform were in progress. And
fourth, global downward pressure on prices of goods was substantial”.
Some recognized that the government has more tools than the Bank of Japan
to stimulate the economy, namely fiscal spending and foreign currency intervention.49
48 Another member said that the Bank’s current monetary easing measures along with the
commitment effect in terms of policy duration had reduced interest rates with relatively long
maturity to the lowest possible level, which in turn supported the Government’s funding. In this
sense, the current policy was desirable in terms of harmonization with the Government’s policy.
This member said that it was difficult to understand why some Government officials advocated
inflation targeting in the current situation despite the possibility that it would cause a rise in longterm interest rates and would increase the Government’s interest payments. This member
expressed a desire to hear the Government participants’ opinion, if possible (October 10, 2002).
49 Some members remarked that, to make the inflation rate positive within a relatively short
period, substantially expanding fiscal spending or conducting an active foreign exchange rate
policy would have to be considered as policy options. These members said that, if an inflation
target were set by the Bank alone, it would not be credible, since fiscal and foreign exchange
policy were under the control not of the Bank but the Ministry of Finance. These members also
40

Some Board members were probably unaware that the Ministry of Finance was about
to launch an unprecedented scale of foreign exchange interventions starting this
month (January 2003) to March 2004.
What is somewhat surprising is an expression again that the Bank was already
practicing de facto inflation targeting, just like the opinions expressed in the 10
October meeting.
Some members noted that the Bank'
s commitment to continue the current
monetary easing framework until the inflation rate became stably zero or more
had virtually already factored in most of the effects that inflation targeting
purported to achieve. This was because the commitment using the actual
figure of the CPI, not a forecast figure, reflected in fact the Bank'
s intention to
achieve a small positive inflation rate, taking into account the time-lag.
They viewed calls for the adoption of inflation targeting as based on a
misunderstanding of “side effects” of policies that are required to achieve an inflation
target, and these misunderstandings had been corrected.
One member raised, as a thought experiment, the question of how the Bank
should approach the issue of adopting inflation targeting, if the Government were to
concede total control over both fiscal and foreign exchange policy to the Bank and if
the Government were to cover all losses arising from the Bank’s purchases of risky
assets. This member said that this exercise would be useful in considering how the
Bank should respond to calls to adopt inflation targeting, particularly from academics
overseas: “[T]he view that inflationary expectations would be shifted upward merely
by a central bank’s announcement of inflation targeting was becoming a minority
opinion overseas. Moreover, the view that the remaining measures that could be
employed by the Bank alone were ones whose effects were uncertain seemed to have
become the majority view overseas. These members pointed out that the risks and side
effects of individual policy tools had not been sufficiently understood, and this lack of
understanding was behind the persisting view that the Bank should try adopting any
policy tool, if the possible side effects could be considered small, even though its
effectiveness might be uncertain”.
Moreover, the suggestion by critics of the Bank’s policy of purchasing risky
assets would be harmful due to side effects: “In relation to this, one member said that
there was an extreme view that the Bank should purchase not only JGBs and foreign
bonds but also risky assets that were securitized such as stocks and real estate without
limit until prices rose. However, if the Bank actually implemented such a policy, it
would be likely to cause many side effects, such as a loss of fiscal discipline, a
deterioration of the central bank’s assets, and a rise in long-term interest rates, and
would therefore negatively impact the economy before the inflation rate rose”.
Some Board members criticized inflation targeting because it would
destabilize the market: “One member noted that inflation targeting was basically
aimed at stabilizing people'
s expectations. However, the mechanism of an upward
shift in inflationary expectations currently envisioned by advocates of inflation
contended that, if Japan were to prioritize realizing a positive inflation rate with a certain time
limit, it would be essential for the Government to give a concrete outline of how it would conduct
fiscal and foreign exchange policy to achieve it (January 21, 2003).
41

targeting was highly likely to destabilize people’s expectations, and this could in turn
destabilize long-term interest rates and the economy. This was because, as most
people still expected that it would take time to overcome deflation, some would start
to anticipate that to achieve the target the authorities would employ extreme means
that could damage the public’s confidence in them”. This argument is difficult to
understand, because if inflation targeting is credible, it would certainly stabilize
expectations. To endorse people’s expectations that it would take a long time to
overcome deflation – to not rock the boat – sounds like a strategy not to fight
deflation.
Then, without inflation targeting, how would deflation be overcome? Many
Board members remarked that deflation would be overcome when the economy got
back on the path of sustainable growth, but how to achieve growth was not
particularly well answered.50 They basically reaffirmed that there is little that the
monetary policy can do.

50 “One member emphasized that the measures to overcome deflation were not ones designed to
create inflation, but ones that would realize sound economic growth…. overcoming deflation
could only come into prospect when the economy realized sustainable growth. The member
continued that the authorities should present credible policies to deal with the fundamental cause
of the price falls, namely the lack of demand and the stagnation of the economy. … two factors
were causing the decline in economic growth in Japan, namely, the weakness in aggregate demand
and the delay in overcoming structural problems of the economy. … fiscal policy could still have
a great impact in revitalizing the Japanese economy, and the efficiency of fiscal spending would
significantly affect the direction of the economy”.
42

Figure 1: Inflation Rates in Japan: CPI and GDP deflators

Inflation Rate: CPI vs. GDP Deflator
GDP Deflator

CPI ex food VAT

1999
2000
2002
2003

1982
1983
1984
1985
1987
1988
1989
1990
1992
1993
1994
1995
1997
1998

5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
- 1.0
- 2.0
- 3.0
- 4.0

Notes:
The following adjustments are done to the original series in order to remove the effects of value-added
tax (consumption tax) rate increases. The tax was introduced, with 3% rate on all goods and services,
in April 1989, with abolishment of many excise taxes. Some very small establishments were exempted
from charging the consumption tax. The tax rate was hiked from 3% to 5% in April 1997.
Adjustments were as follows.

"

!
#$

$

%&

!

&

!

'
#$

$
'

[FILE: CPIChg-GDPDefChg ]

43

Figure 2: Inflation and Growth rates, 1975-2004; CPI vs growth, and GDP deflator vs. growth
Growth and Inflation
16
1975-1992

14

1993-2004:1

12

CPI Inflation Rate

10
8
6
4
2
0
-4

-2

-2

0

2

4

6

-4
Real GDP Growth

Growth and Inflation, 1981- 2004:1

Inflation Rate (GDP Deflator)

8
6
4
2
0
-4

-2

0

2

4

-2
-4
Growth Rates (Real GDP)

44

6

8

8

10

Figure 3: Phillips Curve, 1975-2004
Phillips Curve
16
14

1975-1992

1993-2004:1

12

CPI Inflation Rate

10
8
6
4
2
0
-2

0

1

2

3

4

5

-4
Unemployment Rate

Notes: Inflation rates are calculated as the change in the CPI from the same quarter of the year t-1,
adjusted for VAT rate changes, and the unemployment is all ages, national average.

- 45 -

6

Figure 4. Quantitative Easing
(JPY billion)
1,300
1,200

Long bond purchase and current account target
Long bond purchase (left)

(JPY trillion)
40
Oct-02

Current account target (right)

Jan-04

1,100

Oct-03

Feb-02

1,000

May-03

900
Dec-01

800

35
30
25

Apr-03
20

700
Apr-03

Aug-01

600

Oct-02

500

10

Dec-01

400
300

Mar-01

5

Aug-01

0

200
Apr/98

15

Oct/98

May/99

Nov/99

Jun/00

Dec/00

46

Jul/01

Jan/02

Aug/02

Mar/03

Sep/03

Figure 5

Counts of " Inflation Target" in Minutes
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
1998.0326
1998.0716
1998.1028
1999.0225
1999.0614
1999.1013
2000.0210
2000.0517
2000.1013
2001.0209
2001.0614
2001.1029
2002.0228
2002.0626
2002.1118
2003.0407
2003.0807
2004.0119
2004.0519

0

Source: All the disclosed “Minutes” of the Bank of Japan. Counts by the Author.
Notes: In each Minutes, the “Counts” is defined by a total number of occurrence of the following
words: “Inflation targeting”, “inflation (rate) target”, “targeting inflation”, “the target range of the
inflation rate”, “target for the inflation rate”, “numerical target for (the future) inflation (rate)”, “special
target for the inflation rate”, “a medium-term target for the inflation rate”, “a medium-term inflation
rate targe,”, “the target for the monetary base and the inflation target”, “the target inflation (rate)”, “a
target with a clearer time horizon that the year-on-year inflation”, and “neither a target nor a reference
rate of inflation.”

47

