                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       ARE INVESTORS NAIVE ABOUT INCENTIVES?

                                        Ulrike Malmendier
                                        Devin Shanthikumar

                                        Working Paper 10812
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10812


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2004




We would like to thank Nick Barberis, Stefano DellaVigna, Ming Huang, Charles Lee, Roni Michaely,
Marco Ottaviani, Oguz Ozbas, Josh Pollet, Richard Thaler, Kent Womack and seminar participants at
Harvard, London Business School, Northwestern University, Stanford, Università Bocconi (IGIER),
University of Florida, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Madison-Wisconsin, USC,
UT Austin, University of Utah, Washington University in St. Louis as well as the SITE (Economics &
Psychology) 2003, NBER Behavioral Finance Fall 2003, and the WFA 2004 conferences for helpful
comments. Burak Guner and Michael Jung provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are Investors Naive About Incentives?
Ulrike Malmendier and Devin Shanthikumar
NBER Working Paper No. 10812
September 2004
JEL No. D14, D21, G24, G18, M41, D82, D83

                                            ABSTRACT

Traditional economic analysis of markets with asymmetric information assumes that uninformed

agents account for the incentives of informed agents to distort information. We analyze whether

investors in the stock market internalize such incentives. Stock recommendations of security analysts

are likely to be biased upwards, particularly if the issuing analyst is affiliated with the underwriter

of the recommended stock. Using the NYSE Trades and Quotations database, we find that large

(institutional) traders account for the upward bias and exert no abnormal trade reaction to buy

recommendations, and significant selling pressure in response to hold recommendations. Small

(individual) traders do not account for the upward shift and exert significantly positive pressure for

buys and zero pressure for hold recommendations. Moreover, large traders discount positive

recommendations from affiliated analysts more than from unaffiliated analysts, while small traders

do not distinguish between them. The naive trading behavior of small investors induces negative

abnormal portfolio returns.

Ulrike Malmendier
Graduate School of Business
518 Memorial Way
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
ulrikem@stanford.edu

Devin Shanthikumar
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Filed
Boston, MA 02163
dshanthikumar@hbs.edu
                                           I. INTRODUCTION

Traditional economic analysis of markets with asymmetric information builds on the assumption
that uninformed agents account for the incentives of informed agents to distort information. In
the lemons model [Akerlof, 1970], the uninformed agent understands that the informed agent
does not have an incentive to reveal negative features of the product and that he would rather
advertise the lemon as a “hidden gem.” Consequently, the uninformed agent does not rely on
such unverifiable information, and the informed agent abstains from providing it in the first
place. To put it in the context of cheap talk games, if all Sender-types have the same preferences
over the Receiver’s action, e.g. that the Receiver buys the good the Sender is selling, then cheap
talk cannot be informative [Crawford and Sobel, 1982].
       This result changes if the uninformed agent is naive about the information provided. In
this case, the uninformed agent would accept cheap talk at face value, and the informed agent
would want to provide biased information to extract maximum profits from subsequent economic
interactions.


       What happens in real markets? Are agents sophisticated enough to understand the
informed agents’ incentives to distort information? Or do they naively trust the informed agents?
In this paper, we analyze naiveté about information provision in the market for stocks and stock
recommendations. Analysts of brokerage firms are more informed about the value of a stock and
provide investors with information in the form of buy, hold, and sell recommendations. They
have, however, incentives to distort this information upward. Positive recommendations are more
likely to generate trading commissions than negative ones, given short-selling constraints.
Positive recommendations also allow analysts to gain continued access to information from the
management of the recommended firm.1 The incentives to bias recommendations upward are
even stronger for “affiliated” analysts, whose brokerage belongs to an investment bank
underwriting security issuances of the firms covered by the analyst. Positive analyst coverage
after an equity issuance is often viewed as part of an implicit agreement between underwriter and


                                                                                                1
issuer.2 Moreover, analysts’ compensation depends, either directly or indirectly, on their
“support” in generating profits for the corporate finance department.3
       If investors are rational, they account for such informational distortions of analyst
recommendations. First, they should discount positive and neutral recommendations, i. e. exert
less buy pressure in response to buy and strong buy recommendations than they would if these
recommendations were undistorted. Second, they should discount even more recommendations
from analysts who are affiliated with the underwriter of an issuer. If, however, investors are
naive and do not discount enough for analysts’ incentives, they might overreact to positive
recommendations and not account for affiliation.
       Naive behavior adversely affects investors’ wealth since investors misallocate their
funds. It also impacts the industrial organization of brokerage firms. If investors are naive,
independent brokerage is unlikely to be a profitable business since those firms with analysts and
corporate finance divisions united under one roof get (at least) as much attention from investors
while having informational advantages.


       We examine empirically whether investors account for analysts’ incentives in their
trading decision. First, using the I/B/E/S data set, we show that the vast majority of
recommendations are positive or neutral; only 4.5% are negative. The distribution is even more
skewed for recommendations of affiliated analysts. We also show that a trading strategy that
takes recommendations literally induces losses. Moreover, these losses are significantly larger
for recommendations of affiliated analysts compared to those of unaffiliated analysts, consistent
with previous literature on analyst affiliation [Lin and McNichols, 1998; Michaely and Womack,
1999]. Over any investment horizon between three months and five years, the portfolio based on
unaffiliated recommendations outperforms the portfolio based on affiliated recommendations.
       Second, we analyze the trade reaction of investors to the issuance of analyst
recommendations. We distinguish between small and large investors to allow for the possibility
that individual agents are subject to biases, while firms and their associated professionals
rationally account for informational distortions. This distinction follows the previous behavioral


                                                                                                2
literature on biases in markets, which points to the specialization and experience of firms as well
as competitive pressure to which firms but not individuals are exposed.4 Following previous
market microstructure literature [Lee and Radhakrishna, 2000], we distinguish between small
(individual) and large (institutional) investors based on the size of their trades. Using trading data
from the New York Stock Exchange Trades and Quotations (TAQ) database (1993-2002), we
find distinctly different trade reactions to recommendations among large and small investors.
First, large investors react less positively than small investors to buy and hold recommendations.
Large investors display less abnormal buy pressure in response to buy and strong buy
recommendations than small investors. And, while small investors do not display any abnormal
trading behavior in response to hold recommendations, large investors sell. Second, large
investors distinguish between affiliated and unaffiliated analysts and exert buy pressure only
after strong buy recommendations of unaffiliated analysts and not after positive
recommendations of affiliated analysts. Small traders are equally enthusiastic about stocks
recommended by affiliated and by unaffiliated analysts.
       The results suggest that large investors act according to rational economic theory and
account for the incentives of analysts, but small investors do not. What explains these differences
in trade reaction? At least the second result, the failure of small investors to differentiate between
recommendations from affiliated and unaffiliated analysts, is likely to be affected by higher
informational costs to identify analysts’ affiliation. We find, however, that informational
constraints do not suffice to explain the suboptimal behavior of small investors. If investors were
fully rational about analyst incentive but lacking information about analyst affiliation, their
average reaction to positive recommendations should still take the upward bias among all
analysts into account. For example, small investors should sell in response to hold
recommendations (as large investors do), regardless of whether the analyst is affiliated or not.
Moreover, additional results suggest that even the second result is at least partly driven by
investor naiveté. If only informational constraints prevented small investors from rationally
responding to analyst affiliation, a partial solution would be to focus on those analysts who are
“visibly” unaffiliated. For example, analysts whose financial institutions do not have any

                                                                                                    3
associated corporate finance department and are never involved in any underwriting are easily
identified as “independent.” We find that, in fact, recommendations of such “never-affiliated”
analysts have the least upward bias. However, small investors do not display abnormal trade
reaction in response to their recommendation.
       We interpret our results as evidence that small investors fail to adjust for the incentive
conflicts on the part of analysts and fail to discount the investment advice sufficiently. In many
settings, different psychological explanations of investor naiveté are possible. Investors may take
the distorted information at face value due to limited attention. Or, they may be genuinely “too
trusting.” Our analysis allows some distinction. Since small investors are strongly reacting to the
recommendations themselves, they should also realize the extremely low portion of sell
recommendations (about 5%) and be induced to consider distortions. Mere inattention is unlikely
to explain our results.
       The naive decision-making has negative welfare consequences, as demonstrated by the
negative returns to portfolios following recommendations. Further empirical analysis indicates
that competitive market forces may exacerbate rather than remedy the effect. We show that the
more analysts are covering a stock, the more affiliated recommendations are distorted upwards.


       The findings of this paper are likely to extend to other market settings in which an
uninformed agent receives advice from an informed agent who has different interests. For
example, firms provide consumers only with positive product information in advertisements.
Consumers who take all advertisements at face value may over-consume or misallocate their
resources to goods of better advertisers. Similarly, salesmen can judge which product is most
suitable for their clients, but may also be inclined to recommend the product that maximizes their
commission. Our findings suggest that individuals do not always account sufficiently for such
misalignment of incentives, but follow distorted advice too closely. Competition among
information providers appears to be insufficient to endogenously trigger the rise of institutions
that cater to the interest of the individual consumer.




                                                                                                 4
       This paper relates to two main branches of literature in behavioral economics and in
finance. A growing literature in behavioral economics analyzes the reaction of firms to consumer
or investor biases in individual decision-making. These papers show that market interaction does
not eliminate biases but may rather exacerbate their effect since firms tailor their contracts and
products to take advantage of them [DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2004; Gabaix and Laibson,
2004]. The specific bias, naiveté about incentives, and the resulting firm reaction, the provision
of distorted information, may be related to the experimental finding that subjects embrace the
advice of other subjects, even if the advice-givers do not have superior information [Schotter,
2003]. In the finance literature, this paper builds upon previous evidence that investors incur
losses if they follow analyst recommendations “literally.” Barber, Lehavy, McNichols and
Trueman [2001] show that only sophisticated interpretations of analyst recommendations, such
as buying the most highly buy-recommended stocks and short selling the most strongly sell-
recommended stocks, will lead to positive portfolio returns. Jegadeesh, Kim, Krische, and Lee
[2004] identify the change in recommendations (as opposed to the level of recommendations) as
informative. Their findings are consistent with the evidence in this paper that the level of analyst
recommendations ought to be adjusted downwards but the ordering is informative. We also
build on the evidence in Lin and McNichols [1998] and Michaely and Womack [1999] that stock
recommendations by affiliated analysts are more favorable but perform more poorly over short
(three-day) and long (up to two-year) horizons. Iskoz [2002] confirms these results for strong
buy recommendations and provides evidence that institutional investors may be accounting for
the distortions of affiliated analysts, as far as one can deduce from the quarterly changes in
institutional ownership. From a theory perspective, Morgan and Stocken [2003] analyze the case
that investors are perfectly rational but do not know whether the analyst is biased or not. Their
paper shows that it is difficult to reconcile investor rationality with the fact that different
investors react to the same recommendation in different ways. Ottaviani and Squintani [2004]
analyze a cheap-talk model in which the receiver may be naive and believes that the sender is
honest, leading to too much communication and biased equilibrium allocation. The behavioral-
finance literature on investor reaction to firms’ accounting choices, issuance decisions, and

                                                                                                  5
repurchase offers provides evidence of such naiveté.5 Investors appear to be “credulous” and not
to discount enough for the incentives of firms to manipulate the signal. Finally, our paper relates
to the market microstructure literature on trading reactions. We employ the modified Lee and
Ready [1991] algorithm to classify trades as buyer- or seller-initiated [following Odders-White
2000] and measure trade reaction as in Lee [1992], Hvidkjaer [2001], and Shanthikumar [2003].
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the research
question and research design. Section 3 provides details on the various sources of data employed
in this study. In Section 4, we present the empirical results on distortions in analyst
recommendations, on the trade reaction of small and large investors, and on the associated
returns. We also discuss alternative explanations for the trading behavior of small investors.
Section 5 explores, in more detail, how firms respond to the biases in individual trade decisions,
and points to the effects of competition among analysts as captured by coverage. Section 6
concludes.


                                         II. Empirical Strategy

1. Analyst Incentives

Sell-side analysts issue recommendations about the specific set of stocks they are covering.
Recommendations typically range from “strong sell” to “strong buy.” These recommendations
are published in various forms such as analyst reports, online data sources,6 radio and TV
interviews on CNBC and other channels, and news articles. In particular, online resources allow
investors to get fast and easy access to current recommendations regarding a stock, as shown in
the sample webpage from finance.yahoo.com (Figure I).7 The example of Apache Corp. shows
recommendations of both affiliated and unaffiliated analysts and provides information on
averages, industry comparisons, upgrades, and downgrades. In addition, the company makes its
press releases (including information about the recent stock offering and its lead underwriter)
easily available online. Investors can get to this detailed information with a few clicks from the
yahoo site.8



                                                                                                 6
       Sell-side analysts face a well-known conflict of interest when providing investment
advice in the form of recommendations. On the one hand, it is their job to provide profound
security analyses and reliable recommendations to customers. Customers will, in turn, invest in
the recommended stocks via the associated brokerage firm. The brokerage firm earns trading
commissions and additional fees for their recommendations and reports. Good recommendations
enhance the reputation of an analyst and thus lead to higher compensation.
       On the other hand, analysts have incentives to bias their recommendations upwards. One
reason is simply that buy recommendations are more likely to generate trading business than sell
recommendations. A buy recommendation can induce any investor to buy a stock; a sell
recommendation, however, is mostly relevant for current owners of the stocks, given the short-
selling constraints investors face. In addition, analysts are exposed to pressure from the
management of the company they are covering. In order to ensure increases in shareholder value
of their company, management often calls up analysts and complains about ratings that are “too
low” and even tends to “freeze out” analysts who do not give positive recommendations.9
Similarly, buy-side clients may push sell-side analysts to maintain positive recommendations on
stocks they hold.10
       Analysts have additional reasons to distort recommendations upward if their brokerage
firm is part of an investment bank that is underwriting security issuances. Favorable
recommendations are generally viewed as a precondition for investment banks to get future
underwriting deals and as an implicit condition of existing underwriting contracts.11 Analysts
whose brokerage firm is associated with an investment bank are likely to be exposed to pressure
(and monetary incentives) from corporate finance departments to support underwriting business
with positive recommendations.
       As a result, analysts are trading off their reputational capital with the incentive to
generate portfolio transactions and, in the case of affiliation with an investment bank, the
incentive to support underwriting business.
       Note that sorting may enhance the upward bias of analyst recommendations. Beyond the
largest cap stocks and corporate finance clients, it is typically up to the analysts to select the

                                                                                                7
stocks they cover. They are likely to choose companies whose investment prospects they judge
favorably, hoping that those are of most interest to their buy-side clients. If they do not account
for winner’s curse, their recommendations of covered stocks will be too positive. Similarly, the
corporate finance division may be affected by winner’s curse. The investment bank’s decision to
finance a particular company implies a fundamentally positive view on that company – maybe
more positive than warranted by the companies performance. While the subsequent analysis
focuses on the incentive distortions, bias due to sorting has the same implications:
Recommendations are likely to be biased upwards, in particular if the analyst is affiliated.


2. Investor Rationality

The effect of these distortions of analyst recommendations depends on investor rationality. If
investors accounted for the incentives of analysts, they would discount positive analyst
recommendations in general and those of affiliated analysts in particular. This implies that
rational investors should shift the level of recommendations down and may want to sell in
response to hold recommendations and may not want to buy (but just to hold) in response to buy
recommendations. Only strong buy recommendations should induce abnormal buy reaction.
Moreover, their buy reaction should be stronger in response to positive recommendations of
unaffiliated analysts than to those of affiliated analysts. The left part of Figure II summarizes the
rational trade reaction schematically. Note that, in the rough classification of Figure II, a rational
investor would never buy after any affiliated recommendation.12 Such trading behavior would, in
turn, create demand for independent brokerages.
       If, however, investors are naive about analyst incentives, they do not account for the
general upward bias. As a result, their trade reaction to strong buy, buy and hold
recommendations is too positive on average. Rather than selling in response to hold
recommendations and holding in response to buy recommendations, naive agents follow
recommendations literally and hold after hold recommendations and buy after buy
recommendations.




                                                                                                    8
       The lack of downward adjustment after positive or neutral recommendations also implies
overreaction to negative recommendations. Naive investors will display abnormal sell pressure
only if a stock becomes a bad enough investment to be downgraded to “sell” or “strong sell.”
Thus, they will react more negatively to sell and strong sell recommendations than rational
investors would.
       Moreover, naive agents do not provide for the additional incentive distortion of affiliated
analysts and display the same reaction to the recommendations of affiliated and unaffiliated
analysts. Thus, the deviation from rational trading behavior, both in the form of overreaction to
hold, buy, and strong buy recommendations and in the form of the delayed sell reactions, will be
exacerbated in the case of affiliated analyst recommendations. The right part of Figure II
summarizes the naive trade reaction.


       In this paper, we consider separately the trading behavior of large (institutional) investors
and small (individual) investors and analyze whether they are able to account for the misaligned
incentives of analysts. The distinction between large and small investors reflects that large,
institutional investors, such as pension funds, benefit from numerous professional resources that
allow them to overcome the biases of individuals.13 Institutional investors rely on professional
investment managers who spend their full daily working time on these investment decisions and
may specialize in certain types of investments or particular industries. For individual investors,
instead, investing their funds is one of numerous, widely different, every-day decisions. In
addition, repetition, more frequent feedback, and specialization make it easier for decision-
makers in large institutions (than for individual investors) to learn about analysts’ incentives to
distort information. Market pressure reinforces the effect. Institutions that invest sub-optimally –
for instance, because they are not accounting for distortions in analyst information – lose
investors and will be driven out of the market. No such pressure exists for individual investors.
Finally, sorting works in favor of institutional investors. Individuals working in the finance
industry have a better financial education and better skills in financial decision-making than the




                                                                                                  9
average individual investor, as illustrated by the anomalous trade reaction of small traders to
earnings news [Lee 1992].


3. Empirical measures

Investor type. We separate small and large investors by trading size. Following the analysis of
Lee and Radhakrishna [2000], we choose dollar cutoffs rather than share-based cutoffs in order
to minimize noise in separating individuals from institutions. We also incorporate their
suggestion to use two cutoffs, with a buffer zone between small and large trades. Specifically we
choose the cutoffs based on results for three-month TORQ sample from 1990-91, in which actual
information on the identity of traders was available to check the accuracy of the trade-size based
classification method. The lower cutoff of $20,000 splits small and medium trades, and the
higher cutoff of $50,000 splits medium and large trades.14


Affiliation. Our empirical measures of analyst affiliation are based on the underwriting
relationship of the analyst’s brokerage house with the firm the analyst is reporting on. Following
previous literature,15 we identify analysts as affiliated if their investment bank was the lead
underwriter of an initial public offering (IPO) of the recommended stock in the past five years or
of a secondary equity offering (SEO) in the past two years. We also include co-underwriters over
the same respective periods. We further examine two possible sources of underwriting bias that
have not been explored in the previous literature. The first source is future affiliation, i.e. banks
underwriting an SEO in the next one or two years. There are several potential sources of
incentives for future underwriters to issue higher recommendations, including attempts to gain
the future business, pressure to increase the potential offer price of the future security offering
and winner’s curse. The number of additional firms we capture with this measure is small,
though, since most future underwriters are in previous underwriting relationships. A second type
of affiliation that has not been examined previously is bond underwriting, in particular lead
underwriting of bonds in the past year. If positive coverage is part of an implicit agreement




                                                                                                  10
between underwriter and equity issuer, then there is no obvious reason this should be different
for bond issuance.


Trade Reaction. To capture the reaction of small and large investors to analyst
recommendations, we employ measures of “directional trade” (trade initiation). These measures,
first developed by Lee and Ready [1991], are market microstructure algorithms that aim at
capturing the buy and sell pressure exerted by traders. They exploit the fact that most trades take
place when one side of the transaction demands immediate execution. Accordingly, trades are
classified as “buyer-initiated” if the buyer demands immediate execution and as “seller-initiated”
if the seller demands immediate execution. An abnormally high balance of buyer-initiated trades
indicates buy pressure; an abnormally high balance of seller-initiated trades indicates sell
pressure. In general, the side of a trade demanding faster execution represents a market order, i.e.
an order to be executed immediately at the current market price. For example, investors who
have received positive information about a firm and who believe that the stock price will rise
would not place a limit order to buy. That limit order might never be filled. Instead, they would
place a market order, and demand to buy immediately – before the price goes up further.
        We use the modified version of the Lee and Ready [1991] algorithm, developed in
Odders-White [2000], to determine which side initiated the trade. The algorithm matches a trade
to the most recent quote that precedes the trade by at least 5 seconds. If a price is nearer the bid
price it is classified as seller initiated, and if it is closer to the ask price it is classified as buyer
initiated. If a trade is at the midpoint of the bid-ask spread, it is classified based on a “tick test.
The tick test categorizes a trade as buyer-initiated if the trade occurs at a price higher than the
price of the previous trade (uptick), and as seller-initiated if the trade is on a downtick. We drop
trades at the bid-ask midpoint, which are also the same price as in preceding trades.16
        As a proxy of buy pressure, we will consider three measures. The net number of buy-
initiated trades for firm i, investor type x, and date t is defined as
(1)                              NBi , x ,t = buysi , x ,t − sellsi , x ,t

The raw trade imbalance measure for firm i, investor type x, and date t is calculated as


                                                                                                       11
                                               buys i , x ,t − sells i , x ,t
(2)                            TI i , x ,t =
                                               buys i , x ,t + sells i , x ,t


Finally, we normalize this measure by subtracting off the firm-year mean, and dividing by the
firm-year standard deviation, separately for each investor type, as in Shanthikumar [2003]:


                                                     TI i , x ,t − T I i , x , year (t )
(3)                            TI iabnormal
                                   , x ,t   =
                                                        SD (TI i , x , year (t ) )


The adjustments are made by year to account for changes in trading behavior over time. We also
adjust by firm because the trading behavior for various firms may have consistent differences.
These normalizations allows us to compare trading behavior over time and among firms and
replaces year- and firm-fixed effects in the regression framework. Dividing by the standard
deviation controls for systematic differences in the volatility of large trades and small trades or in
the volatility of the stocks large and small traders invest in. It makes comparisons between small
and large investors possible and rules out that a seemingly more extreme reaction is just the
result of higher volatility in trade imbalances over time.


Ownership. In order to evaluate the economic meaning of our trading variables, we also compare
the trading behavior of investors to changes in institutional ownership, based on the
CDA/Spectrum Institutional Holdings Database. Since institutional ownership data is only
available on a quarterly basis (from 13f SEC filings), we aggregate the daily trade measures over
the corresponding quarterly periods. Table I displays the correlations between ownership change
and the trading variables. Large-trader buy pressure is significantly correlated with an increase in
institutional ownership and small-trader buy pressure with a decrease. This implies that buy
pressure as measured by a positive trade imbalance, does not only capture investor enthusiasm
for a stock, but captures actual increases in the aggregate ownership of the relevant class of
investors as well.



                                                                                                   12
                                                III. Data

We analyze three main sources of data: data on securities trading, data on analyst
recommendations, and data on underwriting.


       The raw trading data is collected from the New York Stock Exchange Trades and
Quotations database (TAQ). The TAQ database reports every round-lot trade and every quote
from January 1, 1993 onwards on the New York Stock Exchange, American Stock Exchange and
NASDAQ. We examine ordinary common shares traded on the NYSE, excluding certificates and
depository receipts. We also exclude foreign companies, Americus trust components, closed-end
fund shares and REITs. The final trading sample includes 2801 securities for 2723 firms, as
defined by 8-digit and 6-digit CUSIPs, respectively.


       We obtain analyst recommendations and information about the analyst and brokerage
firm from I/B/E/S starting from October 29, 1993. I/B/E/S converts the recommendation formats
of different brokerage houses into one uniform numerical format. Like other authors [Jegadeesh,
Kim, Krische and Lee, 2004], we reverse the original I/B/E/S coding to the following, more
intuitive scheme: 5=strong buy, 4=buy, 3=hold, 2=sell, 1=strong. A “higher” recommendation is
better, and an “upgrade” translates into a positive change in the numerical value.
       Note that the I/B/E/S data contains an unusually high number of recommendations during
the first three months of the sample period. While the number of recommendations per year –
and even per month – is fairly uniform during the period from February 1994 through 2001, the
first two months and three days contain a multiple of observations. This may be due to
differences in the way I/B/E/S dealt with data at the beginning of the sample period.
Alternatively, it may have to do with large layoffs in the securities industry during that time. In
fact, the number of firms remains relatively stable, while the number of analysts and stocks
covered declines sharply, from 626 analysts and 1166 stocks in November 1993 to 435 analysts
and 591 stocks in February 1994. Consulting the employment data of the Securities Industry
Association (SIA), we found that employment in the industry slowed in 1994 and 1995.


                                                                                                13
However, the more detailed monthly data from U.S. Dept. of Labor Statistics (DOLS) indicates
that drop off is not as sharp as the I/B/E/S data suggests. That may be because the DOLS data
includes all employees in the securities industry, and equity analysts may have been laid off at a
disproportionate rate. But it also leaves room for concerns about data consistency within the
I/B/E/S sample. From February 1994 on, the number gradually increases from 11,596 in 1995
until in peaks at 13,944 in 1999. The number of recommendations declines in 2000 and 2001, but
then skyrockets in 2002, with a total of 20,560 recommendations made that year. To exclude the
“scandal effects” from 2001 and 2002 and reporting anomalies in the I/B/E/S data set, we focus
on the period from February 1994 through July 2001, containing 2252 securities and 2229 firms,
but run all regressions for both alternative sample periods.


       In addition, we investigated how accessible recommendations are to either type of
investor. We hand-collected additional brokerage company information from company
publications and company websites in order to identify which type of customer a brokerage firm
targets, institutions or individuals. To give two examples, we identified Adams, Harkness & Hill
as serving just institutional clients from their mission statement: “Adams, Harkness & Hill is one
of the largest independent research, brokerage, and investment banking firms serving the
institutional market.” Similarly, we identified Alliance as serving both markets from their
statement: “At Alliance Capital, we're proud to provide a wide range of investment management
services to a diverse group of investors worldwide, including institutional clients, high-net-worth
individuals and mutual fund investors.” If a firm does not specify which type of client they focus
on, the lines of business and services offered often reveal whether this firm handles both types of
clients or just one. In particular, research firms with only 10-15 analysts that are very specialized
in a particular field, such as energy, healthcare, insurance, oil and gas, typically serve only a
select group of institutional investors. Overall, we obtained the information for about 85% of the
brokerage firms.17 We found that only 5.9 % consider themselves retail brokerages (e.g. Credit
Swiss Private Banking), 16.2% brokerages for institutions (e.g. DSP/Merrill Lynch or SG
Cowen), but 77.9% are targeting both individuals and institutions. Moreover, we found that even


                                                                                                  14
recommendations targeted towards institutions are often available to retail clients for two
reasons. First, numerous institutions-oriented firms have in recent years acquired or made
minority investments in retail brokerage firms in order to have a retail distribution outlet for IPO
shares.18 As a result, their research reports end up in the hands of retail customers through the
retail subsidiary. Second, retail brokerage firms, such as Charles Schwab, allow clients to
download reports from research firms that they have partnerships with (such as Goldman Sachs).
An investor can also subscribe to a service such as Yahoo Finance or other websites mentioned
in Section II.1 to access reports. It is thus reasonable to assume that individual investors will
have access to most if not all recommendations contained in our data set.


       We use the SDC New Issues database to obtain underwriting data from 1987 to 2002. We
link I/B/E/S broker firms and SDC underwriters with the company names provided by the
I/B/E/S recommendation broker identification file and the SDC database. We improve the match
using company websites and news articles, in particular to determine subsidiary relationships and
corporate name changes. Finally, we use the mapping from Kolasinski and Kothari [2004] to
identify additional matches.19
       We obtain security prices, returns, and share information from CRSP, and financial
variables of the companies from COMPUSTAT. The merged data set extends from October 29,
1993 through December 31, 2002 (with underwriting data from 1987 on), and contains 173,950
recommendations with linked trading data, for 2424 securities of 2397 firms. Notice that only
12% of the firms in our NYSE sample lack recommendations, so that our final sample contains
almost the entire set of domestic NYSE firms with common stock.


                                         IV. Empirical Analysis

1. Analyst Recommendations

We first analyze the distribution of recommendations (from “strong sell” to “strong buy”) among
affiliated and unaffiliated analysts. We display the sample statistics for the entire sample period
of October 1993 through December 2002, to characterize the full sample and to highlight

                                                                                                 15
differences in behavior after the increased media attention from 2001 on. As Table II shows,
analysts make very few strong sell and sell recommendations (4.58%), regardless of their
affiliation. If investors were to take analyst recommendations literally, they would constantly be
purchasing securities. The strikingly left-skewed distribution is consistent with analysts’
incentive to issue buy recommendations rather than sell recommendations in order to maximize
the resulting amount of trading business or to remain in favor with firm managers.
       Table II also displays the distribution of recommendations for each type of underwriting
affiliation. As in previous literature, “IPO lead underwriting” affiliation indicates that the
analyst’s investment bank was the lead underwriter of an IPO in the past 5 years. If the
investment bank underwrote an SEO in the past 2 years, the analyst is “SEO lead underwriting”
affiliated. “Co-underwriting” affiliation is defined for the same periods. In addition, we consider
future equity underwriting for the next two years and bond underwriting for the past year.20
Including all affiliation categories, there are a total of 11,017 affiliated recommendations, about
9.1% of the total recommendation sample, which contains 121,130 recommendations.
       The summary statistics show that analysts with any type of affiliation issue more positive
recommendations than unaffiliated analysts. The average recommendation level in all of the
affiliated groups lies around 4.00 or higher, that is, their average recommendation is at least a
“buy.” Unaffiliated analysts, on the other hand, have average recommendations of 3.76. The
difference to the average level of affiliated recommendations is statistically significant. (In an
OLS regression of recommendation level on a constant and an indicator for analyst affiliation,
the coefficient on affiliation is 0.2515, with a standard error of 0.0103.) Likewise, the mode is
“buy” for affiliated analysts while it is “hold” for unaffiliated analysts. The distortion is largest
for future underwriting affiliation, with buy and strong buy recommendations amounting to more
than 85%. Note that these differences do not arise from quicker updating of affiliated analysts.
As shown in Malmendier and Shanthikumar (2004), affiliated analysts update their
recommendation on a given stock more slowly than unaffiliated analysts, every 357 days instead
of 308 days for unaffiliated analysts for the sample analyzed in this paper. Moreover, the
difference is entirely driven by positive recommendations. While affiliated analysts are faster to

                                                                                                  16
update negative and hold recommendations, they preserve their positive recommendations about
70 days longer than unaffiliated analysts.
       We find similar differences for negative recommendations. Unaffiliated analysts make
very few sell and strong sell recommendations, but affiliated analysts make even fewer.
Combining all of the possible affiliations, for the entire sample of over 2500 stocks for over ten
years, affiliated analysts issued fewer than 250 sell and strong sell recommendations. The
extremely low number becomes even more remarkable when we examine the timing of these
recommendations. The few sell and strong sell recommendations made by affiliated analysts are
almost exclusively from 2002. For example, for our whole sample, analysts with IPO and SEO
lead and co-underwriter affiliation issue a total of 154 sell and strong sell recommendations. Out
of the 154 negative recommendations, 69 are from 2002. Twenty-two of those recommendations
were made by analysts from Morgan Stanley, as the firm worked on improving their analysts’
reputation and on moderating the effect of the SEC investigation of their analysts’ conflicts of
interest. For the entire sample period affiliated recommendations are significantly higher than
unaffiliated recommendations, but if we limit the sample to 1993-2001, the difference is even
stronger.
       We also consider independent brokerage firms separately, where we define firms as
“independent” or “never affiliated” if they do not underwrite any securities during our SDC
sample period of 1987 through 2002. Analysts of independent firms make the most strong-sell
and sell recommendations, and their average recommendation is significantly lower than the
average recommendation of unaffiliated brokerage firms in general (the difference is -0.0805,
with a standard error of 0.0118), or any other group of affiliated brokerage firms specifically (the
difference to all affiliated analysts is 0.3102, with a standard error of 0.0157).
       Finally, we address the possibility that positive recommendations made by affiliated
analysts are caused by differences in the firms being covered. Companies that have recently
issued securities may be truly of higher quality, as evidenced by their ability to access the capital
markets. We thus examine the sample statistics and average recommendations restricting our
sample to recommendations of firms that have recently issued stocks or bonds. Panel B of

                                                                                                  17
Table II shows that the statistics are virtually identical and that the higher recommendations of
affiliated analysts are thus not due to characteristics of firms that have issued new securities.
       Further evidence that the differences do not arise from differences in the firms being
covered is presented in Appendix Table 1. A detailed look at the NAIC industries covered by
each group shows that there are barely any differences. In fact, the portion of recommendations
falling into any of the NAIC industry groups differs by less than one percentage point for all but
three groups.


       To summarize the insights from the analysis of the recommendations data, we find
evidence that analyst recommendations display two types of distortions. First, more than 95% of
all recommendations are positive or neutral. Second, analysts with underwriting affiliations tend
to issue even more positive recommendations.


2. Returns

Before we turn to the core of our empirical analysis, we briefly show that investors make losses
if they follow analyst recommendations “literally.” Previous literature indicates that investors
cannot naively follow analyst recommendations in order to earn positive portfolio returns
[Barber et al., 2001; Jegadeesh et al., 2004]. Moreover, stocks recommended by affiliated
analysts perform significantly worse than those recommended by unaffiliated analysts [Michaely
and Womack 1999; Lin and McNichols 1998; Iskoz 2002]. These results have been shown for
various measures of abnormal returns, such as the market-model abnormal buy-hold returns and
Fama-French portfolio returns.
       We briefly replicate those results with our data in order to demonstrate the potential
welfare affects of the two types of distortion laid out above. We show that it is not profitable to
take analyst recommendations at face value and to buy in response to buy and strong buy
recommendations, to hold after hold recommendations, and to sell after sell and strong sell
recommendations, in particular in the case of affiliated recommendations.




                                                                                                    18
       Describing our primary portfolio method, we construct two different portfolios. In one,
the recommendations of all affiliated analysts are followed, that is, stock is purchased for a buy
or strong-buy recommendation, and sold for a sell or strong-sell recommendation of any
affiliated analyst. In the second portfolio, the same is done for the recommendations of
unaffiliated analysts. We then examine both the buy-and-hold returns and the cumulative
abnormal returns of these portfolios over many different time horizons. The investment strategy
of a naive (small) investor is likely to correspond to some convex combination of the two
portfolios.
       We calculate both the raw returns and the abnormal returns using the market model. For
the abnormal returns, we form event-time portfolios based on recommendations and estimate the
relation of event-time portfolio and market portfolio over the one-year period ending two months
before the event as follows:
(4)                             Rit = α i + β i Rmt + ε it

where Ri,t is the return of portfolio i on day t, and Rm,t is the return of the market portfolio on day
t. We then use the estimated values of all αi and βi to calculate the abnormal return during and
after the event period. The abnormal return is the difference between the realized portfolio return
and the predicted return based on the estimated parameters and the realized market returns.
(5)                                           (
                                ARit = Rit − αˆ i + βˆi Rmt   )
       We evaluate buy-and-hold returns over a number of horizons. Table III displays the
returns over three months following the analyst recommendation date, six months, the first,
second and third year (in addition to the pre-even returns from day –10 to –2 and the even returns
over the three-day window from –1 to +1). Since the analyst issuing a recommendation is likely
to be evaluated during the same year, the performance over the next six months to one year is
probably most relevant. On the other hand, small investors may not re-evaluate their positions for
some years. Thus, longer horizons are also of interest from the perspective of the investors.
       Panel A of Table III presents the abnormal returns for the portfolio strategy described
above separately for recommendations of affiliated and unaffiliated analysts. We find that both
portfolios significantly underperform relative to the market over any post-event horizon

                                                                                                    19
considered. Using the value-weighted market index, the underperformance amounts to 17.8% for
the stocks recommended by affiliated analysts and to 4.5% for stocks recommended by
unaffiliated analysts over one year. The results are similar for equal weighting (21.4% and 7.5%
underperformance for year one). We also find that the portfolio following recommendations of
affiliated analysts underperforms relative to those recommended by unaffiliated analysts. Over
the one-year horizon, the abnormal returns of affiliated recommendations are more than 13%
lower. Note that these numbers are virtually identical to those in Michaely and Womack [1999].
       We also distinguish between upgrades and downgrades since a given recommendation
level may have different informational content, depending on the direction of change from the
previous level. As the middle part of Panel A shows, we find the same pattern of
underperformance of portfolios following affiliated and unaffiliated analyst recommendations as
well as underperformance of the affiliated relative to the unaffiliated recommendations. The
partition also reveals that the underperformance of the portfolio following affiliated
recommendations is significantly stronger for upgrades. For example, over the one-year horizon,
a portfolio buying and selling in stocks upgraded by an affiliated analyst actually performs worse
by more than 8.5 percentage points relative to a portfolio buying and selling stocks downgraded
by an affiliated analyst. This pattern is less strong for unaffiliated analysts and other intervals.
       Finally, we address the concern that the underperformance of affiliated recommendations
relative to unaffiliated recommendations may be driven by long-run underperformance of IPOs
and SEOs. In the bottom part of Panel A, we recalculate returns for the subsample of firms that
have issued stock in an IPO during the last five years or an SEO during the last two years at the
time of a recommendation. Rather than comparing returns to a market index, we display a
benchmark portfolio that invests in all stocks at issuance. For horizons up to one year, the picture
remains the same: Both portfolios generate lower raw returns than the benchmark, for example
11.5% for affiliated recommendations, 13.8% for unaffiliated recommendations, and 15.8% for
the IPO/SEO benchmark sample over the one-year horizon. The difference is statistically
significant (at the 1% level) for the affiliated portfolio. (The difference to the unaffiliated
portfolio is significant over shorter horizons, e.g. six months). The results suggest that an

                                                                                                       20
investor who wants to trade securities of recent equity issuers would do better simply buying
indiscriminately than following analyst recommendations and in particular affiliated analyst
recommendations, despite the additional information we might expect an affiliated analyst to
have.


        The abnormal returns are virtually the same if we consider portfolio strategies that
account for short-selling constraints and are constructed by buying in case of buy and strong buy
recommendations and holding the stock for the various periods considered above.
        In addition to the event-study methodology, we estimate daily abnormal portfolio returns
using a Fama-French three-factor model (Panel B of Table III). We calculate the time-series of
daily excess returns of zero-investment portfolios with a buy-and-hold horizon of one year. The
buy portfolio consists of all stocks with at least one buy- or strong-buy recommendation in the
last year, the sell portfolio consists of all stocks with at least one sell- or strong-sell
recommendation in the last year. Portfolio returns are value-weighted by market capitalization.
(The results with equal weighting are virtually identical.) If the sell-portfolio is empty we
substitute with the risk-free rate.
        The portfolio of all stocks that are recommended only by affiliated analysts earns
negative abnormal returns of 0.24% per day. The abnormal returns of the portfolio investing in
all stocks that are recommended only by unaffiliated analysts are negative and insignificant. If
we restrict the analysis only to buy recommendations (to account for short-sell constraints), we
find a negative alpha both for the portfolio of affiliated recommendations and the portfolio of
unaffiliated recommendations. While the affiliated portfolio has a lower alpha, the difference is
not significant. If we consider more sophisticated portfolio strategies (such as buying only
stocks with strong-buy recommendations and selling stocks with hold, sell, or strong-sell
recommendations), the alpha of the unaffiliated portfolio becomes zero and that of the affiliated
portfolio small and insignificantly negative. Thus, portfolios naively following analyst
recommendations seem to earn negative returns beyond the three Fama-French factors, in
particular for affiliated analysts.


                                                                                              21
       Thus, a “naïve” portfolio strategy that takes analyst recommendations literally leads to
significant underperformance, in particular if it follows affiliated analysts. It is worth stressing
that the negative abnormal returns to both affiliated and unaffiliated recommendations are due to
the simple portfolio formation. As Barber, Lehavy, McNichols and Trueman [2001] have shown,
more sophisticated strategies allow to “profit from the prophets,” in particular short selling the
least-recommended stocks.         In our sample, for example buying only strong buy
recommendations and selling buy, hold, sell, and strong sell recommendations leads to
considerably less underperformance. The abnormal returns are -3.92% (value-weighted index)
and   -2.44%    (equal-weighted     index)   for   the     portfolio   following   affiliated   analyst
recommendations and -2.51% (value-weighted) and -0.70% (equal-weighted) following
unaffiliated recommendations. As we will see below, however, it is in particular the literal
interpretation of analyst recommendations, which is of interest in the context of trade reactions.


3. Trade Reaction

The incentives faced by analysts seem to have an effect on their recommendations. Overall,
analysts almost never recommend selling a stock. Underwriting-affiliated analysts issue even
more positive recommendations than unaffiliated analysts, and consistently issue more buy and
strong buy recommendations than unaffiliated analysts. The primary question of this section is
whether investors account for these distortions in their trading decisions.


       We apply the different measures of trade reaction, developed in Section II.4, to identify
the buy or sell reaction triggered by recommendations. Table IV presents summary statistics for
our trading measures. Panel A shows that small investors execute about nine more buy-initiated
trades and sell-initiated trades per day than large investors. The average differences between
buy- and sell-initiated trades, however, are very similar, 3.18 for small trades and 3.43 for large
trades. The median is 0 for both small and large trades.
       To test the trade reactions to recommendations, we employ the methodology of event
studies. Trading days 0 and 1 around the event are our primary event period, where day 0 is the


                                                                                                    22
first trading day at or after recommendation issuance. The summary statistics for trading
behavior during these event days, presented in Panel B, show that the difference between buys
and sells is considerably higher, both for small and large trades on the days of recommendations
(19.26 for small trades and 18.92 for large trades over the two event days), indicating systematic
buy-pressure induced by the recommendations. The trade imbalance for large traders is slightly
negative on these days, indicating that they initiate a larger portion of their buy orders than of
their sell orders on high-volume days.
       Our core results are presented in Table V. We regress the normalized trade imbalance on
dummies for all recommendation levels and their interactions with a dummy variable for
affiliation. This regression framework allows us to investigate the investor reaction to both types
of analyst distortions, analysts’ general tendency to issue mostly positive recommendations and
the additional distortion of underwriting-affiliated analysts relative to their unaffiliated peers.
The first three columns show the trade reaction of large investors, of small investors, and the
difference between the two investor classes for all recommendations of unaffiliated analysts in
the upper part and the differential reaction to recommendations of affiliated analysts in the lower
part of Table V. For unaffiliated analysts, we find that large investors’ imbalance is significantly
positive   for   strong   buy   recommendations,     zero   (insignificantly   positive)   for   buy
recommendations and significantly negative for hold, sell, and strong sell recommendations.
Small investors, instead, display significantly positive reaction to both buy and strong buy
recommendations from unaffiliated analysts and zero trade reaction to unaffiliated hold
recommendations. They display negative abnormal trading behavior only in response to sell and
strong sell recommendations.
       The implications of these baseline results are two-fold. First, the pattern of significant
abnormal trade imbalances suggests that recommendations have a significant impact on the
trading behavior of both large and small investors. Second, the results imply that large traders
account for the general upward bias by shifting recommendations down by one level while small
traders take the recommendations literally.



                                                                                                  23
       The bottom part of Table V shows the differential reaction of large and small investors to
the recommendations of affiliated analysts. Large investors significantly reduce their positive or
neutral trade imbalance after strong buy or buy recommendations if the analyst is affiliated. The
differential reaction to hold, sell, and strong sell recommendations is insignificant, implying that,
as with unaffiliated recommendations, they react negatively. Small investors, on the other hand,
do not display any significant difference in trading behavior for strong buy, buy, hold or sell
recommendations. They react more negatively to affiliated strong sell recommendations.
       These results indicate that large traders apply an additional downward adjustment to
positive recommendations if the analyst is affiliated. Small investors, instead, fail to adjust for
affiliation and take both affiliated and unaffiliated recommendations literally. For affiliated sell
and strong sell recommendations, we also observe the predicted difference in trade imbalance of
large and small investors. For example, large investors do not display significant additional sell
pressure after a sell recommendation if it is affiliated (the negative coefficient of -0.195 is
insignificant), but small traders do. Taking affiliated and unaffiliated recommendations together,
the strong negative reaction of small investors to sell and strong sell recommendations is
consistent with their preceding neutral reaction to hold recommendations, as outlined in
Section II.2. Large investors, instead, have already reacted negatively to preceding hold
recommendations. In fact, the mean number of hold recommendations in the month preceding a
recommendation is 0.5989 for the full sample, but 0.8722 for sell recommendations and 1.0126
for strong sell recommendations. The results suggest that large investors incorporate the negative
news earlier, when the hold recommendation is issued, while small investors do so only at
issuance of a sell or strong sell recommendation. It is also consistent with small-investor naiveté
that the difference in trading behavior is stronger for affiliated sell and strong sell
recommendations since most of the large-traders’ negative reaction happens “even earlier” for
affiliated than unaffiliated recommendations while small investors do not distinguish between
affiliated and unaffiliated analysts. Note, though, that a simple theory of naiveté does not predict
that the coefficient of small investors’ trade reaction is more negative for affiliated strong sells
than for unaffiliated strong sells (-0.838 versus -0.105). Interpreting this specific result, however,

                                                                                                   24
is difficult due to the small sample size. There are only 27 affiliated strong sell
recommendations, suggesting that they arise only under unusual circumstances.21


       Using the normalized trade imbalance as our dependent variable also allows us to
compare the magnitude of trade reactions across investor groups. The coefficients for large and
small investors’ trade reaction indicate that small traders react much more strongly to positive
recommendations than large traders do. While the negative trade imbalances following
unaffiliated sell and strong sell recommendations are similar in magnitude for both types of
investors, the positive reaction to unaffiliated strong buy recommendations is about two times
larger for small than for large investors. The trade reaction to buy recommendations is about ten
times as large. Small investors thus appear to condition their trading decisions on
recommendations to a larger extent than large investors. The weaker reaction of large investors
to positive recommendations may either be due to the higher baseline information of large
traders (i.e. their trades are more spread out), or it may result from additional discounting for the
upward recommendation bias.


       Both the failure to adjust for the general upwards bias in recommendations and the failure
to adjust for additional upwards distortion due to affiliation is consistent with small-investor
naiveté. The behavior of large investors, on the other hand, appears to reflect fully rational
behavior.


Reaction to Upgrades and Downgrades. The discussion so far focused on the level of a
recommendation. As the discussion of small investors’ over- and under-reaction revealed,
another important consideration is the previous level of recommendation. To identify the role of
upgrades and downgrades, we re-do the previous analysis on the subsample of upgrades and the
subsample of downgrades in Columns 4 to 9 of Table V. Notice that the category of affiliated
sell recommendations within upgrades disappears due to lack of data – there are only two
observations in this category.



                                                                                                  25
       For recommendations of unaffiliated analysts, we find that the negative trade reaction of
large investors to sell recommendations is significant both for upgrades and for downgrades.
Regardless of whether the previous recommendation level was higher or lower, large investors
recognize the negative news conveyed in a sell recommendation. The negative reaction to hold
recommendations, on the other hand, is mostly driven by downgrades. The coefficient on hold
recommendation for downgrades (-0.15) is almost ten times the coefficient on the hold dummy
for upgrades (-0.016), and only the downgrades coefficient is statistically significant. This means
that an upgrade from sell or strong sell to hold is not enough good news to reverse the previous
sell reaction; a downgrade from buy or strong buy, however, is interpreted as bad news about the
stock. Also the coefficient on the buy recommendations dummy differs between the upgrades
and the downgrades sample. It is significantly positive for upgrades and significantly negative
for downgrades. In other words, large investors evaluate a buy recommendation relative to the
previous level of recommendation.
       Small investors, on the other hand, distinguish much less between upgrades and
downgrades. They buy after buy recommendations, hold after hold recommendations, and sell
after sell recommendations, regardless of the direction of change.22 Small traders react more
positively to a hold, buy or strong buy recommendation than large traders, whether that
recommendation is an upgrade or downgrade. The difference is highly significant for all
categories other than the upgrade-hold recommendation. However, the trade reaction is more
positive for upgrades than for downgrades.
       The estimates of the differential reaction to upgrades and downgrades of affiliated
analysts are much less precisely estimated on the subsamples and are mostly insignificant. Both
the size of the coefficients and the (relatively smaller) standard errors reveal, however, that
reactions to recommendation upgrades are driving the “affiliation neglect” of small traders.
Large traders react more negatively when an affiliated analyst issues an upgrade hold, buy or
strong buy, while small traders react more positively. The difference between the small and large
investors’ trade corrections for affiliation is significant for each of the three upgrade
recommendation categories.

                                                                                                26
Relationship Between Trading and Returns. Our results on trade reaction and the earlier results
on portfolio returns suggest that small traders lose money relative to large traders. In Table VI,
we provide more direct evidence of the loss induced by trading behavior that does not account
for the distortions of analysts. We calculate the buy-and-hold returns over a three-month horizon,
a six-month horizon, and a one-year horizon after each recommendation. We then regress these
post-event returns on the net value of buy- minus sell-initiated trades of small and large investors
for each recommendation (on event days 0 and 1) and on a constant.
        For small investors, we find a significantly negative relation between net trades and
returns over any horizon. Accounting for the positive constant, the net effect is still negative at
any positive amount of net trades. For large traders, instead, the coefficient on trade imbalance is
minimal, at about 0.4% to 0.5% of the coefficient for small trades (while the coefficient on the
constant remains about the same). It is insignificant over the one-year horizon. In fact, for any
net trade value up to about $7m for the one-year horizon and for up to $8.2m for the three-month
horizon, large investors earn positive returns on their trades. (The average net trade size is $5m
for large traders.)
        In addition to the raw return results displayed, we repeated the test using the various
return and trade measures previously employed in this paper. We consistently find that there is a
negative relationship between future returns and event-time net trading, whether measured in
dollars or number of trades. We also calculate the return earned per dollar traded for both small
and large trades, for the three-month, six-month and 1-year horizons. The returns to large trades
are significantly higher than the returns to small trades, using both raw returns and various
abnormal return measures. The difference is 4-5% per year for raw returns and market-adjusted
returns, and is over 10% for market model abnormal returns.


4. Robustness

Panel A of Table VII re-estimates the standard errors, allowing for heteroskedasticity, with
arbitrary within-year correlation and arbitrary within-brokerage firm correlation. Our results are
robust to these alternative assumptions. For large investors, we find both the rational downward


                                                                                                 27
adjustment in response to unaffiliated recommendations (e.g. significant abnormal sell reaction
to hold recommendations) and the additional discounting of positive affiliated recommendations.
Only the downward adjustment to affiliated buy recommendations is not significant in this
variation. As for the small investors, we find again significant abnormal trade reaction in the
direction suggested by a literal (unadjusted) interpretation of recommendations and no
significant difference between their reaction to affiliated and unaffiliated recommendations (as
before with the exception of strong sells). Similarly, including year- or brokerage fixed effects in
the regressions does not affect our results.
       We also check the robustness of our results to variations in the cutoff values for
distinguishing “small” from “large” trades. Panel B of Table VII shows the trade reaction for
four subgroups of trades below $50,000, namely trades of at most $5,000, trades between $5,000
and $10,000, trades between $10,000 and $20,000, and trades between $20,000 and $50,000.
(The cutoff value mainly employed in the paper aggregates the first three groups.) Both sets of
results, the “literal” reaction to any recommendations and failure to account for additional
distortion of affiliated recommendations replicate in almost all cells. In fact, the puzzling
differential trade reaction to affiliated strong sell recommendations loses significance for two
groups (below $5,000 and $10,000-$20,000). On the other hand also the negative abnormal trade
reaction to negative unaffiliated recommendations disappears or loses significance for two
subgroups (below $5,000 and $20,000-$50,000). Overall, both results show remarkable
robustness within each of these small subgroups.
       In addition, the results are similar if we employ the raw number of buy-initiated trades
minus the number of sell-initiated trades or the trade imbalance without normalization over the
event period. Also, longer horizons (up to 20 trading days after the recommendation) lead to
similar results, indicating that small traders continue reacting to recommendations over some
time period.


       As a final robustness check, we split “affiliation” into its component parts, including the
additional definitions of possible affiliation, such as future underwriting and bond underwriting.


                                                                                                 28
We also include whether the firm has recently issued a security and whether the underwriter is
independent. We limit the sample to firms that have at least some institutional ownership at the
quarter-end before the recommendation, using several different cutoffs. We repeat the regression
for each year in the sample, and for various other sub-samples. With all of these variations, the
two general results remain. First, small traders react more positively in general to hold, buy and
strong buy recommendations than large traders.            Second, small traders fail to correct for
underwriter affiliation to the extent that large traders correct for it.


5. Alternative Explanations

Limited Information. Compared to institutional investors, individuals are likely to face higher
informational costs to identify analysts as affiliated. Their limited access to information about
analyst affiliation may generate (and certainly contributes to) the failure of small investors to
differentiate between recommendations of affiliated and unaffiliated analysts. For example, small
traders may decide to follow analyst recommendations regardless of affiliation, since the
probability of randomly hitting an unaffiliated recommendation is high enough to compensate for
the added risk of hitting an affiliated recommendation.
        Informational constraints, however, cannot explain our first result. If investors were just
lacking information about analyst affiliation, but fully rational about analyst incentives, their
average reaction to positive recommendations should still take the upward bias among all
analysts into account. Given that small investors follow recommendations (as evidenced by their
abnormal trade reaction) and given that 95% of these recommendations are positive or neutral,
small investors should be aware of the general upward distortion and discount appropriately. We
find, however, that small investors fail to do so and react more positively to recommendations
than large investors. In particular, while large investors sell in response to hold
recommendations, small investors do not. And while large investors do not display any abnormal
trade reaction after buy recommendations, small investors exhibit abnormal buy pressure.
        Additional empirical results suggest that even the indiscriminate trade reaction after
affiliated and unaffiliated analyst recommendations is at least partly due to naiveté. Investors for


                                                                                                 29
whom it is costly to find out about analysts’ affiliation but who are aware of the incentive effects
can benefit from focusing on analysts who are “visibly” unaffiliated, because their financial
institution is never involved in any underwriting and may not even have any associated corporate
finance department. Such information is easier to collect and often advertised by unaffiliated
brokerage firms. More generally, it is less costly for investors to get a broad impression of which
brokers underwrite heavily and which rarely underwrite than to identify every single underwriter
relationship. We thus analyze the differential trade reaction of small investors to firms in our
sample that never underwrite during our sample period (starting in 1987). Of the 382 brokerage
firms that issue recommendations for the firms in our sample, 105 (27%) do not have a single
match to an SDC underwriter firm who was either the lead or co-underwriter on an equity issue
for a US firm from 1987 on. These brokers issue about 5% of the recommendations in our
sample. As shown earlier, the recommendations of these analysts are less upward-biased than
any other subsample of affiliated or unaffiliated analysts (Table II).           As a result, the
recommendations of never affiliated analysts are significantly less (if at all) underperforming.
For example, in the market model with value-weighted index, the portfolio strategy of buying
any buy- or strong-buy-recommended stock and holding it for one year leads to abnormal returns
-0.20% (from trading day 2 to 255) rather than -18.21% for the buy and strong-buy
recommendations of affiliated analysts and -3.70% for those of all unaffiliated analysts. The net
performance from trading day -1 to day +255 is positive (0.34% from trading day -1 to +1).
       Nevertheless, as shown in the first column of Table VIII, small investors react
significantly less to buy and strong buy recommendations of never-affiliated analysts than to the
average (affiliated or non-affiliated) recommendation, with t-statistics of -1.7 for the interaction
with the buy dummy and -1.8 for the interaction with the strong buy dummy. The differential
reaction to a hold, sell, and strong sell recommendation issued by a never-affiliated analyst is
insignificant. We also account for the possibility that these firms are simply not “on the radar
screen” of small investors because they are too small. Specifically, we gather data on annual
sales and number of employees from D&B’s Million Dollar Database. We match this data to our
underwriting brokers, and use it to control for brokerage firm size. The matched data set is

                                                                                                 30
considerably smaller, only about 5% of the data set used in the baseline regressions (in Table V).
Despite the considerably reduced sample size, we find that our findings are robust to limiting the
sample to the largest 50% of firms for which we have sales data or employee count data. As
shown in the second and third columns of Table VIII, the results remain significant for strong
buy recommendations, and the coefficients become even more negative for both buy and strong
buy.
       Overall, these results suggest that informational constraints do not only fail to explain
small investors’ general inability to adjust their interpretation of recommendations but also fail to
fully explain the lack of adjustment for affiliation.


Analyst Quality. One difficulty in analyzing data on analyst recommendations is the lack of an
objective quality measure for recommendations. Our results that naive portfolio strategies, which
mirror the trade reaction of small investors, induce losses, leave room for two interpretations.
Either the lower returns result from small investors’ inability to account for analysts’ incentives
to distort information. Or investors happen to follow over-proportionally the recommendations of
lower-quality analysts. In order to distinguish investor naiveté from analyst quality, we repeat the
regression analysis of trade reaction on two subsamples. First, we restrict the analysis to analysts
who are classified both as affiliated and as unaffiliated at different points during the sample
period (“Ever-Affiliated Analysts”). Second, we restrict the analysis to analysts who were listed
in Institutional Investor Magazine’s most recent October list of top analysts (“All Star Team”).23
In both cases we reduce the heterogeneity in recommendations due to analyst characteristics.
       The results are shown in Table IX. As in the baseline regressions in Table V, we find that
large traders display negative trade reaction to hold, sell, and strong sell recommendations, no
significant reaction to buy recommendations, and positive reaction to strong buy
recommendations of unaffiliated analysts. Moreover, large traders adjust their trade reactions to
strong buy recommendations downwards if the analyst is affiliated. For all other
recommendation levels, the differential reaction is insignificant. We also replicate the result that
small traders take analyst recommendations “literally” and sell after sell and strong sell


                                                                                                  31
recommendations, hold after hold recommendations, and buy after buy and strong buy
recommendations of unaffiliated analysts. (For the smaller sample of All Star Analysts the sell
reaction loses significance.) As in the baseline regressions, small traders also display additional
sell pressure for the (very small number of) strong sell recommendations issued by affiliated
analysts, and they display no differential reaction to the sell, hold, and buy recommendations of
affiliated analysts. The differential reaction to strong buy recommendations of affiliated analysts
is negative; however the net trade reaction of small investors to affiliated strong buy
recommendations is still strongly positive (differently from the zero reaction of large investors).
       In summary, our two main results replicate both on the Ever-Affiliated subsample and on
the All-Star subsample. These additional findings make it unlikely that analyst heterogeneity
(beyond affiliation) and adverse sorting of small investors generate our results.


Brokerage Firm Heterogeneity. Similar concerns about recommendation quality may apply on
the firm level. While the above analysis rules out that small investors follow worse analysts, they
may still only be aware of a subset of widely published recommendations. Small investors too
positive reaction to recommendations in general and to affiliated recommendations in particular
may be capturing their stronger reaction to recommendations of certain (large) brokerage firms.
To account for heterogeneity of brokerage firms, we turn again to the subsample of firms with
matched sales or employee data and included these characteristics in the regression. We allow
the same degree of non-linearity and interact sales/employees with all levels of
recommendations. As pointed out above, the matched data set is considerably smaller. We thus
first replicated our baseline results on the subsample (first three columns of Table X). The results
are weaker for the subsample, but the coefficients maintain the same signs and almost the same
magnitudes as for the full sample. We include controls of every level of recommendation
interacted with the size proxy. As shown in columns 4 to 9, the additional controls do not
diminish the results any further. In fact, including the controls improves the results for the
subsample.




                                                                                                  32
Relationship Between Trading Size and Affiliation. An additional concern is that our empirical
findings may be due to systematic changes in trading size in response to affiliation. In particular,
it is conceivable that investors trade smaller amounts in response to affiliated buy
recommendations than in response to unaffiliated buy recommendations. The resulting
(re-)classification of large investors as small may generate the weaker trade reaction of large
traders to affiliated recommendations. An immediate weakness of this alternative explanation is
that variations in trade size cannot explain our first result, i.e. that small investors do not discount
analyst recommendations on average. Moreover, two additional results address this concern
directly.
        First, systematic shifts in trade size, which are large enough to move investors normally
trading above $50,000 into the class of investors trading below $20,000, should be reflected in
the remaining class of large trades. For example, a uniform shift would reduce the average size
of the remaining large trades above $50,000 by at least $30,000. We find, however, that the
average size of trades above $50,000 changes by less than 3.5% between unaffiliated to affiliated
recommendations. The average large trade is $217,244 in response to unaffiliated
recommendations and $209,836 in response to affiliated recommendations. It seems unlikely that
for a significant portion of investors with trades of more than $50,000 in response to unaffiliated
recommendations trade for less than $20,000 in response to affiliated recommendations, and so
any inaccuracies in our cutoffs are more likely to introduce noise than bias.
        Second, in order to explain the more negative reaction of large traders in response to
affiliated recommendations, it does not suffice for all traders to reduce their trade size to generate
changes in trade imbalance. Rather, the relative portion of buy-initiators has to go down among
traders classified as large. In other words, an abnormally high portion of those large investors
who are particularly keen to buy the recommended stock has to reduce their trade size enough to
drop out of the large-investor category and potentially join the small-investor category. This is
not the case. Buy-initiated large trades change on average by 3.9% and sell-initiated large trades
by 2.5%, i.e. both changes are small and similar.



                                                                                                     33
Front Running. Large traders may learn either of the recommendation itself, or the information
that sparks the new recommendation, earlier than small traders. As a result, their main trade
reaction may take place earlier and they may display either no or a contrarian trade reaction at
the time of the recommendation.
       The informational advantage of larger traders is likely to explain why large traders
display less of an abnormal trade reaction to recommendations in general, for instance as
measured by the normalized trade imbalance in Table V. The coefficients are typically much
smaller for large investors’ trade reaction for the trade reaction of small investors. Our results,
however, do not only indicate that large investors react “relatively less” but also that they adjust
their reaction downwards as schematized in Figure 2. Rather than display a weaker but
directionally unaffected trade reaction or a contrarian trade reaction, large investors “hold” in
response to buy recommendations and “sell” in response to hold recommendations but follow
strong buy, sell, and strong sell recommendations literally.
       Moreover, it is hard to detect any front running by large investors in the data. Table XI
presents the trading volume in the month preceding a recommendation until one day after the
recommendation. We find that both small and large trades peak on the day of the
recommendation and not before. This result holds regardless of whether trading volume is
measured in transaction dollars or number of trades. In addition, the increase in trading volume
from 20 trading days before the recommendation until the day of the recommendation is
relatively stronger for large investors (29% in number of trades, 51% in dollar volume) than for
small investors (11% and 16%). In addition, we re-analyzed the relation between
recommendation and trade imbalance for the week preceding the recommendation (days -5 to -1)
as in Table V.24 None of the coefficients would imply any anticipatory trades among large
traders. Quite to the opposite, large traders exhibit a significant buy-imbalance for “downgrade
buys,” i.e. stocks that are currently strong buys but will be downgraded to buy within the next
five trading days, while they exhibit a significant sell-imbalance once the downgrade occurs.
Similarly, large traders exert insignificant negative pressure before the upgrade to a strong buy,



                                                                                                 34
but significant buying pressure upon the issuance of the recommendation. These results remain
unchanged when we include a larger event window.


                                          V. Market Response

Consumer biases affect not only consumption decisions, but also market organization. Profit-
maximizing firms have incentives to tailor their product design and information provision to take
advantage of consumers’ systematic deviations from optimal decision-making. In the case of
stock market recommendations, it is profitable for investment banks to entertain a brokerage
branch issuing distorted investment advice and, in particular, to unify brokerage and corporate
finance under one roof since investors systematically neglect analyst distortions.
       How stable is the interaction between biased consumers and rational firms? Specifically,
can we identify circumstances under which firms would cease issuing distorted
recommendations? Or, could individual investors learn to account for the distortions? These
questions are of particular relevance from a policy perspective. Our return results imply that
consumer naiveté and firm response affect negatively the welfare of consumers. If the policy-
maker is concerned about small investors, the question is how to optimally remedy this effect.
       Our data allows us to shed light on two aspects of these questions. First, we can exploit
variation in coverage of stocks and ask whether increased coverage reduces the distortion of
recommendations. The more analysts are covering the same stock, the more each of them is
competing for the attention of investors. Do analysts compete for clients by providing more
accurate recommendations? Given that, almost always, the affiliated brokerages are covering the
stock, increased competition implies an increased number of non-affiliated analysts. Since
unaffiliated analysts tend to bias their recommendations less, one may expect that competition
will also moderate the distortion in affiliated recommendations. The empirical variation in
coverage reflects, of course, heterogeneity of the covered stocks, both in the cross-section and
over time, such as market capitalization, recent and long-term performance, volatility, ownership
structure (broad or narrow). We do not have a clean natural experiment that varies coverage for



                                                                                                 35
exogenous reasons. However, if stocks that attract more analyst coverage also received less
distorted recommendations, there would be potential for increased competition to alleviate the
adverse welfare effects of naiveté for small investors. Such a result would leave room for the
hypothesis that less intrusive policy measures such as removing barriers to entry and competitive
disadvantages for unaffiliated analysts (as, for example, intended with Regulation FD) may be
sufficient.
        To analyze the effect of increased coverage on the distortion of recommendation levels
we calculate for each recommendation the difference between the recommendation and the
consensus (average recommendation level) over the last month as well as the number of analysts
who have made a recommendation on the same stock in the past month. The summary statistics
are in Panel A of Table XII. We then relate the “deviation” from the consensus to affiliation and
to the number of analysts covering the stock. Columns 1 and 3 of Panel B show that, as expected,
affiliated recommendations tend to lie above the average recommendation, recommendations of
independent analysts below. Increased coverage, however, does not mitigate the effect. The
number of analysts enters insignificantly. Moreover, the opposite appears to be the case for
affiliated analysts. As shown in Column (2), the interaction of the affiliation dummy and the
number of analysts is positive and significant. Column (4) shows that SEO lead-underwriter
affiliation appears to contribute most to the upward bias, though the effect is not precisely
estimated. While the mechanism behind the correlation of higher coverage and more upward
bias of affiliated analysts cannot be deduced from this regression, the results are a first indication
that competition may not remedy informational distortion among analysts.
        The reaction of small investors to these recommendations is consistent with competition
failing to influence affiliated analysts towards more accurate recommendations. In untabulated
regressions, we compare the trade reactions for the quartile of recommendations with the highest
number of other analysts with reactions to the quartile with the lowest number. We find that the
small traders react slightly more positively to affiliated buy and strong buy recommendations,
relative to unaffiliated positive recommendations, when the competition is highest.



                                                                                                   36
       A second aspect of the dynamic market interaction between rational firms and biased
consumers, on which the data allows to shed some light, is the ability of small investors to learn.
While the data is insufficient to examine individual learning over time, we analyze the trade
reaction of the class of small investors as a whole. As mentioned before, our baseline results
replicate for every single year between 1994 and 2001 and do not display a clear trend. In
addition, we analyzed whether the neglect of independent analysts changed during the period of
analyst scandals. In August 2001, media coverage of analysts’ conflicts of interest skyrocketed
as the first lawsuit by an investor claiming to have lost money due to biased recommendations
was settled. In May 2002, extensive changes in the regulation of investment banking
organization and analyst affiliation disclosure were initialized, and May was the period of the
initial settlement in the case against Merrill Lynch filed by the state of New York. We take these
two dates as cutoff points and rerun the regressions of abnormal trade imbalances. Columns 4
and 5 of Table VIII show the overall reaction of small analysts becomes considerably weaker (in
terms of the size of the coefficients) and more negative. Moreover, in the sample starting in
5/2002, small investors start to react negatively to hold recommendations, i.e. appear to discount
neutral and positive recommendations on average. The reaction to recommendations of never-
affiliated analysts, on the other hand, becomes stronger, both in terms of economic and in terms
of statistical significance. Differently from the 2/1994-7/2001 sample, the reaction to buy
recommendations of independent analysts is now positive and (for the period starting in 5/2002)
statistically significant at the 1% level. Trade reaction to sell and strong-sell recommendations is
now negative, though insignificant. The other coefficients remain insignificant. (We fail to
explain the negative, though insignificant coefficient on “Strong Buy.”) This change in behavior
suggests that small investors started understanding the implications of incentive conflicts after
they were confronted with stark evidence on the resulting distortions. Information about these
incentive conflicts was available before August of 2001, and the skewed distribution of
recommendations made it even more apparent; but the mere knowledge of an incentive conflict
appears to be insufficient to motivate small investors to adjust. Anecdotes such as Merrill's



                                                                                                 37
Henry Blodget privately referring to stocks as “crap” that he had publicly touted may have
induced small investors to become less credulous and to avoid affiliated analysts.


                                             VI. Conclusion

Analysts face incentives to positively bias the information they provide to investors. These
incentives are reflected in the very low number of sell and strong sell recommendations issued
by all analysts, in particular by affiliated analysts. They also result in negative returns to
portfolios that follow analyst recommendations literally.
       The traditional economic assumption that uninformed agents account for the incentives of
informed agents does not seem to hold for small investors in the market for information about
stocks. While large investors interpret hold recommendations as sell signals and buy
recommendations as hold signals, small investors take recommendations literally. Small
investors also fail to account for the additional distortion due to underwriter affiliation. While
large investors discount positive recommendations of affiliated analysts even further than those
of unaffiliated analysts, small investor do not display differential trading reactions. Finally,
fiercer competition does not seem to solve the problem. Affiliated analysts issue even higher
recommendations when they face more competition of other analysts covering a stock.
       The lack of downward adjustment to positive and neutral recommendations in general
indicates that small traders lack the sophistication to account for analyst recommendations.
Naiveté may also explain small investors’ indifference between affiliated and unaffiliated
analysts. However, the higher informational costs for small traders to identify underwriting
affiliation are another important explanation for the latter mistake. It is striking, though, that
small traders do not remedy the informational asymmetry by focusing on analysts from non-
underwriting firms.
       The behavior of small investors gives rise to another fundamental question: Why do
small investors follow analyst recommendations at all? Why do they display any abnormal trade
reaction to recommendations – in fact stronger trade reaction than large investors? An obvious



                                                                                               38
alternative would be to invest in a broad index-based portfolio such as the S&P500. Is it due to
limited attention? Or to the entertainment value of following investment analysts? Or, do
investors fear the regret if a recommendation turns out to be enormously profitable? The analysis
in this paper does not offer an answer to these questions. However, whatever the answer, such
behavior is certainly consistent with the credulity, i.e. naiveté of small investors of which we
provide evidence.


       Our findings also have implications for the policy debate about the appropriate
regulations to be imposed on brokerage houses. Our results suggest that abstractly informing
agents of potential conflicts of interest may not be enough to remedy their behavior. Small
traders started to moderate their reaction to recommendations in general and to rely more on
independent (non-underwriting brokerages) only after analyst scandals got enormous media
attention.
       Thus, public and direct “warning” about the recommendations of certain types of analysts
may warrant more success. Legislative and other public pressure seems to have pushed the media
into that direction. For example, CNBC now discloses an analyst’s conflicts of interests,
whenever an analyst speaks on air. The network shows a graphic indicating whether the analyst
1) owns the stock; 2) the analyst's family owns the stock; 3) the analyst's firm owns more than
1% of the shares outstanding; 4) the firm does investment banking business with the company; or
5) other possible conflicts. On the other hand, independent analysts still claim that the media
tends to pay far more attention to affiliated than to non-affiliated analysts.25 In other words,
media bias may have exacerbated the distortions in the first place.
       As another result of the increased pressure on brokerage firms not to provide distorted
recommendations, some brokerage firms have started abolishing the use of recommendation
ratings.26 However, firms with more retail business appear unwilling to take that step.
       Overall, there is little indication that market forces and self-regulation are sufficient to
induce more sophisticated decision-making among small analysts. In order to prevent small
investors from naive investment decisions rather intrusive regulatory interference appears to be


                                                                                                39
required. We would like to stress, though, that concerns for market efficiency may lead to very
different conclusions. We have shown that large investors act exactly according to rational
theory and account fully for both types of distortions. Moreover, their trade imbalances are,
according to the classification employed in this paper, about 20 times as large as those of small
investors. Most of the (abnormal) volume considered is thus likely to be generated by rational
response to analyst recommendations. Regulation, such as prohibiting affiliated analysts from
issuing recommendations, would not improve the decision-making of institutional investors and
may in fact reduce informational efficiency.


GRADUATE SCHOOL OF BUSINESS, STANFORD UNIVERSITY
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, HARVARD UNIVERSITY




                                                                                              40
References

Akerlof, George, “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, LXXXIV (1970), 488-500.

Barber, Brad, Reuven Lehavy, Maureen McNichols, and Brett Trueman, “Can Investors Profit
       from the Prophets? Security Analyst Recommendations and Stock Returns,” Journal of
       Finance, LVII, (2001), 2449-2478.

Boni, Leslie and Kent L. Womack, “Solving the Sell-Side Research Problem: Insights from Buy-
       Side Professionals,” Working Paper, (2002).

Bradley, Daniel J., Bradford D. Jordan, and Jay R. Ritter, “The Quiet Period Goes out with a
       Bang,” Journal of Finance, LVIII, (2003), 1-36.

Crawford, Vincent and Joel Sobel, “Strategic Information Transmission,” Econometrica, L,
      (1982), 1431-1451.

Daniel, Kent, David Hirshleifer, and Siew Hong Teoh, “Investor Psychology in Capital Markets:
       Evidence and Policy Implications,” Journal of Monetary Economics, XLIX, (2002), 139-
       209.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier, “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and
      Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIX, (2004), 353-402.

Fisman, Ray, “The Effect of Competition on Forecasting Bias,” Working Paper, (2003).

Francis, Jennifer, J. Douglas Hanna and Donna R. Philbrick, “Management Communications
       with Securities Analysts,” Jounral of Accounting and Economics, XXIV, (1997), 363-
       394.

Gabaix, Xavier and David Laibson, “Shrouded Attributes and Information Suppression in
      Competitive Markets,” Harvard Working Paper, (2004).

Glaeser, Edward L., “Psychology and the Market,” NBER Working Paper No. 10203, (2003).

Hong, Harrison and Jeffrey D. Kubik, “Analyzing the analysts: Career concerns and biased
      earnings forecasts,” Journal of Finance, LVIII, (2003), 313-351.

Hvidkjaer, Soeren, “A Trade-based Analysis of Momentum,” mimeo, (2001).

International Organization of Securities Commissions, Report of the IOSCO Technical
        Committee on Analysts Conflicts of Interest, September 2003.

Iskoz, Sergey, “Relative Performance and Institutional Reaction to Underwriter Analyst
       Recommendations,” Working Paper, (2002).


                                                                                               41
Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Joonghyuk Kim, Susan D. Krische and Charles M. C. Lee, “Analyzing
       the Analysts: When Do Recommendations Add Value?” Journal of Finance,
       forthcoming, (2004).

Kolasinski, Adam and S.P. Kothari, “Analyst Objectivity and Investment Banking Relationships:
       Evidence on Analysts Affiliated with M&A Advisors.” MIT Working Paper, (2004).

Lee, Charles M. C., “Earnings News and Small Traders: An Intraday Analysis,” Journal of
      Accounting and Economics, XV, (1992), 265-302.

Lee, Charles M. C., and Balkrishna Radhakrishna, “Inferring Investor Behavior: Evidence from
       TORQ Data,” Journal of Financial Markets, III, (2000), 83-111.

Lee, Charles M. C., and Mark J. Ready, “Inferring Trade Directions from Intraday Data,”
      Journal of Finance, XLVI, (1991), 733-746.

Lin, Hsiou-wei and Maureen F. McNichols, “Underwriting Relationships, Analysts’ Earnings
       Forecasts and Investment Recommendations,” Journal of Accounting and Economics,
       XXV, (1998), 101-127.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Devin Shanthikumar, “Do Security Analysts Speak in Two Tongues?”
     Working Paper, (2004).

Michaely, Roni and Kent L. Womack, “Conflict of Interest and the Credibility of Underwriter
      Analyst Recommendations,” Review of Financial Studies, XII, (1999), 653-686.

______ and ______, “Brokerage Recommendations: Stylized Characteristics, Market Responses,
      and Biases,” in Richard Thaler, ed., Advances in Behavioral Finance II, forthcoming
      (2003).

Morgan, John and Phillip Stocken, “An Analysis of Stock Recommendations,” Journal of
      Economics, XXXIV, (2003), 183-203.

Odders-White, Elizabeth R, “On the Occurrence and Consequences of Inaccurate Trade
      Classification,” Journal of Financial Markets, III, (2000), 259-286.

Ottaviani, Marco and Francesco Squintani, “Non-Fully Strategic Information Transmission,”
       Working Paper, (2004).

Schotter, Andrew, “Decision Making in the Face of Naive Advice,” American Economic
       Review, Papers & Proceedings, (2003).

Shanthikumar, Devin, Small Trader Reactions to Consecutive Earnings Surprises, Working
       Paper (2003).



                                                                                          42
         1
              Report on Analysts Conflicts of Interest, International Organization of Securities Commissions [2003].
         2
              Michaely and Womack [1999].
         3
              Michaely and Womack [2003]; Hong and Kubik [2003].
         4
              DellaVigna and Malmendier [2004]; Fisman [2003].
         5
              For an overview see Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Teoh [2002], esp. pp. 177 ff.
         6
              Examples are briefing.com, FirstCall of Thomson Financial, and finance.yahoo.com.
         7
              The increasing convenience of online information suggests that analyst recommendations may have
become more easily accessible over time. Surprisingly, trade reactions to recommendations (Table VII) do not
display any time pattern and are replicable year-by-year. (Results available upon request.)
         8
              Note that the press releases mention the lead underwriter, but do not name the co-underwriters.
         9
              For details on management communication with analysts see Francis, Hanna and Philbrick [1997].
         10
              Boni and Womack [2002] cite several press reports and the testimony of the (then) acting SEC chairman
Laura Unger to the House Subcommittee on July 31, 2001.
         11
              See Bradley, Jordan, and Ritter [2003].
         12
              Interestingly, independent analysts had no buy or strong-buy recommendations on any stock at all during
2002 [Economists, October 23, 2002, “Unconflicted – Wall Streets Independent Analysts”].
         13
              Cf. Glaeser [2003].
         14
              The results are robust to variations in cutoff; see Panel B of Table IX.
         15
              Lin and McNichols [1998]; Michaely and Womack [1999].
         16
              The original Lee-Ready algorithm employs a “zero-tick” in the case that a trade is at the bid-ask midpoint
and the same price as the previous trade. Because of its low accuracy (about 60% according to Odders-White, 2000)
the “zero-tick” is left out in the modified Lee-Ready algorithm.
         17
               A significant number of the firms have either been acquired or dissolved, mostly within the last one to
five years.
         18
              For example, Morgan Stanley acquired Dean Witter for this purpose. Salomon Brothers acquired Smith
Barney for this purpose.
         19
               We are very grateful to Adam Kolasinski and S.P. Kothari for providing us with their mapping, which
uses corporate websites, news articles from LexisNexis, Hoover’s Online, and the Directory of Corporate
Affiliations to refine the matches.
         20
               Our subsequent analysis focuses on the traditional measures of affiliation (IPO- and SEO-lead/co-
underwriting), both in order to conform with previous literature and in order to minimize the impact of informational
asymmetries between large and small investors, e.g. about future underwriting.
         21
               Note that, as in all empirical work on trade reactions, the coefficient of determination is rather low,
typically around 1%, revealing large cross-sectional heterogeneity. Since the focus of the analysis, however, is not to
forecast trade volume but rather to contrast small and large investors’ interpretation of stock recommendations, the
goodness of fit has very limited role.


                                                                                                                       43
         22
              Note that the negative sell-coefficient in the upgrades sample is larger than in the downgrades sample but
insignificant. The estimation is again affected by the extremely small sample size of the identifying subsample.
         23
              We thank Steven Drucker for providing us with the lists of “All Star” analysts for the years 1995 through
2001. We obtained the names for the remainder of our sample period using the October issues of Institutional
Investor Magazine.
         24
              Table available upon request.
         25
              See New York Times, Money and Business Section, on August 17, 2003, “Wall Street’s Harsh New
Reality,” describing the (past) celebrity status and TV appearances of investment analyst with inside information.
         26
              Wall Street Journal on March 1, 2004, commenting on the decision of SG Cohen (and HSBC in the UK)
to abandon buy/sell ratings.




                                                                                                                     44
    TABLE I. Correlations of Institutional Ownership and Trades
Correlations of the change in the percentage of shares outstanding owned by
institutions (as of their 13f SEC filings) and measures of trade reaction.
Correlations are calculated using all sample firm-quarters from 12/1993 to
12/2002 with both recommendations data and trading data. P-values in
parentheses.
                             Small Investors         Large Investors
                                Values                   Values
Sum of daily abnormal trade      -0.073                   0.070
imbalances over last quarter    (0.000)                  (0.000)


Quarterly trade                 -0.082                  0.088
imbalance,                     (0.000)                 (0.000)
number of trades

Quarterly trade                 -0.089                  0.122
imbalance,                     (0.000)                 (0.000)
number of shares

Quarterly trade                 -0.085                  0.119
imbalance,                     (0.000)                 (0.000)
dollar value
                                                        TABLE II. Sample of Recommendations

Panel A: Entire Sample                                             Sample size                 Percentage within category                 Numerical translation 1
                                                                                      Strong                                   Strong                    Standard
                                                                                        Sell      Sell     Hold       Buy       Buy         Mean         Deviation
All                                                                       121,130         1.72    2.86     36.84     32.90       25.67       3.78            0.92
Unaffiliated                                                              110,113         1.82    2.95     37.75     32.27       25.22       3.76            0.92
Affiliated                                                                   8,466        0.73    1.61     25.68     39.56       32.42       4.01            0.84
        IPO lead-underwriting (past 5 years)                                 1,104        0.63    1.45     23.82     38.41       35.69       4.07            0.84
        SEO lead-underwriting (past 2 years)                                 1,198        0.42    1.50     21.87     39.90       36.31       4.10            0.82
        Co-underwriting equity2                                              4,143        0.99    1.62     26.43     38.79       32.17       4.00            0.86
        Future SEO (next 2 years)                                              665        0.00    0.30     14.29     45.56       39.85       4.25            0.70
        Bond lead underwriting (past year)                                   2,083        0.62    1.87     27.99     39.85       29.67       3.96            0.84
                       3
Never Affiliated                                                             6,418        3.91    4.25     36.63     28.01       27.19       3.70            1.04


Panel B: Subsample of firms with an IPO in the Sample size                                     Percentage within category                 Numerical translation 1
past 5 years, an SEO in the past 2 years or a bond                                    Strong                                   Strong                    Standard
issue in the past year                                                                  Sell      Sell     Hold       Buy       Buy         Mean         Deviation
All                                                                        54,952         1.55    2.47     34.99     33.73       27.24       3.83            0.91
Unaffiliated                                                               45,523         1.71    2.59     36.70     32.58       26.42       3.79            0.92
Affiliated4                                                                  8,237        0.75    1.65     25.88     39.43       32.28       4.01            0.85
Sample period is 10/29/1993 to 12/31/2002.
1
    The numerical translation scheme is 1=strong sell, 2=sell, 3=hold, 4=buy, 5=strong buy.
2
    We exclude co-underwriters who are also lead underwriters of SEO or IPO issuances to eliminate the large number of double-counts in this particular category.
3
 A brokerage firm is "Never Affiliated" if it does not have any (lead or co-underwriter) equity or bond underwriting affiliation during the entire sample period.
4
 "Affiliated" summarizes the same categories as in Panel A (IPO in the past 5 years, SEO in the past 2 years, IPO/SEO co-underwriting over the same horizons, future
underwriting in the next 2 years, and bond underwriting in the next year).
                                              TABLE III. Portfolio Returns

Panel A. The portfolios are constructed by buying in case of buy and strong buy recommendations and (short-)selling in case of
sell and strong-sell recommendations. The returns are buy-and-hold returns for the various periods specified in trading days.
(Results for cumulative abnormal returns are similar.) MM indicates market model, E equal-weighted market index, V value-
weighted market index, Raw stands for raw returns. The IPO/SEO sample restricts the analysis to firms with an IPO during the
last five years and/or an SEO during the last 2 years. The Benchmark Portfolio is constructed by buying a stock at issuance (IPO
or SEO). The sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001.
                                         Affiliated Analysts           Unaffiliated Analysts          Diff. Unaff. minus Aff.
                 Period             Return        SE       t-stat.  Return        SE      t-stat.   Return      SE       t-stat.
MM, V            (-10,-2)             -1.07%      0.17%       -6.38  -0.02% 0.04%            -0.48    1.05% 0.17%            6.08
                 (-1,+1)               0.12%      0.10%        1.25   0.70% 0.03%            27.57    0.58% 0.10%            5.82
                 (+2,+64)             -3.51%      0.44%       -7.89  -0.75% 0.12%            -6.39    2.76% 0.46%            6.00
                 (+2,+128)            -7.89%      0.63%      -12.50  -2.07% 0.17%           -12.51    5.82% 0.65%            8.92
                 (+2,+255)          -17.83%       0.89%      -19.97  -4.48% 0.23%           -19.09 13.35% 0.92%            14.46
                 (+256,+510)        -19.22%       0.89%      -21.48  -3.61% 0.23%           -15.37 15.61% 0.93%            16.87
                 (+511,+765)        -12.02%       0.89%      -13.44  -2.10% 0.23%            -8.95    9.92% 0.92%          10.73

MM, E          (-10,-2)              -1.09%     0.16%       -6.65     -0.09%    0.04%       -2.10     1.00%    0.17%       5.90
               (-1,+1)                0.22%     0.10%        2.27      0.70%    0.03%       27.68     0.48%    0.10%       4.79
               (+2,+64)              -3.71%     0.44%       -8.52     -0.91%    0.12%       -7.78     2.80%    0.45%       6.21
               (+2,+128)             -8.75%     0.62%      -14.17     -2.95%    0.17%      -17.82     5.80%    0.64%       9.07
               (+2,+255)            -21.36%     0.87%      -24.45     -7.50%    0.23%      -32.01    13.86%    0.90%      15.32
               (+256,+510)          -20.95%     0.88%      -23.93     -6.86%    0.23%      -29.20    14.09%    0.91%      15.55
               (+511,+765)          -15.31%     0.88%      -17.49     -6.07%    0.23%      -25.86     9.24%    0.91%      10.20

Upgrade        (-10,-2)              -1.21%     0.19%       -6.21      0.02%    0.06%        0.36     1.23%    0.20%       6.07
MM, V          (-1,+1)                1.06%     0.11%        9.42      1.23%    0.03%       44.78     0.17%    0.12%       1.47
               (+2,+64)              -3.89%     0.52%       -7.53     -0.34%    0.12%       -2.74     3.55%    0.53%       6.68
               (+2,+128)             -8.86%     0.73%      -12.06     -1.54%    0.18%       -8.65     7.32%    0.76%       9.68
               (+2,+255)            -19.51%     1.04%      -18.79     -3.64%    0.25%      -14.45    15.87%    1.07%      14.85
               (+256,+510)          -20.51%     1.04%      -19.71     -2.91%    0.25%      -11.52    17.60%    1.07%      16.44
               (+511,+765)          -12.50%     1.04%      -12.01     -0.88%    0.25%       -3.47    11.62%    1.07%      10.85

Downgrade      (-10,-2)              -0.34%     0.39%       -0.87     -0.10%    0.10%       -1.05     0.24%    0.40%       0.60
MM, V          (-1,+1)               -3.71%     0.22%      -16.51     -1.15%    0.06%      -20.65     2.56%    0.23%      11.06
               (+2,+64)              -1.90%     1.03%       -1.85     -1.70%    0.25%       -6.67     0.20%    1.06%       0.19
               (+2,+128)             -5.00%     1.46%       -3.42     -2.81%    0.36%       -7.74     2.19%    1.51%       1.45
               (+2,+255)            -10.98%     2.07%       -5.32     -5.65%    0.51%      -11.02     5.33%    2.13%       2.50
               (+256,+510)          -10.34%     2.07%       -5.00     -3.78%    0.51%       -7.37     6.56%    2.13%       3.08
               (+511,+765)           -1.01%     2.07%       -0.49     -0.67%    0.51%       -1.31     0.34%    2.13%       0.16

Raw Returns for IPO/SEO Portfolio
                                        Affiliated Analysts             Unaffiliated Analysts              Benchmark
               Period               Return       SE       t-stat     Return       SE      t-stat    Return    SE     t-stat
               (-10,-2)              -0.21%      0.17%       -1.22     0.59% 0.05%         11.725     0.94% 0.33%      2.813
               (-1,+1)                0.45%      0.10%      4.438      0.93% 0.03%         31.762    -0.55% 0.19%     -2.848
               (+2,+64)               3.63%      0.46%      7.808      3.61% 0.13%          26.96     5.25% 0.88%      5.955
               (+2,+128)              6.75%      0.66%     10.216      7.15% 0.19%         37.659     9.53% 1.25%      7.614
               (+2,+255)             11.47%      0.93%     12.278     13.76% 0.27%         51.237   15.80% 1.77%       8.922
               (+256,+510)            5.23%      0.94%        5.59    11.25% 0.27%         41.812     4.71% 1.77%      2.657
               (+511,+765)            9.94%      0.94%     10.621     12.13% 0.27%         45.067     8.80% 1.77%       4.96
                                     TABLE III. (continued )
Panel B. Time-series regression of daily excess returns (in percent) of zero-investment portfolios
with a buy-and-hold horizon of one year on Fama-French factors:
                     R b - R s = a i + b i (R M -R f ) + s i SMB + h i HML + e i
R b is the daily return of the buy portfolio, consisting of all stocks with at least one buy- or strong-
buy recommendation in the last year. R s is the daily return of the sell portfolio, consisting of all
stocks with at least one sell- or strong-sell recommendation in the last year. If the sell-portfolio
is empty we substitute with the R f , the one-month Treasury bill rate observed at the beginning of
the month (from CRSP). Portfolio returns are value-weighted by market capitalization. (The
results with equal weighting are virtually identical.) R M is the value-weighted return on all
NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ stocks (from CRSP). SMB (Small Minus Big) is the average daily
return on the three Fama-French small portfolios (Small Value, Small Neutral, Small Growth)
minus the average daily return on the three Fama-French big portfolios (Big Value, Big Neutral,
Big Growth). HML (High Minus Low) is the average return on the two Fama-French value
portfolios (Small Value, Big Value) minus the average return on the two Fama-French growth
portfolios (Small Growth, Big Growth). All factors and the risk-free rate are downloaded from Ken
website. The column entitled Affiliated considers all stocks that are recommended only by
affiliated analysts; the column Unaffiliated all stocks that are recommended only by unaffiliated
analysts. The sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001. Standard errors are in parentheses.


                                         Affiliated                       Unaffiliated
                                 a                -0.240                           -0.010
                                                 (0.086)                          (0.007)
                                 b                0.624                             0.050
                                                 (0.150)                          (0.013)
                                 s                0.286                             0.017
                                                 (0.169)                          (0.014)
                                 h                 0.268                            0.064
                                                 (0.225)                          (0.019)
                                R2               0.0181                            0.0092
                      Sample size                  1892                              1892
                             TABLE IV. Measures of Trade Reaction: Summary Statistics
Panel A. Summary Statistics Daily Trading for Sample Firms (2/1990 - 7/2001)
                                                         Mean        Median       Std. Dev.        Min               Max
                      Total number of small trades          66.10         32          102.17                 0             3,953
                       Total number of large trades         45.55             7       128.46                 0             3,627
              Number of small buy-initiated trades          29.97         13           50.98                 0             1,702
              Number of large buy-initiated trades          21.49             3        62.14                 0             1,911
              Number of small sell-initiated trades         26.79         13           42.76                 0             2,453
              Number of large sell-initiated trades         18.06             3        51.09                 0             1,563
    Total number of small buy/sell-initiated trades         56.76         26           91.06                 0             3,506
    Total number of large buy/sell-initiated trades         39.55             6       112.42                 0             3,339
                  ∆(buy-sell) initiated small trades          3.18            0        23.71             -1,440             965
                  ∆(buy-sell) initiated large trades          3.43            0        17.44              -660              791
                     Dollar value total small trades      562,641     244,263        932,865                 0      27,500,000
                     Dollar value total large trades    12,200,000 1,082,491      47,200,000                 0    6,640,000,000
            Dollar value small buy-initiated trades       255,760      99,175        461,493                 0      12,300,000
             Dollar value large buy-initiated trades     5,579,860    417,750     22,700,000                 0    4,860,000,000
            Dollar value small sell-initiated trades      228,392      98,550        387,906                 0      16,000,000
             Dollar value large sell-initiated trades    4,666,593    382,524     18,300,000                 0    3,120,000,000
   Dollar value total small buy/sell-initiated trades     484,153     204,600        828,517                 0      22,700,000
   Dollar value total large buy/sell-initiated trades   10,200,000    918,875     40,000,000                 0    5,510,000,000
             Dollar value of (buy-sell) small trades       27,368       2,338        201,131      -10,600,000        8,854,894
             Dollar value of (buy-sell) large trades      913,267             0    9,824,109    -1,430,000,000    4,860,000,000
                                                 N      2,996,265



Panel B. Summary Statistics Trade Imbalance - Sum over Event Days 0 and 1
                                                         Mean        Median         Std. Dev.              Min             Max
                  ∆(buy-sell) initiated small trades        19.26             5        78.52             -2,545            1560
                  ∆(buy-sell) initiated large trades        18.92             3        55.78              -543             1059
             Dollar value of (buy-sell) small trades      161,318      40,428        670,243      -17,100,000       11,800,000
             Dollar value of (buy-sell) large trades     4,775,637    369,841     33,900,000    -1,400,000,000    1,520,000,000
             Normalized imbalance of small trades          0.1087      0.1265         1.6348         -15.8431           7.1467
             Normalized imbalance of large trades          -0.0063     0.0141         1.4083          -9.4254           7.1931
                                               N           86,962
                                            TABLE V. Trade Reaction: Regression Results
OLS regressions of normalized trade imbalance over event days 0 and 1 on dummies for recommendation level (Strong Sell, Sell, Hold, Buy, Strong
Buy) and affiliation. In the three columns titled Upgrades, the sample is limited to recommendations which are upgrades; in the Downgrades
columns, the sample is limited to downgrades. Sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                  All Recommendations                             Upgrades                             Downgrades
                              Large       Small    Difference         Large         Small      Difference     Large      Small    Difference
                              Trade       Trade       S-L             Trade         Trade         S-L         Trade      Trade       S-L
               Strong Sell      -0.103      -0.105     -0.002                                                   -0.118     -0.168     -0.051
                               (0.039)     (0.045)    (0.059)                                                  (0.044)    (0.054)    (0.070)
                      Sell      -0.118      -0.139     -0.021            -0.377       -0.144        0.234       -0.134     -0.132      0.002
                               (0.033)     (0.038)    (0.051)           (0.173)      (0.201)      (0.266)      (0.040)    (0.049)    (0.063)
                     Hold       -0.091       0.007      0.098            -0.016        0.047        0.063       -0.150      0.013      0.163
                               (0.008)     (0.009)    (0.013)           (0.035)      (0.041)      (0.054)      (0.011)    (0.014)    (0.018)
                      Buy        0.011       0.134      0.123             0.086        0.190        0.105       -0.078      0.053      0.131
                               (0.008)     (0.010)    (0.013)           (0.015)      (0.018)      (0.024)      (0.017)    (0.021)    (0.027)
               Strong Buy        0.112       0.243      0.131             0.144        0.264        0.120
                               (0.010)     (0.011)    (0.015)           (0.013)      (0.015)      (0.020)

  (Strong Sell)*Affiliation     -0.195       -0.838     -0.642                                                  -0.285      -0.735      -0.450
                               (0.273)      (0.317)    (0.419)                                                 (0.292)     (0.357)     (0.462)
         (Sell)*Affiliation      0.094       -0.087     -0.180                                                   0.199       0.085      -0.114
                               (0.247)      (0.287)    (0.378)                                                 (0.260)     (0.318)     (0.411)
        (Hold)*Affiliation      -0.001        0.005      0.006           -0.385        0.526        0.911        0.023      -0.026      -0.049
                               (0.045)      (0.052)    (0.069)          (0.276)      (0.321)      (0.423)      (0.054)     (0.066)     (0.085)
         (Buy)*Affiliation      -0.068        0.013      0.081           -0.116        0.214        0.331        0.046       0.083       0.037
                               (0.034)      (0.040)    (0.052)          (0.089)      (0.103)      (0.136)      (0.064)     (0.078)     (0.101)
 (Strong Buy)*Affiliation       -0.129       -0.023      0.106           -0.053        0.088        0.141
                               (0.036)      (0.042)    (0.056)          (0.059)      (0.069)      (0.091)
Sample size                     86,962       86,962                      21,613       21,613                    24,520      24,520
R2                              0.0034       0.0085                      0.0068       0.0200                    0.0088      0.0012
      TABLE VI. Relationship between event-time trading and post-event returns
Regressions of buy-hold returns in percent (over the period of trading days indicated in parentheses in
the first column) on the dollar value of net buy- minus sell-initiated trades (in $m). The sample is
limited to all firms with at least one year of returns following the recommendation. The
recommendation sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001. Standard errors in parentheses.
                  Small Trades        Constant      R2          Large Trades        Constant     R2
             (in millions of dollars)                      (in millions of dollars)

(2, 64)                -0.879           0.034     0.0008           -0.004             0.033    0.0000
                      (0.106)          (0.001)                    (0.002)            (0.001)
(2, 128)               -1.870           0.071     0.0017           -0.010             0.073    0.0001
                      (0.154)          (0.001)                    (0.003)            (0.001)
(2, 255)               -3.540           0.146     0.0025           -0.002             0.014    0.0003
                      (0.241)          (0.002)                    (0.005)            (0.002)

Sample size: 85,577
                                                                TABLE VII. Robustness.
Panel A. Clustering                                                                                Panel B. Alternative Trade Size Groups
OLS regressions of normalized trade imbalance. Trade reaction is summed over event days 0 and      OLS regressions of normalized trade imbalance.
1. The recommendation levels (Strong Sell, Sell, Hold, Buy, Strong Buy) and Affiliation are        Trade reaction is summed over event days 0 and
dummy variables. Cluster by Year and Cluster by Brokerage Firm indicate that the standard          1. The recommendation levels (Strong Sell, Sell,
errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and arbitrary within-year or, respectively, to arbitrary   Hold, Buy, Strong Buy) and Affiliation are
within-firm correlation. Sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001. Standard errors in                dummy variables. Sample period is 2/1994
parentheses.                                                                                       through 7/2001. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                  Cluster by Year                Cluster by Brokerage Firm              Trade Size - Dollar Value (thousands)
                           Large       Small Difference        Large       Small     Difference
                           Trade       Trade       S-L         Trade       Trade        S-L              ≤5          5-10        10-20       20-50
             Strong Sell     -0.103      -0.105     -0.002       -0.103      -0.105       -0.002         0.014      -0.125      -0.112      -0.018
                            (0.044)     (0.032)    (0.042)      (0.031)     (0.056)      (0.049)       (0.042)     (0.043)     (0.042)     (0.040)
                    Sell     -0.118      -0.139     -0.021       -0.118      -0.139       -0.021        -0.001      -0.094      -0.145      -0.012
                            (0.031)     (0.050)    (0.044)      (0.030)     (0.057)      (0.057)       (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.036)     (0.035)
                   Hold      -0.091       0.007      0.098       -0.091       0.007        0.098         0.065       0.005      -0.009       0.008
                            (0.013)     (0.021)    (0.017)      (0.009)     (0.018)      (0.019)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
                    Buy       0.011       0.134      0.123        0.011       0.134        0.123         0.129       0.107       0.070       0.057
                            (0.015)     (0.019)    (0.014)      (0.011)     (0.010)      (0.011)       (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)     (0.009)
             Strong Buy       0.112       0.243      0.131        0.112       0.243        0.131         0.182       0.198       0.145       0.101
                            (0.018)     (0.030)    (0.016)      (0.012)     (0.023)      (0.019)       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.010)

(Strong Sell)*Affiliation    -0.195     -0.838      -0.642       -0.195      -0.838      -0.642         -0.695      -0.465      -0.755      -0.199
                            (0.216)    (0.320)     (0.463)      (0.226)     (0.266)     (0.333)        (0.296)     (0.300)     (0.294)     (0.285)
       (Sell)*Affiliation     0.094     -0.087      -0.180        0.094      -0.087      -0.180         -0.105      -0.248       0.033      -0.360
                            (0.136)    (0.184)     (0.282)      (0.233)     (0.275)     (0.339)        (0.268)     (0.271)     (0.266)     (0.258)
      (Hold)*Affiliation     -0.001      0.005       0.006       -0.001       0.005       0.006          0.088      -0.089       0.003       0.057
                            (0.038)    (0.050)     (0.066)      (0.040)     (0.077)     (0.076)        (0.049)     (0.049)     (0.048)     (0.047)
       (Buy)*Affiliation     -0.068      0.013       0.081       -0.068       0.013       0.081          0.013       0.008       0.008      -0.080
                            (0.061)    (0.054)     (0.088)      (0.040)     (0.029)     (0.042)        (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.037)     (0.036)
(Strong Buy)*Affiliation     -0.129     -0.023       0.106       -0.129      -0.023       0.106          0.058      -0.041      -0.029      -0.080
                            (0.031)    (0.032)     (0.049)      (0.036)     (0.048)     (0.047)        (0.040)     (0.040)     (0.039)     (0.038)
Sample size: 86,962.
 2
R                            0.0034     0.0085                   0.0034     0.0085                     0.0073      0.0062      0.0035       0.0017
                                                      TABLE VIII. Independent Analysts
Regressions of Normalized Trade Imbalance, Sum Over Event Days 0 and 1
Difference in Number of Buy and Sell Initiated Trades, Normalized
                                                                                                        Small Trades
                                                                                Feb-94 - Jul-01                            Aug-01 -              May-02 -
                                                                                             1                     2
                                                                                      Sales          Employees              Dec-02               Dec-02
                                              Strong Sell           -0.122             1.066             1.018                0.125                0.197
                                                                   (0.048)           (0.575)           (0.618)              (0.068)              (0.073)
                                                        Sell        -0.157            -0.204            -0.204               -0.049               -0.130
                                                                   (0.041)           (0.138)           (0.139)              (0.038)              (0.042)
                                                      Hold           0.005             0.084             0.122                0.000               -0.074
                                                                   (0.010)           (0.046)           (0.050)              (0.015)              (0.018)
                                                       Buy           0.139             0.196             0.243                0.107               -0.030
                                                                   (0.010)           (0.048)           (0.052)              (0.017)              (0.023)
                                              Strong Buy             0.246             0.253             0.286                0.148               -0.041
                                                                   (0.011)           (0.048)           (0.050)              (0.020)              (0.026)

                       (Strong Sell)*NeverAffiliated                -0.002            -1.035            -0.987               -0.074               -0.226
                                                                   (0.132)           (0.613)           (0.653)              (0.199)              (0.244)
                                (Sell)*NeverAffiliated               0.125             1.780             1.780               -0.139               -0.102
                                                                   (0.113)           (1.632)           (1.640)              (0.263)              (0.288)
                               (Hold)*NeverAffiliated                0.032             0.102             0.057                0.010               -0.022
                                                                   (0.039)           (0.099)           (0.102)              (0.069)              (0.084)
                                (Buy)*NeverAffiliated               -0.075            -0.394            -0.383                0.143                0.260
                                                                   (0.044)           (0.386)           (0.425)              (0.085)              (0.109)
                       (Strong Buy)*NeverAffiliated                 -0.087            -0.168            -0.198               -0.106               -0.029
                                                                   (0.048)           (0.102)           (0.104)              (0.069)              (0.086)

                Brokers limited to top 50% sales                                         X
     Brokers limited to top 50% employee count                                                             X
Sample Size                                                        86,962             4,426              3,959              25,557                14,904
     2
R                                                                  0.0085             0.0134            0.0175              0.0043                0.0030
Standard errors in parentheses.
1
    Sales represents the dollar value of annual sales for the brokerage firm issuing the recommendation, and is used as a broker size control.
2
    Employees represents the total number of employees for the brokerage firm issuing the recommendation and is used as a broker size control.
                                     TABLE IX. Analyst Quality
OLS regressions of normalized trade imbalance. Trade reaction is summed over event days 0 and 1. The
recommendation levels (Strong Sell, Sell, Hold, Buy, Strong Buy) and Affiliation are dummy variables.
The Ever-Affiliated Analysts sample includes only recommendations made by analysts who issue at least
one affiliated and one unaffiliated recommendation are included. The All-Star Analysts sample is limited
to recommendations made by analysts who were listed in Institutional Investor Magazine's most recent
October list of top analysts. Sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                       Ever-Affiliated Analysts                All-Star Analysts
                                    Large      Small      Difference     Large      Small Difference
                                    Trade      Trade         S-L         Trade      Trade        S-L
                     Strong Sell      -0.149      -0.197       -0.048      -0.153 -0.152           0.001
                                     (0.069)     (0.080)     (0.105)      (0.092) (0.110)        (0.144)
                            Sell      -0.256      -0.241        0.015      -0.260 -0.153           0.107
                                     (0.057)     (0.067)     (0.088)      (0.124) (0.148)        (0.194)
                           Hold       -0.113      -0.012        0.101      -0.120 -0.010           0.110
                                     (0.012)     (0.014)     (0.019)      (0.022) (0.027)        (0.035)
                            Buy       -0.004       0.145        0.149       0.001     0.145        0.144
                                     (0.012)     (0.015)     (0.019)      (0.022) (0.026)        (0.034)
                     Strong Buy        0.155       0.299        0.145       0.157     0.353        0.197
                                     (0.015)     (0.017)     (0.022)      (0.028) (0.033)        (0.043)

      (Strong Sell)*Affiliation       -0.149      -0.746      -0.597       -0.517    -1.592      -1.074
                                     (0.276)     (0.322)     (0.424)      (0.621)   (0.742)     (0.967)
               (Sell)*Affiliation      0.276      -0.059      -0.335        0.713     0.510      -0.203
                                     (0.253)     (0.294)     (0.388)      (0.627)   (0.748)     (0.976)
              (Hold)*Affiliation       0.022       0.025       0.003        0.041     0.116       0.075
                                     (0.046)     (0.053)     (0.070)      (0.081)   (0.097)     (0.127)
              (Buy)*Affiliation       -0.056       0.005       0.061       -0.056    -0.051       0.005
                                     (0.035)     (0.041)     (0.054)      (0.059)   (0.070)     (0.092)
      (Strong Buy)*Affiliation        -0.171      -0.083       0.088       -0.150    -0.156      -0.006
                                     (0.038)     (0.044)     (0.058)      (0.070)   (0.084)     (0.109)
Sample size                           39,632      39,632                   11,882    11,882
R2                                   0.0058       0.0121                    0.006   0.0135
                                                             TABLE X. Brokerage Heterogeneity

OLS regressions of normalized trade imbalance. Trade reaction is summed over event days 0 and 1. Recommendation level (Strong Sell, Sell, Hold, Buy, Strong Buy) and
Affiliation are dummy variables. Regressions are based on sub-sample of firms for which Sales and Employee data are available from D&B's Million Dollar Database.
Sample period is 2/1994 through 7/2001. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                                Large         Small     Difference       Large       Small   Difference          Large         Small      Difference
                                                Trade         Trade        S-L           Trade       Trade       S-L             Trade         Trade         S-L
Strong Sell and Sell                            -0.170        -0.048      0.122          -0.205      -0.070     0.135            -0.274         0.131       0.405
                                               (0.079)       (0.091)     (0.121)        (0.090)     (0.104)    (0.137)          (0.188)       (0.211)      (0.282)
Hold                                           -0.092       0.009       0.101            -0.094      -0.012       0.081           -0.060      -0.055       0.006
                                              (0.027)      (0.031)     (0.041)          (0.031)     (0.035)      (0.047)         (0.048)     (0.054)      (0.073)
Strong Buy and Buy                             0.051        0.192       0.141            0.057       0.181        0.124           0.034       0.186        0.151
                                              (0.020)      (0.023)     (0.030)          (0.021)     (0.024)      (0.032)         (0.029)     (0.032)      (0.043)

(Strong Sell, Sell)*Affiliation                0.127        -0.012      -0.138           0.145       0.000        -0.145          0.012       -0.690       -0.702
                                              (0.382)      (0.441)     (0.584)          (0.383)     (0.442)      (0.585)         (0.833)     (0.938)      (1.254)
(Hold)*Affiliation                             0.047        0.166       0.119            0.048       0.171        0.123           0.169       0.327        0.158
                                              (0.116)      (0.133)     (0.176)          (0.116)     (0.133)      (0.177)         (0.201)     (0.226)      (0.302)
(Strong Buy, Buy)*Affiliation                  -0.091       0.049       0.140            -0.094      0.053        0.147           -0.060      0.090        0.149
                                              (0.062)      (0.071)     (0.094)          (0.062)     (0.071)      (0.094)         (0.109)     (0.123)      (0.164)
(Recommendation level)*Sales                                                              X            X           X
(Recommendation level)*Employees                                                                                                    X            X           X
                             Sample Size       8,767        8,767                        8,767       8,767                        4,626        4,626
                                      R2      0.0027       0.0095                       0.0029      0.0099                       0.0015       0.0117
                                        TABLE XI. Trading Behavior Preceding Recommendations
Average trading volume (in number of trades or dollar value of trading) per stock-day during specified event-time period. Sample period is 2/1994
through 7/2001.
                         [-20,-16] [-15,-11]       [-10,-6]          -5          -4          -3           -2          -1          0            1
Number of Trades
Small Trade
                  Mean        99.14       99.67       100.99        102.01       102.42      103.31       105.24      109.57     114.62       110.78
                Median           52          52           53             54          54          54            55         59          62           59
                StdDev       137.10      137.88       140.32        140.20       140.72      142.08       144.56      145.04     147.92       151.11
Large Trade
                  Mean        88.85       89.10        90.16          91.63       92.58       93.71        96.85      107.57     114.18       100.79
                Median           27          27           27             27          28          28            29         33          36           32
                StdDev       176.72      177.94       180.46        182.73       183.54      183.78       187.79      204.15     214.41       192.65
Dollar Volume (thousands of dollars)
Small Trade
                  Mean          887         891          903            912         916         924          942         984       1,029          984
                Median          447         448          453            461         464         468          476         511         543          506
                StdDev        1,250       1,257        1,277          1,277       1,280       1,294        1,312       1,314       1,339        1,347
Large Trade
                  Mean       24,100      24,100       24,500        25,000       25,600      26,200       27,300      32,600     36,400       29,000
                Median        5,171       5,170        5,209          5,328       5,418       5,476        5,745       6,600       7,193        6,373
                StdDev       63,000      62,800       67,700        65,100       70,500      74,200       70,200      89,400    118,000       74,700
                   TABLE XII. The Effect of Coverage on Recommendation Bias

Panel A. Summary Statistics
Recommendation Consensus is the average of all analyst recommendations on a specific stock over the
last month. Analysts (#) is the number of analysts who have issued a recommendation for the specific
stock during the last month.
                                                    Mean      Median       25%      75%       St.Dev.
Recommendation Consensus                             3.84       3.87       3.50     4.17       0.51
Difference Recommendation to "Consensus"             -0.06      0.00      -0.75     0.67       0.95
Analysts (#)                                          1.5       1.00      0.00      2.00       1.85


Panel B. Regression Analysis
OLS regression of the difference between a recommendation and the average recommendation
in the past month (consensus) on dummies for affiliation and a dummy for "never affiliated"
analyst, the number of analysts and its interaction with the dummies. The sample period is
1993-2000 (since Regulation FD became effective on Oct. 23, 2000). Standard errors are in
parentheses.
                                                      (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)
Affiliation                                          0.131     0.066
                                                    (0.016)   (0.027)
     IPO Affiliation                                                      0.098     0.020
                                                                         (0.417)   (0.070)
     SEO Affiliation                                                      0.234     0.131
                                                                         (0.038)   (0.063)
     Co-underwriter Affiliation                                           0.104     0.053
                                                                         (0.019)   (0.033)
Never Affiliated                                     -0.157    -0.138     -0.157    -0.139
                                                    (0.015)   (0.025)    (0.015)   (0.025)
Analysts (#)                                         -0.001    -0.001     -0.001    -0.001
                                                    (0.002)   (0.002)    (0.002)   (0.002)
Analysts (#)*Affiliation                                       0.035
                                                              (0.012)
     (Analysts #)*IPO Affiliation                                                   0.046
                                                                                   (0.032)
     (Analysts #)*SEO Affiliation                                                   0.055
                                                                                   (0.055)
     (Analysts #)*Co-underwriter Affiliation                                        0.027
                                                                                   (0.014)
(Analysts #)*(Never Affiliated)                                -0.013               -0.009
                                                              (0.009)              (0.010)
Constant                                             -0.013    -0.013     -0.013    -0.012
                                                    (0.006)   (0.005)    (0.005)   (0.006)
Sample size: 122,730.
                                        Appendix Table 1. Industry Summary Statistics
North American Industry Codes of recommended firms, split up by affiliation. Sample period 10/29/1993-12/31/2002.
                                                                   Subsample of Recommendations                                    %-point
                                                                                                                                  diff. "any
                                                                                                                                 affiliation
                                                          IPO         SEO                     Any equity      No       Never minus no
Industry (NAIC)                               All      affiliation affiliation Co-affiliation affiliation affiliation affiliated affiliation"

All                                         233,698        2,016      2,334           7,524        11,874    222,170     12,442

Agriculture                                      514          0           14             10            24         490         26
                                              0.22%       0.00%       0.60%          0.13%         0.20%       0.22%      0.21%      -0.02%

Mining                                       15,233          124         192            436           752     14,509         830
                                             6.52%        6.15%       8.23%          5.79%         6.33%      6.53%       6.67%      -0.20%

Utilities                                    12,446           28         202            484           714     11,734         532
                                             5.33%        1.39%       8.65%          6.43%         6.01%      5.28%       4.28%      0.73%

Construction                                   2,910          8           30             86           124       2,786         96
                                              1.25%       0.40%       1.29%          1.14%         1.04%       1.25%      0.77%      -0.21%

Manufacturing                                93,768          710        832           2,614         4,156     89,710       5,336
                                            40.12%       35.22%     35.65%          34.74%        35.00%     40.38%      42.89%      -5.38%

Wholesale Trade                                8,350          96         108            324           528       7,834        476
                                              3.57%       4.76%       4.63%          4.31%         4.45%       3.53%      3.83%      0.92%

Retail Trade                                 19,572          206         168            584           958     18,664         836
                                             8.37%       10.22%       7.20%          7.76%         8.07%      8.40%       6.72%      -0.33%

Transportation and Warehousing                 5,980          46          72            222           340       5,660        210
                                              2.56%       2.28%       3.08%          2.95%         2.86%       2.55%      1.69%      0.32%

Information                                  15,660          160         140            540           840     14,846         966
                                             6.70%        7.94%       6.00%          7.18%         7.07%      6.68%       7.76%      0.39%

Finance and Insurance                        36,010          344        306           1,250         1,900     34,154       2,014
                                            15.41%       17.06%     13.11%          16.61%        16.00%     15.37%      16.19%      0.63%

Real Estate and Rental Leasing                 2,128          88          58            208           354       1,796        108
                                              0.91%       4.37%       2.49%          2.76%         2.98%       0.81%      0.87%      2.17%

Professional, Scientific,                      5,361          48          56            158           262       5,107        306
Technical Services                            2.29%       2.38%       2.40%          2.10%         2.21%       2.30%      2.46%      -0.09%

Mgmt of Companies and Enterprises                 0           0           0              0             0           0          0
                                              0.00%       0.00%       0.00%          0.00%         0.00%       0.00%      0.00%      0.00%

Administrative and Support and                 3,380          56          34            140           230       3,156        200
Waste Mgmt and Remediation Services           1.45%       2.78%       1.46%          1.86%         1.94%       1.42%      1.61%      0.52%

Educational Services                             510          6           10             18            34         476         76
                                              0.22%       0.30%       0.43%          0.24%         0.29%       0.21%      0.61%      0.07%

Health Care and Social Assistance              4,232          10          46            214           270       3,962        184
                                              1.81%       0.50%       1.97%          2.84%         2.27%       1.78%      1.48%      0.49%

Arts, Entertainment, Recreation                  886          22          14             70           106         780         14
                                              0.38%       1.09%       0.60%          0.93%         0.89%       0.35%      0.11%      0.54%

Accommodation and Food services                5,914          24          30             86           140       5,786        196
                                              2.53%       1.19%       1.29%          1.14%         1.18%       2.60%      1.58%      -1.43%

Other Services                                   386          22          22             36            80         324         22
                                              0.17%       1.09%       0.94%          0.48%         0.67%       0.15%      0.18%      0.53%

Public Administration                             0           0           0              0             0           0          0
                                              0.00%       0.00%       0.00%          0.00%         0.00%       0.00%      0.00%      0.00%
       FIGURE I. Sample Webpage of Analyst Recommendations (finance.yahoo.com )

On January 16, 2003, Apache Corp (APA), an oil and gas exploration and production company traded on the
NYSE, issued a secondary equity offering (SEO), underwritten by several investment banks. Morgan Stanley
acted as the lead underwriter, while Petrie Parkman & Co, AG Edwards & Sons, Robert W Baird & Co, RBC
Dain Rauscher Corp, Citigroup/Salomon Smith Barney, and Raymond James & Associates all acted as co-
underwriters of the $553.7 million common stock offering.
       FIGURE II. Rational and naive trade reactions to analyst recommendations.
The recommendation levels are indicated as (--) for "strong sell", (-) for "sell", (0) for hold, (+) for
"buy", and (++) for strong buy.
                                              Rational Investors                 Naïve Investors

                                            Rec.           Trade               Rec.           Trade
                                                          Reaction                           Reaction

                    Unaffiliated            (– –)            Sell*            (– –)            Sell*
                    Analysts                 (– )            Sell*             (– )            Sell
                                             (0)             Sell              (0)             Hold
                                             (+)             Hold              (+)             Buy
                                            (+ +)            Buy              (+ +)            Buy

                    Affiliated              (– –)            Sell*            (– –)            Sell*
                    Analysts                 (– )            Sell*             (– )            Sell
                                             (0)             Sell*             (0)             Hold
                                             (+)             Sell              (+)             Buy
                                            (+ +)            Hold             (+ +)            Buy

* Alternatively, investors may display no abnormal trade reaction since previous negative (sell or hold) recommendations
induced them to sell earlier. Short-sell constraints may strengthen this effect.
