                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                DEMAND VARIABILITY, SUPPLY SHOCKS
                AND THE OUTPUT-INFLATION TRADEOFF




                        Richard T. Froyen

                          Roger N. Waud



                      Working Paper No. 1081




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                          February 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Financial Markets and Monetary Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                             NBER Working Paper #1081
                                                  February 1983




                   Demand Variability, Supply Shocks
                   and the Output—Inflation Tradeoff



                               ABSTRACT



     This paper examines the shift in the relation between the inflation

rate and the rate of growth of real output which has occurred in the United

States over the past three decades, and attempts to assess the relative

importance of three possible lines of explanation: a) the new classical

view of the output—inflation tradeoff, initially specified by Lucas;

b) the effect of supply—side shocks, such as energy prices; c) the effect

of inflation variability on the natural rate of real output, as hypothesized

by Milton Friedman. The paper concludes that b) and c) seem to have

played a significant role in the observed shift from a positive to a negative

correlation between the rate of inflation and the rate of real output growth,

but that a) did not.




                                   Richard T. Froyen
                                       and
                                   Roger N. Waud

                                   Department of Economics
                                   Gardner Hall
                                   University of North Carolina—Chapel Hill
                                   Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27514

                                   (919) 966—5332
 I. Introduction

      Over the past three decades there has been a shift in the relation between

 the rate of inflation and the unemployment rate, and analogously, between the

 rate of inflation and the rate of change of real output. As pointed out by Milton

 Friedman (1977), as this shift evolved, the traditional Phillips curve view that

 inflation and unemployment are inversely related was replaced by the "natural

 rate" or "accelerationist" or "expectations adjusted Phillips curve" hypothesis

 (as it is variously called), which in turn has had to give ground to the more

recent empirical phenomenon of an apparent positive relation between inflation

and unemployment, or a negative relation between inflation and the rate of change

of real output. In the United States, while the rate of inflation and the unem—

ployment rate were negatively correlated for the period 1957 to 1968 (—.86),

for the period 1969 to 1980 the correlation between these variables was positive

(.44). Similarly, the correlation between the rate of inflation and the rate

of change of real output was positive from 1957 to 1968 (.16), and negative

over the period 1969 to 1980 (.65)) The purpose of this paper is to sort out

and assess empirically the possible contribution of each of the following in

explaining the shift in the relation between the rate of inflation and the rate

of change of real output:

     a) the new classical view of the output—inflation tradeoff, initially

         specified by Lucas (1972, 1973);

     b) the effect of supply—side shocks, particularly energy price shocks;

     c) the effect of inflation varia1ility on the natural rate of real

         output, hypothesized by Friedman (1977).

     The new classical view hypothesizes that only unanticipated changes in

aggregate demand would affect real output. Furthermore, within the new classical

view the response of real output to unanticipated changes in aggregate demand is

specified to be inversely related to the variability of inflation and aggregate
                                                              2




demand. Hence in the new classical view a deteriorating output—inflation

tradeoff can be explained by increased variability of inflation and aggregate demand.

     Other things equal, supply—side shocks such as the dramatic increases in

the price of energy would be expected to cause an increase in the rate of

inflation and a decrease in the rate of change of real output. Hence the energy

price increases of the 1970s might account, at least in part, for the observed

shift from a positive to a negative relation between the rate of inflation and

the rate of change of real output.

     Friedman's view (1977, pp. 464—468) essentially is that, due to institu-

tional rigidities, increasing variability of the rate of inflation causes a

reduction in the efficiency of the price system in guiding economic activity,

hence a possible increase in the unemployment rate and a reduction in the rate

of change of real output. Since high inflation rates tend to be associated with

greater inflation variability this is reflected in the data as a positive re-

lationship between the inflation rate and unemployment, or a negative relationship

between inflation and the rate of change of real output.

     The model constructed here incorporates each of tihe above influences.

The model, to be described in Section II, is generically related to the Lucas—type

model (1973) as amended by Cukierman and Wachtel (1979). This Lucas—type model

is further modified to explicitly incorporate the effects of supply—side factors,

in particular energy prices, as well as to allow for a variable natural rate of

output as suggested.by Milton Friedman's analysis referred to above. Section III

of the paper presents estimates of the 'model for the United States for the years

1959—1980. Section IV examines the implications of these estimates concerning

the causes of the change in the output—inflation relationship. Section V

contains concluding comments.
                                                                  3



 II. Model Specification

      As noted above, the model used in this study is generically related to the

 Lucas—type model (1973) as amended by Cukierman and Wachtel (1979). These models

 incorporate the new classical view (a) in the introduction, but do not explicitly

 allow for influences (b) and Cc) ——   effects   of supply—side shocksand the effects

 of inflation variability on the natural rate of output. In this section we

 consider first how supply shocks can be incorporated into the model.2 We then

 consider the modifications of the model that are required to allow for variability in

the natural rate as suggested by Milton Friedman's analysis.


11.1 Supply—Side Shocks

     Following Lucas we assume the economy consists of a large number, in, of

"scattered, competitive markets!t (Lucas, 1973, p. 327). We derive-output supply

schedules for each of these markets. Then we specify the demand side of the

model and describe expectations formation. Finally, we derive the aggregate out-

put equation for the model. In this discussion we assume that the supply shock

comes from a change in the price of the energy input to the production process.

For estimation, as explained in Section III we employ an energy price as well

as an import price measure of supply shocks.


 II.1.a Market Supply Equations

     The supply equations derived here are based on factor demand equations

for energy and labor as well as labor supply functions at the individual market

level. (For a more detailed derivation, see the appendix, section A.I.) The

equations are for the short run ——   that   is, the capital stock is taken as given.

     The factor demand equations take the following form:
                                                                         4


                                                                1


                 1°t1           [a10a11a12a13a14]

                                                              Wt(v)           (1)
                 LNt\T          La2oa2ia22a23a24]


                                                                Cv)



where v indexes the market and for         each   market,

     Q(v) = quantity       of   energy; N(v) = number of labor hours;
             = market specific producer price; W(v) = money wage;

             =   price   of energy; K(v) =    quantity      of capital

where all variables are in logs.

     Equations (1) express the demands for energy and labor as functions of

product and factor prices. These functions are derived on the assumption that

firms maximize profit subject to the production function constrairft. The log

linearity of equations (1) can be viewed as deriving from the assumption that

the production function is Cobb—Douglas or, more generally, as an approximation

to factor demand equations based on production functions of the generalized

CES type.3

     The supply of labor to firms in a specific market is taken to be a log

linear function of the money wage in that market and laborers' expectation

of the general price level p (conditioned on information in market v).


                 Nt(v)     d0 + d1p   +
                                          d2Wt(v)   .
                                                                               (2)

Equation (2) indicates laborers know the market—specific money wage but must

form an expectation of the economy—wide aggregate price level. Laborers'

formulation of expected price p will be modeled below.

   The labor supply function (2) is used to substitute W(v) out of equations

(1). We can then express the quantities of labor and energy as functions of
                                                                       5



 product price, laborers' expectations of the aggregate price level, the price

 of energy, and the capital stock,


                                                           1




           1°t(1    -   [b10b11b12b13b14]              P       ,   v       l,...,m.    (3)


           [N(v)j       [b20b21b22b23b24]
                                                       Kt(v)


     The supply function for market v is derived by substituting equations (3)

 into the production function. The resulting supply functions are


            yt(v)   g0 +   1P(V)    +
                                        g2p   +
                                                  3(v) + 4K(v)     ,                  (4)

where g1, g4 >0 and g2, g3 <   0.                                           -




 II.l.b   Demand and Expectations Formation

    On the demand side of the model, following Cukierman and Wachtel (1979),

market demand can be specified as

                               -
           Pt(v) x + wt(v)          Yt(v)                                             (5)



here w(v) is the market specific demand shock, y(v) is market specific real

output, and x is economy—wide aggregate demand. (Again all variables are in

logs.) Cukierman and Wachtel take x to be nominal income, assuming the

aggregate demand curve to be unit elastic —— as did Lucas (l973).

    The expectation of economy—wide aggregate price p is modeled in a manner

consistent with the way actual price is determined in the model. The informa-

tion conditioning expectations in market v is assumed to be the current market

specific product price p(v), the distributions of market specific and aggregate

demand shocks, and the lagged values of aggregate demand. The market specific

demand shock wt(v) and the aggregate demand shock are assumed to be distributed
                                                                   6




as follows.

              w(v) '    N (0, a)                     (6)




              x x1 +          &,           N (,G)    (7)


Je assume that current market specific product price is used together with

aggregate information to form an optimal expectation of the aggregate price

p. This optimal expectation is given by

              p = (1    -   0) pt(v) ÷               (8)


where p is the expectation of aggregate price conditional on information prior

to time period t, i.e., conditional on available aggregate information; where 0

will be seen to be a function of the variances of market specific and aggregate

demand shocks as well as other variances and parameters to be intoduced below

(see below, equation 15; also section A.IV of the Appendix); and where there is a

separate equation (8) for each market (conditioned on the individual p(v)).

    To find      we equate market supply, equation (4), and demand, equation (5),

substituting equation (7) for x and equation (8) for p to obtain equilibrium

         (For details on this and what follows, see appendix section A.II). Next

we aggregate the equilibrium expression for p(v) across markets to obtain

equilibrium p. Taking the expectation of Pt conditional on information through

period t — 1 yields the following expression for

        = 6   + x_1 —
                        g0      g4K —    g3(t)        (9)


where     is the aggregate capital stock and 4(t) will be defined presently.

To derive (9) we have made the following assumptions concerning the market

specific and aggregate energy prices,5

                   =
                             + flt(v)                       (10)


                  Pt + 4(t) +                               (11)
                                                                             7




where: (v) is the market—specific energy price,                     is the economy—wide

aggregate energy price, and rl(v) is the market—specific energy price dis—

turbance; Pt is the aggregate output price, c(t) is a linear time trend in

the relative price of energy, and                  is the aggregate energy price disturbance;

with
                                  2
                       (O,            for all v,                      (12)


                " N(O,      a2)                                       (13)


and fl(v) and       are independently distributed and serially uncorrelated.6'7


 EI.l.c Aggregate Output

       We can now derive the aggregate output equation. (For details of the

derivations in this section see section A.III of the appendix).
                                                                                 Equations (5), (8),
and (9) are used to eliminate pt(v) and p from the market—specific supply

equation (4). Aggregating across markets the resulting aggregate output

equation is


                —
                     g20                    g3
        y =                            +              +
                                                          g3   (t)+ 4K           (14)
                    1—g20                  1—g20

                                                                                 =
                                                                                     Pt + (t) +
where in the derivation of (14) we make use of the facts that

and that by definition       p =      x—
11.2    The Terms of the Output—Inflation Tradeoff in the Extended Model

       Equation (14) indicates that the determinants of output y are: the

difference between the actual change in nominal income Ax and the expected

change in nominal income iS, the aggregate demand shock; the aggregate energy

price disturbance p, the aggregate supply shock in the model; the time trend in the

relative price of energy flt); and the aggregate capital stock.

       The coefficients in (14) are functions of supply equation parameters (the

g's) and the parameter 0 which characterizes the information structure of the
                                                       8



model. That is, 0 can be shown to be a function of the variances of

economy—wide and market—specific disturbances8
                      2 22
                     a÷g3a
                          B
             o
                  222 222'
                 a-s-ga ÷a+ga                               (15)
                 _j w 3r
where A =                     B
                                  =B(lg2o_g3)2
Although (15) is not an explicit expression for 0 it can be shown by use of

the implicit function theorem (see section A.IV of the appendix) that 0 is an

increasing function of the market—specific variances (c12 and 02) and a decreasing

function of the variances of the aggregate demand and supply disturbances (02

and a,   respectively).   Since 0 is a function of these variances the coefficients

in (14) which characterize the real output response to aggregate demand and

aggregate supply shocks, the coefficients which contain 0, will also depend on

these market—specific and aggregate variances.


II.2.a Twisting the Tradeoff Curve

     Inspection of the coefficients in (14) indicates that the response of real

output to aggregate demand shocks is a declining function of the variability of

the aggregate demand shock and an increasing function of the variability of market—

specific demand disturbances, a result analogous to that of previous Lucas—type

models. When the model is extended to include supply shocks, it can also be

seen from inspection of the coefficients of equation (14) that the real output

response to an aggregate demand shock is also a declining function of the var-

iability of aggregate supply shocks and an increasing function of the variability

of market—specific supply shocks. Hence in our framework the real output

response to aggregate demand shocks is a function of the variability of both

demand and supply—side shocks.
                                                          9




     This is illustrated in Figure 1 where the aggregate demand shock (the

change in nominal income) tx is plotted on the vertical axis and real output

   on the horizontal axis. The slope of the tradeoff curve T equals the inverse

of the coefficient on (Ax —   cS)   in equation (14). The natural rate of output in

t, y, equals g0 + g34(t) + g4K in (14), and this determines the location of

the vertical axis in Figure 1. The mean         of Lx is the intercept of the

tradeoff curve on the vertical axis, with        assumed equal to zero. Along a

given tradeoff curve such as T0, an aggregate demand shock such as x' would

cause real output to increase from         to        Associated with the increase

in real output would be an increase in the economy's price level. That the

price level will also rise as the result of a positive shock to aggregate

demand can be seen in the figure by noting that the tradeoff curve (Tc,) is drawn

to the left of the 450 line; the coefficient on Ax, the change in the log of

nominal income, is less than one (the inverse of the coefficient is greater than

one). The portion of the increase in nominal income which does not go into

increased real output goes into an increase in the price level. Therefore,

movements along a given tradeoff curve in response to aggregate demand shocks

will give rise to a positive association between price changes and changes in

real output.
   4
                           7;
                                                 15°
                                     'S
                                          / ,,
   4                       /,
                                'S




                 //
                      'p




            #t             /
       7n

            7
F/yuie
                                                              10


    If the variability of aggregate demand and/or aggregate supply shocks

increases, the tradeoff curve twists counterclockwise to a position such

as T1. Due to this twist in the tradeoff curve a given value of the aggregate

demand shock Axe' (and therefore a given nominal income   x_1 +       would
now correspond to a lower level of real output (y) and consequently a

higher price level. Clearly, this twisting of the tradeoff curve would

result in a deterioration in the terms of the output—inflation tradeoff.

To explain the observed emergence of a negative correlation between price

changes and output changes within the new classical view it is necessary to

argue that this twisting effect (which does produce changes in real output

which are in the opposite direction from the associated price changes) dominates

movements along a given tradeoff schedule (which produce positively associated

movements in price and real output).


II.2.b The Effect of Supply—Side Shocks

    While the variability of supply shocks affects the output—inflation trade-

off through 0, supply shocks also have a direct effect on aggregate real out-

put and the price level. For example, a positive shock      in the energy price

will cause real output to decline [since g3/(l—g20) in (14) is negative]; given

aggregate demand the positive energy price shock will cause the price level to
                                                              11



rise. Furthermore the size of the output response to     will be an increasing

function of the variability of both the aggregate demand and the aggregate

supply shocks, and a decreasing function of the variability of market—specific

demand and supply shocks. Aggregate and market—specific demand and supply

variability affect the output response to    because they affect the size of 0.

Increases (decreases) in the variability of aggregate supply or demand shocks

will lower (raise) 0 and hence raise (lower) the absolute value of the supply

response coefficient (g3/(l—g20) in (l4)),while increases (decreases) in the

variability of market—specific demand and supply shocks will raise (lower) 0

and lower (raise) the absolute value of the supply response coefficient. The

economic interpretation of the relationships between output responses to

aggregate supply and demand shocks and the variability of aggregate and market--

specific shocks may be clarified by reference to aggregate demand and supply

curves in aggregate price and output space. Increases in the variability of

aggregate shocks, whether on the supply or demand side, will cause the aggregate

supply curve to become more steeply sloped: with the effect that a given

aggregate demand shock, represented by a horizontal shift in the aggregate demand

curve along the aggregate supply curve, will cause output to change less; and the

effect that a given aggregate supply shock, represented by a horizontal shift in the

aggregate supply curve along the aggregate demand curve, willeause output to change more

     The direct effect of supply shocks on the relationship between real out-

put and price level changes is illustrated in terms of the tradeoff curve

in Figure 2. As noted before, aside from Axe, the position of the tradeoff

curve is determined by the other parameters and variables in (14), in particular

the supply shock p, which was earlier assumed to be zero. Since the coefficient

on   is negative in (14), an increase in    will cause real output y to decline

and the economy's price level to rise, given Axe. In terms of Figure 2, an
          //.
  4Xt
             77) T(i)




Fi5are   z
                                                              12



increase in    from    to p1 shifts the tradeoff curve leftward from T(p0)

to T(1j1) so that for a given level of the aggregate demand shock, Ax', real

output falls from     to       Given Axe' (the change in nominal demand), the

economy's price level must rise. Therefore supply shocks give rise to an

observed negative correlation between price and real output changes, other things

the same. Moreover, the greater the variability of the aggregate demand and/or

the aggregate supply shocks, the larger the coefficient on    in (14) and

the larger the shift in the tradeoff curve in Figure 2 in response to a given

supply shock


11.3 Aggregate Demand and Supply Variability and the Natural Rate of Output

     Milton Friedman's (1977) analysis suggests that because of rigidities

due to political and institutional arrangements, high variability.of inflation ——

whether caused by variability of aggregate demand or supply —— would lead to
a loss of efficiency in the price system and a likely rise in unemployment.

Since high inflation rates and greater inflation variability have tended to

go together, Friedman would expect this positive relationship between inflation

variability and unemployment to be reflected in the data by a positive associa-

tion between the level of the inflation rate and level of the unemployment

rate. It also appears logical that a rise in the unemployment rate will imply

a decline in real output and we would therefore observe a negative correlation

between the rate of inflation and rate of growth in real output.9 It should

be noted, however, that all Friedman suggests is that the positive (negative)

relationship between inflation variability and unemployment (output) "seems

plausible." He does not argue that such a relationship follows as a necessary

implication of a theory;1° rather Friedman's view is an empirical proposition.

     Consider how we might incorporate Friedman's view within our model. Along

lines similar to Lucas (1973) or Cukierman and Wachtel (1979) we can divide the
                                                                  13




factors which influence output in equation (14) into those affecting the

natural rate             and those causing cyclical fluctuations around the natural

rate

                                 +
                                     'c,t                      (16)




                       g ÷ g3 (t) +     g41(
                                                               (17)


                       -g20                  g

                                            l-ge t
              Yc,t =           (xt_) +                         (18)
                       1•@
        Lucas's or Cukierman and Wachtel's specification of the natural rate


                    = a + bt                                (16')


would result if we made the further assumption that the relative price of

energy as well as         (the log of the capital stock) follow a linear time trend.

        Friedman's analysis suggests that, in addition, the natural rate of out-

put will depend on the variability of inflation. Within our model the variability

of inflation will depend on the variability of aggregate demand and supply.11

Therefore Friedman's analysis suggests the following specification of the

natural rate

    nt =      a + bt +                                a1 < 0       a2 < 0             (16")
                         ala;t+a2ijt
where         and        are the time-dependent variances of the aggregate demand
and supply shocks respectively, empirical measures of which will be described

below. An increase in the variability of aggregate demand or aggregate supply

would lead to an increase in the variability of the inflation rates and hence

would result in a decline in the natural rate of output according to Friedman's

view.

        The way that the variability of the inflation rate affects the relationship

between price level changes and real output level changes via the natural rate

of output in our model is illustrated in Figure 3. If the natural rate of output
_
I4       //
         T'T




     3
                                                         14




is an inverse function of the variability of the inflation rate, as Friedman

suggests, then an increase in that variability will cause the natural rate of

output to fall from y     to y'     say, as indicated by the leftward shift of
                     n,       n,t
the vertical axis in Figure 3. Likewise, the tradeoff curve shifts leftward

from T to T' along with the vertical axis. Suppose that previous to the

decline in the natural rate, an aggregate demand shock Ax0 would give rise to

a real output level y. After the decline, the real output level correspon-

ding to Lix0 would be the lpwer level y1. Therefore, after the decline in

the natural rate, the price level corresponding to Ax0 would be higher. Hence

increases in inflation variability that cause the natural rate of output to

decline will give rise to an observed negative correlation between price and

real output level changes, all other things equal.



III. Empirical Specification and Initial Model Estimates


111.1 Empirical Specification

     This subsection explains some details of the empirical specification of

the independent variables in equations (14) and (16").


III.l.a Measures of the Variability of Aggregate Demand and Supply

     If it could be assumed that aggregate demand and supply variability had

been constant over time, then the variance terms, c?, o, would simply form

a constant term in equation 14 (or 16"). If instead we assumed that there

were discrete shifts in aggregate demand or supply variability between distin-

guishable subperiods, then the variance terms would still be subsumed in the

constant terms of separate subperiod regressions. We will consider two sub—

periods, 1959—68 and 1969—80, which do appear quite different, at least in terms

of supply variability, and we will make comparisons of our

model estimates for the two subperiods. Still, it appears reasonable to
                                                             15



believe that the variability of aggregate demand and supply have fluctuated

within these subperiods as well as perhaps being characterized by a shift

between subperiods. To be able to examine the effects of continuous movements

in the variability of aggregate supply and demand we must first construct

measures of such movements.

     The variability of aggregate demand is measured in our model by the variance

in the change in the log of nominal income (02), the model's measure of the

aggregate demand shock. The variance of aggregate supply is measured by the

variance of the (detrended) relative price of energy, or alternatively of the

(detrended) relative price of imports (a2),12 the model's measures of supply shocks.

The difficulty is that we observe only one outcome from the distribution of

nominal income growth and the energy (or import) price at each point in time and

this alone is not enough to construct estimates of     and        at each point in time.

Hence, as a proxy for a time—varying    we constructXa moving variance of actual

changes in nominal income,        and similarly as a proxy for a time—varying

we construct a moving variance of the actual (detrended relative) energy (or

import) price, cy2     The number of periods used to construct these moving

variances is unavoidably an arbitrary choice. At each point in time we have

computed a variance using observations from the past 8 periods (quarters), exclusive

of the current period. We compute the moving variance at time t from data in

past periods since we do not want our proxy to contain information unavailable

to agents at time t.


III.l.b Removing the Trend fromLthe Growth Rate in Aggregate Demand

     An examination of the data over our sample period (1957—80) revealed a

statistically significant upward trend in Ax, the change in log of nominal

income, rather than the constant mean (5) specified in equation 7. To allow for
                                                                  16



this we respecify the aggregate demand shock as the detrended change in the log

of nominal income A (i.e. Ax =              + cS1t +           being the estimate of the

residual e, which is the unanticipated aggregate demand shock). The trend

growth in Lx can be shown to have no effect on output within the structure of

our model since such growth will be anticipated by rational economic agents.

Therefore the effect of this specification change is simply that Ai replaces

(Lx —iS)    in   equation 14.


III.l.c Autocorrelation of the Supply Shock

      The specification of the model in section 11.1 was based on the assumption

that the supply shock p was serially uncorrelated. An examination of the data

for ii,    as measured by either the energy price or import price shock, revealed

a significant pattern of first order autocorrelation. Consistentwith the data,

the (aggregate) energy price shock should be specified as

                          + c               1 >     >0                     (19)


With this modification, the equation for the cyclical component of output

would become14


                       g20
             c,t =                                + g3
                       l—gO
                                Ax +   g3
                                                   1—g26
                                                           c               (18 )


     In contrast to the case of demand—side shocks, equation (18') implies that

for a supply shock both the anticipated and unanticipated components will

affect real output. In fact the effect of the anticipated portion of the supply

shock will be larger in magnitude thazi for the unanticipated component

(g3 > g3/1—g20 in absolute value in 18'). An anticipated supply shock, such

as a rise in energy prices, will in addition to its direct affect on output also

increase labor suppliers' expectation of the aggregate price level with consequent

upward pressure on the money wage and, therefore, a further effect on output.
                                                       17



     Since we would expect differential effects from the anticipated and

unanticipated components of supply shocks, it would be preferable to split

our measures of supply shocks into these two components           and ce).

We explain how this is done below, but in general our estimates of the output

effects of supply shocks were not significantly affected by whether we made

such a decomposition of supply shocks arid the estimates presented are those

where the whole supply shock is entered as an independent variable.


III.l.d An Adjustment Lag

     As in Lucas's (1973) model we assume that there is persistence to movements

in output due to adjustment lags. This persistence is represented by the

inclusion of the lagged value of the dependent variable in our output equation.

Rationales for such persistence are developed in Lucas (1975) and. Sargent (1977).


111.2 Initial Model Estimates

     With the modification to the specification of the aggregate demand shock

and the addition of the lagged dependent variable, our model implies the

following specification for detrended real output ()

                          "2    —
                                          -
                                               g3
            a1 x,t + a2                                +
                                    l-g2& Ax+ i:i;e         t—l         (20)



where we have included the composite supply shock in the equation)5 [Results

where the energy shock is decomposed into the expected part -—) and

unanticipated part (er) are discussed below] The dependent variable is detrended

real output, but such deviations of output from trend have a different interpretation

here than in Lucas (1973) or Cukierman and Wachtel (1979). In those studies

the deviation of output from trend are the cyclical component of output. Here

output may deviate from trend due to cyclical factors (A and        or due to the

effects of supply and demand variability on the natural rate of output)6
                                                                 18



       The data for this study cover the period 1957:1 to 1980:IV. Since one

quarter is lost in first differencing nominal income (ix) and eight quarters

will be used to create the proxies for the moving variances of aggregate demand

and supply, for estimation our sample period is 1959:11 —             1980:IV.   In

addition to this sample period we estimate equation 20 for two subperiods

1959:11 —   l968:IV   and 1969:1 —   1980:IV. The breakpoint separates our sample
period into an earlier subperiod of relatively low inflation variability and

a later subperiod of higher inflation variability.

      This increase in inflation variability can be seen from the last column

of section A of Table 1 which gives the calculated variance of the inflation

rate.'7 The ratio of the variance of the inflation rate in the second subperiod

to   that of the first subperiod (?             )   equals 2.42. The variances of aggregate
                                        1clL                                -
                                     iip2 Api
demand (ci) as measured by the variance of the change in the log of nominal

Income, and the variance of aggregate supply (&), as measured by the variance of the

energy price shock in section A of Table 1 or the Import price shock in Section B

of Table 1, indicate that it was an increase in the variability of the supply

shock which was responsible for the rise in inflation variability. The ratio of

the calculated variance of the aggregate demand shock in the second subperiod to

that in the first subperiod (a2/a21)           is   .98. The ratio of the variance of the

supply shock in the second subperiod to the same variance in the first subperiod

            is 3.18 for the energy price measure and 2.25 for the import price

measure.

      The estimates of equation 20, as shown in Table 1, assume that the dis—

tribution of both aggregate demand and supply shocks have been constant over time;

or where the estimates are for subperiods we presume that these distributions

were constant over the subperiod but perhaps shifted between those subperiods.

The moving variance terms in equation 20 are in this case subsumed in the constant
                                                         19




 term. The estimation technique is the modified "three pass least squares"

 procedure suggested by Wallis (1967) for equations which include the lagged

 value of the dependent variable in the presence of an autocorrelated error

 term. This procedure was used because preliminary ordinary least squares

 estimates showed evidence of significant first—order autocorrelation.

      The model estimates in Table 1 indicate that both demand side influences,

 as measured by changes in nominal income, and supply—side factors, whether

measured by the energy price variable (section A of Table 1) or the import price

variable (section B of Table 1), were significant determinants of deviations

of output from its time trend over this period.18

     The estimates in Table 2 include the proxy measures for the changing

variances of aggregate demand (â2) and aggregate supply                According   to
                                                                   -
Friedman's (1977) analysis we would expect there to be a negative relationship

between these variances and the level of detrended real output. With the

energy price measure of the supply shock (section A of Table 2),

the estimate for the whole period, given in the first line of the table, shows

a significant negative effect on output for the proxy for aggregate supply

variability. The proxy for the variability of aggregate demand has the expected

negative sign but is not significant (t = —1.657).   The inclusion of the measure

of supply variability in the equation also results in a decline in the size of the

coefficient on the supply shock variable      from 0.01248 (Table 1, section A)

to 0.00541 and this coefficient is no longer significant at the 5% level (t        —1.775).

     The estimates given in the second and third lines of section A of Table 2

reveal significant differences in the estimates for the two subperiods. The

negative output effect for the variability of aggregate supply

       is significant only in the second

subperiod. In the first subperiod there is a significant negative effect for the
                                                         20


variability of aggregate demand (cd). Notice that the energy price supply

shock              is not statistically significant in the first subperiod,

though it is in the second subperiod. The coefficient estimates which are

based on the import price measure of the supply shock (Table 2, section B)

reveal essentially the same pattern as those for the energy price measure,

with the exception that for the whole period estimates using the import price measure

the coefficient on the level of the supply shock (1i) remains significant when

the proxies for aggregate supply and demand variability are included.



 IV. Further Model Estimates and the Implications of the Results

        In light of the results presented in Tables 1 and 2, we evaluate each of the

 influences a), b), c), as listed in the introduction, as separate determinants of

 the change in the nature of the output—inflation tradeoff.

                                                                        -

        a. The New Classical View

        According to the new classical view we would expect the increase in inflation
 variability between the two subperiods to have caused the output response to an

 aggregate demand shock to decline; the coefficient on   i should     be lower for the

  second subperiod than for the first subperiod. In terms of Figure 1 in Section

  II.2.a, the increase in inflation variability should have rotated the tradeoff

  curve in a counter—clockwise direction. Additionally as explained in Section II.2.b,

 we would expect the rise in aggregate price variability to have caused an

  increase in the size of the output response to a supply shock; the (negative)

  coefficient on the energy or import price variables (i)     in   Tables 1 and 2 should

  be larger in absolute value for the second subperiod than for the first. In

  terms of Figure 2 in Section II.2.b a given energy price shock would cause a

  larger leftward shift in the tradeoff curve.

        As can be seen from Tables 1 and 2 there is no evidence of a decline in

  the coefficient on the aggregate demand term (Lii) between the two subperiods.

  The estimates in Table 1 also fail to show the expected increase in the (absolute

  value of) the coefficient on the supply shock measures. But in Table 2 where
                                                                            21



we allow for the effects on the natural rate of output from changes in

aggregate demand and supply variability, we do observe an increase in the

estimated output response to a given supply shock.

    Allowing for a one time shift in the responses to aggregate demand and

supply shocks in the output equation is a crude representation of the new

classical view. If the variability of inflation is changing in a continuous

fashion within sub—periods as suggested in Section lII.1.a, it would be

preferable to specify these responses directly as functions of a measure

of inflation variability. Specifically, we let the coefficients on Ax and

i in equation     20,   denoted       and 3, be linear functions of a time—varying

measure    of   inflation variability

                          a10 + a11
                                                                (21)

                   ,ta2o + a21 Ap,t


where            is a proxy for the time moving variance of the distribution of the

inflation rate (a2 )l9         We construct this proxy for a ,         in   exactly the
                 Ap                                              p,t
same way that the proxies for a2             and a2   were constructed (see Section IIt.1.a).
       -          -
                                       x,t
     When equation 20 is respecified making the substitution shown in (21) for the

coefficients on          and      the resulting equation contains two interaction
          "2              "2      20
terms a   Ax and a
       Ap,t t
                      p .
                  Ap,t t
                                       Significant    estimates for the coefficients on

these terms a11, and a21 would be evidence that the output response to a demand
                                                        21
or supply shock depends upon aggregate price variability. When equation 20

was estimated with this modification, using either the energy price or import

price measures of the supply shock, these interaction coefficients a.1 and a21

were not significant at the 5% level. This was true for estimates of the whole

period (1959:11 —       1980:IV) and for the two subperiods considered (1959:11 —
1968:IV and 1969:1 —       l980:IV).22'2
                                                                22




       Overall then our estimates do not show evidence of the ttwistingtI

  of the output—inflation trade—off curve, as depicted in Figure 1. The

  results in Table 2 did indicate that a given supply shock would have

  generated a larger output response in the second of the subperiods we

  considered. Within the new classical view this would be consistent with

  the greater variability of aggregate supply and, therefore, of inflation

  during that time period.

     b. The Effect of Supply—Side Shocks

     Our estimates in Tables 1 and 2 indicate that supply—side shocks had a

significant negative impact on real output, at least during the second sub—

period. Also, in the estimates where we allow for a Friedman—typ effect on

the natural rate of output (Table 2) we find that the estimated output response

to a given supply shock was somewhat larger in the second subperiod than in

the first. Therefore, our estimates are consistent with the view that the large

supply shocks of the 1970's in the energy sector as well as in the world market

for other basic commodities were an important factor in the change in the nature

of the output inflation relationship.


     c. The Effect of Inflation Variability on the Natural Rate of Output

     The estimated coefficients in Table 2 indicate that, for a given value of

the aggregate supply shock variable           and the aggregate demand measure (Axe),
                                      (u.n)
                                                                   23

the level of aggregate demand variability had a significant negative effect on

real output in the first subperiod while the level of aggregate supply variability

had a significant negative effect in the second subperiod. The estimate for

the whole period shows a significant negative effect for the measures of

aggregate supply variability. Our estimates are therefore not inconsistent

with Milton Friedman's view that an increase in the variability of inflation

will have a negative effect on the natural rate of output. As illustrated in

Figure 3 in Section 11.3, an increase in the variability of aggregate supply

or demand would have caused the vertical axis, the position of which measures

the natural rate of output, to shift leftward. There would then have to be a lef t—

ward shift in the tradeoff curve of equal magnitude. The absence of a significant

effect for supply variability in the estimate for the earlier subperiod

(1959:11 —   1968:IV) is perhaps not surprising due to the relative stability of
supply factors during that period. There may simply be too little movement in

our measure of supply variability to pick up the effects of this variable in

the data. The absence of a significant effect of demand variability in the

second subperiod is more puzzling.

     According to Friedman's analysis, an increase in the variability of

Inflation will cause the natural rate of output to decline. In our model

the variability of inflation depends upon the variability of aggregate demand

and supply ——    the underlying aggregate disturbances in the model. This is
the motivation for including proxies for the aggregate disturbances (ci
                                                                                 '
       in our   output equation. As in the previous subsection, however, we

can test more directly for the effects of changes in inflation variability, in

this case effects on the natural rate of output, by including a proxy for

inflation variability in our equation.

     Table 3 gives the estimates of our output equation when the same proxy

variable,             ,   as was used in the previous ubsection is included in the
                p,t
                                                           24

equation in place of the proxies for aggregate demand and supply variability.

In the estimated equation for the whole sample period the coefficient on

the proxy for the variability of inflation has the correct negative sign but

is not statistically significant. In the first subperiod where our previous

estimates (Table 2) indicated that aggregate demand variability had a

significant negative effect on the natural rate of output, we also find a

significant affect for our direct proxy for the variability of inflation.

In the second subperiod where earlier estimates indicated that it was aggregate

supply variability which had a negative effect on the natural rate of output,

the direct proxy for inflation variability is insignificant and has the wrong sign.

The estimate in the table is for the energy price measure of the supply

shock but the same pattern is evidenced in the estimates using the import price

measure.

     For the first subperiod our estimates indicate that changes in the variability

of inflation, primarily as a result of the variability of aggregate demand,

had a negative impact on real output. For the second subperiod the variability

of aggregate supply seems to have had a negative impact on real output but one

which is not picked up when a more direct measure of inflation variability

           is entered in our income equation.

     One explanation of this latter result, one which stems from Friedman's

own analysis, would be that the increased variability of aggregate supply

shocks did lower the natural rate of output but that due to government inter-

vention in the price process this increased variability in supply is not

closely mirrored in the variability of a published price index such as the GNP

deflator.24 As Friedman puts it, "In practice, the distorting effects of

uncertainty, rigidity of voluntary long—term contracts, and the contamination

of price signals will almost certainly be reinforced by legal restrictions

on price change." In addition to rigidity of the prices of government provided

services and prices which are regulated by the government, Friedman cites
                                                              25


attempts by the government to repress inflation via mandatory or "voluntary"

wage—price controls. Friedman concludes that it is not only increased price

volatility p se but also increased government intervention with the price

system which has negative effects on the natural rate of output.

     An alternative, though not essentially contradictory, explanation for

the significant coefficient on supply variability but insignificant coefficient

on the direct measure of inflation variability is that the negative effect of

supply variability on the level of the natural rate of output is not an effect

which comes through an increase in inflation variability whether open or
supressed. A supply shock, for example the oil embargo of the Arab states in

1974, may have direct effects on output by creating shortages, diversion of

factor services to exploring alternative energy sources, and temporarily

inefficient combinations of factor inputs. These effects may exist even in

the absence of government intervention. Further such effects might be

expected to be associated with sharp movements in energy prices and hence with

the variance, not the level of our supply shock measure.




V. Conclusion

      The purpose of this paper has been to assess empirically the contri-

 butions of the factors listed as a), b), and c) above as explanations of

 the apparent change in the relation between output and inflation in the

 United States. Our results can be summarized as follows:

      a) The new classical view. We did not find that the terms of the U.S.

 output—inflation tradeoff, measured as the output response to a given aggre—

 gate demand shock, have deteriorated as rational economic agents adjusted

 to the increased variability of' inflation. There was rio evidence of a twist—

 ing of the output—inflation tradeoff curve such as that depicted in Figure 1.
                                                               26



       b) The effect of' supply—side shocks. Our estimates suggest that

supply shocks played a significant role in the observed shift in the re-

lation between the rate of inflation and the rate of change of real output.

Both the increase in the price of energy (or imports), and the increase in

the size of the output response to a given supply shock (from the first to

the second sub—period) appear to have contributed to the shift.

       c) The effect of inflation variability on the natural rate of real

output. Our evidence concerning the effect of increased inflation varia-

bility on the natural rate of output was somewhat ambiguous. The significant

output effects of the variability of aggregate supply which we found may

stem from their effect on inflation variability and particularly their effect

upon   the degree of government intervention in the price process as hypothe-
sized by Milton Friedman. On the other hand, the variability of aggregate
supply   may have more direct effects on the natural rate of output, as dis-

cussed above. In either case, our estimates suggest that the increased

variability of aggregate supply also played a role in the observed shift from

a positive to a negative correlation between the rate of inflation and the

rate   of real output growth.
                                                                  F—i



                                 FOOTNOTES




      1These correlation coefficients were computed from annual data for the
 unemployment rate, change in the CNP deflator, and rate of growth in real
 CNP.


     2Froyen and Waud (1980) suggest that adding a supply shock to the Lucas
model is necessary for a consistent explanation of the recent behavior of
movements in aggregate demand variance, inflation variance and the terms of
the output inflation tradeoff within several industrial countries. Blinder
(1981) contains an extension of Lucas' original model to include an energy
price variable.

        3See Sato (1972).


     4mis assumption considerably simplifies the analysis since with it no
detailed specification of the elements Of aggregate demand is required.
Nelson's (1979), (1981) estimates provide support for such a recursive
structure between nominal income and real output. Alberro (1981) tested
the Lucas specification of aggregate demand and found little evid-ence to
refute that specification. (See also Froyen and Waud [1980, p. 420]).

     5Equation 9 also reflects the assumption that a proportional increase in
product price and the prices of each of the two variable factors of production
leaves desired output supply unchanged. It can be shown that this assumption
implies g1 = — (g2 + g3) in equation 4.

     6The case where the aggregate energy price shock is serially correlated
is, in fact, relevant and will be analyzed below.

     7Equation (11) assumes that oil prices are fully indexed to the
aggregate price level (the coefficient on p is one). We have also examined
the case where energy prices are only partially indexed (the coefficient on
Pt in (11) is between zero and one). In this latter case aggregate demand
management policy can, by changing p, affect the real price of energy.
The potential role of monetary policy in this case is analyzed by Blinder (1981).


        8See the Appendix, section AIV, for an explanation of the derivation of e.

        vans (1978) points out that Keynes (1924) also posited a negative
relationship between instability of the aggregate price level and the level
of output. Okun (1981) recently argued, along somewhat different lines, that
increased variability of aggregate demand would both steepen the Phillips
curve and cause the curve to shift upwards, increasing the "inflation rate
associated with the cycle average unemployment rate."
                                                                F—2




     10
       Evans (1978) has shown that within a model where both the
 supply and demand for labor depend on the degree of uncertainty about the
 aggregate price level, employment may either increase or decrease in response
 to an increase in uncertainty. The ambiguity stems from the uncertain response
 of labor supply to an increase in aggregate price uncertainty. A recent
 paper by Azariadis (1981) demonstrates the ambiguity of the relationship between
 price level uncertainty and the natural rate of output within a general
 equilibrium model. Evans (1978), Levi and Makin (1980), and Müllineaux (1980)
 provide empirical evidence supporting the view that increased aggregate price
 uncertainty depresses the natural rate of employment or output. As Levi and
 Makin (1980, p. 1023) note, the relationship between employment and
 inflation uncertainty is somewhat different from the relationship between
 inflation variability and output or employment suggested by Friedman.
 Frjedmants notion would seem broader than those investigated by Evans,
 Makin and Levi, or Mullineaux in that increased uncertainty is only one
 channel by which increased inflation variability might affect output or
 employment.

    For the derivation of the variance of the aggregate price level see
 the Appendix, sectionA.IV. Within our model, since the lagged value of the price
level is given, the variance of the inflation rate can be shown to equal the
variance of the aggregate price level. Within the model, the variance of
the aggregate price level will (through 0) also depend upon the variances
of the market specific demand and supply shocks. Thse variances are
unobservable and are modeled here as part of the additive error term in our
final estimating equation.

     12The relative price of imports is measured as the index of U.S. import
prices divided by the CNP deflator. The price of energy is measured by the
 producer price index for fuels, related products, and electricity. The
 relative price of energy is computed as this index divided by the GNP
 deflator. The supply shock in each case is the detrended relative price.
Data for energy prices are from Producer Prices and Price Indices, (BLS, 1956—80).
Other data are from the IMF, International Financial Statistics computer tape.

    13
      In Friedman's analysis changes in the variability of inflation, and
therefore of aggregate demand or supply, would affect output whether these
changes were perceived or not. Therefore, whether our proxies for the
moving variances contain information not available to market participants
c.,ould not appear to matter. The role of changes in aggregate demand and
supply variability within the Lucas model does, however, depend on whether
the changes in variability are perceived by market participants. Since we
plan to use these same proxies to measure the effects of continuous changes
in demand and supply variability on the terms of the output—inflation tradeoff with-
 in the modified Lucas model of cyclical fluctuations in income, we construct
the proxies using only information available to market participants.
                                                               F—3




              the energy price shock given by (19), the lagged value of the
  energy price now conveys information about the current energy price, and,
  therefore, about the current aggregate price level. Equation (9), for
      must be recomputed taking account of this fact. Equation (18') is not
  derived simply by substituting (19) into (18).

      15Notice that the trend term in the supply shock variable, c(t), will
 affect only the trend in real output and therefore does not appear in
 equation(20) for detrended real output.


      -6Ne1son (1979) (1981) provides evidence that the residuals from a
 deterministic trend representation of real output are nonstationary and
 therefore do not measure the cyclical proportion of real output. Nelson
 suggests that, rather than a fixed trend for natural output, there is instead
 a negative relationship between the natural rate of output and the level of
 inflation, along lines suggested by Friedman. Our specification of detrended
 real output would appear to be consistent with this view.

      '-7The calculated variances of the inflation rate and the aggregate supply
 and demand shocks in the table are for the whole period for which we have data,
 1957:11 — l98O:IV. The first subperiod calculated variances refer to the
 period 1957:11 — l968:IV.


         explained in Section III.l,c, since the anticipated and unanticipated
components of the supply shock        and c1, respectively in equation 19)
will in theory effect output differently we have also decomposed our supply
shock measures into these two components and re—estimated equation 20 with
these two separate parts of the supply shock as independent variables. To
break the supply shock into these two parts we ran regressions of the relative energy
or import price against time using an iterative Cochrane—Orcutt technique to estimate
the first—order autocorrelation coefficient (c). We then broke this equation's
residual into    and          Model estimates with the two separate supply
shocks generally showed ignificant effects for the anticipated portion of
the supply shock (import or energy price measure) which conf2rmed to the
estimated ffects of     in Table 1. The coefficient on the     was generally
insignificant.


    19While Friedman's (1977) analysis and the new classical view, as
expressed in Section I1[.2.a) focus on the relationship between inflation
variability and the nature of the output—inflation tradeoff, other research
concentrates on the relationship between inflation uncertainty and this
tradeoff [Levi and Makin (1980), Evans (l978),Mullineaux (l98)]. To test for the
latter relationship we have constructed an alternative time—varying proxy for
inflation uncertainty. To construct this measure we first detrend the
inflation rate and then proceed in the same manner as described in Section I1I.l.a
for the construction of 2 and            The result using this alternative pr9xy
did not differ from the ru1ts using the measure of inflation variability (c
in any significant respect.
                                                           F—4



    20                                 "2
      The proxy for inflation variance cYAp,t also appears separately in the
equation. The coefficient on this variable is discussed in the next section
where we consider the effects of inflation variability on the natural rate
of output.

          assessing these estimates, a caveat needs to be kept in ind.
The actual relationship between the coefficients on A and lit and cY
which comes via 0 is nonlinear (see Appendix, Section A.IV).
Our expressions for these coefficients given by equation (21) are therefore
only approximations.

     221n addition to specifying the coefficients on     and A as functions
of inflation variability, we also estimate our output equation (20) specifying
the coefficients as linear functions of 4     and& ——     proxies for the structural
aggregate variances that determine 0 in th model   _! in a manner analogous to
the specification in equation 21. These estimates (for the whole period as
well as for the two subperiods) also provided little evidence that the output
response to aggregate demand or supply shocks was significantly affected by
changes in the variability of such shocks. For the energy price measure of
the supply shock only one of thecoefficients on the four interaction terms
between                     lit, ,xt and            was significant at the 5%
level. This was the coefficient for the interaciq.p2between the variance of
aggregate supply and the aggregate demand measure (c A) for the whole period
estimate. This coefficient should be negative but tl!ie estimated coefficient
was positive. For the impott price measure, for the time period as a whole,
none of the four interaction terms was significant. For the first subperiod,
only the coefficient on the interaction term between the viance of the
supply shock and the output response to the supply shock (cp,tPt) was
significant. This coefficient was positive, but should be negative. For the
second subperiod again only one of the coefficients on the interaction terms
was significant, in this case the coefficient for the interaction term between
the variability of aggregate demand and the level of the supply shock variable.
This coefficient is negative, consistent with the sign implied by the new
classical theory.
     23Previous research [see Abrams, Froyen and Waud (1983)] suggests that
the degree of inflation variability and aggregate demand variability in the
United States over a period similar to that considered here may have been too
low to produce evidence of a variable output inflation tradeoff, in the sense
of the type 1 effect here. This previous work did not, however, allow for
explicit type 2 and 3 effects.


    2/1
      In this light, it is of interest to note that the simple correlation
coefficient between the proxy for the variability of the aggregate supply
shock, ct (energy price measure) and the proxy for inflation variability (cY2   )
is only .11 for the second subperiod.                                      Ap,t
                                                TABLE

                                       ESTIMATES OF THE BASIC MODEL




  A.   Energy Price Measure of the Supply Shock (nt)

                                                                                                     b
                                                                          2             "2
 Sample Period        Constant                                        R                                      a
                                    Ax                     t—l

1959:11 —   1980:IV    —OOOO7O 0.88149*       _0.01248*   0.90588*    0.989    0.56   0.000098   0.045389   0.000049
                       (—0.903)    (24.18)     (—2.740)    (29.66)



1959:11 —   1968:IV     0.00089*   0.84590*   _0.01818*   0.92000*    0.995   —0.06   0.000102   0.021545   0.000012
                        (2.572)    (18.82)     (—2.710)    (36.70)


1969:1 — 1980:1V       —0.00197    0.89873*   _O.01249*   0.89296*    0.985    0.55   0.000097   0.068520   0.000029
                       (—1.776)    (18.07)     (—2.393)    (20.64)
                                                       TABLE 1 (Continued)



  B.   Import Price Measure of the Supply Shock
                                                (1i)



  Sample Period            Constant
                                                                                                                '-I


1959:11 — 1980:IV          —0.00079       0.88484*         —0.01889*         0.90850*   0.989       0.47      0.02518
                           (—1.237)       4.47)             (—3.613)          (35.30)


1959:11 —   1968:IV         0.00058         0.85443*       —0.01795*         0.93705*   0.995      —0.33      0.015536
                           (1.479)        (19.08)           (-2.50)           (44.92)


1969:1 -   1980:IV         -0.00187*      0.90168*         _0.01832*         0.89504*   0.986       0.47     0.035021
                           (—2.057)       (18.15)           (—3.023)          (24.18)



                 a.   The dependent variable here and in the table that follows is detrended real income.
                      The numbers in parentheses beneath the coefficients are t
                                                                                statistics. Coefficients
                      marked with an asterisk are significant at the five
                                                                          percent level using a two—tailed
                      t test.  The second to the last column in the table p) is he estimated value of the
                                                                                                           first order
                      autoregressive coefficient.

                b.    Energy price measure of the supply shock

                c.    Import price measure of the supply shock
                                                       TABLE   2


                             MODEL ESTIMATES:   THE EFFECTS OF DEMAND AND SUPPLY VARIABILITY



A.    Energy Price Measure of the Supply Shock


                                                                                                                2
                              Constant      &                                          2          &   2     R          p
     Sample Period                              t
                                                               Pt       y t—l
                                                                                      x,t          P,t


          —                                 0.88397*     —0.00541     0.89841*     —14.067                 0.991    0.35
1959:11           1980:IV
                               (-2.116)     (26.38)        (—1.775)    (42.51)      (-1.657)    (-5.557)



              —                0.00325*     0.86729*      0.00449     0.97260*                 —0.36094    0.996    —0.23
1959:11            1968:IV
                               (4.138)      (22.23)        (0.514)     (38.74)      (—3.200)    (—0.551)


          —                   —0.00077      0.88280*                  0.86150*      15.10                  0.990     0.19
1969:1            1980:IV
                               (—0.497)     (20.14)        (—2.934)    (31.82)      (0.761)    (—6.222)
                                                    TABLE   2   (Continued)




B.     Import Price Measure of the Supply Shock

                                                                                                   A
     Sample Period            Constant                                                                     R2      P


1959:11       —    1980:IV    0.00128    0.88744*   —0.00977*         0.91020*    —9.986     -O.505ll*   0.992    0.27
                              (1.565)     (26.70)     (—2.540)         (49.69)    (—1.276)    (—5.330)


1959:11 —          1968:IV    0.00317*   0.87338*     0.00456         0.97037*   —17.88*     —0.67886    0.996   —0.24

                              (4.l74)     (23.08)     (0.544)          (52.22)   (—2.361)     (—0.900)


1969:1    —       1980:IV    —0.00075    0.89346*   _0.01197*         0.88546*     7.664     _0.47821*   0.990    0.19

                              (—0.467)    (20.00)     (—3.170)         (34.05)     (0.376)    (—5.013)
                                                    TABLE    3


                      INFLATION VARIABILITY AND THE NATURAL RATE OF OUTPUT:   A DIRECT TEST




   Sample Period          Constant                                                                  R2      p
                                                                          t—l

1959:11 —   1980:IV       —0.00061       0.88052*           _O.01250*   0.90504*       —8.796     0.989    0.57
                          (—0.584)       (23.94)            (—2.727)     (29.35)       (—0.126)



1959:11 —   1968:IV        0.00402*      0.83621*           —0.01971*   0.92650*      _5535*      0.996   —0.26
                          (3.279)        (20.62)            (—3.576)    (45.59)        (—2.610)



1969:1 —   1980:IV        —0.00241       0.90280*           —0.01252*   0.89642*        3.330     0.985    0.55
                          (—1.564)       (17.89)            (—2.419)    (20.55)        (0.408)
                               REFERENCE S



 Abrains, Richard K.; Froyen, Richard T.; and Waud, Roger N., "The Variability
      of Output—Inflation Tradeoffs," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control,
      4 (February 1983), forthcoming.

Alberro, Jose, "The Lucas Hypothesis on the Phillips Curve: Further
     International Evidence," Journal of Monetary Economics, 7 (March 1981),
      239—251.

Azariadis, Costas, A Reexamination of Natural Rate Theory," Anierican Economic
     Review, 71 (December 1981), 946—60.

 Blinder, Alan S. "Monetary Accommodations of Supply Shocks Under Rational
     Expectations", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 13 (November 1981),
     425—38.

 Cukierman, Alex and Wachtel, Paul, "Differential Inflationary Expectations
     and the Variability of the Rate of Inflation," American Economic Review,
     69 (September 1979), 595—610.

Evans, Paul, "Monetary Uncertainty and Employment", unpublished manuscript,
    Stanford University, 1978.

Friedman, Milton, "Inflation and Unemployment", Journal of Political Economy,
    85 (June 1977) 451—72.

Froyen, Richard and Waud, Roger, "Further International Evidence on Output—
    Inflation Tradeoffs", American Economic Review, 70 (June 1980), 409—21.

Keynes, John M., Tract on Monetary Reform. New York: Harcourt Brace and
    Company, 1924.

Levi, Maurice D. and Makin, John M., "Inflation Uncertainty and the Phillips
    Curve: Some Empirical Evidence," American Economic Review, 70 (December
    1980), 1022—27.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr.,   "Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal
    of Economic Theory, 4 (April 1972), 103—24.

___________________ "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation Tradeoffs,"
    American Economic Review, 63 (June 1973), 326—34.

___________________ "An Equilibrium Model of the Business Cycle," Journal
    of Political Economy 83 (December 1975), 1113—44.

_________________   "Some International Evidence on Output—Inflation Tradeoffs:
     Reply," American Economic Review 67 (September 1977), 731.

Mullineaux, Donald J., "Unemployment, Industrial Production and Inflation Uncer-
     tainty in the United States," Review of Economics and Statistics, 62
     (May 1980), 163—69.
Nelson, Charles R., "Recursive Structure in U.S. Income, Prices, and Output,"
     Journal of Political Economy, 87 (December 1979), 1307—27.

Nelson, Charles R., "Adjustment Lags Versus Information Lags," Journal of
     Money, Credit and Banking, 13 (February 1981), 1—11.

Okun, Arthur, Prices and Quantities. Washington: The Brookings Institution,
    1981.

Sargent, Thomas, "The Persistence of Aggregate Employment and the Neutrality
    of Money," unpublished manuscript, University of Minnesota, 1977.

Sato, K., "Additive Utility Functions with Double—Log Consumer Demand Functions,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 80 (January/February 1972), 102—25.

Wallis, Kenneth F., "Lagged Dependent Variables and Serially Correlated
    Errors: A Reappraisal of Three—Pass Least Squares," Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 49 (November 1967), 555—67.
                                      -Al -


                                    Appendix



      This appendix provides a more detailed derivation of the equations re-

 ported in the text.



A.I Market Supply Equations

     The output supply equations for each market v (v1,...,m) are based on

the derived factor demand equations for energy and labor.


                                                       1
                       -   [a10 a11 a12 a13 a141

          [Nt(v)
                           [a20 a21 a22 a23 a24j
                                                     pt(v)   ,   vl,   ..., m (1)

                                                                   -
                                                     Wt(v)



                                                     Kt(v)

where v indexes the market and for each market,



           Qt(hI)   quantity   of energy

                    number of labor hours
           Nt(v)

           pt(v)    market specific producer price

           Wt(v) = money wage

                    price of energy

           Kt(v)    quantity of capital


where all variables are in logs.

     The factor demand equations (1) may be derived in the usual way by

assuming that firms maximize profit subject to the production function con-

straint. The log linearity of (1) would follow either from the assumption
                                                    -A2—


that the production function is Cobb—Douglas or, more generally, as an approx-

imation to factor demand equations based on production functions of the

generalized CES type (see K. Sato [1972]).

        it is assumed that laborers know the market—specific money wage but must

form an expectation of the economy-wide aggregate price level p (conditioned

on information in market v), so that the supply of labor to firms in a spe-

cific market is taken to be the log—linear function


                                            +
            Nt(v)     d0 +         d1p          d2Wt(v).                                  (2)



    When (2) is used to substitute Wt(v) out of (1) we             get

                                                             1

                                   b10 b11 b12 b13 b14     pt(v)

            Nt(v)                  b20 b21 b22 b23 b24      p            ,   vzl,...,m.   (3)




                                                           Kt(v)


where
                               a
            b10 = a10      +                    -
                                        (b20        d0)

            b   -              a12b21
             11-a11+               d2

                    a12
            b
             12 22                      d


                -              a12b23
            b13-a13÷               d2
                -              a12b24
            b14-a14÷               d2
                               —
                -   a20d2          a22d0
            b20 -          —
                     (d2        a22)
                                                  -A3..-




         b21
                    (d2a22T


         b22



         b23




        b24
                    (d2a22)


        The production function, in accordance with our earlier remarks, is

assumed to be log—linear of the fcrm



                   =
                       g + K(v)         +              + Q(v).

The supply function for market v is                   derived   by substituting equations (3)   into
the production function to give



        Yt(v) =             + 1P(V)     +
                                            g2p   +
                                                      e3Qt(v)
                                                                +
                                                                    g4   Kt(v),           (4)



where



                   (g + gb20 + gb10)


                 (gb21 + gb11)
             =



             =              +
                 (gb22          gb12)

             --( 2'b        +c'b
                       23    '3 13)


             =         +
        g4       (g        gb24   +
                                      gb14).
                                               -A4 -




A.II     Demand   and Expectations Formation

        Market demand is specified (the same as in Cukierman and Wachtel (1979),

all variables in logs)


              =
                  x   +
                          wt(v)
                                  —
                                      Ytt)                                       (5)



where wt(v) is the market specific demand shock, yt(v) is market specific

real output, and x is economy—wide aggregate demand taken to be nominal in-

come. wt(v) and x, are assumed to be distributed as follows:


                          N(O, a)                                                (6)
            wt(v)

                           +                 N(,a2).                             (7)



The information conditioning expectations in market v is the current market

specific product price Pt(v), the distributions of market specific and aggre-

gate demand shocks, wt(v) and Axt respectively, and the lagged values of

aggregate demand. The expectation of the economy—wide aggregate price p is

modeled consistent with the way actual aggregate price is determined in the

model. This expectation is given by


            p (1—0) Pt(v) +             0                                        (8)


where      is the expectation of aggregate price conditioned on information prior

to time period t, i.e., conditioned on available aggregate information, and 0

is a function (to be explained below) bf the variances of market specific and

aggregate demand shocks as well as other variances and parameters to be intro-

duced below.

       To find        we first equate market supply, equation (4), and demand,

equation (5) to get
                                                      -AS—


               —
                   x    —
                            w(v)      g0 +   1P(V)        +
                                                                 g2p +      g3(v)         +
                                                                                              g4K(v)            (9)



If it is assumed that a proportional increase in product price and the prices

of each of the two variable factors of production leaves desired output supply

unchanged, then g1             —(g2 + g3) and the above equation can be rewritten


                   —                             —                                                     —
       +
           g2(p                 + g3(q(v)                            +
                                                                         g4K(v)
                                                                                  =
                                                                                      xt   +
                                                                                               w(v)        Pt(V).

Substituting from equation (8) for p and rearranging gives the equilibrium

expression for



              ig®g3 [xt + w(v)
                                             -
                                                 g0
                                                      -                  - 3(v)       -
                                                                                          4K(v)].               (9')



                                                                                                       -
Next we make the following assumptions about energy prices


                               + nt(v)                                                                          (10)

                   =          (t) +                                                                             (11)
                       Pt

where: (v) is the market—specific energy price, q is the economy—wide

aggregate energy price, and nt(v) is the market—specific energy price dis-

turbance; Pt IS the aggregate output price, (t) is a function of time, and

   is the aggregate energy price disturbance; and where


                       i.   N(0,o2)   for all v,                                                                (12)


              ii "
               t
                       N(O,c)                                                                                   (13)


and flt(v) and          are independently distributed and serially uncorrelated.

Using the assumptions (6), (7), (10), (11), (12), and (13), aggregating (9')

across markets gives                                         -




  Pt                    t +                      -               -          — 4KJ
                                         g0
           l-g20-g3
                                                          —A6 —



 (For the theoretical underpinnings of such an aggregation procedure see

appendix A, p. 607, of Cukierman and Wachtel [1979]). Taking the expectation

of Pt conditional on information through period t-l gives the expression for

Pt

                    +
                        x1      —
                                        g0
                                             —
                                                 g3$(t)
                                                             —
                                                                  4K   .                       (9)

where Kt is the aggregate capital stock.



A.III Aggregate Output

     To derive the aggregate output equation we proceed as follows. Using

the assumption that g1              —            +           the market—specific supply equation (4)
                                         (g2         g3),
can be rewritten as


                +                                ÷                         +
                    2(P_P(V))                                                  4K(v)
or, substituting from (8),


                                                 +                         +
     Yt(v)   g0 —   C2e(Pt(V)_P)                         e3((v)_P(v))          4K(v)
which, upon substituting from (9), becomes


                                                                                               (14')


Now note that (5) may be written as


                                             +
                            +
                                                           Yt(v)
and, given that Pt =
                        x       —            from (10) and (11) that

                        —           + (t)            +      + nt(v).

Substitute these expressions for p(v) and (v) into (14') and remember the
                                                         —A7—



fact that x                        +
                                       x1      to get



   yt(v)
                   g —                                                                       +



                                                                       + g4K(v).

Aggregating this equation across markets (again see appendix A of Cukierman

and Watchel [1979] ) gives aggregate output                                     as


                                       _____                       g3
                                   —
                                       1—g20
                                                (Axt_s) +
                                                               1g20
                                                                          t +     g3(t)          +
                                                                                                     4K             (14)



A.IV Expectations Formation

                   We will now derive the optimal expectation of the aggregate price

p, given by (8), and show how e is a function of the market—specific demand

and supply variances (a and a2 respectively), the aggregate demand and supply

variances (a2 and a2 respectively), and the parameters g2 and g3. The infor-

mation conditioning the expectation p in market v is assumed to be the

current market product price pt(v) and the distributions given by (6), (7),

(12) and (13). The optimal expectation of the aggregate price p conditioned

on this information is then given by (see for example Hogg and

Craig, pp. 211—13, Introduction to I•athematical Statistics, Macmillan, New

York, 1959).

                                                        opt
                                        Ppp() a                                          +                          (i)
                                                             (v)
                                                        Pt


where 2 and 2                    (v)
                                       are the variances of the aggregate price and market—
          Pt             Pt
specific prices respectively, and p                                       is the correlation coefficient

between            and
                             2
     To obtain                    use (9") and      (11)       to express Pt as
                             Pt


     Pt
               -         -
                             i-g20
                                        -
                                            g3t)    +
                                                        tl         +
                                                                        1-g20
                                                                                     t
                                                                                             g
                                                                                                          -
                                                                                                              g4K
                                             —A8--



Substituting this expression for Pt together with (9) for t into



                      a2
                                        —2
                                E(Pt_Pt)
                       Pt


we get


                      a2        E
                       Pt

or


                      a2
                                    1     — (a 2 + g 22
                                                      a )                        (ii)
                                              X
                       t (l-ge)
assuming        and        are distributed independently. Note from (iii)     that   the

variance of the aggregate price depends upon the variance of

the aggregate demand shock and the variance of the aggregate supply shock, as well
as the market specific variances (via 8).

        The variance of the market-specific price cy2     is equal to the sum of
                                                    Pt' /

the variance of the aggregate price a2 and the variance of market—specific

price about the aggregate price level o ,              or

                                    a2 + a2
                                    P T                                         (iii)



where


                      a2
                               E[Pt(v)_Pt]2.

Substituting (9') and (9")          for   pt(v) and Pt respectively and using (10) gives


                  -        =
                      Pt
                               1-g®-g3 (wtv)3nt(v)
From (6) and (12) it follows that
                                               —A9-


                            2                             2         22
                        a
                                           1
                                                      (aW +        ga
                                                                    .fl).          (iv)
                            T
                                    2          g3,


assuming that w and ri are independently distributed. Note from (iv) that the

variance of market—specific price about the aggregate price depends upon the

variance of the market—specific demand disturbance and the variance of the market—

specific energy price disturbance, as well as the aggregate supply and demand variances

 (via 0). Substituting (ii) and (iv) into (iii) gives

                  2
                            =
                                1      2
                                           +    22    +
                                                          1        2    22
                                               g3a)            (a + g3a)           Cv)


where

                                       A =
                                               (1—g2e)2

                                       B =
                                               (1—g20—g3)2

Now note that



          Cov(pt,pt(v))         E(pt(v)_t)(pt_t)                    E(pt(v)pt) —


Since


                  Pt(v) =       Pt +   _?___ (w(v)_3n(v))
it follows that



           E(pt(v)pt) E(p) +
                                           1-gO-g3 EfP(w(v)_g3n(v)fl
and therefore, since E[P(w(v)_3n(v.))]                        0,



                                Cov(pt,pt(v)) =
                                                          a.
Hence

                                       Cov(pt,pt(v)) a
                      PtPt(V) a • aP(V)                             aP(V)
                                                      -AlO-


and (1) may be written
                                    2
                                a
                           =
                                    P   t                          +
                                                                       —
                                                      [pt(v)_t]                         (i')




Now from (8), ri'), (ii), and (v) it can readily be seen that

                                                2 22
                                            a +g a
                                             W       3fl
                            —                   B
                                2       22
                                       2 22                                             V1
                                x 3y +a+ga
                                         a
                                       w 3
                                    A                      B


       •To show that 0 is inversely related to a2 denote the right—hand

side of (vi) as X and rewrite (vi) as the implicit function



                           = 0 — X =            0.

Then

                                                              X2
                                =       ——=                                            (vii)
                      da                     '0                0
                           x



Note that X, the right—hand side of (vi), can be rewritten

                                —                              — —1

                      x=
                                    B(a + g3a )
                                            2        22
                                                       t +1
                                    A(a + g3a)


and that
                                                                           —2
                                            B(ci + g2 a2
                                               2

                                                                   +                         0.   (viii)
                     Xci
                                            A(a2 + g2a2)                        A(2+g2a2)
                                                    —All-


Lettinga=ax +gcj andb
                     2            22         =   aw2 + g 22
                                                          a also   note that
                                                         3T1
                             —        ——2
                             Ba                  a(B0A—A0B) >
                                  +
                         I             I
             =   —
                                                              0
        0                                                                      (lx)
                                                    A2b


since
        B0A — A0B =                         <                      0,
                    —2g2(l—g20—g3)(l—g20)g3
where

        A0 = —2g2(l—g20)
and
        B0 = —2g2(l—g20—g3).

It reasonably can be argued that

      Xe < 1

since then

      —ab(B0A — A0B) < (Ba+Ab)2

or, substituting for A, B, a, b, A0 and B0,
                     2 22 2 22
                             3p
      2 g2g3(ax+g a )(aw+g a )(l—g20)(1—g20—g3)
                          3n
                               2 2
                              a)
         < (l—g20— g3)4(a2+g23i-'
                     2 2 2             2 2
            + 2(a x+g a )(aw+g a
                             3p 2)(l—g20)2(l—g20—g3)2

                                   2 2 2 2
            + (1—g20)4(           a+ga)
                                   w 3n



which can be seen by inspection to be true for economically reasonable

values of g2 and g3. Hence from (vii), (viii), and (ix) it follows that


      dO
      —<0.                                                                     (x)
      daL
        x
                                 -A12-


A symmetric argument will show that

       dO
                  <   0.                                         (xi)
       cia
             p

Also   note, from Cx), (xi) and inspection of (ii), it can be seen that
             2


             2
                      >0
       cia
             x

and

             2
       cia
             Pt
       da
             p
