                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            ASSET PRICING WITH LIQUIDITY RISK

                                          Viral V. Acharya
                                         Lasse Heje Pedersen

                                        Working Paper 10814
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w10814


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2004




We are grateful for conversations with Andrew Ang, Joseph Chen, Sergei Davydenko, Francisco Gomes, Joel
Hasbrouck, Andrew Jackson, Tim Johnson, Martin Lettau, Anthony Lynch, Stefan Nagel, Lubos Pastor, Tano
Santos, Dimitri Vayanos, Luis Viceira, Jeff Wurgler, and seminar participants at London Business School,
London School of Economics, New York University, the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)
Summer Institute 2002, the Five Star Conference 2002,Western Finance Association Meetings 2003, and the
Texas Finance Festival 2004. We are especially indebted to Yakov Amihud and to an anonymous referee for
help and many valuable suggestions. All errors remain our own. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Viral V. Acharya and Lasse Heje Pedersen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Asset Pricing with Liquidity Risk
Viral V. Acharya and Lasse Heje Pedersen
NBER Working Paper No. 10814
September 2004
JEL No. G0, G1, G12

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper solves explicitly an equilibrium asset pricing model with liquidity risk – the risk arising

from unpredictable changes in liquidity over time. In our liquidity-adjusted capital asset pricing

model, a security's required return depends on its expected liquidity as well as on the covariances

of its own return and liquidity with market return and market liquidity. In addition, the model shows

how a negative shock to a security's liquidity, if it is persistent, results in low contemporaneous

returns and high predicted future returns. The model provides a simple, unified framework for

understanding the various channels through which liquidity risk may affect asset prices. Our

empirical results shed light on the total and relative economic significance of these channels.

Viral V. Acharya
London Business School
Regents’s Park
London NW1 4SA
United Kingsom
vacarya@london.edu

Lasse Heje Pedersen
NYU Stern Finance
44 West Fouth Street
Suite 9-190
New York, NY 10012
1    Introduction
Liquidity is risky and has commonality: it varies over time both for individual
stocks and for the market as a whole (Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000),
Hasbrouck and Seppi (2000), and Huberman and Halka (1999)). Liquidity risk is
often noted in the press, for instance:

      The possibility that liquidity might disappear from a market, and so
      not be available when it is needed, is a big source of risk to an in-
      vestor.
      — The Economist September 23, 1999

    and in the financial industry:

      there is also broad belief among users of financial liquidity — traders,
      investors and central bankers — that the principal challenge is not
      the average level of financial liquidity ... but its variability and un-
      certainty
      — Persaud (2003)

    This paper presents a simple theoretical model that helps explain how asset
prices are affected by liquidity risk and commonality in liquidity. The model
provides a unified theoretical framework that can explain the empirical findings
that return sensitivity to market liquidity is priced (Pastor and Stambaugh (2003)),
that average liquidity is priced (Amihud and Mendelson (1986)), and that liquidity
comoves with returns and predicts future returns (Amihud (2002), Chordia, Roll,
and Subrahmanyam (2001), Jones (2001), and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2003)).


                                          2
    In our model, risk averse agents in an overlapping-generations economy trade
securities whose liquidity varies randomly over time. We solve the model ex-
plicitly and derive a liquidity-adjusted capital asset pricing model (CAPM). Our
model of liquidity risk complements the existing theoretical literature on liquidity
and transactions costs, which deals with deterministic trading costs (for instance,
Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Constantinides (1986), Vayanos (1998), Vayanos
and Vila (1999), Gârleanu and Pedersen (2000), Huang (2002)). In the liquidity-
adjusted CAPM, the expected return of a security is increasing in its expected
illiquidity and its “net beta,” which is proportional to the covariance of its return,
ri , net of illiquidity costs, ci , with the market portfolio’s net return, r M − cM .
The net beta can be decomposed into the standard market beta and three betas
representing different forms of liquidity risk. These liquidity risks are associated
with (i) commonality in liquidity with the market liquidity, cov(c i , cM ); (ii) return
sensitivity to market liquidity, cov(r i , cM ); and (iii) liquidity sensitivity to market
returns, cov(ci , rM ).
    We explore the cross-sectional predictions of the model using NYSE and
AMEX stocks over the period 1963–1999. We use the illiquidity measure of Ami-
hud (2002) to proxy for ci . We find that the liquidity-adjusted CAPM fares better
than the standard CAPM in terms of R2 for cross-sectional returns and p-values
in specification tests, even though both models employ exactly one degree of free-
dom. The model has a good fit for portfolios sorted on liquidity, liquidity varia-
tion, and size, but the model cannot explain the cross-sectional returns associated
with the book-to-market effect.
    An interesting result that emerges from our empirical exercises based on Ami-
hud’s illiquidity measure is that illiquid securities also have high liquidity risk. In
particular, a security that has high average illiquidity c i also tends to have high


                                            3
commonality in liquidity with the market liquidity, high return sensitivity to mar-
ket liquidity, and high liquidity sensitivity to market returns. While this collinear-
ity is itself interesting, it also complicates the task of distinguishing statistically
the relative return impacts of liquidity, liquidity risk, and market risk. There is,
however, some evidence that the total effect of the three liquidity risks matters
over and above market risk and the level of liquidity.
   It is interesting to consider the total and relative economic significance of liq-
uidity level and each of the three liquidity risks by evaluating their contribution
to cross-sectional return differences. It is, however, difficult to accurately dis-
tinguish the relative economic effects because of the inherent collinearity in the
data. One of the benefits of having an economic model is that it provides a re-
strictive structure under which the identification problem is alleviated. Under the
model’s restrictions, liquidity risk contributes on average about 1.1% annually to
the difference in risk premium between stocks with high expected illiquidity and
low expected illiquidity. We decompose the effect of liquidity risk into the con-
tribution from each of the three kinds of risk, recognizing that these estimates are
subject to error and rely on the validity of the model:
   First, we estimate that the return premium due to commonality in liquidity,
cov(ci , cM ), is 0.08%. Hence, while the model shows that investors require a
return premium for a security that is illiquid when the market as a whole is illiquid,
this effect appears to be small. The commonality in liquidity has been documented
by Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000), Huberman and Halka (1999), and
Hasbrouck and Seppi (2000), but these papers do not study the implications for
required returns.
   Second, we estimate that the return premium due to cov(r i , cM ) is 0.16%. This
model-implied premium stems from investors’ preference for securities with high


                                          4
returns when the market is illiquid. Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) find empirical
support for this effect using monthly data over 34 years with a measure of liquidity
that they construct based on the return reversals induced by order flow.
       Third, we estimate that the return premium due to cov(ci , rM ) is 0.82%. In-
tuitively, investors are willing to pay a premium for a security that is liquid when
the market return is low. We note that cov(ci , rM ) appears to be the most impor-
tant source of liquidity risk although it has not previously been considered in the
academic literature. It is, however, reflected in industry practices such as legal
disclaimers for certain asset management firms, e.g.

         Risks of investing in smaller companies include ... the potential diffi-
         culty of selling these stocks during market downturns (illiquidity).
         — Legal Disclaimer, Investec Asset Management, 2004.1

       The return premium due to the level of liquidity is calibrated based on the aver-
age turnover to be 3.5% so the combined effect of the differences in liquidity risks
and differences in the level of liquidity is estimated to be 4.6% per year. These
estimates of the relative importance of liquidity level and the liquidity risks de-
pend on the model-implied restrictions of a single risk premium and a level effect
consistent with the turnover. If we depart from the model restrictions and estimate
each liquidity risk premium as a free parameter then the economic effect of liquid-
ity risk appears to be larger, but the unrestricted premia are estimated with little
precision. Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) find a large (7.5%) effect of liquidity risk
(cov(ri , cM )) using an unrestricted liquidity risk premium and without controlling
for the level of liquidity.
   1
       Source: http://www2.investecfunds.com/US/LegalDisclaimer/Index.cfm




                                              5
        Finally, the model also shows that, since liquidity is persistent, 2 liquidity pre-
dicts future returns and liquidity co-moves with contemporaneous returns. This
is because a positive shock to illiquidity predicts high future illiquidity, which
raises the required return and lowers contemporaneous prices. This may help ex-
plain the empirical findings of Amihud, Mendelson, and Wood (1990), Amihud
(2002), Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2001), Jones (2001), and Pastor and
Stambaugh (2003) in the US stock market, and of Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2003) in emerging markets.
        In summary, we offer a simple theoretical framework that illustrates several
channels through which liquidity risk can affect asset prices. The model is a useful
first step in understanding how a number of recent empirical findings fit together.
Finally, our empirical analysis suggests that the effects of liquidity level and liq-
uidity risk are separate, although the analysis is made difficult by collinearity, and
that one channel for liquidity risk that has not been treated in the prior literature,
cov(ci , rM ), may be of empirical importance.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the economy. Section 3
derives the liquidity-adjusted capital asset pricing model and outlines how liquid-
ity predicts and co-moves with returns. Section 4 contains an empirical analysis.
Section 5 concludes. Proofs are in the Appendix.



2        Assumptions
The model assumes a simple overlapping generations economy in which a new
generation of agents is born at any time t ∈ {. . . , −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, . . .} (Samuel-
son (1958)). Generation t consists of N agents, indexed by n, who live for two
    2
    Amihud (2002), Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000, 2001), Hasbrouck and Seppi
(2000), Huberman and Halka (1999), Jones (2001), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003).


                                              6
periods, t and t + 1. Agent n of generation t has an endowment at time t and no
other sources of income, trades in periods t and t + 1, and derives utility from
consumption at time t + 1. He has constant absolute risk aversion A n so that his
preferences are represented by the expected utility function −E t exp(−An xt+1 ),
where xt+1 is his consumption at time t + 1.
       There are I securities indexed by i = 1, . . . , I with a total of S i shares of secu-
rity i. At time t, security i pays a dividend of Dti , has an ex-dividend share price of
Pti , and has an illiquidity cost of Cti , where Dti and Cti are random variables.3 The
illiquidity cost, Cti , is modeled simply as the per-share cost of selling security i.
Hence, agents can buy at Pti but must sell at Pti − Cti . Short-selling is not allowed.
       Uncertainty about the illiquidity cost is what generates the liquidity risk in
this model. Specifically, we assume that Dti and Cti are autoregressive processes
of order one, that is:

         Dt = D̄ + ρD (Dt−1 − D̄) + εt

          Ct = C̄ + ρC (Ct−1 − C̄) + ηt ,

where4 D̄, C̄ ∈ RI+ are positive real vectors, ρD , ρC ∈ [0, 1], and (εt , ηt ) is an
independent identically distributed normal process with mean E(ε t ) = E(ηt ) = 0
and variance-covariance matrices var(εt ) = ΣD , var(ηt ) = ΣC , and E(εt ηt> ) =
ΣCD .
       We assume that agents can borrow and lend at a risk-free real return of r f > 1,
which is exogenous. This can be interpreted as an inelastic bond market, or a
   3
      All random variables are defined on a probability space (Ω, F, P), and all random variables
indexed by t are measurable with respect to the filtration {Ft }, representing the information com-
monly available to investors.
    4
      For notational convenience we assume that all securities have the same autocorrelation of
dividends and liquidity (ρD and ρC ) although our results apply more generally.



                                                7
generally available production technology that turns a unit of consumption at time
t into r f units of consumption at time t + 1.
       The assumptions with respect to agents, preferences, and dividends are strong.
These assumptions are made for tractability, and, as we shall see, they imply nat-
ural closed-form results for prices and expected returns. The main result (Propo-
sition 1) applies more generally, however. It holds for arbitrary utility functions
defined on (−∞, ∞) as long as conditional expected net returns are normal, 5 and
also for arbitrary return distribution and quadratic utility. Furthermore, it can be
viewed as a result of near-rational behavior, for instance, by using a Taylor ex-
pansion of the utility function (see Huang and Litzenberger (1988), Markowitz
(2000), and Cochrane (2001)). Our assumptions allow us, additionally, to study
return predictability caused by illiquidity (Proposition 2) and the co-movements
of returns and illiquidity (Proposition 3), producing insights that also seem robust
to the specification.
       Perhaps the strongest assumption is that investors need to sell all their securi-
ties after one period (when they die). In a more general setting with endogenous
holding periods, deriving a general equilibrium with time-varying liquidity is an
onerous task. While our model is mostly suggestive, it is helpful since it provides
guidelines concerning the first-order effect of liquidity risk, showing which risks
are priced. The assumption of overlapping generations can capture investors’ life-
cycle motives for trade (as in Vayanos (1998), and Constantinides, Donaldson, and
Mehra (2002)), or can be viewed as a way of capturing short investment horizons
(as in De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990)) and the large turnover
observed empirically in many markets.
   5
     The normal returns assumption is an assumption about endogenous variables that is used
in standard CAPM analysis (for instance, Huang and Litzenberger (1988)). This assumption is
satisfied in the equilibrium of the model of this paper.


                                            8
    It should also be noted that a narrow interpretation of the illiquidity cost, C ti ,
is that it is a transaction cost such as broker fees and bid-ask spread, in line with
the literature on exogenous transactions costs. More broadly, however, the illiq-
uidity cost could represent other the real costs, for instance, arising from delay
and search associated with trade execution as in Duffie, Gârleanu, and Pedersen
(2000). The novelty in our model arises from the fact that we allow this cost
to be time-varying. While research on endogenous time-variation in illiquidity
is sparse, in a recent paper Eisfeldt (2004) presents a model in which liquidity
fluctuates with real-sector productivity and investment.



3    Liquidity-Adjusted Capital Asset Pricing Model
This section derives a liquidity-adjusted version of the Capital Asset Pricing Model
(CAPM) and studies its asset pricing implications.
    We are interested in how an asset’s expected (gross) return,

                                            Dti + Pti
                                    rti =       i
                                                      ,
                                             Pt−1

depends on its relative illiquidity cost, defined as

                                                 Cti
                                        cit =     i
                                                     ,
                                                Pt−1

on the market return,
                                             S i (Dti + Pti )
                                        P
                              rtM   =       iP
                                                   i i
                                                              ,
                                               i S Pt−1




                                                9
and on the relative market illiquidity,
                                              P i i
                                                  SC
                                       cM
                                        t   = P i i it .
                                               i S Pt−1


In a competitive equilibrium of the model (henceforth referred to simply as equi-
librium), agents choose consumption and portfolios so as to maximize their ex-
pected utility taking prices as given, and prices are determined such that markets
clear.
       To determine equilibrium prices, consider first an economy with the same
agents in which asset i has a dividend of Dti − Cti and no illiquidity cost. In
this imagined economy, standard results imply that the CAPM holds (Markowitz
(1952), Sharpe (1964), Lintner (1965), and Mossin (1966)). We claim that the
equilibrium prices in the original economy with frictions are the same as those of
the imagined economy. This follows from two facts: (i) the net return on a long
position is the same in both economies; (ii) all investors in the imagined econ-
omy hold a long position in the market portfolio, and a (long or short) position
in the risk-free asset. Hence, an investor’s equilibrium return in the frictionless
economy is feasible in the original economy, and is also optimal, given the more
limited investment opportunities due to the short-selling constraints. 6
       These arguments show that the CAPM in the imagined frictionless economy
translates into a CAPM in net returns for the original economy with illiquidity
costs. Rewriting the one-beta CAPM in net returns in terms of gross returns,
we get a liquidity-adjusted CAPM for gross returns. This is the main testable 7
   6
      This argument applies more generally since positive transactions costs imply that a short po-
sition has a worse payoff than minus the payoff of a long position. We impose the short-sale
constraint because C can be negative in our normal setting.
    7
      Difficulties in testing this model arise from the fact that it makes predictions concerning condi-
tional moments as is standard in asset pricing. See Hansen and Richard (1987), Cochrane (2001),



                                                  10
implication of this paper:

Proposition 1 In the unique linear equilibrium, the conditional expected net re-
turn of security i is

                                                   i
                                            covt (rt+1            M
                                                       − cit+1 , rt+1 − cM
                                                                         t+1 )
            i
       Et (rt+1 − cit+1 ) = rf + λt                       M
                                                                                                    (1)
                                                   vart (rt+1 − cM t+1 )


where λt = Et (rt+1
                M
                      t+1 −r ) is the risk premium. Equivalently, the conditional
                    −cM     f


expected gross return is
                                                  i      M
         i              f                  covt (rt+1 , rt+1 )         covt (cit+1 , cM
                                                                                      t+1 )
    Et (rt+1 )    = r +       Et (cit+1 )
                                   + λt          M        M
                                                               + λt
                                          vart (rt+1 − ct+1 )                M
                                                                      vart (rt+1 − cM  t+1 )
                                i      M                    i      M
                         covt (rt+1 , ct+1 )         covt (ct+1 , rt+1 )
                    −λt        M        M
                                             − λt          M
                                                                          .                  (2)
                        vart (rt+1 − ct+1 )         vart (rt+1 − cM t+1 )


Equation (2) is simple and natural. It states that the required excess return is the
expected relative illiquidity cost, Et (cit+1 ), as found theoretically and empirically8
by Amihud and Mendelson (1986)), plus four betas (or covariances) times the risk
premium. These four betas depend on the asset’s payoff and liquidity risks. As
in the standard CAPM, the required return on an asset increases linearly with the
market beta, that is, covariance between the asset’s return and the market return.
This model yields three additional effects which could be regarded as three forms
and references therein. An unconditional version of (2) applies under stronger assumptions as
discussed in Section 3.3.
    8
      Empirically, Amihud and Mendelson (1986, 1989) find the required rate of return on NYSE
stocks to increase with the relative bid-ask spread. This result is questioned for NYSE stocks
by Eleswarapu and Reinganum (1993), but supported for NYSE stocks (especially for amortized
spreads) by Chalmers and Kadlec (1998), and for Nasdaq stocks by Eleswarapu (1997). Gârleanu
and Pedersen (2000) find that adverse-selection costs are priced only to the extent that they render
allocations inefficient. The ability of a market to allocate assets efficiently may be related to market
depth, and, consistent with this view, the required rate of return has been found to decrease with
measures of depth (Brennan and Subrahmanyam (1996) and Amihud (2002)). Easley, Hvidkjær,
and O’Hara (2002) find returns to increase with a measure of the probability of informed trading.



                                                   11
of liquidity risks.


3.1 Three Liquidity Risks

1. covt (cit+1 , cM
                  t+1 ): The first effect is that the return increases with the covariance

between the asset’s illiquidity and the market illiquidity. This is because investors
want to be compensated for holding a security that becomes illiquid when the
market in general becomes illiquid. The potential empirical significance of this
pricing implication follows from the presence of a time-varying common factor
in liquidity, which is documented by Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000),
Hasbrouck and Seppi (2000), and Huberman and Halka (1999). These papers
find that most stocks’ illiquidities are positively related to market illiquidity, so
the required return should be raised by the commonality-in-liquidity effect. The
effect of commonality in liquidity on asset prices is, however, not studied by these
authors; We study this effect empirically in Section 4.
    In this model, the risk premium associated with commonality in liquidity is
caused by the wealth effects of illiquidity. Also, this risk premium would poten-
tially apply in an economy in which investors can choose which securities to sell.
In such a model, an investor who holds a security that becomes illiquid (that is,
has a high cost cit ) can choose not to trade this security and instead trade other
(similar) securities. It is more likely that an investor can trade other (similar) se-
curities, at low cost, if the liquidity of this asset does not co-move with the market
liquidity. Hence, investors would require a return premium for assets with positive
covariance between individual and market illiquidity.

2. covt (rt+1
          i
                 t+1 ): The second effect on expected returns is due to covariation
              , cM
between a security’s return and the market liquidity. We see that cov t (rt+1
                                                                          i
                                                                              , cM
                                                                                 t+1 )


                                           12
affects required returns negatively because investors are willing to accept a lower
return on an asset with a high return in times of market illiquidity. Related effects
also arise in the theoretical models of Holmstrom and Tirole (2000), who examine
implications of corporate demand for liquidity, and Lustig (2001), who studies the
equilibrium implications of solvency constraints. Empirical support for this effect
is provided by Pastor and Stambaugh (2003), who find that “the average return
on stocks with high sensitivities to [market] liquidity exceeds that for stocks with
low sensitivities by 7.5% annually, adjusted for exposures to the market return as
well as size, value, and momentum factors.” Sadka (2002) and Wang (2002) also
present consistent evidence for this effect using alternative measures of liquidity.

3. covt (cit+1 , rt+1
                  M
                      ): The third effect on required returns is due to covariation be-
tween a security’s illiquidity and the market return. This effect stems from in-
vestors’ willingness to accept a lower expected return on a security that is liquid
in a down market. When the market declines, investors are poor, and the ability
to sell easily is especially valuable. Hence, an investor is willing to accept a dis-
counted return on stocks with low illiquidity costs in states of poor market return.
We find consistent evidence for this liquidity risk in the stock market in Sec-
tion 4, and the effect seems economically important. Also, anecdotal evidence 9
suggests that private equity is illiquid during down markets, which, together with
our model, may help explain the high average return documented by Ljungqvist
and Richardson (2003).
       Outside our model, intuition suggests that a low market return causes wealth
problems for some investors, who then need to sell. If a selling investor holds
securities that are illiquid at this time, then his problems are magnified. Con-
   9
     E.g., the Institute for Fiduciary Education (2002) characterizes private equity as an “illiquid
asset class” and points out that “In down equity markets, exits are more difficult and little cash is
returned.” Source: http://www.ifecorp.com/Papers-PDFs/Wender1102.PDF


                                                13
sistent with this intuition, Lynch and Tan (2003) find that the liquidity premium
is large if the transactions costs covary negatively with wealth shocks, among
other conditions. This is consistent with our effect of cov t (cit+1 , rt+1
                                                                        M
                                                                            ) to the extent
that rM proxies for wealth shocks. Lynch and Tan (2003) complement our paper
by showing through calibration that, even if an investor chooses his holding pe-
riod endogenously, the liquidity premium can be large (3.55% in one calibration).
They follow Constantinides (1986) in using a partial-equilibrium framework and
defining the liquidity premium as the decrease in expected return that makes an
investor indifferent between having access to the asset without transaction costs
rather than with them.

    The three covariances thus provide a characterization of the liquidity risk of a
security. We note that all these covariances can be accounted for by simply using
the conditional CAPM in net returns as in (1). It is useful, however, to use gross
returns and illiquidity as the basic inputs for several reasons: First, computing
the net return is not straightforward since it depends on the investor’s holding pe-
riod, and the holding period may be different from the econometrician’s sampling
period. We explain in Section 4 how we overcome this problem. Second, the
empirical liquidity literature is based on measures of gross return and illiquidity
costs, and the model provides a theoretical foundation for the empirical relations
between these security characteristics. Third, a pricing relation for gross returns
and illiquidity, which is similar in spirit to (2), may hold in richer models in which
net returns are not sufficient state variables. As argued above, additional liquidity
effects outside the model suggest risk premia of the same sign for the covariance
terms in (2). These additional liquidity effects also suggest that the size of the risk
premia need not be identical across the covariance terms. To accommodate the
possibility of a richer liquidity framework, we also consider a generalization of

                                            14
(2) in our empirical work in Section 4.


3.2 Implications of Persistence of Liquidity

This section shows that persistence of liquidity implies that liquidity predicts fu-
ture returns and co-moves with contemporaneous returns.
       Empirically, liquidity is time-varying and persistent, 10 that is, ρC > 0. This
model shows that persistent liquidity implies that returns are predictable. Intu-
itively, high illiquidity today predicts high expected illiquidity next period, imply-
ing a high required return.

Proposition 2 Suppose that ρC > 0, and that q ∈ RI is a portfolio11 with
      q     q
Et (Pt+1 + Dt+1 ) > ρC Ptq . Then, the conditional expected return increases with
illiquidity,

           ∂        q      f
             q Et (rt+1 − r ) > 0.                                                                        (3)
          ∂Ct

Proposition 2 relies on a mild technical condition, which is satisfied, for instance,
                                                     q     q
for any portfolio with positive price and with Et (Pt+1 + Dt+1 )/Ptq ≥ 1. The
proposition states that the conditional expected return depends positively on the
current illiquidity cost, that is, the current liquidity predicts the return.
       Jones (2001) finds empirically that the expected annual stock market return
increases with the previous year’s bid-ask spread and decreases with the previous
year’s turnover. Amihud (2002) finds that illiquidity predicts excess return both
for the market and for size-based portfolios, and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad
(2003) find that illiquidity predicts returns in emerging markets.
  10
    See Amihud (2002), Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000, 2001), Hasbrouck and Seppi
(2000), Huberman and Halka (1999), Jones (2001), and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003).
                                                                  P           i     i    i
  11                                                                       i q (Dt +Pt )
       For any q ∈ RI , we use the obvious notation Dtq = q > Dt , rtq =   P
                                                                                q iP i       and so on.
                                                                              i      t−1



                                                  15
   Predictability of liquidity further implies a negative conditional covariance
between contemporaneous returns and illiquidity. Naturally, when illiquidity is
high, the required return is high also, which depresses the current price, leading to
a low return. This intuition applies as long as liquidity is persistent (ρ C > 0) and
innovations in dividends and illiquidity are not too correlated (q > ΣCD q low for a
portfolio q) as is formalized in the following proposition.

Proposition 3 Suppose q ∈ RI is a portfolio such that ρC (rf q > ΣCD q + (rf −
ρD )q > ΣC q) > (r f )2 q > ΣCD q. Then, returns are low when illiquidity increases,


      covt (cqt+1 , rt+1
                     q
                         )<0                                                       (4)


Consistent with this result, Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2001), Jones (2001),
and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) find a negative relation between the market re-
turn and measures of market illiquidity, Amihud (2002) finds a negative relation
between the return on size portfolios and their corresponding unexpected illiq-
uidity, and Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2003) find a negative relationship
between illiquidity and returns for emerging markets.


3.3 An Unconditional Liquidity-Adjusted CAPM

To estimate the liquidity-adjusted CAPM, we derive an unconditional version. An
unconditional result obtains, for instance, under the assumption of independence
over time of dividends and illiquidity costs. Empirically, however, illiquidity is
persistent. Therefore, we rely instead on an assumption of constant conditional




                                         16
covariances of innovations in illiquidity and returns. 12 This assumption yields the
unconditional result that,

           E(rti − rtf ) = E(cit ) + λβ 1i + λβ 2i − λβ 3i − λβ 4i ,                          (6)

where

                             cov(rti , rtM − Et−1 (rtM ))
           β 1i =                                                                             (7)
                    var (rtM − Et−1 (rtM ) − [cM              M
                                                  t − Et−1 (ct )])
                       cov(cit − Et−1 (cit ), cM           M
                                                t − Et−1 (ct ))
           β 2i   =                                                                           (8)
                    var (rtM − Et−1 (rtM ) − [cM              M
                                                  t − Et−1 (ct )])
                             cov(rti , cM            M
                                         t − Et−1 (ct ))
           β 3i   =                                                                           (9)
                    var (rtM − Et−1 (rtM ) − [cM              M
                                                  t − Et−1 (ct )])
                       cov(cit − Et−1 (cit ), rtM − Et−1 (rtM ))
           β 4i   =                                                ,                         (10)
                    var (rtM − Et−1 (rtM ) − [cM              M
                                                  t − Et−1 (ct )])


and λ = E(λt ) = E(rtM − cM
                          t − r ). Next, we describe the empirical tests of this
                               f


unconditional relation.



4          Empirical Results
In this section, we estimate and test the liquidity-adjusted CAPM as specified in
Equation (6). We do this in five steps:
         (i) We estimate, in each month t of our sample, a measure of illiquidity, c it , for
each individual security i. (Section 4.1.)
    12
   Alternatively, the same unconditional model can be derived by assuming a constant risk pre-
mium λ, and by using the fact that for any random variables X and Y , it holds that

           E(covt (X, Y )) = cov(X − Et (X), Y ) = cov(X − Et (X), Y − Et (Y )).               (5)

We note that the possible time-variation of risk premium is driven by constant absolute risk aver-
sion in our model, but with constant relative risk aversion the risk premium is approximately
constant. See Friend and Blume (1975).


                                               17
    (ii) We form a “market portfolio” and sets of 25 test portfolios sorted on the
basis of illiquidity, illiquidity variation, size, and book-to-market by size, respec-
tively. For each portfolio and each month, we compute its return and illiquidity.
(Section 4.2.)
    (iii) For the market portfolio as well as the test portfolios, we estimate the
innovations in illiquidity, cpt − Et−1 (cpt ). (Section 4.3.)
    (iv) Using these illiquidity innovations and returns, we estimate and analyze
the liquidity betas. (Section 4.4.)
    (v) Finally, we consider the empirical fit of the (unconditional) liquidity-adjusted
CAPM by running cross-sectional regressions. To check the robustness of our re-
sults, we do the analysis with a number of different specifications. (Section 4.5.)


4.1 The Illiquidity Measure

Liquidity is (unfortunately) not an observable variable. There exist, however,
many proxies for liquidity. Some proxies, such as the bid-ask spread, are based
on market microstructure data, which is not available for a time series as long as
is usually desirable for studying the effect on expected returns. Further, the bid-
ask spread measures well the cost of selling a small number of shares, but it does
not necessarily measure well the cost of selling many shares. We follow Amihud
(2002) in estimating illiquidity using only daily data from the Center for Research
in Security Prices (CRSP). In particular, Amihud (2002) defines the illiquidity of
stock i in month t as

                       Days    i
                            i
                  1 Xt |Rtd    |
            i
      ILLIQ t =      i       i
                                 ,                                               (11)
                Days t d=1 Vtd




                                            18
where Rtd
       i
          and Vtdi are, respectively, the return and dollar volume (in millions) on
day d in month t, and Days it is the number of valid observation days in month t
for stock i.
       The intuition behind this illiquidity measure is as follows. A stock is illiquid
— that is, has a high value of ILLIQ it — if the stock’s price moves a lot in response
to little volume. In our model, illiquidity is the cost of selling and, as discussed in
Section 2, real markets have several different selling costs including broker fees,
bid-ask spreads, market impact, and search costs. Our empirical strategy is based
on an assumption that ILLIQ is a valid instrument for the costs of selling, broadly
interpreted. Consistent with this view, Amihud (2002) shows empirically that
ILLIQ is positively related to measures of price impact and fixed trading costs
over the time period in which he has the microstructure data. Similarly, Has-
brouck (2002) computes a measure of Kyle’s lambda using micro-structure data
for NYSE, AMEX and NASDAQ stocks, and finds that its Spearman (Pearson)
correlation with ILLIQ in the cross-section of stocks is 0.737 (0.473). Hasbrouck
(2002) concludes that “[a]mong the proxies considered here, the illiquidity mea-
sure [ILLIQ] appears to be the best.” Furthermore, ILLIQ is closely related to
the Amivest measure of illiquidity, which has often been used in the empirical
microstructure literature.13
       There are two problems with using ILLIQ. First, it is measured in “percent per
dollar,” whereas the model is specified in terms of “dollar cost per dollar invested.”
This is a problem because it means that ILLIQ is not stationary (e.g., inflation is
ignored). Second, while ILLIQ is an instrument for the cost of selling, it does
not directly measure the cost of a trade. To solve these problems, we define a
  13
       The Amivest measure of liquidity is the average ratio of volume to absolute return.




                                                 19
normalized measure of illiquidity, cit , by


         cit = min 0.25 + 0.30 ILLIQ it Pt−1
                                          M
                                                                                             (12)
                                                    
                                             , 30.00 ,


where Pt−1
        M
           is the ratio of the capitalizations of the market portfolio at the end
of month t − 1 and of the market portfolio at the end of July 1962. The P t−1
                                                                           M


adjustment solves the first problem mentioned above, and it makes this measure
of illiquidity relatively stationary. The coefficients 0.25 and 0.30 are chosen such
that the cross-sectional distribution of normalized illiquidity (c it ) for size-decile
portfolios has approximately the same level and variance as does the effective
half spread14 reported by Chalmers and Kadlec (1998). This normalized illiquid-
ity is capped at a maximum value of 30% in order to ensure that our results are
not driven by the extreme observations of ILLIQ it . Furthermore, a per-trade cost
greater than 30% seems unreasonable and is an artifact of the effect of low volume
days on ILLIQ it .
       Chalmers and Kadlec (1998) report that the mean effective spread for size-
decile portfolios of NYSE and AMEX stocks over the period 1983–1992 ranges
from 0.29% to 3.41% with an average of 1.11%. The normalized illiquidity, c it ,
for identically formed portfolios has an average of 1.24%, a standard deviation
of 0.37%, and matches the range as well as the cross-sectional variation reported
by Chalmers and Kadlec (1998). This means that we can interpret the illiquidity
measure cit as directly related to (a lower bound of) the per-trade cost.
       Admittedly, this is a noisy measure of illiquidity. This makes it harder for us
to find an empirical connection between return and illiquidity, and it can enhance
omitted-variable problems. The noise is reduced by considering portfolios rather
  14
     The effective half spread is the difference between the transaction price and the midpoint of
the prevailing bid-ask quote, see Chalmers and Kadlec (1998), Table 1.


                                               20
than individual stocks.


4.2 Portfolios

We employ daily return and volume data from CRSP from July 1st, 1962 until
December 31st, 1999 for all common shares (CRSP sharecodes 10 and 11) listed
on NYSE and AMEX.15 Also, we use book-to-market data based on the COM-
PUSTAT measure of book value.16
       We form a market portfolio for each month t during this sample period based
on stocks with beginning-of-month price between 5 and 1000, and with at least 15
days of return and volume data in that month.
       We form 25 illiquidity portfolios for each year y during the period 1964 to
1999 by sorting stocks with price, at beginning of year, between 5 and 1000, and
return and volume data in year y − 1 for at least 100 days.17 We compute the
annual illiquidity for each eligible stock as the average over the entire year y − 1
of daily illiquidities, analogously to monthly illiquidity calculation in (11). The
eligible stocks are then sorted into 25 portfolios, p ∈ {1, 2, . . . , 25}, based on
their year y − 1 illiquidities.
       Similarly, we form 25 illiquidity-variation portfolios (denoted “σ(illiquidity)
  15
      Since volume data in CRSP for Nasdaq stocks is available only from 1982 and includes inter-
dealer trades, we employ only NYSE and AMEX stocks for sake of consistency in the illiquidity
measure.
   16
      We are grateful to Joe Chen for providing us with data on book-to-market ratios. The book-
to-market ratios are computed as described in Ang and Chen (2002): [For a given month] the
book-to-market ratio is calculated using the most recently available fiscal year-end balance sheet
data on COMPUSTAT. Following Fama and French (1993), we define “book value” as the value
of common stockholders’ equity, plus deferred taxes and investment tax credit, minus the book
value of preferred stock. The book value is then divided by the market value on the day of the
firm’s fiscal year-end.
   17
      Amihud (2002) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) employ similar requirements for the in-
clusion of stocks in their samples. These requirements help reduce the measurement error in the
monthly illiquidity series.


                                               21
portfolios”) by ranking the eligible stocks each year based on the standard devi-
ation of daily illiquidity measures in the previous year, and 25 size portfolios by
ranking stocks based on their market capitalization at the beginning of the year.
       Finally, we form portfolios sorted first in 5 book-to-market quintiles and then
in 5 size quintiles within the book-to-market groups as in Fama and French (1992)
and Fama and French (1993). This sample is restricted to stocks with book-to-
market data in year y − 1. When considering the portfolio properties, we use
the year-y book-to-market, averaging across stocks with available book-to-market
data in that year.
       For each portfolio p (including the market portfolio), we compute its return in
month t, as

                 X
         rtp =            wtip rti ,                                                               (13)
                 i in p


where the sum is taken over the stocks included in portfolio p in month t, and
where wtip are either equal weights or value-based weights, depending on the spec-
ification.18
       Similarly, we compute the normalized illiquidity of a portfolio, p, as

                 X
         cpt =            wtip cit ,                                                               (14)
                 i in p

  18
     The returns, rti , are adjusted for stock delisting to avoid survivorship bias, following Shumway
(1997). In particular, the last return used is either the last return available on CRSP, or the delisting
return, if available. While a last return for the stock of −100% is naturally included in the study,
a return of −30% is assigned if the deletion reason is coded in CRSP as 500 (reason unavailable),
520 (went to OTC), 551–573 and 580 (various reasons), 574 (bankruptcy) and 584 (does not meet
exchange financial guidelines). Shumway (1997) obtains that −30% is the average delisting return,
examining the OTC returns of delisted stocks. Amihud (2002) employs an identical survivorship
bias correction.




                                                  22
where, as above, wtip are either equal weights or value-based weights, depending
on the specification.
       The model’s results are phrased in terms of value-weighted returns and value-
weighted illiquidity for the market portfolio. Several studies, however, focus on
equal-weighted return and illiquidity measures, for instance Amihud (2002) and
Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000). Computing the market return and
illiquidity as equal-weighted averages is a way of compensating for the over-
representation in our sample of large liquid securities, as compared to the “true”
market portfolio in the economy. In particular, our sample does not include illiquid
assets such as corporate bonds, private equity, real estate, and many small stocks,
and these assets constitute a significant fraction of aggregate wealth. 19 Therefore,
we focus in our empirical work on an equal-weighted market portfolio, although
we also estimate the model with a value-weighted market portfolio for robustness.
Also, we use both equal- and value-weighted averages for the test portfolios.


4.3 Innovations in Illiquidity

Illiquidity is persistent. The auto-correlation of the market illiquidity, for in-
stance, is 0.87 at a monthly frequency. Therefore, we focus on the innovations,
cpt − Et−1 (cpt ), in illiquidity of a portfolio when computing its liquidity betas as
explained in Section 3.3.
       To compute these innovations, we first define the un-normalized illiquidity,
  19
     Heaton and Lucas (2000) report that stocks constitute only 13.6% of national wealth, while
non-corporate (i.e. private) equity is 13.8%, other financial wealth is 28.2%, owner-occupied real
estate is 33.3%, and consumer durables is 11.1%.




                                               23
truncated for outliers, of a portfolio p as
                                                                
            p                                     i 30.00 − 0.25
                        X
      ILLIQ t      :=            wtip   min ILLIQ t ,        M
                                                                   ,                       (15)
                        i in p
                                                      0.30 Pt−1


where wtip is the portfolio weight. As explained in Section 4.1, we normalize
illiquidity to make it stationary and to put it on a scale corresponding to the cost
of a single trade.
   To predict market illiquidity, we run the following regression:
                             M
                                                                                 M
                                                                                                
                                            M                                              M
          0.25 +   0.30 ILLIQ t           Pt−1       = a0 + a1 0.25 +   0.30 ILLIQ t−1   Pt−1
                                                                                M
                                                                                          
                                                                                       M
                                                          + a2 0.25 + 0.30 ILLIQ t−2 Pt−1

                                                            + ut .                         (16)

Note that the three terms inside parentheses in this specification correspond closely
    t , ct−1 , and ct−2 , respectively, as given by (12) and (14), with the difference
to cM    M          M


that the same date is used for the market index (Pt−1
                                                   M
                                                      ) in all three terms. This
is to ensure that we are measuring innovations only in illiquidity, not changes in
P M . Our results are robust to the specification of liquidity innovations and, in
particular, employing other stock-market variables available at time t − 1 did not
improve significantly the explanatory power of the regression. Pastor and Stam-
baugh (2003) employ a specification to compute market liquidity innovations that
is similar in spirit to the AR(2) specification in (16).
   The residual, u, of the regression in (16) is interpreted as the standardized
market illiquidity innovation, cM
                                t − Et−1 (ct ), that is,
                                           M




      cM          M
       t − Et−1 (ct ) := ut .                                                              (17)



                                                       24
and innovations in portfolio illiquidity are computed in the same way, using the
same AR coefficients.
       For the market illiquidity series, the AR(2) specification has a R 2 of 78%. The
resulting innovations in market illiquidity, cM
                                              t − Et−1 (ct ), have a standard de-
                                                         M


viation of 0.17%. Figure 1 plots the time-series of these innovations, scaled to
have unit standard deviation. The auto-correlation of these illiquidity innovations
is low (−0.03) and, visually, they appear stationary. Employing AR(1) specifica-
tion produces a significantly greater correlation of innovations (−0.29), whereas
employing AR(3) specification produces little improvement in the explanatory
power.
       The measured innovations in market illiquidity are high during periods that
anecdotally were characterized by liquidity crisis, for instance, in 5/1970 (Penn
Central commercial paper crisis), 11/1973 (oil crisis), 10/1987 (stock market crash),
8/1990 (Iraqi invasion of Kuwait), 4,12/1997 (Asian crisis), and 6–10/1998 (Rus-
sian default and Long-Term Capital Management crisis). The correlation between
this measure of innovations in market illiquidity and the measure of innovations
in liquidity used by Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) is −0.33. 20 (The negative sign
is due to the fact that Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) measure liquidity, whereas we
follow Amihud (2002) in considering illiquidity.)


4.4 Liquidity Risk

In this section, we present the descriptive statistics of liquidity risk, measured
through the betas β 2p , β 3p and β 4p . We focus on the value-weighted illiquid-
ity portfolios whose properties are reported in Table 1. Similar conclusions are
drawn from examining the properties of equal-weighted illiquidity portfolios or
  20
       We thank Pastor and Stambaugh for providing their data on innovations in market liquidity.


                                                 25
                                                  5



                                                  4



                                                  3
                   Innovations in market ILLIQ




                                                  2



                                                  1



                                                  0



                                                 −1



                                                 −2
PSfrag replacements
                                                 −3
                                                  1960   1965   1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000
                                                                              Date

                              Figure 1: Standardized innovations in market illiquidity from 1964-1999.


           size portfolios (not reported). The four betas, β 1p , β 2p , β 3p and β 4p , for each
           portfolio are computed as per Equation (7) using the entire time-series, that is,
           using all monthly return and illiquidity observations for the portfolio and the mar-
           ket portfolio from the beginning of year 1964 till end of year 1999. Similarly,
           average illiquidity E(cp ) for a portfolio is computed using the entire time-series
           of monthly illiquidity observations for the portfolio. This approach of using the
           entire time-series in computing the portfolio characteristics is similar to the one
           adopted in Black, Jensen, and Scholes (1990) and Pastor and Stambaugh (2003).
              Table 1 shows that the sort on past illiquidity successfully produces portfolios
           with monotonically increasing average illiquidity from portfolio 1 through port-
           folio 25. Not surprisingly, we see that illiquid stocks — that is, stocks with high
           values of E(cp ) — tend to have a high volatility of stock returns, a low turnover,

                                                                              26
and a small market capitalization. Furthermore, we find that illiquid stocks also
have high liquidity risk: they have large values of β 2p and large negative values
of β 3p and β 4p . This is an interesting result on its own. It says that a stock, which
is illiquid in absolute terms (cp ), also tends to have a lot of commonality in liq-
uidity with the market (cov(cp , cM )), a lot of return sensitivity to market liquidity
(cov(rp , cM )), and a lot of liquidity sensitivity to market returns (cov(c p , rM )). We
note that all of the betas are estimated with a small error (i.e., a small asymptotic
variance). Indeed, almost all of the betas are statistically significant at conven-
tional levels.
       A liquidity beta is proportional to the product of the correlation between its re-
spective arguments and their standard deviations. As noted before, more illiquid
stocks have greater volatility of returns. Furthermore, since illiquidity is bounded
below by zero, it is natural that more illiquid stocks also have more volatile illiq-
uidity innovations. This is verified in Table 1 which shows that the standard de-
viation of portfolio illiquidity innovations, σ(∆c p ), increases monotonically in
portfolio illiquidity. The higher variability of returns and illiquidity innovations
are, however, not the sole drivers of the positive relationship between illiquidity
and liquidity risk. The correlation coefficients between c p and cM (rp and cM ) are
also increasing (decreasing) in portfolio illiquidity. The correlation coefficients
between cp and rM are decreasing in illiquidity between portfolios 1 − 15 and are
gradually increasing thereafter. Nevertheless, the variability of c p ensures that the
covariances between cp and rM are decreasing in illiquidity.21
       The co-linearity of measures of liquidity risk is confirmed by considering the
correlation among the betas, reported in Table 2. The co-linearity problem is not
just a property of the liquidity-sorted portfolios; it also exists at an individual
  21
       These correlations are not reported in the table for sake of brevity.



                                                   27
stock level as is seen in Table 3. The co-linearity at the stock level is smaller,
which could be due in part to larger estimation errors. While this co-linearity is
theoretically intriguing, it makes it hard to empirically distinguish the separate
effects of illiquidity and the individual liquidity betas. 22


4.5 How Liquidity Risk Affects Returns

In this section, we study how liquidity risk affects expected returns. We do
this by running cross-sectional regressions on our test portfolios using a GMM
framework that takes into account the pre-estimation of the betas (as in Cochrane
(2001)). Standard errors are computed using the Newey and West (1987) method
with 2 lags.23


Illiquidity and σ(illiquidity) Portfolios
The potential effect of liquidity and liquidity risk is, of course, detected by consid-
ering portfolios that differ in their liquidity attributes. Hence, we consider first the
liquidity-adjusted CAPM (6) for portfolios sorted by illiquidity and the illiquidity
variation.
       To impose the model-implied constraint that the risk premia of the different
  22
      We have not been able to construct portfolios which allow us to better identify the separate
beta effects. For instance, we have considered portfolios based on predicted liquidity betas, similar
to the approach taken by Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). These results are not reported as these
portfolios did not improve statistical power: The liquidity betas after portfolio formation turned out
to be better sorted for illiquidity and size portfolios than for the portfolios sorted using predicted
liquidity betas. We attribute this, in part, to the large estimation errors associated with predicting
liquidity betas at the individual stock level.
   23
      Our point estimates are the same as those derived using OLS (either in a pooled regression or
using the Fama and MacBeth (1973) method). Our standard errors correspond to those of Shanken
(1992) except that the GMM method also takes serial correlation into account.




                                                 28
betas is the same, we define the “net beta” as


       β net,p := β 1p + β 2p − β 3p − β 4p .                                                    (18)


With this definition, the liquidity-adjusted CAPM becomes

       E(rtp − rtf ) = α + κE(cpt ) + λβ net,p ,                                                 (19)

where we allow a non-zero intercept, α, in the estimation, although the model
implies that the intercept is zero. In our model, investors incur the illiquidity cost
exactly once over their holding period. The coefficient κ adjusts for the difference
between the monthly period used in estimation, and the typical holding period
of an investor (which is the period implicitly considered in the model). More
precisely, κ is the ratio of the monthly estimation period to the typical holding pe-
riod.24 The average holding period is proxied by the period over which all shares
are turned over once. Hence, we calibrate κ as the average monthly turnover
across all stocks in the sample.25 In the sample of liquidity portfolios, κ is cali-
brated to 0.034, which corresponds to a holding period of 1/0.034 ∼ = 29 months.
The expected illiquidity, E(cpt ), is computed as the portfolio’s average illiquidity.
Note that the structure of the liquidity-adjusted CAPM and its calibration using
  24
       If the estimation period is equal to the holding period, then the model implies (19) with κ = 1.
If the estimation period is κ times the holding period, then E(rtp − rtf ) is (approximately) κ times
the expected holding period return, and β net,p is assumed to be approximately κ times the holding-
period net beta. This is because a κ-period return (or illiquidity innovation) is approximately a sum
of κ 1-period returns (or illiquidity innovations), and because returns and illiquidity innovations
have low correlation across time. The illiquidity, E(cp ), however, does not scale with time period
because it is an average of daily illiquidities (not a sum of such terms). Therefore, the E(c p ) term
is scaled by κ in (19).
    25
        To run the regression (19) with a fixed κ, we treat the net return, E(rtp − rtf ) − κE(cpt ),
as the dependent variable. All R2 are, however, based on the same dependent variable namely
E(rtp − rtf ).



                                                 29
κ equal to the average monthly turnover for stocks make the estimation different
from the typical cross-sectional regression study in which the asset-pricing rela-
tionship is backed out from the return series and data on security characteristics
such as beta, size, book-to-market, etc.
    The liquidity-adjusted CAPM (19) has only one risk premium, λ, that needs to
be estimated as in the standard CAPM. Here, the risk factor is the net beta instead
of the standard market beta. Hence, the empirical improvement in fit relative to the
standard CAPM is not achieved by adding factors (or otherwise adding degrees of
freedom), but simply by making a liquidity adjustment.
    The estimated results for Equation (19) are reported in line 1 of Table 4, with
illiquidity portfolios in Panel A and σ(illiquidity) portfolios in Panel B. With either
portfolio, the risk premium λ is positive and significant at a 1% level and α is
insignificant, both results lending support to our model. The R 2 of the liquidity-
adjusted CAPM is high relative to the standard CAPM, reported in line 3. In line 2,
we estimate the liquidity-adjusted CAPM with κ as a free parameter, which results
in only modest changes in κ and λ.
    While the improvement in fit of the liquidity-adjusted CAPM over the CAPM
is encouraging, it does not constitute a test of the effect of liquidity risk. To isolate
the effect of liquidity risk (β 2 , β 3 , and β 4 ) over liquidity level (E(c)) and market
risk (β 1 ), we consider the relation

      E(rtp − rtf ) = α + κE(cpt ) + λ1 β 1p + λβ net,p                              (20)

In line 4, this relation is estimated with κ at its calibrated value. We see that β net is
insignificant for illiquidity portfolios, but significant for σ(illiquidity) portfolios.
In line 5, the relation is estimated with κ as a free parameter. In this regression, the
support for the model is stronger in that β net is significant with either portfolio.

                                           30
We note that κ is estimated to be negative in Panel A, although it is statistically
insignificant. Since the model implies that κ should be positive, we estimate in
line 6 with the restriction that κ = 0. With this specification, β net remains sig-
nificant in both panels. In conclusion, there is some evidence that liquidity risk
matters over and above market risk and liquidity level. The collinearity problems
imply, however, that this evidence is weak.
   We note that a negative coefficient on β 1 does not imply a negative risk pre-
mium on market risk since β 1 is also contained in β net . Rather, a negative coeffi-
cient suggests that liquidity risk may have a higher risk premium than market risk.
For instance, line 4 of Table 4A means that

     E(rtp − rtf ) = −0.333 + 0.034E(cpt ) − 3.181β 1p + 4.334β net,p

                  = −0.333 + 0.034E(cpt ) + 1.153β 1p + 4.334 β 2p − β 3p − β 4p
                                                                                      


   Finally, in line 7 we allow all of the betas to have different risk premia λ i ,
and in line 8 we further let κ be a free parameter. That is, lines 7–8 estimate the
generalized relation

      E(rtp − rtf ) = α + κE(cpt ) + λ1 β 1p + λ2 β 2p + λ3 β 3p + λ4 β 4p        (21)

without the model restrictions that λ1 = λ2 = −λ3 = −λ4 . We see that the
multicollinearity problems are severe, and, hence, statistical identification of the
separate effects of the different liquidity risks is difficult. Of course, we must also
entertain the possibility that not all these risk factors are empirically relevant.
   The empirical fit of the standard CAPM is illustrated in the top panel of Fig-
ure 2 for illiquidity portfolios and in Figure 3 for σ(illiquidity) portfolios. The
middle and bottom panels show, respectively, the fit of the constrained and un-


                                          31
constrained liquidity-adjusted CAPM, that is, lines 1 and 8, respectively, from
Table 4. We see that the liquidity adjustment improves the fit especially for the
illiquid portfolios, consistent with what our intuition would suggest. We note that
the number of free parameters is the same in top and middle panels, so the im-
provement in fit is not a consequence of more degrees of freedom.


Economic Significance of Results
It is interesting to consider the economic significance of liquidity risk. To get
a perspective on the magnitude of the effect, we compute the annual return pre-
mium required to hold illiquid rather than liquid securities. This is computed as
the product of the risk premium and the difference in liquidity risk across liquidity
portfolios. If we use the unrestricted model in line 8 of Table 4A then our esti-
mates are very noisy because of the multicollinearity problem. Instead, the benefit
of having an economic model is that we can impose its structure and can get rel-
atively tight estimates. Hence, we use the calibrated value of κ and the common
risk premium, λ = 1.512, from line 1. Of course, when interpreting the results,
one must bear in mind that they rely on the validity of the model.
    The difference in annualized expected return between portfolio 1 and 25 that
can be attributed to a difference in β 2 , the commonality between the portfolio
illiquidity and market illiquidity, is


                          λ(β 2,p25 − β 2,p1 ) · 12 = 0.08%.


Similarly, the annualized return difference stemming from the difference in β 3 ,
the sensitivity of the portfolio return to market illiquidity, is


                         −λ(β 3,p25 − β 3,p1 ) · 12 = 0.16%,

                                           32
and the effect of β 4 , the sensitivity of the portfolio illiquidity to market return, is


                          −λ(β 4,p25 − β 4,p1 ) · 12 = 0.82%.


    The total effect of liquidity risk is therefore 1.1% per year. Using the standard
error of the estimates of λ and the betas, the 95% confidence interval for the total
effect of β 2 − β 3 − β 4 is [0.24%, 1.88%]. Hence, under the model restrictions and
using the calibrated κ, the effect of liquidity risk is significantly different from
zero.
    Interestingly, of the three liquidity risks the effect of β 4 , the covariation of
a security’s illiquidity to market returns, appears to have the largest economic
impact on expected returns. (Also, it has the highest t-statistics in the unrestricted
regression of lines 7–8 in Table 4.) This liquidity risk has not been studied before
either theoretically or empirically.
    The difference in annualized expected return between portfolio 1 and 25 that
can be attributed to a difference in the expected illiquidity, E(c), is 3.5%, using
the calibrated coefficient. The overall effect of expected illiquidity and liquidity
risk is thus 4.6% per year.
    While the magnitude of liquidity risk is economically significant, it is lower
than the magnitude estimated by Pastor and Stambaugh (2003). This could be
due to the fact that they employ a different measure of liquidity, or due to the fact
that they sort portfolios based on liquidity risk (in their case, β 3 ) whereas we sort
based on the level of liquidity. Also, this could be because they do not control for
the level of illiquidity which has been shown to command a significant premium in
a number of studies including Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Brennan and Sub-
rahmanyam (1996), Brennan, Chordia, and Subrahmanyam (1998), Datar, Naik,



                                           33
and Radcliffe (1998), Swan (2002), and Dimson and Hanke (2002). Finally, the
difference could also arise because we restrict the risk premia on different liquid-
ity betas to be the same. For instance, the magnitude of the risk premium related
to β 4 is estimated to be higher in line 7–8 of Table 4A. This higher risk premium
results in a per year effect of about 9% from β 4 alone.26
       The collinearity between liquidity and liquidity risk implies that the most ro-
bust number is their overall effect. Further, our results suggest that studies that
focus on the separate effect of liquidity (or liquidity risk) can possibly be rein-
terpreted as providing an estimate of the overall effect of liquidity and liquidity
risk.


Robustness, Size, and Book-to-Market
To check the robustness of our results, we consider different specifications and
portfolios. First, we consider whether our results are robust to the choice of
value weighting versus equal weighting. Table 5A reports the results with equal-
weighted illiquidity portfolios and equal-weighted market, and Table 5B with
value-weighted illiquidity portfolios and value-weighted market. The results and
their significance are similar to those of Table 4A. First, β net is borderline signifi-
cant at a 5% level in line 1 of Table 5A, but insignificant at this level in Table 5B.
In both tables, the liquidity-adjusted CAPM has a higher R-square than the stan-
dard CAPM. In particular with value-weighted portfolios in Table 5B, the standard
CAPM has an R-square of 0.0%, whereas the liquidity-adjusted CAPM has an R-
square of 48.6%. There is further evidence that liquidity risk matters over and
  26
     In another recent paper, Chordia, Subrahmanyam, and Anshuman (2001) find that expected
returns in the cross-section are higher for stocks with low variability of liquidity, measured using
variables such as trading volume and turnover. They examine the firm-specific variability of liq-
uidity. By contrast, our model and tests suggest that it is the co-movement of firm-specific liquidity
with market return and market liquidity that affects expected returns.


                                                 34
above liquidity level and market risk. In particular, β net is significant in line 5 of
Table 5A, and in all of lines 4–6 in Table 5B. (Also, β net is significant in line 6 of
Table 5A, but this line is not relevant since the coefficient on E(c p ) has the correct
sign in line 5.)
       As a further robustness check, we re-estimate our model with size-based port-
folios and portfolios sorted first in 5 book-to-market quintiles and then in 5 size
quintiles within the book-to-market groups (as in Fama and French (1992)).
       Small-sized stocks are illiquid (in absolute terms as measured by E(c)) and
also have high liquidity risk (as measured by the three betas β 2p , β 3p and β 4p ). Ta-
ble 6A shows that the cross-sectional regressions have coefficients that are similar
to our earlier results, but the statistical significance is reduced. The coefficient of
β net is estimated to be positive and the liquidity-adjusted CAPM still has a higher
R2 than the standard CAPM. Figure 4 shows graphically the fit for size portfolios
of the standard CAPM, and the liquidity-adjusted CAPM, with constrained and
unconstrained risk premia. We see that the liquidity adjustment improves the fit,
particularly for the smaller size portfolios.
       Table 6B and Figure 5 show the models’ fit of the B/M-by-size portfolios. We
recover the well-known27 result that CAPM does relatively poorly for B/M-by-
size portfolios (adjusted R2 = 22.9%) since market beta is relatively “flat” across
these portfolios. The liquidity-adjusted CAPM in line 1 provides a moderate im-
provement in the fit (adjusted R2 = 40.6%) whereas the model with unconstrained
risk premia produces a significant improvement in the fit (adjusted R 2 = 73.3%).
It should be noted, however, that the unconstrained specification may be “over
fitted” in the sense that some of the risk premia estimated have incorrect sign and
they are all insignificant. The negative coefficient on β net in line 5 suggest that
  27
       See Fama and French (1992) and Fama and French (1993).



                                              35
the model is misspecified for these portfolios.
   To further consider the model’s ability to explain the size and book-to-market
effects, we run our regressions while controlling for size and book-to-market (Ta-
ble 7). We do this both for illiquidity portfolios (Panel A) and for B/M-by-size
portfolios (Panel B). The results with illiquidity portfolios are similar to the earlier
results, although the standard errors increase because of the additional variables.
The coefficient on β net is significant in the liquidity-adjusted CAPM of line 1. The
coefficient on size is always insignificant and the coefficient on book-to-market
is insignificant in all specifications except line 2. (Including volatility does not
change the results, and volatility is not significant. These results are not reported.)
With B/M-by-size portfolios (Table 7B) the model performs poorly. Indeed, the
coefficient on β net is negative, although insignificant, and the coefficient on B/M
is significant in most specifications. To summarize, the results with illiquidity
portfolios suggest that liquidity risk matters while controlling for book to market,
while the results with B/M-by-size portfolios suggest that liquidity risk does not
explain the book-to-market effect. (Pastor and Stambaugh (2003) reach a simi-
lar conclusion.) Hence, our simple model fails to explain the entire investment
universe.


Specification Tests
We perform several specification tests of the liquidity-adjusted CAPM. First, we
note that we fail to reject at conventional levels the model-implied restriction that
α = 0 in the liquidity-adjusted CAPM (lines 1–2 and 4–8 of Table 4), whereas this
restriction is rejected for the standard CAPM (at a 10% level in line 3 Table 4A,
and at a 5% level in Table 4B). Second, in context of the model with unrestricted




                                          36
risk premia in line 8 of Table 4, a Wald test28 fails to reject the five model-implied
restrictions λ1 = λ2 = −λ3 = −λ4 , α = 0, and κ = k, where k is the calibrated
value. The p-value is 47% in Table 4A and 28% in Table 4B. The CAPM restric-
tions λ2 = λ3 = λ4 = 0, α = 0, and κ = 0 have p-values of 15% and 8.7%,
respectively. The CAPM is rejected in lines 5 and 6 since β net is significant.
       Another testable restriction implied by the model is that the risk premium
equals the expected net return on the market in excess of the risk-free rate. The
point estimate of the risk premium, λ, is larger than the sample average of the
excess return of the market net of transaction costs, E(rtM − rtf − κcM
                                                                      t ) and the

p-value is 6.6% in regression 1 of Table 4A and 7.3% in Table 4B. In comparison,
the test that the standard CAPM risk premium equals the E(rtM − rtf ) has p-values
of 1.2% and 0.8%, respectively.
       Lastly, we test that the linear model has zero average pricing error for all of the
portfolios, a stringent test since it requires that the model is pricing all portfolios
correctly. (We use a GMM test as in Cochrane (2001) page 241, which corre-
sponds to the test of Shanken (1985).) With illiquidity portfolios, the p-values for
regressions 1, 5, and 8 are, respectively, 8.5%, 9.9%, and 6.8%. In comparison,
the standard CAPM has a p-value of 0.5%. With σ(illiquidity) portfolios the p-
values for the liquidity-adjusted CAPM are, respectively, 16%, 42%, and 65%,
and the p-value for the standard CAPM is 6.6%. The specification tests for size
portfolios are similar, and lends further support to the model. This confirms the
visual evidence from Figures 2–4 that the model fit for these portfolios is good.
       With B/M-by-size portfolios, the Wald test of the liquidity-adjusted CAPM
has a p-value of 47% and the test of zero pricing errors for regressions 1, 5, and
  28
     We compute the joint variance-covariance test of the parameters in a GMM framework and
derive a standard Wald test with an asymptotic chi-square distribution.



                                             37
8 are, respectively, 15.7%, 38%, and 85%. The standard CAPM has a p-value of
23% for the Wald test and 3.2% for the test of zero pricing errors. The failure to
reject the liquidity-adjusted CAPM using B/M-by-size portfolios may be due to
low power since, as discussed above, the model fit is not good for these portfolios.



5    Conclusion
This paper derives a model of liquidity risk. The model in its simplest form shows
that the CAPM applies for returns net of illiquidity costs. This implies that in-
vestors should worry about a security’s performance and tradability both in mar-
ket downturns and when liquidity “dries up.” Said differently, the required return
of a security i is increasing in the covariance between its illiquidity and the market
illiquidity, covt (cit+1 , cM
                            t+1 ), decreasing in the covariance between the security’s re-

turn and the market illiquidity, cov t (rt+1
                                         i
                                                t+1 ), and decreasing in the covariance
                                             , cM
between its illiquidity and market returns, cov t (cit+1 , rt+1
                                                            M
                                                                ). The model further
shows that a positive shocks to illiquidity, if persistent, are associated with a low
contemporaneous returns and high predicted future returns.
    Hence, the model gives an integrated view of the existing empirical evidence
related to liquidity and liquidity risk, and it generates new testable predictions.
We find, in a variety of specifications, that the liquidity-adjusted CAPM explains
the data better than the standard CAPM, while still exploiting the same degrees
of freedom. Further, we find weak evidence that liquidity risk is important over
and above the effects of market risk and the level of liquidity. The model has a
reasonably good fit for portfolios sorted by liquidity, liquidity variation, and size,
but it fails to explain the book-to-market effect.
    The model provides a framework in which we can study the economic signif-


                                           38
icance of liquidity risk. We find that liquidity risk explains about 1.1% of cross-
sectional returns when the effect of average liquidity is calibrated to the typical
holding period in the data and the model restriction of a single risk premium is im-
posed. About 80% of this effect is due to the liquidity sensitivity, cov t (cit+1 , rt+1
                                                                                     M
                                                                                         ),
to the market return, an effect not previously studied in the literature. Freeing up
risk premia leads to larger estimates of the liquidity risk premium, but these results
are estimated imprecisely because of collinearity between liquidity and liquidity
risk.
    While the model gives clear predictions that seem to have some bearing in the
data, it is obviously simplistic. The model and the empirical results are suggestive
of further theoretical and empirical work. In particular, it would be of interest
to explain the time-variation in liquidity, and why stocks that are illiquid in ab-
solute terms also are more liquidity risky in the sense of high values of all three
liquidity betas. Another interesting topic is the determination of liquidity premia
in a general equilibrium with liquidity risk and endogenous holdings periods. We
note that if investors live several periods, but their probability of living more than
one period approaches zero, then our general-equilibrium economy is approached
(assuming continuity). Hence, our effects would also be present in the more gen-
eral economy, although endogenous holding periods may imply a smaller effect of
liquidity risk (as in Constantinides (1986)). The effect of liquidity risk is strength-
ened, however, if investors have important reasons to trade frequently. Such rea-
sons include return predictability and wealth shocks (as considered in the context
of liquidity by Lynch and Tan (2003)), differences of opinions (e.g. Harris and
Raviv (1993)), asymmetric information (e.g. He and Wang (1995)), institutional
effects (e.g. Allen (2001)), taxes (e.g. Constantinides (1983)), etc. It would be
interesting to determine the equilibrium impact of liquidity risk in light of these


                                            39
trading motives.




                   40
A       Appendix
Proof of Proposition 1:


We first solve the investment problem of any investor n at time t. We assume, and
later confirm, that the price at time t + 1 is normally distributed conditional on
the time t information. Hence, the investor’s problem is to choose optimally the
number of shares, y n = (y n,1 , . . . , y n,I ), to purchase according to
                                                                   
                                             n       1 n        n
                        max            Et (Wt+1 )   − A vart (Wt+1 ) ,
                        y n ∈RI+                     2

where
                  n
                Wt+1 = (Pt+1 + Dt+1 − Ct+1 )> y n + rf (ent − Pt> y n ),

and ent is this agent’s endowment. If we disregard the no-short-sale constraint, the
solution is

         1                                   −1
  yn =                                                                           f
                                                                                       
            (var t (P t+1 + D t+1 − C t+1 ))    E t (P t+1 + D t+1 − C t+1 ) − r   P t   .
         An

We shortly verify that, in equilibrium, this solution does not entail short selling.
In equilibrium, n y n = S, so equilibrium is characterized by the condition that
               P


              1
      Pt =       [Et (Pt+1 + Dt+1 − Ct+1 ) − A vart (Pt+1 + Dt+1 − Ct+1 )S ] ,
              rf

                      1 −1
where A =                  .   The unique stationary linear equilibrium is
               P        
                   n An


                           ρD             ρC
        Pt = Υ +                D t −          Ct ,                                   (A.1)
                       r f − ρD       r f − ρC



                                                    41
where

                         rf (1 − ρD )     rf (1 − ρC )                rf          rf
                                                                                       
      1
Υ = f                                 D̄ − f           C̄ − Avart          εt − f     ηt S
    r −1                   r − ρD          r − ρC                   r − ρD     r − ρC

and S = (S 1 , . . . , S I ) is the total supply of shares.
    With this price, conditional expected net returns are normally distributed, and
any investor n holds a fraction A/An > 0 of the market portfolio S > 0 so
he is not short selling any securities. Therefore, our assumptions are satisfied in
equilibrium.
    Finally, since investors have mean-variance preferences, the conditional CAPM
holds for net returns. See, for instance, Huang and Litzenberger (1988). Rewrit-
ing in terms of net returns yields the result stated in the proposition.



Proof of Proposition 2:


The conditional expected return on a portfolio q is computed using (A.1):
                                    q      q
                                  Pt+1 + Dt+1
                                               
             q
        Et (rt+1 )   = Et
                                       Ptq
                                                       C
                                        rf
                            Et (Υq +        Dq − rfρ−ρC Ct+1
                                    r f −ρD t+1
                                                           q
                                                             )
                     =                  ρ D   q    ρ C   q
                                Υq + rf −ρD Dt − rf −ρC Ct

so we have that

         ∂        q      f
           q Et (rt+1 − r )
        ∂Ct
                           (ρC )2 q    ρC
                                                            
                 1                               q     q
         =              − f      P + f     Et (Pt+1 + Dt+1 )
              (Ptq )2    r − ρC t   r − ρC



                                                42
This partial derivative is greater than 0 under the conditions given in the proposi-
tion.                                                                              


Proof of Proposition 3:


The conditional covariance between illiquidity and return for a portfolio q is:

                               1
        covt (cqt+1 , rt+1
                       q
                           ) =                q
                                     covt (Ct+1        q
                                                  , Pt+1      q
                                                           + Dt+1 )
                             (Ptq )2
                               1              q          rf     q       ρC
                           =         cov t (C     ,           D     −       Cq )
                             (Ptq )2          t+1
                                                     rf − ρD t+1 rf − ρC t+1
                                            rf                      ρC
                                                                             
                               1                     > CD                > C
                           =                        q Σ q− f            q Σ q
                             (Ptq )2 rf − ρD                     r − ρC



which yields the proposition.                                                      




                                          43
References
 Allen, F. (2001). Do Financial Institutions Matter? Journal of Finance 56,
    1165–1175.

 Amihud, Y. (2002). Illiquidity and Stock Returns: Cross-Section and Time-
    Series Effects. Journal of Financial Markets 5, 31–56.

 Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson (1986). Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread.
    Journal of Financial Economics 17, 223–249.

 Amihud, Y. and H. Mendelson (1989). The Effect of Beta, Bid-Ask Spread,
    Residual Risk, and Size on Stock Returns. Journal of Finance 44, 479–486.

 Amihud, Y., H. Mendelson, and R. Wood (1990). Liquidity and the 1987 Stock
    Market Crash. Journal of Portfolio Management Spring, 65–69.

 Ang, A. and J. Chen (2002). Asymmetric Correlations of Equity Portfolios.
    Journal of Financial Economics 63(3), 443–494.

 Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad (2003). Liquidity and Expected
    Returns: Lessons from Emerging Markets. Columbia University.

 Black, F., M. Jensen, and M. Scholes (1990). The Capital Asset Pricing Model:
    Some Empirical Tests, in Michael Jensen (ed.), Studies in the Theory of
    Capital Markets. Praeger, New York.

 Brennan, M. J., T. Chordia, and A. Subrahmanyam (1998, September). Alter-
    native factor specifications, security characteristics, and the coress-section
    of expected returns. Journal of Financial Economics 49(3), 345–373.

 Brennan, M. J. and A. Subrahmanyam (1996). Market Microstructure and As-
    set Pricing: On the Compensation for Illiquidity in Stock Returns. Journal
    of Financial Economics 41, 441–464.

                                      44
Chalmers, J. M. and G. B. Kadlec (1998). An Empirical Examination of the
   Amortized Spread. Journal of Financial Economics 48, 159–188.

Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam (2000). Commonality in Liquidity.
   Journal of Financial Economics 56, 3–28.

Chordia, T., R. Roll, and A. Subrahmanyam (2001). Market Liquidity and
   Trading Activity. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Chordia, T., A. Subrahmanyam, and V. R. Anshuman (2001). Trading Activity
   and Expected Stock Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 59, 3–32.

Cochrane, J. H. (2001). Asset Pricing. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton Uni-
   versity Press.

Constantinides, G. M. (1983). Capital Market Equilibrium with Personal Tax.
   Econometrica 51(3), 611–636.

Constantinides, G. M. (1986). Capital Market Equilibrium with Transaction
   Costs. Journal of Political Economy 94, 842–862.

Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra (2002). Junior Can’t
   Borrow: A New Perspective on the Equity Premium Puzzle. Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 117(1), 269 – 296.

Datar, V. T., N. Y. Naik, and R. Radcliffe (1998). Liquidity and Stock Returns:
   An Alternative Test. Journal of Financial Markets 1, 203–219.

De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann (1990). Noise
   Trader Risk in Financial Markets. Journal of Political Economy 98, 703–
   738.

Dimson, E. and B. Hanke (2002). The Expected Illiquidity Premium. London
   Business School.

                                    45
Duffie, D., N. Gârleanu, and L. H. Pedersen (2000). Valuation in Over-the-
   Counter Markets. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

Easley, D., S. Hvidkjær, and M. O’Hara (2002). Is Information Risk a Deter-
   minant of Asset Returns? Journal of Finance 57, 2185–2221.

Eisfeldt, A. L. (2004). Endogenous Liquidity in Asset Markets. Journal of Fi-
   nance 59, 1–30.

Eleswarapu, V. R. (1997). Cost of Transacting and Expected Returns in the
   Nasdaq Market. Journal of Finance 52, 2113–2127.

Eleswarapu, V. R. and M. R. Reinganum (1993). The Seasonal Behavior of
   Liquidity Premium in Asset Pricing. Journal of Financial Economics 34,
   373–386.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1992). The Cross-Section of Expected Stock
   Returns. Journal of Finance 47(2), 427–465.

Fama, E. F. and K. R. French (1993). Common Risk Factors in the Returns on
   Stocks and Bonds. Journal of Financial Economics 33, 3–56.

Fama, E. F. and J. D. MacBeth (1973). Risk, Return, and Equilibrium: Empir-
   ical Tests. Journal of Political Economy 81(3), 607–636.

Friend, I. and M. Blume (1975). The Demand for Risky Assets. American Eco-
   nomic Review 65 (5), 900–922.

Gârleanu, N. and L. H. Pedersen (2000). Adverse Selection and the Required
   Return. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Hansen, L. P. and S. F. Richard (1987). The Role of Conditioning Informa-
   tion in Deducing Testable Restrictions Implied by Dynamic Asset Pricing
   Models. Econometrica 55, 587–614.

                                   46
Harris, M. and A. Raviv (1993). Differences of Opinion Make a Horse Race.
   Review of Financial Studies 6(3), 473–506.

Hasbrouck, J. (2002). Inferring Trading Costs from Daily Data: US Equities
   from 1962 to 2001. New York University.

Hasbrouck, J. and D. J. Seppi (2000). Common Factors in Prices, Order Flows
   and Liquidty. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

He, H. and J. Wang (1995). Differential Information and Dynamic Behavior of
   Stock Trading Volume. The Review of Financial Studies 8 (4), 919–972.

Heaton, J. and D. Lucas (2000). Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Impor-
   tance of Entrepreneurial Risk. Journal of Finance 55(3), 1163–1198.

Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole (2000). LAPM: A Liquidity-based Asset Pricing
   Model. Journal of Finance 56, 1837–1867.

Huang, C. and R. H. Litzenberger (1988). Foundations for Financial Eco-
   nomics. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.

Huang, M. (2002). Liquidity Shocks and Equilibrium Liquidity Premia. Jour-
   nal of Economic Theory, forthcoming.

Huberman, G. and D. Halka (1999). Systematic Liquidity. Columbia Business
   School.

Jones, C. M. (2001). A Century of Stock Market Liquidity and Trading Costs.
   Graduate School of Business, Columbia University.

Lintner, J. (1965). The Valuation of Risk Assets and the Selection of Risky
   Investments in Stock Portfolios and Capital Budgets. Review of Economics
   and Statistics 47, 13–37.



                                   47
Ljungqvist, A. and M. Richardson (2003). The Cash Flow, Return and Risk
   Characteristics of Private Equity. New York University.

Lustig, H. (2001). The Market Price of Aggregate Risk and the Wealth Distri-
   bution. Stanford University.

Lynch, A. W. and S. Tan (2003). Explaining the Magnitude of Liquidity
   Premia: The Roles of Return Predictability, Wealth Shocks and State-
   dependent Transaction Costs. New York University.

Markowitz, H. (1952). Portfolio Selection. Journal of Finance 7, 77–91.

Markowitz, H. (2000). Mean-Variance Analysis in Portfolio Choice and Capi-
   tal Markets. New Hope, Pennsylvania: Frank J. Fabozzi Associates.

Mossin, J. (1966). Equilibrium in a Capital Asset Market. Econometrica 35,
   768–783.

Newey, W. and K. West (1987). A Simple, Positive Semi-definite, Het-
   eroskedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix. Econo-
   metrica 55, 703–708.

Pastor, L. and R. F. Stambaugh (2003). Liquidity Risk and Expected Stock
   Returns. Journal of Political Economy 111, 642–685.

Persaud, A. D. (2003). Introduction. In A. D. Persaud (Ed.), Liquidity Black
   Holes. Risk.

Sadka, R. (2002). Momentum, Liquidity Risk, and Limits to Arbitrage. North-
   western University.

Samuelson, P. A. (1958). An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with
   or without the Social Contrivance of Money. Journal of Political Econ-
   omy 66, 467–482.

                                   48
Shanken, J. (1985). Multivariate Tests of the Zero-Beta CAPM. Journal of Fi-
   nancial Economics 14, 327–348.

Shanken, J. (1992). On the Estimation of Beta Pricing Models. Review of Fi-
   nancial Studies 5, 1–34.

Sharpe, W. (1964). Capital Asset Prices: A Theory of Capital Market Equilib-
   rium under Conditions of Risk. Journal of Finance 19, 425–442.

Shumway, T. (1997). The Delisting Bias in CRSP Data. Journal of Finance 52,
   327–340.

Swan, P. L. (2002). Does “Illiquidity” rather than “Risk Aversion” Explain
   the Equity Premium Puzzle? The Value of Endogenous Market Trading.
   University of New South Wales.

Vayanos, D. (1998). Transaction Costs and Asset Prices: A Dynamic Equilib-
   rium Model. Review of Financial Studies 11, 1–58.

Vayanos, D. and J.-L. Vila (1999). Equilibrium Interest Rate and Liquidity Pre-
   mium with Transaction Costs. Economic Theory 13, 509–539.

Wang, A. W. (2002). Institutional Equity Flows, Liquidity Risk and Asset Pric-
   ing. University of California, Los Angeles.




                                    49
                    Table 1: Properties of illiquidity portfolios.
This table reports the properties of the odd–numbered portfolios of 25 value-weighted
illiquidity portfolios formed each year during 1964–1999 as described in Section 4.2. The
four betas (β ip ) are computed for each portfolio using all monthly return and illiquidity
observations for a portfolio, and an equal-weighted market portfolio. In particular, these
betas based on (7), where the innovations in portfolio illiquidity and market illiquidity are
computed using the AR(2) specification in (16) for the standardized illiquidity series, and
the innovations in market portfolio return is computed using an AR(2) specification for
the market return series that also employs available market characteristics at the beginning
of the month (return, volatility, average illiquidity, log of average dollar volume, log of
average turnover, all measured over past six months, and log of one-month lagged market
capitalization). The t-statistics, reported in parenthesis, are estimated using GMM. The
standard deviation of the portfolio illiquidity innovations is reported under the column
σ(∆cp ). The average illiquidity, E(cp ), the average excess return, E(r e,p ), the turnover
(trn), the market capitalization (size), and book-to-market (BM) are computed for each
portfolio as time-series averages of the respective monthly characteristics. Finally, σ(r p ),
is the average of the standard deviation of daily returns for the portfolio’s constituent
stocks computed each month.

        β 1p      β 2p       β 3p       β 4p  E(cp ) σ(∆cp )   E(re,p ) σ(r p ) trn    size      BM
      (· 100)   (· 100)    (· 100)    (· 100)  (%)    (%)       (%)      (%) (%)      (bl$)
 1     55.10     0.00      −0.80      −0.00   0.25 0.00         0.48 1.43 3.25        12.50   0.53
      (14.54)   (0.08)    (−5.90)    (−0.10)
 3     67.70     0.00      −1.05      −0.03   0.26 0.00         0.39   1.64   4.19    2.26    0.72
      (16.32)   (0.58)    (−7.14)    (−0.62)
 5     74.67     0.00      −1.24      −0.07   0.27 0.01         0.60   1.74   4.17    1.20    0.71
      (20.44)   (1.27)    (−7.43)    (−1.36)
 7     76.25     0.00      −1.27      −0.10   0.29 0.01         0.57   1.83   4.14    0.74    0.73
      (20.63)   (2.18)    (−7.49)    (−2.03)
 9     81.93     0.01      −1.37      −0.18   0.32 0.02         0.71   1.86   3.82    0.48    0.73
      (33.25)   (3.79)    (−8.00)    (−3.74)
 11    84.59     0.01      −1.41      −0.33   0.36 0.04         0.73   1.94   3.87    0.33    0.76
      (34.21)   (5.07)    (−7.94)    (−5.85)
 13    85.29     0.01      −1.47      −0.40   0.43 0.05         0.77   1.99   3.47    0.24    0.77
      (34.15)   (6.84)    (−8.01)    (−7.46)
 15    88.99     0.02      −1.61      −0.70   0.53 0.08         0.85   2.04   3.20    0.17    0.83
      (42.88)   (6.87)    (−8.35)    (−8.45)
 17    87.89     0.04      −1.59      −0.98   0.71 0.13         0.80   2.11   2.96    0.13    0.88
      (27.54)   (8.16)    (−8.18)    (−9.30)
 19    87.50     0.05      −1.58      −1.53   1.01 0.21         0.83   2.13   2.68    0.09    0.92
      (40.74)   (7.63)    (−8.75)    (−8.77)
 21    92.73     0.09      −1.69      −2.10   1.61 0.34         1.13   2.28   2.97    0.06    0.99
      (37.85)   (7.33)    (−8.34)    (−6.11)
 23    94.76     0.19      −1.71      −3.35   3.02 0.62         1.12   2.57   2.75    0.04    1.09
      (39.71)   (6.85)    (−8.68)    (−5.91)
 25    84.54     0.42      −1.69      −4.52   8.83 1.46         1.10   2.87   2.60    0.02    1.15
      (20.86)   (6.40)    (−8.23)    (−3.35)
                 Table 2: Beta correlations for illiquidity portfolios.

This table reports the correlations of the four covariances, β 1p , β 2p , β 3p and β 4p , for the 25
value-weighted illiquidity portfolios formed for each year during 1964–1999 as described
in Section 4.2. The four betas are computed for each portfolio as per (7) using all monthly
return and illiquidity observations for the portfolio and the market portfolio. The monthly
innovations in portfolio illiquidity and market illiquidity are computed using the AR(2)
specification in (16) for the standardized illiquidity series. The monthly innovations in
market portfolio return are computed using an AR(2) specification for the market return
series that also employs available market characteristics at the beginning of the month.

                                    β 1p     β 2p      β 3p       β 4p
                              1p
                            β      1.000    0.441    −0.972     −0.628
                            β 2p            1.000    −0.573     −0.941
                            β 3p                      1.000      0.726
                            β 4p                                 1.000




                  Table 3: Beta correlations for individual stocks.

This table reports the correlations of the four covariances, β 1i , β 2i , β 3i and β 4i , for the
common shares listed on NYSE and AMEX during the period 1964–1999. The correla-
tions are computed annually for all eligible stocks in a year as described in Section 4.2
and then averaged over the sample period. The four betas are computed for each stock as
per (7) using all monthly return and illiquidity observations for the stock and the market
portfolio. The monthly innovations in market illiquidity are computed using the AR(2)
specification in (16) for the standardized market illiquidity series. The innovations in
stock illiquidity are computed using a similar AR(2) specification with coefficients es-
timated for the market illiquidity. The monthly innovations in market portfolio return
are computed using an AR(2) specification for the market return series that also employs
available market characteristics at the beginning of the month.

                                    β 1i     β 2i      β 3i       β 4i
                              1i
                            β      1.000    0.020    −0.685     −0.164
                            β 2i            1.000    −0.072     −0.270
                            β 3i                      1.000      0.192
                            β 4i                                 1.000
                  Table 4: Illiquidity and σ(illiquidity) portfolios.

This table reports the estimated coefficients from cross-sectional regressions of the
liquidity-adjusted CAPM for 25 value-weighted portfolios using monthly data during
1964–1999 with an equal-weighted market portfolio. We consider special cases of the
relation:

       E(rtp − rtf ) = α + κE(cpt ) + λ1 β 1p + λ2 β 2p + λ3 β 3p + λ4 β 4p + λβ net,p ,

where β net,p = β 1p + β 2p − β 3p − β 4p . In some specifications, κ is set to be the average
monthly turnover. The t-statistic, reported in the parentheses, is estimated using a GMM
framework that takes into account the pre-estimation of the betas. The R 2 is obtained in a
single cross-sectional regression, and the adjusted R 2 is reported in the parentheses.

                             Panel A: illiquidity portfolios
      constant     E(cp )       β 1p        β 2p        β 3p       β 4p      β net,p     R2
 1    −0.556       0.034                                                     1.512      0.732
     (−1.450)      (—)                                                      (2.806)    (0.732)
 2    −0.512       0.042                                                     1.449      0.825
     (−1.482)     (2.210)                                                   (2.532)    (0.809)
 3    −0.788                   1.891                                                    0.653
     (−1.910)                 (3.198)                                                  (0.638)
 4    −0.333      0.034       −3.181                                         4.334      0.843
     (−0.913)      (—)       (−0.998)                                       (1.102)    (0.836)
 5     0.005      −0.032     −13.223                                        13.767      0.878
      (0.013)    (−0.806)    (−1.969)                                       (2.080)    (0.861)
 6    −0.160                  −8.322                                         9.164      0.870
     (−0.447)                (−2.681)                                       (3.016)    (0.858)
 7    −0.089       0.034       0.992     −153.369      7.112    −17.583                 0.881
     (−0.219)      (—)        (0.743)    (−1.287)     (0.402)   (−1.753)               (0.865)
 8    −0.089       0.033       0.992     −151.152      7.087    −17.542                 0.881
     (−0.157)     (0.166)     (0.468)    (−0.280)     (0.086)   (−1.130)               (0.850)

                            Panel B: σ(illiquidity) portfolios
      constant    E(cp )      β 1p        β 2p         β 3p        β 4p      β net,p     R2
 1    −0.528      0.035                                                      1.471      0.865
     (−1.419)     (—)                                                       (2.817)    (0.865)
 2    −0.363      0.062                                                      1.243      0.886
     (−1.070)    (2.433)                                                    (2.240)    (0.875)
 3    −0.827                  1.923                                                     0.726
     (−2.027)                (3.322)                                                   (0.714)
 4    −0.014      0.035      −7.113                                          7.772      0.917
     (−0.037)     (—)       (−1.939)                                        (2.615)    (0.914)
 5     0.094      0.007     −11.013                                         11.467      0.924
      (0.235)    (0.158)    (−2.080)                                        (2.480)    (0.914)
 6     0.119                −11.914                                         12.320      0.924
      (0.305)               (−2.413)                                        (2.608)    (0.917)
 7     0.464      0.035      −1.105     −83.690     −74.538     −14.560                 0.940
      (0.913)     (—)       (−0.728)    (−0.663)    (−1.175)    (−1.662)               (0.931)
 8     0.459      0.148      −1.125     −390.588    −73.552     −21.688                 0.942
      (0.565)    (0.140)    (−0.485)    (−0.140)    (−1.943)    (−0.335)               (0.927)
        Table 5: Illiquidity portfolios: robustness of weighting method

This table reports the estimated coefficients from cross-sectional regressions of the
liquidity-adjusted CAPM for 25 liquidity portfolios using monthly data during 1964–
1999. We consider special cases of the relation:

       E(rtp − rtf ) = α + κE(cpt ) + λ1 β 1p + λ2 β 2p + λ3 β 3p + λ4 β 4p + λβ net,p ,

where β net,p = β 1p + β 2p − β 3p − β 4p . In some specifications, κ is set to be the average
monthly turnover. The t-statistic, reported in the parentheses, is estimated using a GMM
framework that takes into account the pre-estimation of the betas. The R 2 is obtained in a
single cross-sectional regression, and the adjusted R 2 is reported in the parentheses.

          Panel A: equal-weighted illiquidity pf’s, equal-weighted market
      constant     E(cp )       β 1p         β 2p         β 3p         β 4p      β net,p     R2
 1    −0.391       0.046                                                         1.115      0.825
     (−0.889)      (—)                                                          (1.997)    (0.825)
 2    −0.299       0.062                                                         0.996      0.846
     (−0.737)     (3.878)                                                       (4.848)    (0.832)
 3    −0.530                   1.374                                                        0.350
     (−1.082)                 (2.085)                                                      (0.322)
 4    −0.088       0.046      −2.699                                             3.395      0.879
     (−0.249)      (—)       (−1.441)                                           (1.782)    (0.873)
 5     0.105       0.008      −6.392                                             6.800      0.901
      (0.296)     (0.318)    (−2.238)                                           (2.427)    (0.886)
 6     0.143                  −7.115                                             7.467      0.900
      (0.397)                (−3.623)                                           (3.871)    (0.891)
 7    −0.132       0.046       1.568      −141.416      47.823      −12.784                 0.911
     (−0.633)      (—)        (1.295)     (−1.032)      (0.469)     (−1.553)               (0.898)
 8    −0.053       0.117       1.207      −346.547      33.043      −17.356                 0.913
     (−0.060)     (0.837)     (0.343)     (−0.796)      (0.186)     (−0.981)               (0.890)

           Panel B: value-weighted illiquidity pf’s, value-weighted market
      constant     E(cp )       β 1p         β 2p         β 3p         β 4p      β net,p      R2
 1    −1.938       0.034                                                         2.495       0.486
     (−1.203)      (—)                                                          (1.627)     (0.486)
 2    −2.059       0.081                                                         2.556       0.642
     (−1.755)     (2.755)                                                       (2.107)     (0.609)
 3     0.700                   0.062                                                         0.000
      (0.272)                 (0.025)                                                      (−0.043)
 4    −1.536       0.034      −6.070                                             8.099       0.754
     (−2.033)      (—)       (−1.540)                                           (2.040)     (0.743)
 5    −0.583      −0.076     −16.226                                            17.333       0.841
     (−0.718)    (−0.902)    (−2.978)                                           (3.453)     (0.819)
 6    −1.241                  −9.210                                            10.954       0.800
     (−1.271)                (−2.733)                                           (3.183)     (0.781)
 7    −0.301      0.034        0.363     −4494.924     −370.840     −26.044                  0.850
     (−0.285)      (—)        (0.268)     (−1.060)     (−0.806)     (−1.366)                (0.828)
 8     0.039      −0.056       0.015     −116.450      −405.451     −13.135                  0.865
      (0.031)    (−0.410)     (0.007)     (−0.010)     (−0.413)     (−0.270)                (0.829)
                      Table 6: Size and B/M-by-size portfolios.

This table reports the estimated coefficients from cross-sectional regressions of the
liquidity-adjusted CAPM for 25 value-weighted size and B/M-by-size portfolios using
monthly data during 1964–1999 with an equal-weighted market portfolio. We consider
special cases of the relation:

       E(rtp − rtf ) = α + κE(cpt ) + λ1 β 1p + λ2 β 2p + λ3 β 3p + λ4 β 4p + λβ net,p ,

where β net,p = β 1p + β 2p − β 3p − β 4p . In some specifications, κ is set to be the average
monthly turnover. The t-statistic, reported in the parentheses, is estimated using a GMM
framework that takes into account the pre-estimation of the betas. The R 2 is obtained in a
single cross-sectional regression, and the adjusted R 2 is reported in the parentheses.

                                  Panel A: size portfolios
      constant     E(cp )       β 1p       β 2p        β 3p        β 4p       β net,p        R2
 1    −0.087       0.047                                                      0.865         0.910
     (−0.274)      (—)                                                       (1.864)       (0.910)
 2    −0.059       0.056                                                      0.823         0.912
     (−0.201)     (2.139)                                                    (1.768)       (0.904)
 3    −0.265                   1.144                                                        0.757
     (−0.789)                 (2.270)                                                      (0.747)
 4    −0.043       0.047      −0.770                                          1.562         0.912
     (−0.151)      (—)       (−0.323)                                        (0.685)       (0.908)
 5    −0.055       0.054      −0.168                                          0.984         0.912
     (−0.186)     (1.180)    (−0.050)                                        (0.266)       (0.900)
 6     0.032                  −4.633                                          5.278         0.902
      (0.112)                (−1.899)                                        (2.104)       (0.893)
 7    −0.073      0.047        0.887      27.387      1.741       0.038                     0.913
     (−0.122)      (—)        (0.304)    (0.342)     (0.009)     (0.006)                   (0.901)
 8     0.224      −0.408      −0.079     742.841    −42.800       7.933                     0.929
      (0.552)    (−1.206)    (−0.047)    (1.157)    (−0.845)     (0.691)                   (0.911)

                            Panel B: B/M-by-size portfolios
      constant     E(cp )       β 1p       β 2p        β 3p        β 4p       β net,p        R2
 1     0.200       0.045                                                      0.582         0.406
      (0.680)      (—)                                                       (1.197)       (0.406)
 2     0.453       0.167                                                      0.182         0.541
      (1.657)     (3.452)                                                    (0.377)       (0.499)
 3     0.109                   0.748                                                        0.262
      (0.348)                 (1.406)                                                      (0.229)
 4     0.529       0.045      −8.289                                          8.275         0.502
      (1.665)      (—)       (−2.013)                                        (2.198)       (0.481)
 5     0.187       0.387      18.229                                        −17.458         0.571
      (0.626)     (3.061)     (2.344)                                       (−2.265)       (0.510)
 6     0.574                 −11.787                                         11.671         0.483
      (1.959)                (−3.102)                                        (2.902)       (0.436)
 7    −0.425       0.045       4.606     203.397    198.027      −3.330                     0.788
     (−0.254)      (—)        (0.483)    (0.200)    (0.526)     (−0.049)                   (0.758)
 8    −0.395      −0.031       4.545     397.770    195.128       0.380                     0.789
     (−0.638)    (−0.028)     (1.722)    (0.115)    (1.612)      (0.004)                   (0.733)
                    Table 7: Controlling for size and book-to-market.

This table reports the estimated coefficients from cross-sectional regressions of the
liquidity-adjusted CAPM for 25 value-weighted illiquidity and B/M-by-size portfolios
using monthly data during 1964–1999 with an equal-weighted market portfolio. We con-
sider special cases of the relation:

E(rtp −rtf ) = α+κE(cpt )+λ1 β 1p +λ2 β 2p +λ3 β 3p +λ4 β 4p +λβ net,p +λ5 ln(sizep )+λ6 BM p ,

where β net,p = β 1p + β 2p − β 3p − β 4p , and the control variables ln(sizep ) and BM p are,
respectively, the time-series average of the natural log of the ratio of the portfolio’s market
capitalization at the beginning of the month to the total market capitalization, and BM is
the time-series average of the average monthly book-to-market of the stocks constituting
the portfolio. In some specifications, κ is set to be the average monthly turnover. The
t-statistic, reported in the parentheses, is estimated using a GMM framework that takes
into account the pre-estimation of betas. The R 2 is obtained in a single cross-sectional
regression, and the adjusted R2 is reported in the parentheses.

                                       Panel A: liquidity portfolios
      constant   E(cp )       β 1p        β 2p       β 3p       β 4p     β net,p    ln(sizep )     B/M       R2
 1    −1.358      0.034                                                   2.158        0.142      1.076     0.865
     (−1.843)      (—)                                                   (2.114)      (1.247)    (1.871)   (0.852)
 2    −1.286      0.028                                                   1.970        0.129      1.120     0.865
     (−1.501)    (1.129)                                                 (1.869)      (0.950)    (2.215)   (0.838)
 3    −0.818                  0.798                                                    0.043      1.350     0.850
     (−0.837)                (0.651)                                                  (0.302)    (1.724)   (0.829)
 4    −1.273       0.034     −3.740                                       6.145        0.155      0.679     0.869
     (−1.459)       (—)     (−0.576)                                     (0.891)     (1.054)     (0.814)   (0.850)
 5    −0.441      −0.018    −12.278                                      13.565        0.068      0.159     0.882
     (−0.613)    (−0.227)   (−1.292)                                     (1.453)     (0.871)     (0.229)   (0.850)
 6    −0.730                 −9.313                                      10.988        0.098      0.339     0.880
     (−0.939)               (−1.884)                                     (2.106)      (0.788)    (0.598)   (0.856)
 7    −0.491      0.034       1.253     −124.221   −18.359    −16.421                  0.078      0.205     0.884
     (−0.369)      (—)       (0.714)    (−0.818)   (−0.180)   (−1.230)               (0.313)     (0.208)   (0.853)
 8    −0.557      0.059       1.300     −183.466   −19.865    −17.238                  0.087      0.253     0.884
     (−0.912)    (0.298)     (2.043)    (−0.325)   (−0.208)   (−0.922)               (0.773)     (0.376)   (0.836)

                                     Panel B: B/M-by-size portfolios
     constant    E(cp )       β 1p        β 2p       β 3p       β 4p      β net,p   ln(sizep )     B/M       R2
 1    0.310       0.045                                                   −0.199      −0.084      0.251     0.924
     (1.040)       (—)                                                   (−0.345)    (−1.415)    (2.892)   (0.917)
 2    0.317       0.035                                                   −0.236      −0.091      0.250     0.925
     (1.026)     (0.684)                                                 (−0.311)    (−1.176)    (2.905)   (0.910)
 3    0.365                  −0.403                                                   −0.119      0.246     0.920
     (1.177)                (−0.516)                                                 (−2.155)    (2.749)   (0.909)
 4    0.311        0.045      0.484                                       −0.696      −0.089      0.249     0.924
     (1.170)        (—)      (0.155)                                     (−0.262)    (−1.598)    (2.960)   (0.913)
 5    0.340       −0.003     −3.145                                        2.850      −0.087      0.259     0.925
     (1.083)     (−0.039)   (−0.894)                                      (0.846)    (−1.224)    (3.108)   (0.906)
 6    0.338                  −2.930                                        2.639      −0.087      0.259     0.925
     (1.003)                (−1.366)                                      (0.613)    (−1.065)    (3.314)   (0.910)
 7    0.237       0.045       0.490     −286.927   38.480     −14.711                 −0.095      0.226     0.932
     (1.483)       (—)       (0.284)    (−1.063)   (0.615)    (−1.069)               (−1.613)    (2.868)   (0.915)
 8    0.171       0.284       0.529     −916.982   42.353     −26.730                 −0.100      0.233     0.937
     (0.249)     (0.308)     (0.232)    (−0.344)   (0.181)    (−0.391)               (−0.735)    (0.746)   (0.911)
                                                                                                           CAPM

                                                                           1.2




                                            Fitted monthly excess return
                                                                            1




                                                                           0.8



                     PSfrag replacements
                                                                           0.6




                                                                           0.4




                    Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                                0.2
                                                                             0.2         0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
dity-adjusted CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                  Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                                 Liquidity-adjusted CAPM

                                                                           1.2
                                            Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                            1




                                                                           0.8



                     PSfrag replacements
                                                                           0.6




                                                                           0.4

                                      CAPM
                                                                           0.2
                                                                             0.2         0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
dity-adjusted CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                  Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                 Liquidity-adjusted CAPM, unconstrained risk premia

                                                                           1.2
                                            Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                            1




                                                                           0.8



                     PSfrag replacements
                                                                           0.6




                                                                           0.4

                                       CAPM
                    Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                                0.2
                                                                             0.2         0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
                                                                                               Realized monthly excess return

                          Figure 2: Illiquidity portfolios: The top panel shows the fitted CAPM returns vs. realized
                          returns using monthly data 1964–1999 for value-weighted illiquidity portfolios. The middle panel
                          shows the same for the liquidity-adjusted CAPM, and the lower panel shows the relation for the
                          liquidity adjusted CAPM with unconstrained risk premia.
                                                                                                           CAPM

                                                                            1.2




                                             Fitted monthly excess return
                                                                             1




                                                                            0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                            0.6




                                                                            0.4




                     Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                                0.2
                                                                              0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                 Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                                 Liquidity-adjusted CAPM

                                                                            1.2
                                             Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                             1




                                                                            0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                            0.6




                                                                            0.4

                                       CAPM
                                                                            0.2
                                                                              0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                 Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                    Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia

                                                                            1.2
                                             Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                             1




                                                                            0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                            0.6




                                                                            0.4

                                        CAPM
                     Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                                0.2
                                                                              0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
                                                                                               Realized monthly excess return

                           Figure 3: σ(illiquidity) portfolios: The top panel shows the fitted CAPM returns vs. realized
                           returns using monthly data 1964–1999 for value-weighted σ(illiquidity) portfolios. The middle
                           panel shows the same for the liquidity-adjusted CAPM, and the lower panel shows the relation for
                           the liquidity adjusted CAPM with unconstrained risk premia.
                                                                                                           CAPM

                                                                            1.2




                                             Fitted monthly excess return
                                                                             1




                                                                            0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                            0.6




                                                                            0.4




                     Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                                0.2
                                                                              0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                 Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                                 Liquidity-adjusted CAPM

                                                                            1.2
                                             Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                             1




                                                                            0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                            0.6




                                                                            0.4

                                       CAPM
                                                                            0.2
                                                                              0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                 Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                    Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia

                                                                            1.2
                                             Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                             1




                                                                            0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                            0.6




                                                                            0.4

                                        CAPM
                     Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                                0.2
                                                                              0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
                                                                                               Realized monthly excess return

                           Figure 4: Size portfolios: The top panel shows the fitted CAPM returns vs. realized returns
                           using monthly data 1964–1999 for value-weighted size portfolios. The middle panel shows the
                           same for the liquidity-adjusted CAPM, and the lower panel shows the relation for the liquidity
                           adjusted CAPM with unconstrained risk premia.
                                                                                                          CAPM

                                                                           1.2




                                            Fitted monthly excess return
                                                                            1




                                                                           0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                           0.6




                                                                           0.4




                     Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                               0.2
                                                                             0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                                Liquidity-adjusted CAPM

                                                                           1.2
                                            Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                            1




                                                                           0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                           0.6




                                                                           0.4

                                       CAPM
                                                                           0.2
                                                                             0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia                                                Realized monthly excess return

                                                                                   Liquidity-adj. CAPM, unconstrained risk premia

                                                                           1.2
                                            Fitted monthly excess return




                                                                            1




                                                                           0.8



                      PSfrag replacements
                                                                           0.6




                                                                           0.4

                                        CAPM
                     Liquidity-adjusted CAPM                               0.2
                                                                             0.2        0.4         0.6      0.8      1        1.2
                                                                                              Realized monthly excess return

                           Figure 5: Book-to-market by size portfolios: The top panel shows the fitted CAPM returns
                           vs. realized returns using monthly data 1964–1999 for value-weighted BM-size portfolios. The
                           middle panel shows the same for the liquidity-adjusted CAPM, and the lower panel shows the
                           relation for the liquidity adjusted CAPM with unconstrained risk premia.
