                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ACCOUNTING FOR CROSS-COUNTRY INCOME DIFFERENCES

                                            Francesco Caselli

                                         Working Paper 10828
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10828


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




This is the draft of a chapter on Development Accounting for the forthcoming Handbook of Economic
Growth, edited by P. Aghion and S. Durlauf. A previous draft circulated with the title: “The Missing Input:
Accounting ...” A data set will be posted at www.economics.harvard.edu. I thank Silvana Tenreyro for
comments, and Mariana Colacelli, Kalina Manova, and Andrea Szab`o for research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2004 by Francesco Caselli. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences
Francesco Caselli
NBER Working Paper No. 10828
October 2004
JEL No. E2, O1, O2, O3, O4, O5

                                             ABSTRACT

Why are some countries so much richer than others? Development Accounting is a first-pass attempt

at organizing the answer around two proximate determinants: factors of production and efficiency.

It answers the question ``how much of the cross-country income variance can be attributed to

differences in (physical and human) capital, and how much to differences in the efficiency with

which capital is used?'' Hence, it does for the cross-section what growth accounting does in the time

series. The current consensus is that efficiency is at least as important as capital in explaining income

differences. I survey the data and the basic methods that lead to this consensus, and explore several

extensions. I argue that some of these extensions may lead to a reconsideration of the evidence.

Francesco Caselli
Harvard University
Department of Economics
Littauer Building
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
caselli@harvard.edu
                                        Contents
1 Introduction
2 The Measure of Our Ignorance
     2.1   Basic Data
     2.2   Basic Measures of Success
     2.3   Alternative Measures Used in the Literature
     2.4   Sub-samples
3 Robustness: Basic Stuﬀ
     3.1   Depreciation Rate
     3.2   Initial Capital Stock
     3.3   Education-Wage Profile
     3.4   Years of Education 1
     3.5   Years of Education 2
     3.6   Hours Worked
     3.7   Capital Share
4 Quality of Human Capital
     4.1 Quality of Schooling: Inputs
           4.1.1 Teachers’ Human Capital
           4.1.2 Pupil-Teacher Ratios
           4.1.3 Spending
     4.2   Quality of Schooling: Test Scores
     4.3   Experience
     4.4   Health
     4.5   Social vs. Private Returns to Schooling and Health
5 Quality of Physical Capital
     5.1 Composition
     5.2 Vintage Eﬀects
     5.3 Further Problems with K
6 Sectorial Diﬀerences in TFP
     6.1 Industry Studies
     6.2 The Role of Agriculture
     6.3 Sectorial Composition and Development Accounting
7 Non-Neutral Diﬀerences
     7.1 Basic Concepts and Qualitative Results
     7.2 Development Accounting with Non-Neutral Diﬀerences
8 Conclusions
                                           1
1      Introduction
This chapter is about development accounting. It is widely known, and will be found again to
be true here, that cross-country diﬀerences in income per worker are enormous. Development
accounting uses cross-country data on output and inputs, at one point in time, to assess the
relative contribution of diﬀerences in factor quantities, and diﬀerences in the eﬃciency with
which those factors are used, to these vast diﬀerences in per-worker incomes. Hence, it is the
same idea of growth accounting (illustrated by Jorgenson’s chapter in this Handbook), with
cross-country diﬀerences replacing cross-time diﬀerences.
           Conceptually, development accounting can be thought of as quantifying the relation-
ship
                                 Income = F (Factors, Eﬃciency).                             (1)

Like growth accounting, this is a potentially useful tool. If one found that Factors are able
to account for most of the diﬀerences, then development economics could focus on explaining
low rates of factor accumulation. There would of course be ample scope for controversy over
the policies better suited to engineering higher investment rates in various types of capital,
but there would be consensus over the fact that the intermediate goal of development policy is
to engineer those higher rates. Instead, should one find that Eﬃciency diﬀerences play a large
role, then one would have to confront the additional task of explaining why some countries
extract more output than others from their factors of production. Experience suggests that
this additional question is the hardest to crack.
           The consensus view in development accounting is that Eﬃciency plays a very large
role. A sentence commonly used to summarize the existing literature sounds something like
“diﬀerences in eﬃciency account for at least 50% of diﬀerences in per capita income.” The
next section of this chapter (Section 2) will survey the existing literature, replicate its basic
findings, and update them with more recent data. Looking at a cross-section of 93 countries
in the year 1996, I confirm that standard procedures assign to Eﬃciency the role of the chief
culprit.
           Operationally, the key steps in development accounting are: (1) choosing a functional
form for F , and (2) accurately measuring Income and Factors. Eﬃciency is backed out as a
residual. As for the Solow residual, this residual is a “measure of our ignorance” on the causes
of poverty and under-development. And, as in growth accounting, one potentially promising
research strategy is to try to “chip away” at this residual by improving on steps (1) and
(2), i.e. by looking at alternative functional forms, and by attempting a more sophisticated
measurement of Income and Factors. For example, one could try to include information on
quality diﬀerences in the capital stock — instead of relying exclusively on quantity.

                                                 2
           The bulk of this chapter aims at outlining strategies for such a chipping away.1 It in-
vestigates the potential for diﬀerent functional forms, and diﬀerent ways of estimating inputs
and outputs, to reduce the measure of our ignorance. Rather than reaching firm conclusions,
it tries to classify ideas into more or less promising. Its contribution is to formulate sentences
such as “improvements in the measurement of x are unlikely to significantly reduce the un-
explained component of per-capita income diﬀerences,” or “the unexplained component is
somewhat sensitive to the measurement of z, so this is a potentially fruitful area for further
research.”
           The experiments I perform fall in five broad categories. The first is a fairly mechanical
set of robustness checks with respect to the choice of parameters in the basic model used in
the literature, as well as with respect to possible measurement errors in output, labor, and
years of schooling. I conclude that none of these robustness checks seriously calls into question
the conclusions from the current consensus (Section 3).
           Second, I consider extensions of the basic development-accounting framework aimed
at improving the measurement of human capital. In most development-accounting exercises
diﬀerences in human capital stem exclusively from diﬀerences in the quantity of schooling.
One set of extensions I consider exploits cross-country data on school resources and test
scores as proxies for the quality of education, and then uses these quality indicators to
augment the quantity-based measure of human capital. I find that taking into account
schooling quality leads to trivially small reductions in the measure of our ignorance. Another
extension replicates existing work that augments human capital by a proxy of the health
status of the labor force. There is some indication that this may lead to a significant reduction
in the unexplained component of income, but I argue that the bulk of the variance most
likely remains unexplained. All the measures of human capital considered are built on the
assumption that the private return to human capital accurately describes its social return. I
conclude this section with a brief discussion of why and how one may want to try and relax
this assumption (Section 4).
           Third, I turn to the measurement of physical capital. Here I review contributions that
highlight enormous cross-country variation in the composition of the stock of equipment. A
simple model shows how to relate variation in capital composition to unobserved quality
diﬀerences in the capital stock. How much of the responsibility for eﬃciency diﬀerences can
be assigned to these diﬀerences in the quality of capital depends on parameters that are
very hard to pin down, but the potential is extremely large. I therefore conclude that the
composition of capital should be a key area of future research. I also glance at vintage-
   1
       The analogy in spirit with Jorgenson’s monumental contribution in growth accounting — some of which is
collected in Jorgenson (1995a, 1995b) is obvious, but it stops there: the reader should expect nothing like the
same level of depth, comprehensiveness, and insight.

                                                       3
capital models, but argue that they hold little promise for development accounting, as well
as at the distinction between private and public investment, which is instead potentially quite
important. (Section 5).
        The most innovative contributions of the chapter are represented by the fourth and
fifth sets of extensions. In the former I explore the role of the sectorial composition of output.
The large diﬀerences in overall eﬃciency that are found at the aggregate level could reflect
large diﬀerences in eﬃciency within each sector of the economy, but they could also be due to
the fact that some countries have more of their inputs in intrinsically less productive sectors
than others. I explore this idea by looking at an agriculture/non-agriculture decomposition
(poor countries have as much as 90% of their workforce in agriculture, rich countries as little
as 3%), but find that only a small fraction of the overall variation in eﬃciency is due to
diﬀerences in sectorial composition: Eﬃciency diﬀerences appear to be a within industry
phenomenon (Section 6).
        The last set of exercises explores a radical departure from the standard framework,
and finds radically diﬀerent answers. In the standard framework eﬃciency diﬀerences are
factor neutral: if a country uses physical capital eﬃciently, it also necessarily uses human
capital eﬃciently. I argue that this is a pretty restrictive assumption, and propose a simple
generalization of the basic framework where cross-country eﬃciency diﬀerences are allowed to
be non neutral. Stunningly, I find that, when non neutrality is allowed for, the data say that
poor countries use physical capital more eﬃciently than rich countries (while rich countries use
human capital more eﬃciently). Furthermore, when the development-accounting exercise is
performed in a context of non neutral eﬃciency diﬀerences the conclusions on the contribution
of these diﬀerences to cross-country income inequality become very fragile. In particular, if
the elasticity of substitution between physical and human capital is low enough, observed
diﬀerences in factor endowments become able to explain the bulk of the income distribution.
I therefore conclude that the most important outstanding question in development accounting
may well be what this elasticity of substitution is (Section 7).
        Before plunging into the data and the calculations, it is worthwhile to stress the limits
of development accounting. Development accounting does not uncover the ultimate reasons
why some countries are much richer than others: only the proximate ones. Like growth
accounting, it has nothing to say on the causes of low factor accumulation, or low levels of
eﬃciency. Indeed, the most likely scenario is that the same ultimate causes explain both.
Furthermore, it has nothing to say on the way factor accumulation and eﬃciency influence
each other, as they most probably do. Instead, it should be understood as a diagnostic tool,
just as medical tests can tell one whether or not he is suﬀering from a certain ailment, but
cannot reveal the causes of it. This does not make the test any the less useful.

                                                4
2        The Measure of Our Ignorance
The key empirical result that motivates this chapter is that in a simple framework with two
factors of production, physical and human capital, a large fraction of the cross-country income
variance remains unexplained. This result has been established by a variety of authors using
a variety of techniques. Knigth, Loayza, and Villanueva (1993), Islam (1995), and Caselli,
Esquivel and Lefort (1996), for example, used panel-data techniques to estimate (1). They
all found that, after controlling for factor accumulation, country-specific eﬀects played a
large role in output diﬀerences, and interpreted these fixed eﬀects as picking up diﬀerences
in eﬃciency. King and Levine (1994), Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997), Prescott (1998),
and Hall and Jones (1999), instead, used a calibration approach, and found that plausible
parametrizations of (1) had limited explanatory power without large eﬃciency diﬀerences.
These studies used cross-country national-account data on inputs and outputs, but Hendricks
(2002) was able to reach similar conclusions by using earnings of migrants to the United
States, and Aiyar and Dalgaard (2002) by using a dual approach involving factor prices
rather than quantities. All these papers were inspired by — and written in response to the
challenged posed by — the seminal contribution of Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992).2
            In this section I revisit the basic development-accounting finding. Because I want to
set the stage for a variety of extensions of the basic model, I adopt the calibration approach,
which oﬀers more flexibility in experimenting with diﬀerent parameter values and functional
forms.3
            I adopt as the benchmark Hall and Jones’ production function, according to which a
country’s GDP, Y, is
                                               Y = AK α (Lh)1−α ,                                            (2)

where K is the aggregate capital stock and Lh is the “quality adjusted” workforce, namely
the number of workers L multiplied by their average human capital h. α is a constant.
Clearly this is a special case of (1), where the residual A represents the eﬃciency with which
factors are used. It is also clear that A corresponds to the standard notion of Total Factor
Productivity (TFP), so until further notice I will speak of eﬃciency and TFP interchangeably.
            In per-worker terms the production function can be rewritten as

                                                  y = Ak α h1−α ,                                            (3)
    2
        However, there are some pre-1990s antecedents. In particular, the nine—country studies of Denison (1967),
and Christensen, Cummings, and Jorgenson (1981).
   3
     An earlier survey of the material covered in this section is provided by McGrattan and Schmitz (1999).
See also Easterly and Levine (2001) for a review of development accounting as well as other evidence for
cross-country eﬃciency diﬀerentials.


                                                         5
where k is the capital labor ratio (k = K/L). We want to know how much of the variation
in y can be explained with variation in the observables, h and k, and how much is “residual’
variation, i.e. must be attributed to diﬀerences in A. Clearly to answer this question we
need, besides data on y, data on k and h, as well as a value for the capital share α.

2.1       Basic Data
The basic data set used in this chapter combines variables from two sources. The first is
version 6 of the Penn World Tables [PWT6 - Heston, Summers, and Aten (2002)], i.e. the
latest incarnation of the celebrated Summers and Heston (1991) data set. From PWT6 I
extract output, capital, and the number of workers. The second is Barro and Lee (2001),
which I use for educational attainment. Several additional data sources will be brought to
bear for specific exercises in later sections, but the data we construct here will be crucial to
everything we do.
           Previous authors have mostly used version 5.6 of the Penn World Tables (PWT56).
They have therefore attempted to explain the world income distribution as of the late 1980s.
By using version 6.0 I am able to update the basic result to the mid-90s.
           I measure y from PWT6 as real GDP per worker in international dollars (i.e. in PPP
- this variable is called RGDPW in the original data set).4
           I generate estimates of the capital stock, K, using to the perpetual inventory equation

                                            Kt = It + δKt−1 ,

where It is investment and δ is the depreciation rate. I measure It from PWT6 as real
aggregate investment in PPP.5 Following standard practice, I compute the initial capital
stock K0 as I0 /(g + δ), where I0 is the value of the investment series in the first year it is
available, and g is the average geometric growth rate for the investment series between the
first year with available data and 1970. The rationale for this choice is tenuous: I/(g + δ) is
the expression for the capital stock in the steady state of the Solow model. We will see below
if results are very sensitive to this assumption, or for that matter to the others I am about
to make, such as the one for δ, which — following the literature — I set δ to 0.06. To compute
   4
       Some authors subtract from the PWT measure of GDP the value-added of the mining industry, because
not doing so would result in some oil-rich countries being among the most productive in the world. This
rationale is inherently dubious (then why not substracting the value added of agriculture and forestry, that
also use natural resources abundantly?). More importantly, since a similar correction is not feasible for the
capital stock, this procedure must result in hugely downward biased estimates of the TFP of these countries.
I apply no such correction here.
   5
     Computed as RGDPL*POP*KI, where RGDPL is real income per capita obtained with the Laspeyres
method, POP is the population, and KI is the investment share in total income.

                                                     6
k, I divide K by the number of workers.6
           To construct human capital I take from Barro and Lee (2001) the average years of
schooling in the population over 25 year old. Following Hall and Jones (1999) this is turned
into a measure of h through the formula:

                                                    h = eφ(s) ,

where s is average years of schooling, and the function φ(s) is piecewise linear with slope
0.13 for s ≤ 4, 0.10 for 4 < s ≤ 8, and 0.07 for 8 < s.7 The rationale for this functional
form is as follows. Given our production function, perfect competition in factor and good
markets implies that the wage of a worker with s years of education is proportional to his
human capital. Since the wage-schooling relationship is widely thought to be log-linear, this
calls for a log-linear relation between h and s as well, or something like h = exp(φs s), with
φs a constant. However, international data on education-wage profiles (Psacharopulos, 1994)
suggests that in Sub-Saharan Africa (which has the lowest levels of education) the return to
one extra year of education is about 13.4 percent, the World average is 10.1 percent, and the
OECD average is 6.8 percent. Hall and Jones’s measure tries to reconcile the log-linearity at
the country level with the convexity across countries.
           s is observed in the data every five years, most recently in 2000. Since s moves slowly
over time, a quinquennial observation can plausibly be employed for nearby dates as well.
           I treat a country as having “complete data” at date t if it has an uninterrupted
investment series between 1960 and t, and it has an observation for s in 1995.8 With this
definition, there are 93 countries with complete data in 1995 and 1996, 89 in 1997, and 86
in 1998 (and 0 thereafter). Hence, I focus on 1996 as the most recent year that aﬀords the
largest sample. In this sample, for more than half of the countries the investment series starts
in 1950.9
           As is well known, per-capita income diﬀerences are enormous. The richest country
in the sample (USA) has income per worker equal to 57,000 1996 international dollars, while
the poorest (Zaire, today’s Democratic Republic of the Congo) has 605 — a ratio of 94. The
ratio between the 90th (France) and the 10th percentile (Togo) of the income distribution, a
measure of dispersion I’ll use prominently in the rest of the paper, is 20. The log-variance,
another measure I’ll rely on heavily, is 1.26.
   6
       Obtained as RGDPCH*POP/RGDPW, where RGDPCH is real GDP per capita computed with the chain
method.
  7
    Specifically we have φ(s) = 0.134 · s if s ≤ 4, φ(s) = 0.134 · 4 + 0.101 · (s − 4) if 4 < s ≤ 8, φ(s) =
0.134 · 4 + 0.101 · 4 + 0.068 · (s − 8) if 8 < s.
   8
       Availability of data on income and labor force are not binding given these constraints.
   9
       Nicaragua in 1979 has I < 0, which we deal with by re-setting it to I = 0. Haiti has missing data on I in
1966, which we deal with by imputing the average of 1965 and 1967.
                                                        7
        For the last ingredient required by equation (3), α, I (implicitly) use US time-series
data on the capital-share, whose long-run (and roughly constant) average value is 1/3. All
these data choices will be subject to scrutiny in the rest of the chapter — indeed, this scrutiny
is one of the chapter’s contributions.

2.2   Basic Measures of Success
With data on k, h, and y, and a choice for α, equation (3) is one equation in the unknown
A. In particular, after defining yKH = kα h1−α , we can rewrite (3) as

                                          y = A yKH ,                                         (4)

where both y and yKH are measurable. I will refer to yKH as the factor-only model.
        Throughout this chapter I will pursue the following version of the development-
accounting question: how successful is the factor-only model at explaining cross-country
income diﬀerences? In other words, I will compare the (observed) variation in yHK to the
(observed) variation in y. Clearly, this means that I am asking the following question. Sup-
pose that all countries had the same level of eﬃciency A: what would the world income
distribution look like in that case, compared to the actual one?
        To perform this assessment, I will look at two alternative measures. The first one is
in the tradition of variance decompositions. From (4) we have

             var[log(y)] = var[log(yKH )] + var[log(A)] + 2cov[log(A), log(yKH )].            (5)

Now notice that if all countries had the same level of TFP we would have var[log(A)] =cov[log(A), log(yKH )] =
0. Hence, a first measure of success of the factor-only model is
                                               var [log(yKH )]
                                  success1 =                   .
                                                var [log(y)]
In our data the counterfactual variance, var[log(yKH )] , takes the value 0.5. Since the observed
variance of log(y), var[log(y)], is 1.25 this approach leads to the conclusion that the fraction
of the variance of income explained by observed endowments is success1 =0.4.
        While success1 is nicely grounded in the tradition of variance decomposition, it has
the well-known drawback that variances are sensitive to outliers. A measure that is less
sensitive to outliers is a measure of the inter-percentile diﬀerential. Define xp the value of the
pth percentile of the distribution of x. My second measure of success of the factor-diﬀerences
model is
                                                  90 /y 10
                                                 yKH    KH
                                    success2 =              ,
                                                  y90 /y10
i.e. it compares what the 90th − to − 10th     percentile ratio would be in the counterfactual
                                                                             90 /y 10 is 7.
world with common technology, to the actual value. In the data the value of yKH   KH
                                           8
Since y 90 /y 10 is 20, according to the percentile ratio the fraction of the cross-country income
dispersion explained by observables is success2 =0.35.
           I summarize the baseline experiment in Table 2.2. Clearly by both measures of success
the dispersion of yKH is much less than the dispersion of y, and this is the basic fact that
motivates this study.10


                                 var[log(y)]        1.246    y 90 /y 10     20
                                 var[log(yKH )]     0.501     90 /y 10
                                                             yKH            7
                                                                   KH
                                 success1           0.40     success2       0.35


                          Table 1: Baseline Success of the Factor-Only Model

           Before proceeding, it is useful to check that these results are consistent with the
slightly diﬀerent data used in previous studies. Using the Hall and Jones data set success1
is 0.40, as with ours, and success2 is 0.34 (vs. 0.35 with ours). As is evident, the diﬀer-
ent decade, country coverage, and methodology in assembling the PWT does not lead to
important changes in this basic finding.

2.3       Alternative Measures Used in the Literature
success1 essentially asks what would the dispersion of (log) per-capita income be if all coun-
tries had the same level of eﬃciency, A, and then compares this counter-factual dispersion to
the observed one. Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) propose the alternative measure:

                                          var[log(yKH )] + cov[log(A), log(yKH )]
                          successKR =                                             ,
                                                        var[log(y)]

which diﬀers from success1 for the covariance term in the numerator. In terms of equation
(5) successKR is equivalent to a variance decomposition in which the contribution from the
covariance term is split evenly between A and yKH . Because in the data cov[log(A), log(yKH )]
is positive (0.26) the Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare measure assigns a greater role to k and h
than the simple ratio of variances: successKR is 0.61. Here I do not emphasize this measure
because it does not answer the question: what would the dispersion of incomes be if all
countries had the same A? As Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare explain, it asks the diﬀerent
question: “when we see 1% higher y, how much higher is our conditional expectation of
yKH ?” which in my opinion is not as intuitive.
  10
       Of course variation in yKH — even though much less than variation in y — is economically significant and
interesting in its own right. For recent studies shedding light on the sources of variation in k and h see, e.g.,
Bils and Klenow (2000), Hsieh and Klenow (2003), and Gourinchas and Jeanne (2003).

                                                        9
           Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and Hall and Jones (1999) also work with a
diﬀerent version of the expression for per-capita income, because they rewrite (3) as
                                                 µ ¶    a
                                                  k    1−α       1
                                            y=               hA 1−α ,
                                                  y
i.e. in terms of the capital-output ratio instead of the capital-labor ratio. In other words
                                                                                    a       ³ ´
                                                                                             k    1−α
their counterfactual income estimates based on factor-diﬀerences is ỹKH =                   y          h (in-
stead of yKH =        k α h1−α ).   I find yKH more intuitive and cleaner, as ỹKH is not invariant
to diﬀerences in A (since A aﬀects y), and is therefore less appropriate for answering the
question: “what would the income distribution look like if all countries had the same A?”.
Indeed, it is easy to see that ỹKH = yKH A−α . Whether var[log(ỹKH )] is greater or less than
var[log(yKH )] depends on the relative magnitudes of (appropriately weighted) var[log(A)]
and cov[log(yKH ),log(A)], with log(ỹKH ) getting less credit the (relatively) larger is the co-
variance. Intuitively, when A and yKH covary a lot, if the latter is very small the former is
also very small, so that ỹKH does not vary as much. In practice this is indeed what hap-
pens: when using ỹKH the factors only model looks even more unsuccessful than when using
yKH : success1 is as low as 0.26, and success2 is 0.21. Notice that relative to Klenow and
Rodriguez-Clare (1997) we have made two methodological changes whose eﬀects go in oppo-
site directions: omitting the covariance term from success1 lowers the explanatory power of
factors, while writing y in terms of the capital-labor ratio increases it. This is why we end
up with results that are in the same ball park.
           It is worth noting that Hall and Jones’ production function, equation (2), is substan-
tially more restrictive than the one used by some of the other authors in the literature. In
particular Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992) and Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) work
with Y = K α H β L1−α−β . Equation (2) is the special case where β = 1 − α. The great ad-
vantage of the Hall and Jones’ formulation is that it generates the log-linear relation between
wages and years of schooling that we exploited to calibrate h.11 Since wage data do seem to
call for log-linear wage-education profiles, Hall and Jones’ restriction may be justified.

2.4       Sub-samples
It may be interesting to take a look at the values that the success measures take in sub-sample
of countries. This is done in Table 2, where I report success1 — as well as its two component
parts — for the sub-samples of countries below and above the median per worker income;
in and out of the OECD; and for the various continents. I also for convenience repeat the
  11
       With the Mankiw, Romer, and Weil formulation the wage of a worker with s years of schooling is w(s) =
wL + wH h(s), where wL is the wage paid to “raw” labor and wH is the wage per unit of human capital.


                                                      10
full-sample values. I do not report success2 because the small sample sizes make this variable
hard to interpret.


                 Sub-sample              Obs.    var[log(y)]    var[log(yKH )]     success1
                 Above the median          47       0.174            0.112           0.643
                 Below the median          46       0.586            0.257           0.438
                 OECD                      24       0.077            0.047           0.606
                 Non-OECD                  69       1.001            0.378           0.376
                 Africa                    26       0.843            0.271           0.322
                 Americas                  25       0.341            0.175           0.513
                 Asia and Oceania          25       0.652            0.292           0.448
                 Europe                    17       0.128            0.033           0.255
                 All                       93       1.246            0.501           0.400


                                    Table 2: Success in sub-samples

          Obviously the variation in log income per worker is smaller the smaller and more
homogenous the sub-samples. Perhaps more interestingly, it is also smaller in sub-samples
that tend to be richer on average (Above the median, OECD, Europe and Americas). It
is indeed remarkable that, within the four continental groupings, the greatest variation in
living standards is observed in Africa, a continent that is often depicted as flattened out by
unmitigated and universal blight.
          The success of the factor-only model is higher in the above the median and in the
OECD samples than in the below the median and non-OECD samples, respectively. Hence,
it is easier to explain income diﬀerences among the rich than among the poor. Furthermore,
as indicated by comparison with the results for the full sample, it is easier to explain income
diﬀerences among the rich than between the rich and the poor — while it is roughly as easy
to explain within-poor diﬀerences as rich-poor diﬀerences. At the continental level, success is
highest in the Americas, with roughly 50% of the log income variance explained, and lowest
in Europe, with 25%. The latter result is entirely driven by the inclusion of the lone eastern
European country (Romania), whose very high level of human capital makes it diﬃcult to
explain its very low income [Caselli and Tenreyro (2004) generalize this finding to a broader
sample]. When Romania is excluded the success of the factor-only model for Europe is
virtually perfect. In sum, the factor-only model works the worst where we need it most: i.e.
when poor countries are involved.12
 12
      Results for Asia are virtually unchanged when I do not aggregate it with Oceania.

                                                      11
3         Robustness: Basic Stuﬀ
The rest of this chapter is essentially about the robustness of the findings reported in Table
2.2. In this section I start out with a set of relatively straightforward and somewhat plodding
robustness checks. In particular, I look at some of the parameters of the basic model as well
as at some issues of measurement error. Subsequent subsections deviate from the benchmark
increasingly aggressively.

3.1         Depreciation Rate
The eﬀect of varying the depreciation rate in the perpetual-inventory calculation is to change
the relative weight of old and new investment. A higher rate of depreciation will increase the
relative capital stock of countries that have experienced high investment rates towards the
end of the sample period. Poorer countries have in general experienced a larger increase in
investment rates over the sample period, but the relative gain is very small, so it is unlikely
that higher or lower depreciation rates will have a considerable impact on our calculation.13
In Figure 1 I compute and plot success1 and success2 for diﬀerent values of δ. Clearly, the
sensitivity of the factor-only model to changes in δ is minimal.

3.2         Initial Capital Stock
The capital stocks in our calculations depend on the time series of investment (observable)
and on assumptions on the initial capital stock, K0 , which is unobservable. Does the initial
condition for the capital stock matter? One way to approach this question is to compute the
statistic
                                                (1 − δ)t K0
                                                    P                  ,                             (6)
                                      (1 − δ)t K0 + ti=0 (1 − δ)i It−i
i.e. the surviving portion of the guessed initial capital stock as a fraction of the final estimate
of the capital stock. For t = 1996 the average across countries of this statistic is .01, with
a maximum of .08 (Congo). This is prima facie evidence that the initial guess has very
small “persistence”. However, this statistic is considerably negatively correlated with per
capita income in 1996 (correlation coeﬃcient -.24), indicating that our estimate of the capital
stock is more sensitive to the initial guess in the poorer countries in the sample. This may
be troublesome because if we systematically overestimated the initial (and hence the final)
capital stocks in poor countries, we will bias downward the measured success of the factor-
only model. Furthermore, it is not implausible that our guess of the initial capital stock
    13
         We computed the average investment rate in the sub-periods 1969-1972 and 1993-1996. Then we sub-
tracted these two averages, and correlated the resulting change in investment with real GDP per worker in
1996. The result is a modest -.01.

                                                     12
                    success1                                        success2

              1

             .9

             .8

             .7

             .6

             .5

             .4

             .3

             .2

             .1

              0
                   0       10       20        30       40       50       60      70        80       90      100
                                                   capital depreciation rate (%)




                                  Figure 1: Depreciation Rate and Success


will be too high for poor countries. While rich countries may have roughly satisfied the
steady state condition that motivates the assumption K0 = I0 /(g + δ), most of the poorer
countries almost certainly did not. Indeed it is quite plausible that their investment rates were
systematically lower before than after date 0 (i.e. before investment data became available
for these countries).14
            A first check on this problem is to focus on a narrower sample with longer investment
series. If we focus only on the 50 countries with complete investment data starting in 1950,
we should be fairly confident that the initial guess plays little role in the value of the final
capital stock. In this smaller, and probably more reliable, sample we get success1 = 0.4, and
success2 = .54. Hence, the ratio of log-variances is unchanged relative to the full 93-country
sample, but the inter-percentile ratio shows a considerable improvement. Clearly, though, as
the sample size declines the inter-percentile ratio becomes less compelling as a measure of
  14
       Circumstantial evidence that this may be the case is that a regression of the growth rate of total investment
between 1950 and 1960 on per-capita income in 1950 yields a statistically significant negative coeﬃcient.



                                                          13
dispersion, so on balance these results — though inconclusive — are reasonably reassuring.15
           Another strategy is to attempt to set an upper bound on the measures of success,
by making extreme assumptions on the degree to which the capital stock in poor countries
is mismeasured. One such calculation assumes persistent growth rates in investment, I (as
opposed to persistent investment levels). For example, we can construct a counter-factual
investment series from 1940 to 1950 by assuming that the growth rate of investment in this
period was the same as in the period 1950-1960. For countries with investment data starting
after 1950 we can use the growth rate of investment in the first ten years of available data,
and project back all the way to 1940. We can then use the perpetual inventory model on
these data [always with K0 = I0 /(g + δ)], and measure success. On the full sample this yields
success1 = .41 and success2 = .35, and on the sub-sample with complete I data starting in
1950 it yields success1 = 0.4 and success2 = 0.54, i.e. no change.16
           Another experiment is to estimate the initial capital stock by assuming that the
factor-only model adequately explained the data at time 0. Suppose that we trusted the
estimate K0 = I0 /(g + δ) for the United States (where date 0 is 1950), and consequently for
all other dates. Then for any other country we could estimate K0 by solving the expression
                                              µ         ¶α µ               ¶1−α
                                      Y0          K0            L0 h0
                                         =                                        ,
                                     YUS          KUS          LU S hU S
where 0 is now the first year for which this country’s and the US’ data on investment, GDP,
and human capital is available. Note that everything is observable in this equation except K0
(tough this does require us to construct new estimates of the human-capital stock for years
prior to 1996). Clearly this procedure implies enormous variance in K0 , and this variance
should persist to 1996, giving the factor-only model a real good shot at explaining the data.
On the full sample this yields success1 = 0.43 and success2 = 0.36, and on the sub-sample
with complete I data starting in 1950 it yields success1 = 0.45 and success2 = 0.54. Hence,
even when the initial capital stock is constructed in such a way that the factor-only model
fully explained the data at time 0, the model falls far short in 1996. I conclude from this set
of exercises that improving the initial capital stock estimates is not likely to lead to major
revisions to the baseline result.
  15
       In this 50-country sample the variance of log income is 1.04, and the inter-percentile ratio is 7.6, i.e.
according to both measures there is less dispersion than in the full sample (1.2 and 20), but much more so for
the inter-percentile diﬀerential.
  16
     When this method is used only to fill-in data between 1950 and 1961 it yields success1 = 0.40 and
success2 = 0.35.




                                                         14
3.3   Education-Wage Profile
By assuming decreasing aggregate returns to years of schooling the Hall and Jones method
dampens the variation across countries in human capital, thereby potentially increasing the
role of diﬀerences in technology. More generally, our measure of human capital may obviously
be quite sensitive to the parameters of the function φ(s).


              success1                                  success2


         1

        .9

        .8

        .7

        .6

        .5

        .4

        .3

        .2

        .1

         0
             0           5          10           15           20         25      30     33
                                      return per year of schooling (%)




                         Figure 2: Returns to schooling and Success

       One way of checking this is to assume a constant rate of return, or φ(s) = φs s, and
experiment with various values of the (constant) return to schooling φs . Since countries with
higher per-capita income have higher average years of education, the factor-only model will
be the more successful the steeper is the education—wage profile. Figure 2 confirms this by
plotting success1 and success2 as functions of φs .
       While higher assumed returns to an extra year of education do lead to greater ex-
planatory power for the factor-only model, only returns that are implausibly large lead to
substantial successes. For success1 (success2 ) to be 0.75 the return to one year of schooling
would have to be around 24% (25%). As already mentioned, in the Psacharopulos (1994)

                                              15
survey the average return is about 10%. The highest estimated return is 28.8% (for Jamaica
in 1989), but this is a clear outlier since the second-highest is 20.1% (Ivory Coast, 1986).
These tend to be OLS estimates. Instrumental variable estimates on US data are 17-20 per-
cent at the very highest [Card (1999)] - suﬃcient for our measures of success to just clear
the 50 percent threshold. But the IV estimates tend to be lower in developing countries.
For example, Duflo (2001) finds instrumental-variable estimates of the return to schooling in
Indonesia in a range between 6.8% to 10.6% — and roughly similar to the OLS estimates. It
seems, then, that independently of the return to schooling, the variation in schooling years
across countries is too limited to explain very large a fraction of the cross-country variation
in incomes.17

3.4      Years of Education 1
De la Fuente and Doménech (2002) survey data and methodological issues that arise in
the construction of international educational attainment data, such as the average years of
education in the Barro and Lee data set. Their conclusion — perhaps not surprisingly — is
that such series are rather noisy, and that this explains in part why human-capital based
models often perform rather poorly. For several OECD countries they also construct new
estimates that take into account more comprehensive information than is usually exploited,
and find that for this restricted sample their measure substantially improves the empirical
explanatory power of human capital.
          To see if incorrect measurement of s is a likely culprit for the lack of success of the
factor-only model, I compute our success statistics for the sub-sample covered in the De
la Fuente and Doménech (2002) data set, first with our baseline data, and then with the
new figures provided by these authors (in their Appendix 1, table A.4) for 1995. This data
is available for only 16 of our 93 countries. In this 16-country sample, with our baseline
(Barro and Lee) schooling data, I obtain success1 = 0.44 and succeess2 = 0.83. In the same
sample with the De la Fuente and Doménech data success1 = 0.47 and success2 = 0.86. The
diﬀerences seem small.
          This result is not particularly surprising because De la Fuente and Doménech (2002)
show that the discrepancies between their measures and the ones in the literature are (i)
stronger in first diﬀerences than in levels; and (2) stronger at the beginning of the sample
than at the end. Indeed, for the 16-country sample in 1995 the correlation between the De
la Fuente and Doménech (2002), and the Barro and Lee (2001) data I use in the rest of
the paper is 0.73. Incorrect measurement of s is not the reason why the factor-only model
performs poorly.
 17
      This discussion, of course, assumes away human-capital externalities. I return to this in Section 4.5.

                                                       16
3.5       Years of Education 2
So far we have used Barro and Lee’s data on years of schooling in the population over 25
years old. This may be appropriate for rich countries with a large share of college graduates.
But it is much less appropriate for the typical country in our sample. Barro and Lee (2001)
also report data on years of schooling for the population over 15 years of age. These data
can be combined with the data on the over-25 as follows.
           First, note that we can write
                                          1
                                 s15 =       [(N15 − N25 )s<25 + N25 s25 ] ,
                                         N15
where s15 and s25 are the average years of education in the population over 15 and over 25
years of age, respectively (the data), and s<25 is the (unknown) average years of education in
the population between 15 and 25 years of age. N15 and N25 are the sizes of the population
over 15 and over 25. With data on N15 and N25 , then, this is one equation in one unknown
that can easily be solved for s<25 . With an estimate of s<25 at hand, one could then produce
a new measure of s as
                                          s = L<25 s<25 + L25 s25 ,

where L<25 and L25 are estimates of the proportions of above and below 25 year olds in the
economically active populations.
           I take data for N15 , N25 , L<25 , and L25 from LABORSTA, the data base of the
International Labor Organization (ILO).18 This alternative measure of s can be constructed
for 90 countries. With it, our success measures are 0.391 and 0.345, respectively. Hence, this
potentially improved measure of human capital worsens its explanatory power. The reason
is not hard to see: poor countries experienced much faster growth in schooling than rich
countries. This means, in particular, that the education gap is much smaller for the cohort
less than 25 years of age. Hence, bringing the education of this cohort into the picture reduces
the cross-country variation in human capital.

3.6       Hours Worked
So far I have measured L as the economically active population, a measure that basically
coincides with the labor force. Of course, the number of hours worked — the concept of labor
input we would ideally like to use in our calculations — may be far from proportional to
this measure, both because of cross-country diﬀerences in unemployment, and because the
  18
       For both the population at large and the economically active subset the data is available at 10-year
intervals from 1950 to 2000, with the lucky exception that there is also an observation for 1995, which I use.
The population is broken down in 5-year age intervals, so it’s a no brainer to aggregate up to the numbers we
need.
                                                     17
average employed worker may supply diﬀerent amount of hours in diﬀerent countries, for
example because of diﬀerent wages or diﬀerent opportunity cost of work (in terms of forgone
leisure).


                                                EGY
                      57
                      55



                      50
                                              COL
                                                             TUR                                                            SGP
                                                     CRI
weekly hours




                                                                                                                            HKG

                      45                       DOM                        MEX
                                                                                                         JPN
                                                                                 ARG
                                                                                                   CYP
                             PHL
                                                                   POL                       GRC           ISL
                                                                                       SVN                  GBR    FRA
                      40                                                                           NZL                     ITA
                                               PRY
                                       ROU
                                                                                                                  ISR
                                                                                                          ESP
                                                                                                            FIN      IRL
                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                   AUS
                      35                                                   SVK

                                                       RUS                                                         CHE
                                                                                                                    NLD

                      30
                           9.02834                                                                                  10.8672
                                                               log income per worker




                                       Figure 3: Hours Worked around the World

                   LABORSTA includes data on weekly hours for 41 countries in 1996, and in this sample
the variance of hours worked is indeed very large: from 57 (Egypt), to 26.6 (Moldova).19
However, the particular cross-country pattern of these hours does not go in the direction that
favors the factor-only model. Figure 3, where I plot weekly hours against log income per
worker (for countries with data on both variables), clearly shows that workers work fewer
hours in high-income countries.20 This implies that — if anything — TFP diﬀerences are
under-estimated!
                   In principle, this eﬀect may be compensated — and possibly reversed — by higher
     19
               For the subset of 28 countries that are both in the ILO sample and in our baseline sample the maximum
is the same, and the minimum is 31.7 (Netherlands).
   20
      The coeﬃcient of a regression of log weekly hours on log per-worker income implies that a one percent
increase in per worker income lowers weekly hours by about 0.1% — which is sizable.


                                                                    18
                               40                                   MKD



                               35


                               30
unemployment rate (%)




                               25
                                                                                                                     ESP

                               20
                                                                      MAR
                                                                      DOM                         TTO ARG
                                                      JAM
                                                NIC
                               15                                    BGR          PAN      BLZ
                                                                                                                      FIN
                                                                                                            PRI
                                                                       COL              POL
                                                                                         VEN                                 FRAITA
                                                                                                                              IRL
                                                        LKA                                      SVK          BHS
                                                                      ECU                        HUN         GRC
                               10                                            RUS                                          CAN BEL
                                                                          PRY SLV                                      SWE AUS
                                                                                                                      GBR
                                                        PHL    PER                        BRA           SVNPRT               DNK
                                                               ROU          CRI TUR                                         ISR
                                                                                                                              NLD
                                                  PAK                                              CHL
                                                                                                 ZAF                            USA
                                                                                                                              NOR
                                5                HND
                                                BOL           IDN                                MEX
                                                                                                                     MLT AUT
                                                                                                                      ISL CHE
                                      CHN                                                                           JPN
                                                                                                                  CYP         SGP         LUX
                                               BGD                                                    MYS                     HKG
                                                                                                                  KOR
                                                                            THA
                                1
                                    8.50025                                                                                           11.3145
                                                                             log income per worker




                                              Figure 4: Unemployment Rates Around the World


unemployment rates in poorer countries. Figure 4 plots data from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI) on unemployment rates against log per capita income, in
1996.21 Contrary to common perceptions, unemployment rates are not higher in poorer
countries. It therefore seems unlikely that further pursuing diﬀerences in hours worked may
lead to a significant improvement in the explanatory power of the factor-only model.

3.7                        Capital Share
The exponents on k and h act as weights: the larger the exponent on, say, k, the larger
the impact that variation in k will have on the observed variation in y. However, under
constant returns to scale these exponents sum to one, so increasing the explanatory power
of k through increases in α also means lowering the explanatory power of h. Because k is
more variable across countries than h, in general one can increase the explanatory power of
the “factor-only” model by increasing α.
         21
                        ILO data on unemployment generate a very similar picture.


                                                                                  19
              success1                                 success2

         1

        .9

        .8

        .7

        .6

        .5

        .4

        .3

        .2

        .1

         0
             0           10          20          30           40       50         60    65
                                             capital share (%)




                              Figure 5: Capital Share and Success


       Figure 5 plots success1 and success2 as functions of the capital share α. As predicted,
the fit of the factor-only model increases with the assumed value of α. Remarkably, our
measures of success are quite sensitive to variations in α. For example, a relatively minor
increase of α to 40% is suﬃcient to bring success1 to 0.5, and a 50% capital share implies
success measures in the 0.6 - 0.7 range. Success is almost complete with a 60% capital
share. This high sensitivity of the success measure, especially around the benchmark value
of α = 1/3, imply that the parameter α is a “sensitive choice” in development accounting,
and that our assessment of the quantitative extent of our ignorance may change non-trivially
with more precise measures of the capital share. Still, as long as the capital share is below
40%, most of the variation in income is still explained by TFP.


4    Quality of Human Capital
We have seen that simple parametric deviations from the benchmark measurements in Section
(2) do not alter the basic conclusion that diﬀerences in the eﬃciency with which factors are

                                              20
used are extremely large. Here and in the next section I subject this claim to further scrutiny,
by investigating possible diﬀerences in the quality of the human and physical capital stocks.
For, the measures adopted thus far are exclusively based on the quantity of education and
the quantity of investment, but do not allow, for example, one year of education in country
A to generate more human capital than in country B. Similarly, they do not allow one dollar
of investment in country A to purchase capital of higher quality than in country B.
        I conceptualize diﬀerences in the quality of human capital by writing

                                            h = Ah eφ(s) .

Up until now, I have assumed that Ah is constant across countries. In this section I examine
the possibility that Ah is variable.

4.1     Quality of Schooling: Inputs
Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and Bils and Klenow (2000) have proposed ways to allow
the quality of education to diﬀer across countries. Their main focus is that the human capital
of one generation (the “students”) may depend on the human capital of the preceding one (the
“teachers”). One can further extend their framework to allow for diﬀerences in teacher-pupil
ratios, and other resources invested in education. For example, one could write:


                                       Ah = pφp mφm khφk hφt h ,                                (7)

where p is the teacher-pupil ratio, m is the amount of teaching materials per student (text-
books, etc.), kh is the amount of structures per student (classrooms, gyms, labs, ...), and ht is
the human capital of teachers: the better the teachers, the more students will get out of their
years of schooling. More generally, the term ht might capture externalities in the process of
acquiring human capital.
        In this sub-section I will try to plug in values for the inputs p, m, kh , and ht , and cal-
ibrate the corresponding elasticities. Unfortunately, little is known about the latter. Indeed,
they are the object of intense controversy in and out of academe. Hence, I will typically look
at a fairly broad range of values.

4.1.1    Teachers’ Human Capital

I begin by focusing on the last of the factors in (7), ht . To isolate this particular channel for
diﬀerences in schooling quality I ignore other sources, i.e. I set φp = φm = φk = 0, which
is essentially Bils and Klenow’s assumption. When we review the evidence on these other
φs, we’ll see that this assumption may actually be quite realistic. If we make the additional

                                                  21
“steady state” assumption that ht = h, we can write

                                          h = eφ(s)/(1−φh ) ,

and plugging this into (3) we get:
                                                      (1−α)φ(s)
                                         y = Ak α e     1−φh
                                                                  .                              (8)

Note that this formulation magnifies the impact of diﬀerences in years of schooling, the more
so the larger the elasticity of student human capital to teacher’s human capital.


               success1                                       success2


         1

         .9

         .8

         .7

         .6

         .5

         .4

         .3

         .2

         .1

         0
              0            .1            .2          .3           .4          .5          .6   .68
                          elasticity of students' human capital to teachers' human capital




                                     Figure 6: φh and Success

       I continue to choose α = 1/3, and the function φ(·) as described in Section 2. The
new, unknown parameter is φh . In Figure 6 I plot success1 and success2 as functions of this
parameter. Note that φh = 0 is the baseline case of section 2. At the low values of φh implied
by the baseline case the success measures are fairly insensitive to changes in the elasticity of
students’ to teachers’ human capital. However, the relationship between the success measures
and φh is suﬃciently convex that when φh is 67% success is complete. Coincidentally, 67% is
the upper bound of the range of values Bils and Klenow consider “admissible” for φh , though
                                             22
clearly this admissibility is purely theoretical: their preferred values are actually in the 0-20%
range.22
           One way to think about what is reasonable for φh is to compute by how much the
teachers human capital eﬀect “blows up” the Mincerian return: from equation (8) we see that
with φh = 0.2 the “social” return to schooling is 1.2 times the private one; with φh = 0.4
it is 1.7 times larger; and with φh = 0.67 it is 3 times more. While it is hard to reach
a firm conclusion, it would seem that reasonable priors on φh are inconsistent with large
improvements in the fit of the factor-only model.
           Turning to possible objective estimates of φh , the first option is of course to look
for estimates of the eﬀect of teachers’ years of education on student achievement. This is
because under our assumptions diﬀerences in teacher’s quality are ultimately determined by
teachers’ years of education. However, Hanushek’s (2004) review of the literature concludes
that teachers’ measurable credentials — including years of education — have no measurable
impact on schooling outcomes.23
           Another way to formulate priors on the possible magnitude of φh is to look at evidence
on the eﬀect of parental education on wages. After all, our simple representative-agent model
of human capital is not explicit about the particular way the economy’s average level of human
capital enhances the learning experience of new members of society. We can legitimately re-
interpret ht , therefore, as the human capital of parents. One recent set of log-wage regressions
including the schooling of parents (alongside with an individual’s own schooling) is presented
in Altonji and Dunn (1996). Depending on data sources, and on whether the regression is
estimated for men or women, their coeﬃcient on father’s years of schooling ranges from -.5%
to 1%, and the coeﬃcient on mother’s schooling from less than .1% to about .5%. Note that
given our functional form assumption the coeﬃcient of parental education is φs φh , where φs
  22
       They compute this upper-bound (roughly) as follows. Given data on schooling years of diﬀerent cohorts,
given a Mincerian wage-years of schooling profile, and given a value for φh , it is possible to estimate the
growth rate of h, and hence the contribution of growth in h to the growth of y. Holding the Mincerian profile
constant, the larger φh , the larger the fraction of growth explained by human capital (for reasons already
touched upon in the text). For Bils and Klenow the upper bound for φh is the value such that growth in
human capital explains all
  of growth - or the value beyond which the residual, growth in TFP, would have to be negative. When the
Mincerian profile features decreasing returns, as in our baseline specification, and as in Bils and Klenow’s
preferred specification, this maximum value for φh is 0.19; when the Mincerian profile is linear the maximum
becomes 0.67. The decreasing returns case allows for a smaller maximum φh because, towards the beginning of
the sample period, many countries with very low education levels have very high Mincerian returns, implying
fast growth in human capital.
  23
     This does not mean that teachers’ quality does not matter, of course. It only means that teacher quality
is not related to measurable credentials. This unmeasurable quality eﬀect remains (appropriately) a part of
the measure of our ignorance.

                                                      23
is the return to own years of schooling (assumed constant for simplicity). If the return to own
schooling, φs , is in the ball park of 0.10 (as the evidence on Mincerian coeﬃcients roughly
implies), and we focus on Altonji and Dunn’s upper bound of 0.01 for φs φh , we conclude that
φh cannot be more than 0.1. A quick check with Figure 6 reveals that even this upper bound
does not support a meaningful boost in the explanatory power of overall human capital.24

4.1.2      Pupil-Teacher Ratios

The term hφt h in equation (7) does not appear to enhance the success of the factor-only model.
I now consider the term pφp . Lee and Barro (2001) report data on the pupil-teacher ratio
in a cross-section of countries for various periods since 1960, and separately for primary and
secondary schooling. For each country, I focus on the pupil-teacher ratio in the years when
the average worker attended school. To pinpoint this year, I need to start with an estimate
of the age of the average worker, which I construct from LABORSTA.25 Then I assume that
children begin primary schooling at the age of 6. This implies that the relevant observation
for the primary pupil-teacher ratio would be for the year 1996-age+6. Furthermore, using
unpublished panel data by Barro and Lee on the duration of primary and secondary schooling,
we can determine the relevant observation for the secondary pupil-teacher ratio as 1996-
age+6+duration of primary school.
           In order to combine the primary and secondary ratios in a unique statistic, I combine
the duration of schooling data with our basic data on the average years of schooling of the
population over 25 years of age, s, to determine what fraction of schooling time the average
worker spent in primary, and what fraction in secondary school. I then construct p by simply
averaging the primary and secondary teacher-pupil ratio using as weights the time spent in
these two grades, respectively. At the end of all this, I have data on p for 86 of our 93
countries.26
  24
       Another way to boost the contribution of human capital to income would be to assume that
parental/teacher human capital increases the slope and not just the intercept of the log-wage — schooling
relation. This is indeed Altonji and Dunn’s main focus. However, they do not find much evidence in support
of this hypothesis.
  25
     As already mentioned, LABORSTA breaks down the economically active population in 5-year age intervals,
from 10-14, to 60-64, plus a catch-all bracket for 65+. To get at the average age of a worker I simply weighted
the middle year of each interval by the fraction of the labor force in that interval. For the 65+ group, I
arbitrarily used 68. Of my 93-country sample, this data is available for 91 countries. I imputed average age
for the two missing countries (Taiwan and Zaire) through a cross-sectional regression of average age of worker
on per-worker income and years of schooling.
  26
     Since the pupil-teacher ratio is observed at five-year intervals in practice we “target” the observation
closest to the estimated age at which the average worker went to school. With this procedure, in the sample
of 86 countries with data on pupil-teacher ratios, the target dates for primary school attendance are 1960 for
two countries, 1965 for 40, and 1970 for 44. For secondary school attendance the target dates are 1965 (one

                                                      24
                 success1                                     success2




           1
          .9
          .8
          .7
          .6
          .5
          .4
          .3
          .2
          .1
           0
                0      .2     .4      .6      .8      1    1.2     1.4    1.6     1.8     2      2.2 2.34
                                      elasticity of human capital to teacher-pupil




                                       Figure 7: φp and Success


        Figure 7 plots success1 and success2 as functions of φp . Since richer countries have
higher teacher-pupil ratios, clearly a higher elasticity of human capital to this ratio implies
a better fit, or greater success. What is a reasonable range of values for φp ? At the low
end of the spectrum there is the position taken by Hanushek and coauthors, who conclude
that resources — including a large teacher-pupil ratio — have little if any eﬀect on economic
outcomes.27 At the other end of the spectrum, my own reading of the literature indicates
that the highest published estimate of φp is a very sizable 0.5.28 However, even with this
extremely high estimate it is clear that the fit of the model improves modestly, with our
success measures barely attaining even the 50% mark.
country), 1970 (25), 1975 (55), and 1980 (5).
  27
     In a cross-country context, Hanushek and Kimko (2000) find no evidence that more resources improve
schooling quality, and Hanushek, Rivkin and Taylor (1996) and Hanushek (2003) reach the same conclusion
upon reviewing the US-based literature.
  28
     Card and Krueger (1996). I infer this number from their reported 5% increase in earnings associated with
a 10% reduction in class size for white men.



                                                     25
4.1.3   Spending


               success1                                     success2


         1

         .9

         .8

         .7

         .6

         .5

         .4

         .3

         .2

         .1

         0
              0           .1            .2          .3           .4         .5          .6   .69
                               elasticity of human capital to expenditure per student




                                     Figure 8: φsp and Success

        I do not have direct data on materials, m and structures per student, kh . Instead, I
have — always from Lee and Barro (2001) — a measure of government spending per student
in PPP dollars. The bulk of this spending typically goes to teacher salaries, so variation
in these data also reflect diﬀerences in the number and possibly the quality of teachers per
student. However, to a certain extent, they may also reflect variation in materials. For
the purposes of using these data, it seems sensible, therefore, to replace equation (7) by
Ah = spending φsp , where the dating of the spending observation and the weights given to
primary and secondary spending are determined as for the pupil-teacher ratio. For this
exercise, I have data for 63 countries, and for this sample the measures of success are plotted
in Figure 8. Again, rich countries devote more resources to education per student, so the fit
of the model improves with φsp . However, again, there is the Hanushek position in the papers
cited above, according to which φsp should be thought of as close to zero. At the other end
of the range I have found an estimate of 0.2, which clearly is barely suﬃcient to even clear

                                                  26
the 50% threshold of explanatory power.29,30

4.2       Quality of Schooling: Test Scores
Another way to investigate the potential of quality-of-education modifications to the basic
model is to exploit information on the performance of students on reading, science, and math
tests in diﬀerent countries. When students in one country outperform students of another
(holding grade constant), we can assume that they have enjoyed schooling of higher quality,
whether this higher quality comes from higher teacher-pupil ratios, quality of teachers, other
expenditures, or other unobservables specific to the production of human capital. Hanushek
and Kimko (2000) find that test scores enter significantly in growth regressions.
           To implement this idea I think of Ah as a function of test scores: higher test scores
signal higher human capital. Suppose, for example, that the relationship between school
quality and test results is given by Ah = eφτ τ , where τ is the test score.31 Then, with data
on test scores, if we knew φτ we could construct a new counterfactual measure of yKH , or
the output attributable to “observable” factors of production.
           I use data on test scores provided by Lee and Barro (2001), who for several countries
observe data on multiple tests (e.g.: math, science, and reading), and for multiple grades, at
diﬀerent dates. Ideally I would follow the procedure outlined in the previous sub-section, i.e.
to “target” the year in which the average worker is presumed to have been in school. Because
this data is very sparse, however, and mostly available in recent dates, I will focus on recent
observations. This procedure is appropriate if the quality of education has grown over time
at roughly similar rates across countries.
           The two tests that aﬀord the greatest country coverage — 28 countries with overlapping
test, input, and output data— are a math and a science test imparted to 13 year old children
between 1993 and 1998. The scores are standardized on a 0-to-100 scale, and I take the
simple average of the two test scores.32 With this summary measure of τ at hand, in Figure
9 I plot our measures of success against φτ .
           The result should be treated with great caution given the very small sample size.
Notice for example that, even for φτ = 0, both measures of success are considerably higher
  29
       Johnson and Staﬀord (1973), who run a regression of log hourly wages on log state expenditure per student
(and controls), obtaining a coeﬃcient of 0.198. For the reasons discussed by Hanushek and co-authors there
is a high presumption of upwad bias in this estimate.
   30
      Lee and Barro (2001) also report information on the duration of the schooling year (in days and hours),
but these variables — while highly variable — are weakly, and if anything negatively, correlatd with per-capita
income, so that they are highly unpromising from the perspective of improving the fit of the model. Similarly,
teacher salaries, as a percent of per-capita GDP, are higher in poorer countries.
  31
       The reason for the exponential form will be apparent below.
  32
       The correlations between the two test scores is 0.87.
                                                        27
                   success1                                     success2


             1

             .9

             .8

             .7

             .6

             .5

             .4

             .3

             .2

             .1

             0
                  0            1             2           3            4              5           6    6.5
                                   percentage wage increase per extra point in test scores




                                      Figure 9: φτ (×100) and Success.


than in the full sample. With that caveat, it is true that students in rich countries perform
better in standardized tests, and therefore the success of the model improves with φτ .
           To find a benchmark for φτ against which to evaluate Figure 9, notice that our
assumption on the relationship between test scores and school quality translates into an
assumption on the relation between test scores and wages: a unit increase in test scores is
associated with a φτ proportional increase in wages. I have chosen this exponential form
because studies of the relationship between test scores and wages tend to report coeﬃcients
from regressions of log wages on absolute test scores. For example, the coeﬃcient φτ × 100
(after rescaling the test data to be in the same units as ours) is reported to be between 0.08
and 0.34 by Murnane, Willet, and Levy (1995); between 0.12 and 0.27 by Currie and Thomas
(1999), and between 0.55 and 1.02 by Neal and Johnson (1996) — which is at the high end of
the range of available estimates.33
  33
       Murnane, Willet, and Levy (1995) report the coeﬃcient of the regression of log of weekly wages on math
test scores (tested in senior high school) to vary between 0.00004 and 0.00017 (depending on sex and cohorts
considered, US data). Since the test results are reported to vary between 2 and 17 points, we assume that

                                                       28
           Inspection of Figure 9 given this range of values suggests that using test scores as
proxies for schooling quality cannot substantially improve the performance of the factor-only
model. The problem is that, given the drastically reduced sample size, it is hard to take a
stand on the degree to which this finding generalizes.
           I can attain a slight increase in sample size if I drop the requirement that the tests
be imparted in roughly the same period and roughly the same subject. If I use all the test
scores available from the 1990s, i.e. I average across all tests irrespective of subject, age
group, and specific year, our sample size becomes 42 and success is given by figure 10. If I
use all available tests, including those from decades before the 1990s, the sample size is 45
and success is shown by figure 11. As we increase the sample size, the potential success of
the factor-only model if anything declines.

4.3       Experience
Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) and Bils and Klenow (2000) also allow for diﬀerences
across countries in experience levels. Since Mincerian wage regressions indicate that expe-
rience increases earnings, it makes sense to correct human capital for the contribution of
experience. This correction has two conflicting eﬀects on the explanatory power of human
capital. Since workers in rich countries live longer than workers in poor countries, this should
boost rich countries’ human capital. However, since rich-country workers spend more time
in school, a smaller proportion of their time is spent accumulating experience, which reduces
their relative human capital.34
           Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997) find that the net eﬀect is negative: experience is
the test is on a 0—20 scale. When translated to our 0-100 scale this implies the φs reported in the text. The
Currie and Thomas (1999) results imply that “students who score in the upper quartile of the reading exam
earn 20% more than students who score in the lower quartile of the exam, while students in the top quartile
of the math exam earn another 19% more. When they control for father’s occupation, father’s education,
children, birth order, mother’s age, and birth weight, the wage gap between the top and bottom quartile on
the reading exam is 13% for men and 18% for women, and on the math exam it is 17% for men and 9% for
women” (Krueger, 2002, p. 25). From here we can infer that φτ varies between 0.0012 and 0.0027 (dividing
the percentage change in the wage by the 75 points that separate the top from the bottom quartile). Neal
and Johnson (1996) run a regression of log real yearly wages on standardized AFQT test scores, and find
a coeﬃcient between 0.17 and 0.29. Introducing more controls the coeﬃcients are between 0.12 and 0.16.
Since the standard deviation of AFQT scores (as reported in the note to their Appendix A.3) is 36.65, this
implies that a one-point increase in AFQT scores increases wages by between 0.33 and 0.79 percent. Given
that AFQT scores range between 95 and 258, this implies a φ between 0.0055 and 0.0102 (treating each of
the AFQT points as 1.64 of our 100 points). (Whether AFQT scores are measures of schooling outcome is
somewhat controversial). Hanushek and Kimko (2000) use essentially the same international test scores we
are using here to explain the earnings of migrants to the US, and obtain φτ × 100 of approximately 0.2.
  34
       A third eﬀect, that adds to the second, is that rich-country workers may retire earlier.

                                                        29
                   success1                                     success2



             1

             .9

             .8

             .7

             .6

             .5

             .4

             .3

             .2

             .1

             0
                  0              1             2              3                4                5      5.5
                                 percentage wage increase per extra point in test scores




                         Figure 10: φτ (×100) and Success, all tests in the 90s.


actually higher in poor countries. Hence, in their calculations correcting for experience lowers
the explanatory power of the factor-only model. However, in order to compute the average
age of workers they rely on UN data on the age structure of the population, while in principle
it would be more accurate to look at the age structure of the labor force. Using again the
LABORSTA-based measure of the average age of the economically active population in the
formula
                                        experience=age-schooling-6,

I find that the correlation between experience and per-capita income is -0.29 in our 93-country
sample. Therefore, I confirm the Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare conclusion that poor countries
have less education but more experience. Adding experience to the model, therefore, will
only worsen its explanatory power.35
  35
       This discussion assumes implicitly that experience enters linearly in the production function for human
capital, an assumption we know not to be valid. However, for this cnsideration to overturn the conclusion we
just reached, it would have to be the case that poor countries are to the right of the argmax, which seems
very unlikely: in my data, the maximum average experience is 27 years. More importantly the discussion

                                                       30
                 success1                                      success2




           1
          .9
          .8
          .7
          .6
          .5
          .4
          .3
          .2
          .1
           0
                0         1        2        3        4         5          6         7             8    8.6
                               percentage wage increase per extra point in test scores




                    Figure 11: φτ (×100) and Success, all available test scores


4.4     Health
Weil (2001) and Shastry and Weil (2003) point out that there are very large cross-country
diﬀerences in nutrition and health status, and argue that these diﬀerences map into sub-
stantial diﬀerences in energy and capacity for eﬀort. They find that accounting for health
diﬀerences across countries increases by one-third the explanatory power of human capital
for diﬀerences in per-capita income.
         Weil (2001) uses as a proxy for health the Adult Mortality Rate (AMR), which mea-
sures the fraction of current 15 year old people who will die before age 60, under the as-
sumption that age-specific death rates in the future will stay constant at current levels. In
practice, this is a measure of the probability of dying “young,” and is therefore a plausible
(inverse) proxy for overall health status.
also abstracts from compositional issues. Feyrer (2002) uncovers an economically important and remarkably
robust association between a country’s productivity and its share of the labor force that is between 40 and 49
years of age. Extending the development accounting framework to capture this eﬀect would be a worthwhile
task.

                                                     31
          The correction of human capital for health can be implemented through the assump-
tion Ah = eφamr AMR , where clearly φamr < 0: a higher adult mortality rate implies a less
energetic workforce. I gather cross-country data on AMRs from the WDI, covering 91 of our
93 countries, for the year 1999. I plot success for diﬀerent values of −φamr in Figure 12. Since
richer countries have healthier workers, the explanatory power of human capital increases in
−φamr .


                 success1                                 success2

           1

           .9

           .8

           .7

           .6

           .5

           .4

           .3

           .2

           .1

           0
                0        .5          1         1.5          2        2.5          3           3.6
                     % decrease in h associated with a one percentage point increase in AMR




                                  Figure 12: −φamr and Success

          Weil’s preferred value for −φamr (×100) is 1.68. Conditional on this value, I do confirm
his finding that the factor-only model’s explanatory power improves considerably - indeed by
almost one third, taking us well above the 50 percent threshold of success. This is therefore
a very important and promising contribution.
          Given his choices of functional form, however, this calibration implies that a one-
percentage-point reduction in the probability of dying young is associated with a 1.68 percent
increase in human capital, and hence in wages. Put another way, reducing the probability
of dying before the age of 60 (as of age 15) by 6 percentage points has the same impact on
wages as one extra year of schooling. This eﬀect may seem a bit too large to be realistic.
                                                 32
Given the somewhat tortuous — if ingenious — path through which Weil comes up with this
calibration, I would tend to consider this number an upper bound.36
           One can perhaps improve on Weil’s exercise by exploiting as a proxy for health the
information on average birthweight generated by Behrman and Rosenzweig (2004). The great
advantage is that these authors also report estimates (based on within twin-pair regressions)
of the economic returns to higher birthweight (as measured by wages). This should provide a
more solid base for calibration. There are, however, several shortcoming. First, birthweight
may be less strongly correlated with health than the adult mortality rate. Second, the cross-
section of mean birthweights refers to new borns in 1989, so it captures (a correlate of) the
health of a cohort of workers that was not even in the labor force (aside from the most
extreme cases of child labor) as of the date of our development accounting exercise (1996).
Hence, one needs to assume a very high degree of persistence in cross-country diﬀerences in
birthweights in order to put a lot of stock in this exercise. Third, the point estimate of the
returns to birthweight are from a sample of US female twins, and one may question their
applicability to the population at large.37
           With those caveats, Figure 13 plots the usual measures of success when we assume
Ah = eφbw BW , where BW is Behrman and Rosenzweig’s mean birthweight (in pounds), and
φbw is the elasticity of human capital to birthweight. The number of countries is 82. Since
birthweight is higher in rich countries a higher value of φbw increases the explanatory power
of human capital. However, the value of φbw implied by Behrman and Rosenzweig’s log
wage regressions is 0.076, which implies a trivially small improvement in the success of the
factor-only model. This is substantively the same conclusion of Behrman and Rosenzweig,
who report that the variance of φbw BW is less than one percent of the variance of log(y).
           In sum, while the results with the adult mortality rate strongly imply that a correction
for diﬀerences in health status is a first-order requirement in the measurement of human
capital, those using birthweight are much less supportive. In light of the shortcomings of
both exercises, however, it seems highly worthwhile to try and explore the matter further
with more accurate indicators of health and more precisely calibrated parameters.
  36
       Weil uses published micro-level estimates from three developing countries to infer the elasticity of human
capital to height. He then uses time series data from Korea and Sweden to estimate a relationship between
height and the AMR. He then combines these two pieces of information to infer the elasticity of human capital
to the AMR. In essence, he is using the AMR to predict height, and then applies to the predicted height the
microeconomic estimate of the eﬀect of height on wages.
 37
    Fourth, Behrman and Rosenzweig also find some evidence of non-linearity in the birthweight-log wage
relationship, so to perform a really accurate exercise one should use data on each country’s entire birthweight
distribution. Of course that is easily available for only a handful of countries.




                                                        33
                         success1                                    success2

            1

           .9

           .8

           .7

           .6

           .5

           .4

           .3

           .2

           .1

            0
                 0            .4             .8           1.2             1.6      2     2.32
                                      elasticity of human capital to birthweight




                                     Figure 13: φbw and Success


4.5      Social vs. Private Returns to Schooling and Health
Some additional important caveats about the nature of the calculations above is in order
before I “set aside” human capital. Recall that the function φ(s) that we have used to
map years of schooling into human capital was calibrated on estimates of private rates of
return. Similarly, attempts at calibrating the health-human capital relation rely on observed
private returns to health. But, as pointed out by various authors, and especially forcefully by
Pritchett (2003), these private returns may bear little relationship to the social (or aggregate)
return to education, which is of course what one would like to plug in our calculations.
          As Pritchett points out, the social return to education may be higher or lower than
the private one. Most growth theorists instinctively think about the former case, as they have
in mind models with positive spillovers from human capital. However, Pritchett’s review of
the evidence is typical in finding very little empirical support for positive externalities.38 On
the other hand, various versions of the education-as-signalling-device model, as well as models
 38
      See, e.g., Heckman and Klenow (1997) and Acemoglu and Angrist (2000).


                                                   34
of rent seeking, imply that the social return to education is lower than the private return.39
This possibility is quite compelling. Note, however, that our calculations above imply that if
we uniformly lower the social rate of return to education, cross-country schooling inequality
will explain even less of income inequality than it does in our benchmark calculation (see
Figure 2).
             Pritchett, however, also convincingly argues that the extent of rent seeking, and there-
fore the extent to which the social return is below the private return, is much larger in poor
countries. For example, in many poor countries the government employs an overwhelmingly
large share of college graduates. This is sometimes the result of guaranteed-employment
rules that commit the government to find employment to anyone with a tertiary degree. In
contrast, in rich countries most college graduates work in the private sector. Since standard
rent-seeking arguments imply that the government sector is intrinsically likely to make less
eﬃcient use of resources, this implies that on average the social return to education will be
lower in poor countries. This eﬀect is of course reinforced by the fact that poor countries are
notoriously more prone to corruption and rent seeking than rich ones.
             This will help. If the social rate of return to education (and health) is allowed to
be higher in rich countries, then the variance of h will increase, and with it the explanatory
power of the model. How important this could be quantitatively is hard to say, but by all
means it would be worth finding out. A first exploratory step may be to break down the
labor force into government-employees and private-sector workers. One may then retain the
parameterization of the benchmark case for the private sector workers, but assume lower
returns for government employees.


5         Quality of Physical Capital
5.1         Composition
Recent research by Eaton and Kortum (2001) has shown that most of the world’s capital is
produced in a small number of R&D-intensive countries, while the rest of the world generally
imports its equipment. This suggests that, for most countries, (widely available data on)
imports of capital of a certain type are an adequate proxy for overall investment in that type
of equipment. Caselli and Wilson (2004) exploit this observation to investigate cross-country
diﬀerences in the composition of the capital stock.40
             Their results — a partial summary of which is shown in Table 3 — are startling: diﬀerent
    39
         See, e.g., Murphy, Shleifer, and Vishny (1991), or Gelb, Knight, and Sabot (1991).
    40
         This idea is also used in Caselli and Coleman (2001a). The equipment-import data are extracted from
the Feenstra (2000) data set.


                                                       35
types of equipment constitute widely varying fractions of the overall capital stock across
countries. For each of the nine equipment categories Caselli and Wilson work with, the
share in total investment in 1995 has minima in the low single digits, and maxima that
vary between 20 percent and 80 percent! The standard deviations of investment shares are
always large relative to the cross-country means. Furthermore, this enormous heterogeneity
is systematically related to per capita income, as the correlations with income of the various
investment shares are large in absolute values.

              Fabricated      Non-         Oﬃce            Electrical    Comm.      Motor-      Other    Aircraft   Prof.
                Metal       Electrical   Computing         Equipment    Equipment   Vehicles   Transp.              Goods
               Products     Machinery    Accounting
 Mean              .08          .21          .06              .14          .11         .24       .03         .05     .07
 STD               .06          .08          .05              .07          .05         .10       .04         .09     .03
 Min               .01          .03          .01              .01          .01         .01       .00         .00     .01
 Max               .55          .48          .41              .59          .37         .55       .34         .88     .23
 Corr Y           -.25         -.14          .53              .27          .20        -.32      -.41         .14     .33
 R&D              202          887           1170             848         2280       1810        57          1880    801

                            Table 3: The Composition of the Capital Stock

           To begin to see why this vast heterogeneity in the composition of equipment may
matter for development-accounting, Table 3 also reports global, cumulated R&D expenditures
in the various equipment categories.41 The wide variation in R&D spending across types
reinforces the impression of equipment heterogeneity across countries: since equipment shares
vary so much, so does the embodied-technology content of the aggregate capital stock. If the
R&D content of equipment determines its quality, i.e. its productivity per dollar of market
value, one begins to suspect that the quality of capital — and not only its quantity — may
vary across countries.
           Furthermore, these diﬀerences are systematic, since richer countries appear to employ
high R&D capital much more than poor countries. A simple way to see this is to look at
Figure 14, from Wilson (2004). For equipment types with a high R&D content the share in
overall investment is positively correlated with output per worker, while the opposite is true
for low-tech equipment types. Could it be that rich countries use higher quality equipment,
and that this higher quality accounts for some of the residual TFP variance?
           To see how this may work it is useful to write down a very simple model. Imagine
that final output Y is produced combining various intermediate inputs, xp , according to the
  41
       This is sometimes referred to as the “R&D stock” of a certain type of capital, as it is computed by
cumulating past R&D spending with the perpetual inventory method. The R&D spending data come from
the ANBERD data base. See Caselli and Wilson (2004) for details.

                                                      36
                                                                                Figure 2: R&D flow intensity (%) vs. Corr(Y/L, import share)
                                                                                                   1995, 118 countries
                                                                0.6
                                                                                                                     Office and Computer Eq.
                                                                                                              0.53

                                                                0.4


                     Correlation between Y/L and import share
                                                                                                                                  Professional Goods
                                                                                            Electrical Eq.                 0.33

                                                                0.2                     0.27                                                                      Aircraft
                                                                                                                      Communications Eq.
                                                                                                              0.20
                                                                                                                                                                   0.14

                                                                  0
                                                                  0.000        0.020      0.040       0.060        0.080     0.100      0.120     0.140   0.160     0.180    0.200
                                                                                       Non-electrical Eq.

                                                                -0.2            -0.14
                                                                          Fabricated Metal
                                                                       -0.25                    Motor Vehicles
                                                                                        -0.32
                                                                -0.4                            Other Trans. Eq.
                                                                                        -0.41



                                                                -0.6
                                                                                                                   R&D Intensity




                                                                          Figure 14: Capital Composition and Income

CES production function42
                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                             P                     γ
                                                                                                             X               γ
                                                                                         Y =B                       (xp )                      γ < 1,
                                                                                                             p=1

where B is a disembodied total factor productivity term. Intermediate-good p is produced
combining equipment and labor:

                                                                               xp = Ap (hp Lp )1−α (Kp )α                                       0 < α < 1,                           (9)

where Kp measures the quantity of equipment (in current dollars) used to produce intermediate-
input p, hp Lp is human-capital augmented labor in sector p, and Ap is the productivity of
sector p.
           The key assumption is that capital is heterogeneous: there are P distinct types of
capital, and each type is product specific, in the sense that intermediate p can only be
produced with capital of type p. In other words, an intermediate is identified by the type
of equipment that is used in its production.43 The assumption that γ < 1 implies that — in
producing aggregate output — all these activities are imperfect substitutes.
  42
       Production functions such as this one have been the staple of recent developments in growth theory.
  43
       For example, for equipment-type “trucks,” the corresponding intermediate good x (say, “road trans-
portation”) is the one obtained by combining workers with trucks. For equipment-type “computers,” the
                                                                                                                           37
           The productivity term Ap is product specific. Product variation in A allows for the
possibility that one dollar spent on equipment of type p may deliver diﬀerent amounts of
eﬃciency units if instead spent on type p0 . For example, the embodied-technology content
of good p may be greater because the industry producing equipment of type p is more R&D
intensive.44
           A number of simplifying assumptions allow one to write a simple formula that brings
the idea of the “quality of capital” in sharp relief. In keeping with the representative-agent
spirit of the rest of the chapter say, then, that human capital per worker is constant across
sector, i.e. hp = h, and that labor is free to flow across sectors so that the marginal product
of labor is the same for all equipment types. Then one can show that the output equation
can be rewritten as45
                                                                                                1−(1−α)γ
                                                    P                                                γ
                                α      1−α
                                                    X                 γ                 αγ
                     Y = (K) (hL)            B           (Ap )   1−(1−α)γ   (ξp )   1−(1−α)γ               ,   (10)
                                                    p=1

where of course K is the total market value of the capital stock, L is total labor, and ξp is
the share of capital of type p in the total capital stock, or ξp = Kp /K.
           Up until now we have been writing Y = (K)α (hL)1−α A, and we have struggled
with the fact that A seems to play an enormously important role in determining output
diﬀerences. The last equation neatly shows the relationship between A and the composition
of the capital stock: if diﬀerent types of capital have diﬀerent productivities, then the observed
wild variation in equipment shares ξ implies that the quality of capital — over and above its
quantity K — can vary across countries and can account for a portion of the unexplained
variation.
           Caselli and Wilson (2004) propose a regression-based approach to make inferences on
the various Ap s. Unfortunately, even with knowledge of the Ap s it is virtually impossible to
corresponding intermediate good is “computing services,” etc. Hence, our intermediates do not easily map
into industries or sectors (computers are used in most industries), but rather into the various types of activities
(transport, computing, etc.) required to generate output within each sector.
  44
     Since, for simplicity, we have written an aggregate production function that is symmetric in the services
provided by diﬀerent types of capital, product variation in Ap may also reflect diﬀerences in the various capital
types’ shares in aggregate output.
  Caselli and Wilson also allow the productivity term Ap to vary across countries, for a given equipment
type p. The idea behind country variation is that equipment of type p may be more complementary with the
characteristics of country i, an idea that is strongly supported by their empirical results.
  In order to make sure that cross-country diﬀerences in Kp measure physical diﬀerences in installed capital
we need to assume that the law of one price holds. This is plausible, since we know that most capital is
imported from a few world producers. If the law of one price does not hold, however, cross-country diﬀerences
in Ap may also reflect price diﬀerences.
  45
       See Caselli and Wilson (2004) for details.
                                                             38
bound the amount of income variance that the ξp s can explain. This is because the last term
of equation (10) is exceedingly sensitive to the value of γ, and there seem at the moment
to exist no reliable approach to the calibration of this elasticity. If γ is suﬃciently low, i.e.
capital types are suﬃciently poor substitutes for one another, the quality of capital accounts
for all of the unexplained component of income diﬀerences. However, whether such values are
reasonable or not our current state of knowledge cannot say. I conclude therefore that further
research on the composition of capital is an important priority for development accounting.

5.2   Vintage Eﬀects
Solow’s (1959) paper on vintage capital formalized the idea that technological progress is
embodied in capital goods. Jovanovic and Rob (1997), Parente (2000), Mateos-Planas (2000),
and Rodriguez-Clare (1996) have noted that this could potentially enhance the explanatory
power of cross-country diﬀerences in investment rates. The idea, of course, is that low
investment rates will be associated with lower adoption of new technology. Indeed, some of
these authors have argued that versions of the capital-embodied model greatly outperform
the homogenous-capital model in accounting for cross-country income diﬀerences.
       Formally, the vintage-capital model could be described by the formulas:
                                                       t
                                                       X
                                 Yt = (Lt ht )1−α                  α
                                                             At−i Kt−i ,                    (11)
                                                       i=0
                              Kt−i = (1 − δ)i I˜t−1 ,

where I˜t−1 is investment at time t − 1 in terms of the consumption good. Consistent with
Solow’s idea, this model has the property that capital installed by sacrificing one unit of
consumption at date s yields As (1 − δ)t−s eﬃciency units of capital at time t, while capital
installed by sacrificing one unit of consumption at time t yields At eﬃciency units. If As < At
we have that the earlier sacrifice in consumption contributes less to output today not only
because of physical depreciation, but also because of the older vintage. To appreciate the
potential consequences of this note that the same comparison in a homogenous-capital (i.e.
disembodied technical change) model would be between At (1 − δ)t−s and At , i.e. diﬀerences
in eﬃciency units obtained with the same sacrifice of consumption would only be due to
physical depreciation.
       As explained by Greenwood, Hercowitz, and Krusell (1997), under certain conditions
the formulation above is equivalent to
                                                         t
                                                         X
                                   Yt = (Lt ht )1−α             α
                                                               Kt−i ,
                                                         i=0
                                K̃t−i = (1 − δ) qt−i I˜t−i ,
                                                   i

                                           39
which has the following interpretation. Instead of one unit of consumption producing equal
amounts of capital of increasing quality at diﬀerent dates, one unit of consumption produces
increasing amounts of capital of the same quality. Because the aggregate implications of
growth in A are isomorphic to those of growth in q, the two formulations can be equivalent
representations of the idea of embodied technological progress.
        The second version of the model suggests, however, that — at least in principle — the
estimates of the physical capital stocks we have been using until now do actually already
reflect embodied technical change. This is because the real investment series we construct
from PWT6 is a series for real investment in terms of the investment good, and not in terms
of the consumption good. In other words, the PWT6 investment data that we use are data
on Is = qs I˜s , and not on I˜s . Therefore, vintage eﬀects — or at least those vintage eﬀects that
show up in a reduced relative price of investment goods — should already be accounted for.
        As a very rough check on this argument, I have run a cross-country OLS regression of
output per quality-adjusted worker on a distributed-lag function of depreciated investments
(in units of the investment good). I.e. the left hand side variable was Yt /(Lt ht )1−α , and the
right hand side variables where It , (1 − δ)It−1 , (1 − δ)2 It−2 ... I experimented with 5, 10,
and 20 lags of investment. The homogeneous-capital hypothesis — or, much more accurately,
the hypothesis that all vintage eﬀects are adequately captured by investment-good prices
in PWT6 — is equivalent to all the coeﬃcients taking the same value, irrespective of the
vintage. The “vintage eﬀects” hypothesis would predict that coeﬃcients on recent lags of
investment would be systematically larger than those on older lags. The result was somewhat
inconclusive, in that both hypotheses were rejected: all coeﬃcients were not statistically the
same, but neither they fell monotonically with the lag of investment. A possible explanation
is that the price deflators in PWT work well enough to remove systematic vintage eﬀects,
but the remaining i.i.d. measurement error occasionally makes some vintages look more
productive than others. In any case there is little indication that vintage-based models will
significantly improve on the benchmark.

5.3   Further Problems with K
The investment series I have used to estimate the capital stock is an aggregate of private
and public investment expenditures. As Pritchett (2000) very convincingly argues, however,
elementary logic and vast anecdotal experience suggest that many governments’ investment
eﬀorts are much less productive than private ones. There is an infinite supply of examples
where government investments have not produced anything tangible (non-existent highways,
industrial complexes that have never been completed, etc.). Furthermore, even when public
investments do materialize, the resulting structures and machinery may be run less eﬃciently

                                                40
than under private management.46
           As for Pritchett’s (2003) criticism of schooling-based measures of human capital based
on private returns, his (2000) criticism of what he derogatorily but accurately calls CUDIE
(cumulated depreciated investment expenditure) may help shedding light on the puzzles we
are concerned with, both because governments tend to account for a larger share of produc-
tion, employment, and capital ownership in poorer countries, and because less-accountable
poor-country governments are likely to be disproportionately less eﬃcient (relative to the pri-
vate sector) than rich country ones. Hence, there are good reasons to expect the government
to play an especially detrimental role in the productivity of investment in poor countries.
This implies that the “eﬀective” variance of K is larger than in the baseline model.47
           As I suggested in the previous section for the analogous problem with human capital,
a first pass at investigating this issue would be to try to separate out public from private
investment, and apply diﬀerent weights in the perpetual-inventory calculation, which would
become
                                  Kt = Iprivate,t + γIpublic,t − δKt−1 .

One could then try to re-do development accounting with this modified capital measure
(possibly for various values of γ). Unfortunately, I have not been able to identify reliable and
updated PPP breakdowns of the investment series into private and public capital.48
           Perhaps a cleaner exercise, but also even more ambitious, would be to try to com-
pletely net out the government from the development accounting exercise. I.e. subtract the
government’s share from aggregate output, capital ownership, and employment, and perform
the development-accounting exercise on the residual (private) inputs and output. This con-
fronts the same data limitations as the exercise described in the previous paragraph, and the
additional problem of coming up with a reliable PPP government share of GDP.49
  46
       The 1994 World Bank’s World Development Report documents substantial cross-countryy diﬀerences in
the eﬃciency with which public infrastructure is used. Hulten (1996) uses these ineﬃciency indicators in a
growth-regression exercise.
  47
     While the emphasis is on the role of the government, Pritchett gives various other reasons why CUDIE is
problematic. One reason he does not list is that poor countries tend to experience more frequent destructions
of capital dur to natural disasters [Caselli and Malhotra (2004)] or wars. Since the perpetual inventory model
assumes a constant rate of depreciation common for all countries, this implies again that the benchmark
numbers underestimate the variability of k.
  48
     However, both the WDI and the IMF’s Government Finance Statistics (GFS) have data on government
capital formation in domestic currency. One could therefore potentially construct a non-government investment
series, and — in principle — use PWT deflators to turn this series into a real investment series. Whether one
would get anything sensible out of this is another matter.
  49
     One can of course not simply subtract G from Y , in PWT, because G is government consumption of
goods and services, and not government production. In the NIPA government output is defined as the sum of
factor payments, i.e. compensation to general-government employees plus general-government consumption

                                                     41
6     Sectorial Diﬀerences in TFP
Up to here in this chapter I have treated a country’s GDP as if it was produced in a single
sector, i.e. as if GDP measured the physical output of a homogeneous good. The basic
message has been that it is impossible to explain cross-country diﬀerences in income without
admitting a large role for diﬀerences in TFP. It is tempting to jump to the conclusion that
these TFP diﬀerences signal the existence of barriers to technology adoption in less developed
countries, or other frictions that broadly make some countries “function” less well than others.
But large diﬀerences in TFP could also be the result of variation in the weights in GDP of
sectors with diﬀerent sectorial-level productivity — even when these sectorial productivities
are identical across countries. In this case we would want to focus on barriers to the mobility
of factors across sectors, instead of barriers to the mobility of technology or work practices
across countries.50

6.1    Industry Studies
There is a tradition of productivity comparisons at the industry, or even at the firm, level.
Particularly illustrative of the advantages of this approach are a series of reports published
by the McKinsey Global Institute. These studies focus on painstaking comparisons of the
production functions (broadly construed) of narrowly defined industries (from automobile, to
beer, to retail banking) in a few industrialized economies (mostly US, Japan, Germany, and
the UK). Baily and Solow (2001) present a thoughtful survey of the achievements, as well as
the shortcomings, of these studies (as well as extensive references).51
        Briefly, even within narrowly defined industries, and even among countries at very sim-
ilar levels of development, total factor productivity presents remarkable variation. A similar
conclusion, for somewhat more aggregated manufacturing industries (but more countries), is
reached by Harrigan (1997, 1999). Hence, industry-level studies suggest that aggregate TFP
diﬀerences are not solely due to diﬀerences in the weights of high- and low-TFP sectors. Since
these studies are often limited to industries in a few highly developed economies, however,
one should be cautious before assuming that the same causes drive the low TFP levels of less
developed economies.
        Besides confirming that TFP diﬀerences exist also at the industry level, the McKinsey
of fixed capital. Something like these categories are reported in the IMF’s Government Financial Statistics.
Unfortunately, the spottiness of these data forced me to abandon this particular enterprise.
 50
    Here we are arguing that diﬀerences in sectoral composition may account for some of the diﬀerences in the
level of GDP. Koren and Tenreyro (2004) show that these same diﬀerences account for a substantial fraction
of diﬀerences in its volatility.
  51
     A precursor to these intra-industry cross-country productivity comparisons is the three-country study of
Conrad and Jorgenson (1985). See also Wagner and Van Ark (1996).

                                                     42
researchers are often also able to shed some tentative light on their sources. In particular, they
highlight diﬀerences in working practices, and they are sometimes also able to link ineﬃcient
practices to the regulatory environment. In general, the studies point to a link between
the degree of competition domestic producers are exposed to (as aﬀected by the amount of
regulation), and the eﬃciency with which they organize their labor input. This is of course
an important, and plausible, finding. Further support for this view comes from the work of
Schmitz (2001) on the North-American iron-ore industry, which shows convincingly that the
eﬃciency of labor practices is very responsive to the degree of product-market competition.52

6.2       The Role of Agriculture
As mentioned, existing cross-country comparisons of sectorial TFP tend to be limited to small
sets of developed countries. The goal of this section is therefore to provide a rough, prelimi-
nary assessment of the sectorial-composition interpretation of TFP diﬀerences that extends
to developing countries as well. In particular, I will focus on an agriculture-nonagriculture
split of GDP. The main reason for looking at this particular breakdown is easily inferred from
Figure 15: in the poorest countries of the world virtually everyone works in agriculture, and
in the richest virtually nobody does. It is obvious that this is the most important source
of variation in the composition of GDP around the World. Another reason for focusing on
agriculture is that I have no PPP output data for other sectors. Finally, the agriculture-
nonagriculture dualism has traditionally played a central role in the history of thought on
economic development.53
           The main purpose of this section, then, is to assess the hypothesis that (i) agriculture
is an intrinsically low TFP sector, and (ii) poor countries’ low aggregate TFP is due in
substantial measure to their high shares of agriculture. In this subsection, however, I start
by taking a preliminary (and perhaps somewhat digressive) look at basic data on agricultural
  52
       Another wonderful industry-level comparison of cross-country productivity diﬀerences is presented by
Clark (1987), who examines the productivity of cotton mills around the world in the early years of the
twentieth century. He shows that, assuming constant capital-labor ratios, the textile industries of Britain and
New England would have had a huge cost disadvantage relative to India, Japan, and many other countries.
Yet, British cotton textiles dominated export markets. Clark shows that the various countries’ industries used
identical equipment, and that the expertise to organize and run the mills could not have diﬀered too much.
Rather, the source of the productivity diﬀerences boils down to the fact that each English worker was willing
to tend to a much larger number of machines. In low-productivity countries workers were idle most of the
time. Why this was so remains a bit of a mystery, and one shouold be cautious in assuming that this finding
would still hold up one century later. Nevertheless, Clark’s findings reinforce the case that labor practices
may be an important source of observed diﬀerences in productivity.
 53
    Some of the classics are Fisher (1945), Clark (1940), Rostow (1960), Nurske (1953), Lewis (1954), Kuznets
(1966), and Jorgenson (1961).


                                                      43
                                            96          UGA
                                                          BDI NER
                                                                   NPL
                                                                RWA    MLI
                                                           BFA
                                                       TZA MOZ
                                                                    KEN
                                                                            SENAGO
                                                     ETH MWI    MDGNGA
                                                                           TCD     GIN
                                                                                            ZWE
                                            75
          employment share of agriculture
                                                                               BGD
                                                                                            PNG
                                                                  HTI
                                                                   CHN
                                                                             IND      THA
                                                                                        CMR
                                                         COD
                                                                                            HND
                                                                                     CIV
                                                                          GHA       PAK
                                                                                      IDN            GTM
                                                                                                    TUR
                                                                                                     PRY
                                            50                                        LKA
                                                                                          PHL
                                                                                            BOL
                                                                                                     EGY
                                                                                                   DOM
                                                                                                  MAR
                                                                                                    NIC
                                                                                                  SLV PER
                                                                                                       MYS
                                                                                                      ECU          MEX
                                                                                                          KORIRN
                                                                                                           TUN
                                                                                                       COL
                                                                                                       CRI BRA
                                                                                                     SYR                 GRC
                                                                                                  ROU
                                            25                                                      POL
                                                                                                                   DZA
                                                                                                               PRT
                                                                                                             CUB
                                                                                                                  ZAF IRL
                                                                                                       CHLURY HUN
                                                                                                               VEN      ESP
                                                                                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                              NZLITA
                                                                                                                            FIN
                                                                                                                      JPN AUT   NOR
                                                                                                                               FRA
                                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                          ISRSWE  NLD CHE
                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                          GBR        USA
                                             2
                                                 7                    8                     9                      10                       11
                                                                              log aggregate GDP per worker




                                                     Figure 15: The Importance of Agriculture

GDPs, non-agricultural GDPs, and agricultural labor shares. What we find should provide
further motivation for asking the development-accounting question with disaggregated data.
       I begin by writing per-worker GDP in PPP as

                                                                   y = PA yA lA + PA yA lA ,                                                     (12)

where PA (PA ) is the international (PPP) price of agricultural (non-agricultural) goods, yA
(yA ) is the per-worker output of the agricultural (non-agricultural) sector, and lA (lA ) is
the agricultural (non-agricultural) share of employment. We already know that lA varies
dramatically across countries. What about PA yA and PA yA ?
       The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) has collected and published cross-
country data on producer prices in agriculture for a large number of countries between 1970
and 1990 [Rao (1993), see also Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu (2003)]. This permits the construc-
tion of PPP exchange rates for agriculture, and therefore of PPP comparisons of agricultural
output. Going even further, the FAO researchers also assembled some data on agricultural
inputs for the year 1985, and this allowed them to generate a cross-section of PPP agricul-
tural GDPs. Furthermore, the methodology followed in the FAO study deliberately follows
the methods of Summers and Heston (1991). Hence, the estimates of PPP agricultural GDP
in the FAO data set are comparable to the aggregate PPP numbers of PWT6. The FAO
data set also obviously contains information on agricultural employment (which was used for
                                             44
Figure 15).
           A diﬃculty that needs to be addressed, however, is that the FAO numbers for PPP
agricultural GDP do not directly map into the quantity PA yA in equation (12). The reason is
as follows. The FAO PPP GDPs aggregate the quantities of the various agricultural products
by a set of “international prices,” that are essentially weighted averages of each countries’s
prices. The same is done in the PWT for all goods and services. However, the two systems
use a diﬀerent normalization for the international prices - i.e. they have the same relative
prices of agricultural products but diﬀerent absolute levels. Hence, the PPP agricultural
value-added coming from the FAO data set cannot simply be plugged into equation (12) with
PWT aggregate value added on the left hand side.54
           I try to solve this problem as follows. It is well known that — because they are
quantity-weighted — international-dollar prices in the PWT closely resemble rich-country,
and especially US, prices (Hill 2000). Hence, for the US, we should have
                                                        D
                                                       PA,US   D
                                                             YA,U
                                        PA,US YA,U S              S
                                                     ≈      D
                                                                    ,
                                           YUS            YU S
       D
where PA,US  D /Y D is the agricultural share in GDP at domestic prices, which can be
            YA,U S US
                                                      D
obtained from the WDI. In these equations YU S , and PA,U    D       D
                                                          S YA,U S /YUS are known (the former
from PWT, and the latter from WDI). Hence, we can solve for the US value of PA,US YA,U S .
Now recall that the FAO estimates for PPP agricultural GDP diﬀer from the (implicit) PWT
estimates only by a constant of normalization. It should follow that if we rescale all of the
FAO agricultural GDP numbers such that the US value coincides with PA,US YA,U S (as just
calculated) we have an estimate of the contribution of agriculture to PWT GDP that we can
plug into equation (12).
           As already pointed out by Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu (2003), the most striking feature
of the FAO data is that variation in agricultural value-added per worker (in PPP) dwarfs
the variation in aggregate value-added per worker. In the largest sample with data on both
agricultural and aggregate GDP per worker (80 countries) the inter-percentile range in agri-
  54
       Formulas may help here. Suppose that there is only one agricultural good and one nonagricultural good.
Call PA and PA their respective prices in PWT international dollars: the PWT’s unit of account. The
normalization used in PWT is that PA yA,U S + PA yA,U S = PA,U S yA,U S + PA,U S yA,U S , where PA,U S (PA,U S )
is the price of A (A) in the US (this is what Summers and Heston mean when they say, somewhat opaquely,
that the the PPP of the US is 1). Instead, the normalization in the FAO data set is PAF yA,U S = PA,U S yA,U S ,
where PAF is the price of the agricultural good in FAO’s international dollar. In this two-good example this
obvioulay implies PAF = PA,U S , so that PAF yA = PA yA only if we have PA = PA,U S , as well. But the
above-described normalization of PWT prices does not assure this at all, and indeed it would be true only
by coincidence. I guess one could put this into PWT-speak, and say that the fact that the PPP of GDP
is normalized to 1 for the US, does not imply that the PPP of individual sectors (such as agriculture) is
normalized to 1 as well.
                                                      45
cultural GDP is 45 and the log-variance is 2.15. The corresponding numbers for aggregate
GDP are 19 and 1.09, respectively.55 Real agricultural GDP per worker is plotted in Figure
16 against real aggregate GDP per worker.


                                                  11

                                                                                                                                         NZL
                                                                                                                                          AUS USA
                                                                                                                                            NLD
                                                  9.5                                                                                       CAN
                                                                                                                                          DNK
                log agricultural GDP per worker




                                                                                                                                      GBR FRA
                                                                                                                               ARGIRL
                                                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                                                  URY                    AUT ITA CHE
                                                                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                                        HUN         ESP
                                                                                                                                      FIN NOR
                                                   8                                                            CHL
                                                                                                                                   GRC
                                                                                                                CRI BRA VENZAF
                                                                                                              PRY
                                                                                                             SYR
                                                                                                                COL TUN PRT
                                                                                                               ECU
                                                                                                               MYS         MEX JPN
                                                                                                           DOM        IRN
                                                                                                    BOL     NIC
                                                                                                          SLV               DZA
                                                                                                  HND        EGY
                                                                                                            TUR
                                                                                                             GTM
                                                                                           CIV PNGPHL           PER
                                                  6.5                                     PAK
                                                                                                          MAR      KOR
                                                                               GHA           LKA
                                                                                              THA
                                                                                            IDN
                                                                      MDG                        ZWE
                                                             UGA
                                                               COD      HTI   MLITCD
                                                                                  IND
                                                           TZA            KEN        BGD GIN
                                                             MWI
                                                               BDI   RWA NGA       SEN
                                                         ETH            NPL            AGO
                                                   5            BFANER
                                                                  MOZ




                                                                                                CMR
                                                  3.5
                                                        7.1                8                       9                          10                 10.9
                                                                                     log aggregate GDP per worker




                                                         Figure 16: Labor Productivity in Agriculture

           Subtracting real agricultural GDP from aggregate GDP, it is also possible to back
out non-agricultural value-added per worker.56 The (not surprising but nonetheless) very
important finding is that diﬀerences in labor productivity in the non-agricultural sector are
much smaller than diﬀerences in aggregate labor productivity (and, a fortiori, in agricultural
labor productivity). The inter-percentile range is only 3.69 (compared with 19 for aggregate
GDP and 45 for agriculture) and the log-variance is 0.29 (compared with 1.10 and 2.15).
Figure 17 plots non-agricultural value-added per worker against aggregate value-added per-
worker. Comparison of Figures 16 and 17 shows that labor productivity is generally higher
outside than inside agriculture, and this is much more true for developing countries, an
observation previously made by Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson (2000).57
  55
       Due to the high persistence of the World’s income distribution these last two numbers are very close to
the corresponding numbers for our benchmark 1996 sample (20 and 1.2).
  56
     This is where the measurement problem described before becomes important: the log-variance of agricul-
tural GDP is obviously insensitive to the price-normalization adopted, but non-agricultural GDP is computed
as a residual from equation (12), so it is crucial that PA yA and y are in the same units.
  57
     Only Australia and New Zealand have higher productivity in agriculture than in nonagriculture. The
average log-diﬀerence between nonagricultural and agricultural output per worker in the entire 80-country
sample is 2.23; among the poorest 20 it is 3.26; among the richest 20 it is 0.97.
                                                                                           46
                                                   10.9                             NPL
                                                                                                                                                                        CHE
                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                                                                                                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                                                                                                  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                   CAN
                                                                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                                                                               AUTAUS
                                                                                                                                                         GRC FINDNK
                                                                                                                                                               SWE
                                                   10.5                                                                                            MEX    ESP
                                                                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                                                                                                NZL
                                                                                           MLI
                                                                                                                                                     DZAJPNGBR
              log nonagricultural GDP per worker
                                                                                                                                                        IRL
                                                                                                                      ZWE           GTM             ZAF
                                                                                                       AGO                         TUR       IRNPRT ARG
                                                                                                             GIN    PNG                     BRA VEN
                                                    10                        RWA
                                                                            NER                                     CMR             EGYPERKOR
                                                                                                                                     PRY   TUN
                                                                                                                                      MYS      HUN
                                                                 UGA                             SEN               THA             NICECU
                                                                                                                                  DOM
                                                                                                                                 MAR COL
                                                                  BDI                                                    HND     SLV   CRI
                                                                                     KEN                                            SYR URY
                                                                                                     BGD                               CHL
                                                                                               TCD                         BOL
                                                                      BFA                                                PHL
                                                    9.5                MOZ
                                                                                                                IDN
                                                                                                              CIV
                                                                                     NGA                     PAK
                                                                                                                LKA
                                                                                                 IND

                                                                              MDG
                                                                TZA
                                                     9
                                                                                HTI           GHA

                                                                  MWI
                                                           ETH
                                                    8.5
                                                                      COD

                                                    8.1
                                                          7.1                             8                       9                                10                   10.9
                                                                                                    log aggregate GDP per worker




                                                      Figure 17: Labor Productivity outside of Agriculture


           Recalling now from Figure 15 that the third component of equation (12), the employ-
ment share lA , ranges from almost 0 percent in the richest countries to almost 100 percent
in the poorest, we conclude that poor countries have most of their labor force in the sector
where they are particularly unproductive.58,59
           We can summarize this first overview of the sectorial data by saying that there are
three proximate reasons for poor countries’ poverty: their much lower labor productivity
  58
       Attempts at explaining this apparent deviation from comparative advantage abound. It may be that the
non-agricultural sector has greater skill requirements, so that low human-capital economies are constrained in
the supply of non-agricultural workers (Caselli and Coleman, 2001b); or it could be that investment distortions
push producers into the home (agricultural) sector (Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson, 2000); or it could be
that economies are subject to a “subsistence constraint,” such that resources cannot start moving out of
agriculture until agriculture is suﬃciently productive to generate a surplus that will feed the industrial class
(Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson, 2001; Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu, 2003); or it could be that some countries are
“trapped” in agriculture by a coordination failure (long tradition; most recently Graham and Temple, 2001).
  59
     Given the huge employment shares of agriculture in figure 15 one would guess that in most developing
countries agriculture would account for an equally vast share of GDP. In fact, the agricultural share of GDP
is always below 40 percent. This is a consequence of the disproportionately low productivity of agriculture
in low-income countries. Also note that the PPP agricultural share in GDP is both much less variable across
countries, and — for most countries — lower than the domestic-currency agricultural share in GDP. This is
because — perhaps contrary to common wisdom — the relative price of agricultural goods is higher in poor
countries than in the US.


                                                                                                             47
in agriculture; their somewhat lower labor productivity outside agriculture; and their larger
share of employment in the sector that — on average — is less productive.
           To quantify these eﬀects Table 4 presents income-dispersion statistics (log-variance
and inter-percentile range) in the data (first row), and under alternative counterfactual as-
sumptions on industry-level productivity and labor shares. Counterfactual 1 is that all coun-
tries have the US level of agricultural GDP per worker, but their own level of non-agricultural
GDP per worker and agricultural labor share. Counterfactual 2 is that all countries have the
US-level of non-agricultural GDP per worker, but their own level of agricultural GDP per
worker and agricultural labor share. Counterfactual 3 is that all countries have the US
agricultural labor share, but their own level of agricultural and non-agricultural GDP per
worker.60


                      Variable                                     log-variance   int. range
                      actual real output per worker                    1.10           19
                      counterfactual 1: US yA , own yA & lA            0.04           1.6
                      counterfactual 2: US yA , own yA & lA            0.58           7.1
                      counterfactual 3: US lA , own yA & yA            0.30           3.8


                          Table 4: Counterfactual World Income Distributions

           The results are stunning. The figures in the second row imply that if poor countries
achieved the same level of agricultural labor productivity as the US, world income inequality
would virtually disappear! This is of course a reflection of the convergence of US agricultural
incomes to US non-agricultural incomes [documented in Caselli and Coleman (2001b)], as well
as the huge agricultural share of employment in many of the poorest countries. However,
the other two counterfactual experiments also generate large declines in dispersion. Because
agriculture is generally much less productive than non-agriculture, reducing the agricultural
employment share to US levels would reduce income inequality by an enormous two thirds
(third row). And cross-country non-agricultural productivity diﬀerences, while much less
than agricultural ones, are still suﬃciently large that income inequality would fall by about
one half if poor countries were as productive outside of agriculture as the US (second row).61
  60
       A similar calculation is reported by Restuccia, Yang, and Zhu (2003). Calculations in this spirit can also
be found in Caselli and Coleman (2001b) (for US regions), and Gollin, Parente, and Rogerson (2001).
  61
     Of course, this discussion abstracts from the changes in world-wide agricultural relative prices that such
changes would bring about.




                                                        48
6.3       Sectorial Composition and Development Accounting
The previous subsection establishes that there are very large within industry cross-country
diﬀerences in output per worker. Indeed, the agricultural GDP diﬀerences are substantially
larger than the aggregate GDP ones. Furthermore, these cross-country diﬀerences in industry
GDPs are seen to potentially “account” for a large fraction of the cross-country dispersion in
aggregate income. We can now return to the original question: are these large diﬀerences in
agricultural GDP attributable to the amounts of observable inputs employed in agriculture by
the various countries, or are they the result of industry-level cross-country TFP diﬀerences?
This is of course “the” development-accounting question.
           To try to answer this question, we need assumptions on the industry production
functions, as well as ways of measuring industry-level inputs. I will assume that each of the
two sectors produces according to a Cobb-Douglas technology. In agriculture, the factors of
production are capital, labor, and land (T ). In non-agriculture, they are capital and labor:

                               YA = AA (KA )αA (LA hA )βA (TA )1−αA −βA ,                                  (13)
                                               ¡    ¢α ¡            ¢1−α
                               YA = AA KA             A     LA hA           A   .                          (14)

           The goal now is to construct counter-factual agricultural and non-agricultural output
data,
                                                  αA βA 1−αA −βA
                                         yA,HK = kA hA tA
                                                            α    1−αA
                                         yA,HK = kAA hA                 .

These counter-factual data answer the question: what would the world distribution of agricul-
tural (non-agricultural) output per worker look like if all countries had the same agricultural
(non-agricultural) total factor productivity?
           Assume that the rates of return on capital must be equalized across sectors — a
plausible arbitrage condition. This is easily seen to imply
                                                 PAD YA      PAD YA
                                              αA        = αA        ,
                                                  KA          KA
where PAD (PAD ) is the domestic producer price of agricultural (non-agricultural) goods, which
will generally diﬀer from the PPP price, and is the price the domestic investor cares for
(unless he produces for the export market). The quantities PAD YA and PAD YA are, of course,
agricultural and non-agricultural output in domestic prices, and they are observable from
WDI.62 Hence, combining this equation with

                                                   KA + KA = K,                                            (15)
  62
       In fact, we use the share of agriculture in GDP in domestic prices from the WDI. This is suﬃcient for the
                                          D
                                         YA
calculation below since only the ratio   YD
                                               is needed.
                                          A

                                                            49
where K is the (observable) total capital stock, we can back out KA and KA , and hence
(with the FAO data on labor shares) kA and kA .63
           It is harder to come up with numbers for hA and hA . Caselli and Coleman (2001b)
show that there is a very systematic tendency for agriculture to be one of the least skill
intensive sectors in the economy. For example, for each of the years between 1940 and 1990
they rank the roughly 120 industries featured in the US Census of Population by percentage of
workers with an elementary degree or less, and in each of these years agriculture consistently
ranks in the bottom 10. This suggests that it may not be unreasonable to set hA = 1 in
all countries, i.e. that the agricultural work force is made up by workers with no education.
It is then easy to compute human capital per worker outside of agriculture. In particular,
if s is the average years of schooling in the labor force, and a fraction lA has no education
and work in agriculture, then the remaining fraction 1 − lA must have years of education
sA = s/(1 − lA ). hA is then computed with the “standard” formula linking years of education
to human capital by way of Mincerian returns.
           For tA I simply plug in WDI data on each country’s endowment of arable land. For
the parameters, I use essentially the same calibration as in Caselli and Coleman (2001b),
which is in turn based on the work of Jorgenson and Gollop (1992). The labor share in the
USA is about 60% in both farming and non-farming. The capital share in agriculture is
about 21%, and the remainder is absorbed by land.
           For the 65 countries for which we can construct yA,HK and yA,HK and for which we
have measures of yA and yA , the success of the factor-only model is as reported in Table
5. Once again, the results are striking. Briefly, the factor-only model explains virtually
nothing of the observed per-capita income variance in agriculture: it’s entirely a story of
TFP diﬀerences, even more so than for aggregate GDP. Conversely, physical and human
capital inputs do a better than usual job at explaining per-worker output diﬀerences outside
of agriculture. This may be plausible, as knowledge flows are probably more eﬀective in
manufacturing or services than in agriculture. Still, the TFP scales are still tipped against
the developing countries.
           While informative, this exercise does not yet answer the development accounting
question of how much PPP income per worker variation would be observed if all countries
  63
       Instead of using a no-arbitrage condition for capital, sector specific capital inputs may be recovered using
an indiﬀerence condition for rural-urban labor flows. This condition would involve, among other things, an
“urban wage premium” compensating for costs of skill acquisition [as, for example, in Caselli and Coleman
(2001b)] or for the lower probability of finding a job, as in the celebrated model of Harris and Todaro (1970).
See Temple (2003) for an interesting calibration of the Harris-Todaro model aiming to assess the output costs
of the labor-market rigidities that lead to economic dualism.




                                                         50
                             sector             success 1    success 2
                             agriculture        0.15         0.09
                             nonagriculture     0.65         0.79


                                 Table 5: Success within sectors

had the same technology. This counter-factual PPP income per worker would be

                              i           i     i          i     i
                             yHK = PA AA yA,KH lA + PA AA yA,KH lA                              (16)

where PA and PA are the international-dollar prices of agricultural and non-agricultural
goods, and AA and AA are the eﬃciency levels in some reference country.
        Because of its additive nature, implementing equation (16) calls for an explicit choice
of values for AA and AA to keep constant as we vary country factor endowments and sectorial
                             i
composition — summarized by yA,KH  i and y i
                                  lA          li . (We did not have to choose a benchmark
                                          A,KH A
in the purely multiplicative framework of the one-sector model, because in that framework
the common level of eﬃciency disappears when taking the log-variance or the inter-percentile
ratio). Furthermore, the results will be sensitive to which country (i.e. what particular
choice of As) is chosen as a reference. Hence, the development accountant must decide
whose country’s technology will be assigned the role of the benchmark technology in the
counterfactual exercise.
        A certain degree of arbitrariness is inevitable in this choice. Nevertheless, a somewhat
plausible argument can be made that it makes sense to hold constant the technology of the
richest country in the sample; in our case, the USA. This is because in a sense this is the
most successful country, so it is interesting to know how the world income distribution would
change if all countries shared the industry TFPs of the most successful among them.
        For the reference country (the US) it is true by definition that

                                        yA = PA AA yA,KH ,

and
                                        yA = PA AA yA,KH .

Since yA and yA are known, we can back out reference values for PA AA and PA AA and
compute the counter-factual in (16). The result of this exercise, which is also the main result
of this section, is 0.37 for success1 , and 0.35 for sucess2 . In words, once again, this means that,
if all countries had the same industry-level TFPs as the US, but their observed allocation
of measurable factors to agriculture and non-agriculture, the world distribution of income
                                                 51
would be about one third as unequal as it actually is. Given that — for this sub-sample — the
corresponding success measures are 0.48 and 0.42 when the sectorial composition of GDP is
not taken into account, I conclude that taking account of diﬀerences in sectorial composition
actually decreases the share of cross-country income inequality that we can explain with a
country’s factor endowments.
             This result should have been expected, by now. In the previous subsection we have
seen that the dispersion in agricultural incomes per worker is a critical “source” of dispersion
in per-capita income. Table 5 shows, however, that almost all of the variation in agricultural
income comes from diﬀerences in agricultural TFP. It is not surprising, therefore, that we
find that — even allowing for diﬀerences in output composition — factor endowments still don’t
work as the main cause of GDP diﬀerences.
             One possible way to enhance the quantitative role of sectorial considerations is ex-
plored in a highly innovative paper by Graham and Temple (2001). Instead of assuming, as
here, that both agriculture and non-agriculture have constant returns to scale, they follow
a long tradition in development economics in hypothesizing that the former is characterized
by decreasing returns and the latter by increasing returns. As is well known these assump-
tions tend to generate multiple equilibria, and it is therefore possible to try to explain large
cross-country income diﬀerences with the argument that poor countries are in “low,” i.e. high
agriculture, i.e. low returns, equilibria; while rich countries are in industrialized equilibria and
therefore benefit from the increasing returns. The diﬃculty here is to figure out in the data
which countries are in the bad and which ones are in the good equilibrium. The contribution
of Graham and Temple is to show a very ingenious way of solving this problem. They find
that multiple equilibria explain a relatively large fraction of per capita income diﬀerences.
The lingering question is whether the significant departures from constant returns to scale
required for their result are plausible.64


7         Non-Neutral Diﬀerences
7.1         Basic Concepts and Qualitative Results
In all of the previous sections we have assumed that all diﬀerences in eﬃciency across countries
are TFP diﬀerences, as summarized by the multiplicative factor A. This implies that we
view diﬀerences in eﬃciency as factor neutral: some countries simply use all of their inputs
more eﬃciently than others. This is of course a restriction on the set of possible eﬃciency
diﬀerences. Caselli and Coleman (2004) have begun exploring a more general view, that allows
for the possibility that diﬀerences in technology show up as diﬀerences in the eﬃciency with
    64
         See also Chanda and Dalgaard (2003) for another contribution that argues for a large role of agriculture.

                                                          52
which specific factors — as opposed to all factors proportionally — are used, or even that some
countries use some factors more eﬃciently, and some less eﬃciently, than others. In other
words, a more general view of technology diﬀerences where such diﬀerences are not factor
neutral.65
          Extending the development-accounting exercise to allow for factor non neutrality in
eﬃciency diﬀerences is the object of this section. While Caselli and Coleman consider a
three-factor production function (capital, skilled labor, and unskilled labor), here I will stick
to the two-factor world (human and physical capital) of the rest of the chapter. The first
step we need to take to proceed in this direction is to replace the Cobb-Douglas restriction
— which implicitly rules out non-neutrality — with a more general production function where
non-neutral diﬀerences can be contemplated. The simplest such generalization is provided
by the CES formula:

                      Y = [α (Ak K)σ + (1 − α)(Ah Lh)σ ]1/σ           α ∈ (0, 1), σ < 1.                  (17)

In (17) Ak and Ah are the eﬃciency units delivered by one unit of physical capital and one
unit of quality-adjusted labor, respectively. If Ak is higher in one country than in another,
we say that the former country uses capital more eﬃciently. If Ah is greater, the country
uses human capital more eﬃciently. The parameters σ and α are constant across countries.
σ governs the ease of substitution between physical and human capital. The elasticity of
substitution is
                                               η = 1/(1 − σ).
The Cobb-Douglas case of the previous sections of the paper emerges as a limit for σ ap-
proaching 0 (η approaching 1). In this case, total factor productivity A converges to Aαk A1−α
                                                                                           h .
          In the factor-neutral world explored so far in this chapter, making inference about
eﬃciency diﬀerences across countries is a simple matter of solving one equation in one un-
known. Inference on non neutral diﬀerences is a bit more challenging, as equation (17) has
two unknowns: Ak and Ah . The issue, then, is to find a suitable second equation. As in
Caselli and Coleman (2003), to do so I assume that factor markets are everywhere compet-
itive. Then, if r is the user cost of capital, and if w is the market price of a unit of human
capital, the following equations will hold:

                                        r = αy 1−σ kσ−1 Aσk                                               (18)
                                       w = (1 − α)y 1−σ hσ−1 Aσh .

Given values of α and σ, and data on y, k, h, r, and w, these two equations can be solved for
the two unknowns Ak and Ah .66
 65
      See also Hsieh (2000) for some observations on this topic.
 66
      Alternatively, one could solve the system constituted by one of the factor-pricing equations and equation
                                                       53
                         Rearranging equations (18) we find the following formulas for the factor-specific eﬃ-
ciency levels
                                                       µ          ¶1/σ          µ        ¶1/σ
                                                           rk 1          y          Sk          y
                                           Ak =                            =                                                    (19)
                                                            y α          k          α           k
                                                       µ                 ¶1/σ            µ          ¶1/σ
                                                           wh 1                 y             Sh           y
                                           Ah =                                   =                          ,
                                                            y 1−α               k            1−α           h
where Sk and Sh are the shares of physical and human capital in income, respectively. To
see what these equations tell us about the way technology diﬀers across countries it is useful
to start from the case where factor shares are constant across countries, i.e. Sk and Sh are
invariant parameters. Note that this is the assumption we have maintained so far throughout
the paper, where we have set Sk to α (and consequently Sh to 1 − α). Under this assumption,
these equations have very intuitive implications: a high output-capital ratio implies that
capital is used eﬃciently, and the same for human capital.


                                                      UGA
                       4.46207




                                                                          HTI

                                                       MOZ
output-capital ratio




                                                      MDG

                                                ETH
                                                             SLE

                                                      RWA
                                                                                                    EGY

                                                          BENGHA
                                                           GMB SEN                           SLV
                                                                                            GTM
                                               BDI NER
                                                     MLI
                                                      NGA MRT          CIV
                                                     CAF TGOKEN
                                                       BFA          COM       BGD
                                                    MWI      AGO CMR
                                                             TCD           IND BOL
                                                                                 PAK
                                                                                   LKA          SYR
                                   ZAR                                      GIN PNG        PRY            MUS
                                                                NPL                        COL
                                                                                           DOM GAB ZAF
                                                                                           MAR
                                                                                HND    CPV          JOR TTO BRB
                                                                                                      URY
                                                                               NIC     IDN        TUN
                                                                                                FJI
                                                      GNB              CHN
                                                                      LSO          PHL      CRI BWA SYC
                                                                                               NAM
                                                                                               TUR
                                                                                                         CHL   TWN
                                                           ZMB COG          ZWE GUY               IRN     ARG CYP IRL USA
                                           TZA                                     JAM PERECU PANVENBRAMEXMYSPRT  GBR HKG
                                                                                                                   SWE
                                                                                                                  ESP  AUS
                                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                                                               LUX
                                                                                        ROU THA              GRC
                                                                                                               NZL
                                                                                                               KOR ISL NLD
                                                                                                                      CAN
                                                                                                                      DNKBEL
                                                                                                                         ITA
                                                                                                                       FRA
                                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                 JPNFIN
                                                                                                                      CHESGP
                                                                                                                         NOR
                       .293363
                                 6.40523                                                                                 11.3145
                                                                    log income per worker




                                                      Figure 18: Distribution of y/k
(17). The result would be identical. The properties of the constant returns to scale production function,
combined with national-account identities, imply that from any two of these equations the third follows.

                                                                          54
                                   Figure 18 plots the output-capital ratio y/k against the log of per-capita income,
and Figure 19 does the same for the output-human capital ratio, y/h. As is well known,
the output-capital ratio is decreasing in income. The output-human capital ratio, instead, is
increasing. Hence, if we continue to assume that factor shares are constant across countries,
but we allow for non-neutrality in technology diﬀerences, we reach the startling conclusion
that rich countries use human capital more eﬃciently than poor countries, but they use
physical capital less eﬃciently.67


                                                                                                                                            KWT
                                  27828



                                                                                                                                      ITA

                                                                                                                                      SGP
 output-human capital ratio




                                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                                         HKG
                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                       IRL
                                                                                                                             PRT ESPAUT
                                                                                                                                      NLD
                                                                                                                                 MLTISR USA
                                                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                                                                      AUSNOR
                                                                                                                                  ISLCHE
                                                                                                                           BHR GBR GER
                                                                                                                               TWN   CAN
                                                                                                                                   FIN
                                                                                                                         MUS CYPJPN
                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                                             GRC
                                                                                                                           SVN KOR
                                                                                                                  TUN
                                                                                                                   BRA     BRB
                                                                                                                        MYS NZL
                                                                                                                 IRN MEXARG
                                                                                                           GTM VEN TTO CHL
                                                                                                               BWA URY
                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                            SLVSYRJORZAF
                                                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                                                      SVK
                                                                                                          EGY
                                                                                                           SWZ
                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                         COL
                                                                                                           THA
                                                                                                           CRI FJI
                                                                                                         PRY PAN
                                                                                                    IDN ECU     POL
                                                                                             PNG
                                                                                              PAK
                                                                                           BGD       PER   RUS
                                                                                             HNDJAM
                                                                                                LKA ROU
                                                                                                GUY    BGR
                                                                                            NIC
                                                                                         ZWEBOLPHL
                                                                                    HTI IND
                                                                               NPL
                                                                             SENCMRLSO
                                                                                    CHN
                                                                           SLE
                                                                         GMB
                                                                    MOZ
                                                                   MLI  BEN
                                                                       TGO GHACOG
                                                                          KEN
                                                             ETH NER
                                                                   RWA
                                                                   CAF
                                                                   UGA
                                                                  MWI    ZMB
                                            ZAR
                                405.276
                                          6.40523                                                                                   11.0263
                                                                               log income per worker




                                                                Figure 19: Distribution of y/h

                                   Consider now relaxing the assumption of constant factor shares. Clearly our conclu-
sions would be unchanged if the factor shares, while not constant, were not systematically
related with income. Our knowledge of cross-country patterns in factor shares is somewhat
            67
                              Notice that, in the neutral world of the first part of the chapter, one way of writing total factor productivity
is as                                                                         ³ ´α ³ ´1−α
                                                  y     y
                                                              .         A=
                                                  k     h
Hence, our conclusion there that rich countries are more eﬃcient was based on the fact that the increasing
pattern of (y/h)1−α more than compensates for the decreasing pattern in (y/k)α .

                                                                                  55
                                                                                    ECU    BWA
                       .55
                                                COG

                                                                                    PRY



                                                                                               VEN                             SGP

                                                                                                     MEX
                                                                              PER
                                                                                                      MUS                      HKG
                                                                                    MARSLV       URY
 Capital Share




                                                                        PHL                         CHL
                                                                        JAM
                                                                                                                               NOR
                                                                                             TUN ZAF

                                                                                               JOR
                                                                                    COL                            KOR
                                                                                                           MYS
                                                                  BOL                                              NZLESP NLD
                                                        CIV                                                          JPN CAN
                                                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                                      TTO
                                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                                                            AUT
                                                                                                                         FINDNKITA
                                          ZMB                                                                    PRT
                                                                                      CRIPAN                               IRL
                                                                                                                               USA
                                                                                                                          FRABEL
                               BDI                                                                                     GBR
                                                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                     EGY                               SWE
                                                                        LKA
                                                                                                                 GRC
                       .21
                             7.19744                                                                                       10.9494
                                                              log income per worker




                                                Figure 20: Distribution of Sk


limited. The only thing we are quite sure of is that in the US this share has historically
been rather stable, at around 1/3. When it comes to cross-country comparisons, however,
we are on shakier ground. Traditionally, the capital share — as measured in the national
accounts — is calculated as a residual after employee compensation has been taken out. With
this method, Sk is generally found to be higher in poor countries than in rich countries.
Recently, however, Gollin (2002), and Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2001) have convincingly
criticized the construction of the traditional estimates of the capital share, and have pro-
vided revised estimates that — among other things — attempt to include the labor component
of self-employment income in the labor share. These estimates are plotted in Figure 20.68
Figure 20 shows essentially no systematic pattern of cross-country variation in capital shares.
      68
                 The numbers are from Table X in Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2001). We follow their advice and use
the value in column “Actual OSPUE” whenever available; “Imputed OSPUE” when “Actual OSPUE” is
unavailable but “Imputed OSPUE” is; and “LF” when the two OSPUE measuresd are unavailable. Of course
Bernanke and Gurkaynak (2001) are reporting labor income, so our measure is 1 minus the numbers in the
table.


                                                                56
This supports our preliminary finding: the eﬃciency of capital is higher in poor countries,
and the eﬃciency of (quality adjusted) labor is higher in rich ones!
       Unfortunately, the data set on capital shares is small — only 54 observations — and
developed economies are over-represented. Furthermore, many untested assumptions have
been used to develop these estimates. Hence, the conclusion that capital shares are not
systematically related to labor productivity is not iron tight. What would it take then to
reverse the startling result that poor countries are more eﬃcient users of capital?
       If factor shares vary systematically with per-worker income, then it becomes critical
to know what is the elasticity of substitution η = 1/(1 − σ). Suppose that Sk is higher in rich
countries. If σ > 0 (i.e. η > 1, or capital and human capital are good substitutes relative to
the Cobb-Douglas case), then Ak may conceivably become increasing in income [if (Sk )1/σ
grows “faster” than y/k falls]. In this case, however, since Sh = 1 − Sk the result on Ah could
also possibly be overturned. If σ < 0 (or η < 1) the results from the constant-share case
would be reinforced. Symmetrically, if Sk is decreasing in income, the negative (positive)
correlation between Ak (Ah ) and y would be reinforced for σ > 0 (η > 1), and weakened (and
possibly overturned) if σ < 0 (η < 1). These observations are summarized in Table 6. Each
cell of the table lists the predicted sign (positive, negative, or ambiguous) for the correlation
between Ak and y (first term) and between Ah and y (second term), conditional on the
observed patterns of y/k and y/h, under various assumptions on σ, and on the correlation
between Sk and y.

             Table 6: Predicted Correlations between Ak and y, and Ah and y

                             Corr(Sk , y) > 0    Corr(Sk , y) = 0   Corr(Sk , y) < 0
            σ > 0 (η > 1)           ?,?               −, +               −, +
            σ < 0 (η < 1)          −, +               −, +                ?,?


       The intuition for the way observed factor shares modify our predictions on cross-
country eﬃciency patterns is simple. If σ > 0 the two factors are good substitutes. Because
the two factors are good substitutes, it makes sense to try to increase the usage of the most
eﬃcient factor. Hence, when σ > 0 demand will concentrate on the factor with high eﬃciency,
leading to a high share in income for this factor. Conversely, then, with σ > 0, when we
observe a high income share for factor x we can infer that this factor is eﬃcient. On the other
hand, if σ < 0 the two factors are poor substitutes. In this case, allocative eﬃciency calls for
boosting the overall eﬃciency units provided by the low-eﬃciency factor. This increases the
income share of this factor. Hence, with σ < 0, a high income share for factor x signals that
this factor is used ineﬃciently.
                                                57
           In sum, skepticism about the greater capital eﬃciency of poor countries is authorized
if one believes that there is a strong positive correlation between Sk and income and η > 1;
or if one believes that there is a strong negative correlation between Sk and y and η < 1. We
have seen what the data say about Sk (no correlation): what about η?
           Hamermesh (1986) provides an exhaustive survey, featuring firm, industry, and country-
level studies, both cross-sectional and time series. Unfortunately, he reports a dismayingly
wide range of estimates, both greater and less than one. To my knowledge, additional recent
contributions have not helped narrowing down the region in which η may fall.69 Since pub-
lished estimates of η are neither stable, nor reliable, one could, perhaps, turn to theoretical
considerations. There is of course a tradition of arguing that long-run elasticities are higher
than short-run ones, and macro-economic higher than micro-economic. Ventura (1997) is
a particularly convincing recent example. For our purposes it clearly seems appropriate to
focus on a long-run, aggregate interpretation of the elasticity. However, it is not clear that
even in this case these arguments put a lower bound on η: even accepting that it is higher
than a microeconomic, short-run elasticity, does not necessarily imply that it is, say, greater
than 1.
           For the countries with available data, we can actually compute the implied values
of Ak and As from equation (19) for diﬀerent values of the elasticity of substitution η. For
each of these implied set of estimates, in Table 7 we report the coeﬃcients of regressions
of log(Ak ) and log(Ah ) on log(y) (t-statistics in parenthesis).70 The results from the table
confirm that the available data is consistent with the situation in the middle column of Table
6: irrespective of the value of η, rich countries seem to use capital less eﬃciently than poor
ones. However, they use human capital more eﬃciently. These relationships are almost always
statistically significant, except for η = 0.9. This is not surprising, since η = 0.9 is “almost”
Cobb-Douglas, and in this limiting case Ak and Ah are not independently identifiable. The
  69
       Aside from the huge dispersion in existing estimates of η, the non-neutrality approach we follow here
points to an intrinsic pitfall in attempting to identifying this parameter. Specifically, empirical investigations
of the elasticity of substitution implicitly assume that there is no variation across observations in the relative
eﬃciency of labor and capital. If Ak and Ah vary across observations, then the eﬀective input Ak k and Ah h
will be mis-measured, perhaps wildly. I believe this may indeed be the reason why estimates of η are so
unstable. I think this point is implicit in the analysis of Diamond, McFadden, and Rodriguez (1978). If the
induced measurement error is random, it seems the bias in the estimate of η should be upwards. Intuitively,
observations with very diﬀerent input combinatons will appear to have similar output levels, something that
is consistent with a high elasticity of substitution. However, if the As vary systematically, the bias could also
be downward. Suppose, for example, that Ax and x are positively correlated across observations. Then the
data will tend to understate the true variation in eﬀective input, so that less substitutability will appear to
be required to explain the observed variation in output.
  70
     In these regressions there are 52 observations for log(Ak ) and 49 for log(Ah ). Also notice that, from
equations 19, the As are identified up to the common multiplicative constants α1/σ and (1 − α)1/σ .

                                                       58
                          Table 7: Regressions of log(Ak ) and log(Ah ) on log(y)

            Dep. Var.        η = .1      η = .5     η = .9        η = 1.1   η = 1.5     η=2         η = 50
            log(Ak )          -.32        -.27        -.15         -.89      -.48        -.43        -.37
                             (5.98)      (4.01)      (.39)        (1.99)    (3.62)      (4.44)      (5.67)
            log(As )           .80         .74        .20          1.55      1.01         .95         .88
                            (28.41)     (17.56)      (.81)        (5.33)    (12.72)    (17.18)     (25.47)



coeﬃcients are also sizable, with a 10 percent increase in income per worker being associated
with up to a 9 percent decline in Ak , and even larger increases in Ah .
            Everything considered, the result that poor countries use capital more eﬃciently than
rich ones seems surprisingly robust. Needless to say, it is also rather stunning — especially
if one is used to think about the world in TFP (factor neutral) terms. It is reminiscent
of the findings of Caselli and Coleman (2003), that poor countries use unskilled labor more
eﬃciently. In that paper, a possible explanation is constructed around the idea of appropriate
technology. Perhaps countries face a menu of technology choices - some of which are more
complementary with some of their endowments than others. It may be possible to construct
a similar explanation for the facts documented in this section. In that explanation, rich
countries would choose technologies that are complementary with human capital, while poor
countries choose technologies that are complementary with physical capital.

7.2       Development Accounting with Non-Neutral Diﬀerences
Development accounting asks how the observed distribution of GDP per worker compares to
the distribution that would obtain if all countries had the same technology. As is clear from
equation (17), we are again in the situation in which — unlike in the simple TFP framework
— the answer to this question will not be insensitive to which particular pair of values of Ak
and Ah are plugged in. As we did in the previous subsection, and for the same reasons, I
choose as the benchmark country the USA. Hence, I first compute the US Ak and Ah from
equations (19), and then I plug these numbers in equation (17) for each country, and obtain
measures of success of a model where all countries use the same (US) technology.71
            Figure 21 plots the success of the factor-only model when all countries use the tech-
nology of the United States. Note that our measures of success converge — as they should — to
those of the factor-neutral (Cobb-Douglas) model for η converging to 1. Success of the factor-
  71
       More precisely, I compute αAσk = Sk,U S (yU S /kU S )σ , and (1 − α)Aσh = Sh,U S (yU S /hU S )σ , and plug these
expressions in equation (17).

                                                             59
                      s1                                         s2


         1

         .9

         .8

         .7

         .6

         .5

         .4

         .3

         .2

         .1

         0
              0       .2     .4      .6      .8        1      1.2      1.4   1.6   1.8     2
                                          Elasticity of Substitution




                  Figure 21: Success with Non-Neutral Technlogy Diﬀerences


only model is also systematically decreasing with the value of the elasticity of substitution, η.
To see why this is so recall that the lower is η the closer the production function becomes to
the Leontief case. Also notice that Figures 18 and 19 imply that poor countries are relatively
abundant in human capital: the ratio h/k is decreasing with per-capita income. Finally,
recall that the US uses human-capital relatively eﬃciently. Hence, the ratio Ah,U S h/Ak,U S k
is extremely high in poor countries, suggesting that much “eﬀective human capital” in these
countries would be unproductive, if not entirely wasted, in the limiting Leontief case. This
“waste” may explain the low GDP of poor countries without having to invoke low As, i.e.
it leads to greater success of the factor-only model. On the other side of η = 1, we tend to
approach the linear production function. The closer we are to this case, the less a dispropor-
tionate Ah h/Ak k ratio hurts a country’s productivity, so the factor-only model performs less
and less well. Something else is required to explain why GDP is so low.
       The most remarkable finding of Figure 21, however, is quantitative: namely, not only
for elasticities of substitution less than 1 does the model with non neutral technology outper-
forms the Cobb-Douglas one, but there is a range of elasticities such that the performance
                                               60
of the model is extremely good. Indeed, an elasticity of 0.5 delivers a perfect fit for the
factor-only model! This is remarkable because an elasticity of 0.5 — given our current state
of knowledge — is not particularly implausible.72
           One could object to the exercise we just reported that the counter-factual choice of
technology — all countries using the US technology — is not sensible. For, we know from
the previous section that — assuming our factor share data to be dependable — countries are
observed to use technologies that cannot be ranked: some technologies boost the productivity
of physical capital, some others of human capital. Therefore, one may speculate that — given
the choice — poor countries would not necessarily choose to use the US technology. Instead,
they would choose the technology most appropriate given their factor endowments.
           In order to address this point, we now treat the observed (Ak , Ah ) combinations from
the previous sub-section as a “menu” of available technologies. One could think of this
menu as a summary of the world’s technical knowledge, each observed (Ak , Ah ) pair being a
particular blueprint to generate output from physical and human capital. I then re-interpret
the counter-factual of no technology diﬀerences as one where all countries have access to the
same menu of technologies; ask what technology from this menu would each country choose;
and compute the counter-factual world income distribution when all countries choose their
appropriate technology (from the set of available ones). The appropriate technology is the
output-maximizing one.73
           The results from this alternative counter-factual experiment are plotted in Figure 22.
Here, for each value of η, I have computed from equations (19) the implied values of Ak and
Ah for each country with complete data — including data on the factor shares Sk and Sh .
This gave us 49 “observed” technologies. For each country in our 93-country sample, then, I
have “chosen” from this menu of 49 the appropriate technology, and I have computed success
under the assumption that each country uses this output-maximizing choice. As can be seen,
the results preserve the broad qualitative features of those of Figure 21, but quantitatively
the factor-only model does much less well. In particular, (almost) complete success only
occurs if the technology is Leontief.
           The intuition for this change in results is simple. Given the observed wide disparity
in factor proportions, when countries can choose their technology appropriately they will in
general choose diﬀerent (Ak , Ah ) combinations. In particular, few poor countries will find it
optimal to use the technology observed in the USA. Indeed, countries with unfavorable factor
endowments will be able to partially remedy by choosing technology appropriately. Hence,
  72
       Elasticities less than 0.5 imply an income dispersion under the common-technology assumption that are
even greater than the observed ones.
  73
     See Caselli and Coleman (2004) for a model where the technology choice is decentralized at the level of
firms, and the equilibrium aggregate technology is the GDP-maximizing one.

                                                      61
                     s1                                         s2

         1

        .9

        .8

        .7

        .6

        .5

        .4

        .3

        .2

        .1

         0
              0      .2     .4      .6      .8        1      1.2      1.4   1.6   1.8    2
                                         Elasticity of Substitution




              Figure 22: Success with Non-Neutral but Appropriate Technology


factor endowments do not have as much explanatory power for income diﬀerences as they do
when all countries are forced to use the same (US) technology.
       Even when countries choose technology, however, the measures of success are suf-
ficiently sensitive to the choice of the elasticity of substitution that the answer to the
development-accounting question can change substantially. It is therefore appropriate to
conclude that gathering more information on this elasticity is a high priority for development
accounting.


8    Conclusions
Development accounting is a powerful tool to getting started thinking about the sources of
income diﬀerences across countries. As of now, the answer to the development-accounting
question — do observed diﬀerences in the factors employed in production explain most of
the cross-country variation in income — is: no, way no. This negative answer is robust to
attempts to improve the measurement of human capital by allowing for diﬀerences in the

                                              62
quality of schooling and in health status of the population; to attempts to account for the
age composition of the capital stock; to sectorial disaggregations of output; and to several
other robustness checks.
        On the other hand, incomplete knowledge about certain key parameters that describe
the relationship between inputs and outputs implies that the jury should be treated as being
still out. For one thing, depending on the elasticity of substitution between capital of diﬀerent
types, the observed wild heterogeneity in the composition of the capital stock by type of
equipment could turn out to be a key proximate determinant of income diﬀerences. For
another, depending on the elasticity of substitution between physical and human capital, we
may find that all is needed for these factors to explain a large fraction of income inequality is
a departure from Cobb-Douglas. Disaggregating the government sector out of the data may
also potentially reduce the unexplained component of GDP. There is no deep reason why
we should not be able to make progress on these three fronts, so that my assessment of the
future of this research enterprise is optimistic.




                                               63
                                       References

       Acemoglu, D., and J. Angrist (2000), “How Large Are Human Capital Externalities?
Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws”, in: B.S. Bernanke, and K. Rogoﬀ, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2000 (MIT Press, Cambridge) 9-59.
       Aiyar, S., and C-J. Dalgaard (2002), “Total Factor Productivity Revisited: A Dual
Approach to Levels-Accounting”, Working Paper (Brown University).
       Altonji, J.G., and T.A. Dunn (1996), “The Eﬀects of Family Characteristics on the
Return to Education”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 78(4):692-704.
       Baily, M.N., and R.M. Solow (2001), “International Productivity Comparisons Built
from the Firm Level” Journal of Economic Perspectives 15(3):151-172.
       Barro, R.J. and J. Lee (2001): “International Data on Educational Attainment: Up-
dates and Implications,” Oxford Economic Papers, 53 (3), 541-563 (July).
       Behrman, J.R. and M. R. Rosenzweig (2004): “Returns to Birthweight,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 86(2): 586-601.
       Bernanke, B.S., and R.S. Gurkaynak (2001), “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw,
Romer, and Weil Seriously”, in: B.S. Bernanke, and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds, NBER Macroeco-
nomics Annual 2001 (MIT Press, Cambridge)
       Bils, M., and Klenow, P.J. (2000), “Does Schooling Cause Growth”, The American
Economic Review 90(5):1160-1183.
       Card, D. (1999), “The Causal Eﬀect of Education on Earnings”, in: Ashenfelter, O.,
and Card, D., eds., Handbook of Labor Economics Volume 3A., (North-Holland, Amsterdam)
1801-1863.
       Card, D., and A. Krueger (1996), “Labor Market Eﬀects of School Quality: Theory
and Evidence”, in: Burtless, G. ed., Does Money Matter? The Eﬀect of School Resources on
Student Achievement and Adult Success (Brookings Institute, Wasinghton D. C.).
       Caselli, F., and W.J. Coleman (2001a), “Cross-Country Technology Diﬀusion: The
Case of Computers”, American Economic Review 91(2):328-335.
       Caselli, F., and W.J. Coleman (2001b), “The U.S. Structural Transformation and
Regional Convergence: A Reinterpretation”, Journal of Political Economy 109(3):584-616.
       Caselli, F., and W.J. Coleman (2004), “The World Technology Frontier”, Working
Paper (Harvard University).
       Caselli, F., G. Esquivel, and F. Lefort (1996), “Reopening the Convergence Debate:
A New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics”, Journal of Economic Growth 1(3):363-389.
       Caselli, F. and P. Malhotra (2004): “Natural Disasters and Growth: from Thought
Experiment to Natural Experiment,” working paper, Harvard University.
       Caselli, F. and S. Tenreyro (2004), “Is Poland the Next Spain?,” working paper,
                                            64
Harvard University.
       Caselli, F., and D. Wilson (2004), “Importing Technology”, Journal of Monetary
Economics, 51(1), 1-32.
       Chanda, A., and C.-J. Dalgaard (2003) “Dual Economies and International TFP
Diﬀerences”, Working Paper (Louisiana State University).
       Christensen, L.R., D. Cummings, and D.W. Jorgenson (1981), “Relative Productivity
Levels, 1947-1973: An International Comparison”, European Economic Review 16(1):61-94.
       Clark, C. (1940), “The Morphology of Economic Growth”, in: C. Clark (ed.): The
Conditions of Economic Progress (Macmillan, London) 337-373.
       Clark, G. (1987), “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed? Lessons From the Cotton
Mills”, Journal of Economic History 47:141-173.
       Conrad, K., and D.W. Jorgenson (1985), “Sectoral Productivity Gaps between the
United States, Japan and Germany, 1960-1979” in: H. Giersch, ed., Probleme und Perspek-
tiven der weltwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Duncker and Humblot, Berlin) 335-347.
       Currie, J., and D. Thomas (1999),“Early test scores, socioeconomic status and future
outcomes”, Working Paper No. 6943 (NBER).
       de la Fuente, A., and R. Doménech (2002), “Human Capital in Growth Regressions:
How Much Diﬀerence Does Data Quality Make? An Update and Further Results”, CEPR
Discussion Papers No. 3587.
       Denison, E.F. (1967), Why Growth Rates Diﬀer (The Brookings Institutions, Wash-
ington, D.C.).
       Diamond, Peter, Daniel McFadden and Miguel Rodriguez (1978), “Measurement of
the Elasticity of Factor Substitution and Bias of Technical Change”, in Melvyn Fuss and
Daniel McFadden (eds.), Production Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory and Applica-
tions, Vol. II, Applications of the Theory of Production, Amsterdam, North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company.
       Duflo, E. (2001), “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction
in Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment”, American Economic Review
91(4):795-813.
       Easterly, W., and R. Levine (2001), “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts
and Growth Models”, World Bank Economic Review 15(2):177-219.
       Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2001), “Trade in Capital Goods”, European Economic
Review 45(7):1195-1235.
       Feyrer, James (2002): “Demographics and Productivity,” working paper, Dartmouth
College.
       Fisher, A. (1945), Economic Programs and Social Security (Macmillan, London).

                                            65
         Gelb, A., Knight J.B., and R.H. Sabot (1988), “Lewis through a looking glass: Public
sector employment, rent seeking, and economic growth,” World Bank.
         Gollin, D. (2002), “Getting Income Shares Right”, Journal of Political Economy
110(2):458-474.
         Gollin, D., Parente S.L., and Rogerson R. (2000), “Farm Work, Home Work and
International Productivity Diﬀerences”, Working Paper.
         Gollin, D., S.L. Parente, and R. Rogerson (2001), “Structural Transformation and
Cross-Country Income Diﬀerences”, Working Paper (University of California in Los Angeles).
         Gourinchas, P-O., and O. Jeanne (2003), “The Elusive Gains from International
Financial Integration”, Working Paper No. 9684 (NBER).
         Graham, B.S., and J. Temple (2001), “Rich nations, poor nations: how much can
multiple equilibra explain?”, Working Paper No. 76 (Center for International Development ,
Harvard University).
         Greenwood, Jeremy; Hercowitz, Zvi; Krusell, Per. Long-Run Implications of Investment-
Specific Technological Change. American Economic Review. Vol. 87 (3). p 342-62. June
1997.
         Hall, R.E., and C.I. Jones, (1999), “Why do some countries produce so much more
output per worker than others?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(1):83-116.
         Hamermesh, D. S. (1986), “The Demand for Labor in the Long Run”, in: Hand-
book of Labor Economics, Vol 1, O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. (North-Holland Press,
Amsterdam).
         Hanushek, E.A. (2003), “The Failure of Input Based Schooling Policies”, Economic
Journal 113(485):F64-98.
         Hanushek E.A., and D.D. Kimko (2000), “Schooling, Labor-Force Quality, and the
Growth of Nations”, The American Economic Review 90(5):1184-1208.
         Hanushek, E.A. (2004): “Some Simple Analytics of School Quality,” NBER WP
10229.
         Hanushek, E.A., S.G. Rivkin, and L.L. Taylor (1996), “Aggregation and the Estimated
Eﬀects of School Resources”,The Review of Economics and Statistics 78(4):611-627.
         Harrigan, J. (1997), “Technology, Factor Supplies, and International Specialization:
Estimating the Neoclassical Model”, American Economic Review 87(4):475-494.
         Harrigan, J. (1999), “Estimation of Cross-Country Diﬀerences in Aggregate Produc-
tion Functions.” Journal of International Economics, 47, 267-93.
         Harris, J. R. and Todaro, M. (1970). Migration, unemployment and development: a
two-sector analysis. American Economic Review, 60, 126-142.
         Heckman, J.J., and P.J. Klenow (1997) “Human Capital Policy” Working Paper (Uni-

                                              66
versity of Chicago).
        Heston, Alan; Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten (2002): Penn World Tables Ver-
sion 6.1. Downloadable dataset. Center for International Comparisons at the University of
Pennsylvania.
        Hill, R. (2000), “Measuring Substitution Bias in International Comparisons Based on
Additive Purchasing Power Parity Methods”, European Economic Review 44(1):45-162.
        Hsieh, C.-T. (2000), “Measuring Biased Technology”, Working Paper (Princeton Uni-
versity).
        Hulten, Charles R. (1996): “Infrastructure Capital and Economic Growth: How Well
You Use It May Be More Important Than How Much You Have.” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Inc, NBER Working Papers: 5847.
        Hsieh, C-T., and P.J. Klenow (2003), “Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity”,
Working Paper No. 9701 (NBER).
        Islam, N. (1995), “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach”, The Quarterly Jour-
nal of Economics 110:1127-1170.
        Johnson, G.E., and F.P. Staﬀord (1973), “Social Returns to Quantity and Quality of
Schooling”, Journal of Human Resources 8(2):139-155.
        Jorgenson, D. W. (1961), “The Development of a Dual Economy”, Economic Journal
(71):309-334.
        Jorgenson, D.W. (1995a): “Productivity. Volume 1: Postwar U.S. Economic Growth.”
MIT Press.
        Jorgenson, D.W. (1995b): “Productivity. Volume 2: International Comparisons of
Economic Growth.” MIT Press.
        Jorgenson, D.W., and F.M. Gollop (1992), “Productivity Growth in U.S. Agriculture:
A Postwar Perspective”, American Journal of Agricultural Economics 74 (3):745-750.
        Jovanovic and Rob (1997): “Solow v. Solow: Machine Prices and Development,”
unpublished, New York University.
        King, R.G., and R. Levine (1994), “Capital Fundamentalism, Economic Development,
and Economic Growth”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 40(0):259-
292.
        Klenow, P.J., and A. Rodriguez-Clare (1997), “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?”, in: B.S. Bernanke, and J.J. Rotemberg, eds., NBER
macroeconomics annual 1997 (MIT Press, Cambridge) 73-103.
        Knight, M., N. Loyaza, and D. Villanueva (1993), “Testing the Neoclassical Theory
of Economic Growth”, IMF Staﬀ Papers 40(3):512-541.
        Krueger, A.B. (2000), “Economic Considerations and Class Size”, Working Paper No.

                                            67
8875 (NBER).
       Kuznets, S. (1966), Modern economic growth (Yale University Press, New Haven).
       Lee, J-W., and R.J. Barro (2001), “Schooling Quality in a Cross-Section of Countries”,
Economica 68:465-488.
       Lewis, W.A. (1954), “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor”,
Manchester School of Economics and Social Studies 22:139-151.
       Lutz, H. (2002), “How Important Is Human Capital for Development? Evidence from
Immigrant Earnings”, American Economic Review 92(1):198-219.
       Mankiw, N.G., D. Romer, and D.N. Weil (1992), “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(2):407-437.
       Mateos-Planas, X. Schooling and Distortions in a Vintage Capital Model. University
of Southampton - Department of Economics, University of Southampton - Department of
Economics. p 40 pages. 2000.
       McGrattan, E.R., and J.A. Schmitz, Jr. (1999), “Explaining Cross-Country Income
Diﬀerences”, in: Taylor, J.B., and Woodford, M., eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics Volume
1A., (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 669-737.
       Murnane, R.J., J.B. Willett, and F. Levy (1995), “The Growing Importance of Cog-
nitive Skills in Wage Determination”, The Review of Economics and Statistics 77(2):251-266.
       Murphy, K., Shleifer, A., and R. Vishny (1991): “The Allocation of Talent: Implica-
tions for Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106 (2): 503-530.
       Neal, D.A., and W. R. Johnson (1996), “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-
White Wage Diﬀerences”, Journal of Political Economy 104(5):869-895.
       Nurske, R. (1953), Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries (Ox-
ford University Press, New York).
       Parente, Stephen L. (2000): Learning-by-Using and the Switch to Better Machines.
Review of Economic Dynamics. Vol. 3 (4). p 675-703. October.
       Parente, S.L., R. Rogerson, and R. Wright (2000), “Homework in Development Eco-
nomics: Household Production and the Wealth of Nations”, Journal of Political Economy
108(4):680-687.
       Rao, P. D.S. (1993), Intercountry comparisons of agricultural output and productivity,
Fao Economic and Social Development Paper (FAO, Rome).
       Prescott, E.C. (1998), “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity”, Interna-
tional Economic Review 39(3):525-551.
       Pritchett, L. (2000), “The Tyranny of Concepts: CUDIE (Cumulated, Depreciated,
Investment Eﬀort) Is Not Capital,” Journal of Economic Growth 5(4): 361-84.
       Pritchett, L. (2003), “Does learning to add up add up? The returns to schooling in

                                            68
aggregate data,” draft chapter for Handbook of Education Economics, Harvard University.
        Psacharopulos, G. (1994), “Returns to investment in education: A global update”,
World Development 22(9):1325-1343.
        Restuccia, D., D.T. Yang, and X. Zhu (2003), “Agriculture and Aggregate Produc-
tivity: A Quantitative Cross-Country Analysis”, Working Paper (University of Toronto, Eco-
nomics Department).
        Rodriguez-Clare, A. (1996): “The Role of Trade in Technology Diﬀusion,” Minneapo-
lis Fed Working Paper 114.
        Rostow, W. W. (1960), The Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Mani-
festo (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA).
        Schmitz, Jr., J.A. (2001), “What Determines Labor Productivity?: Lessons From the
Dramatic Recovery of the U.S. and Canadian Iron-ore Industries”, Staﬀ Report 286, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.
        Shastry, G.K., and D.N. Weil (2003), “How much of Cross-Country Income Variation
is Explained by Health?”, Journal of the European Economic Association, April-May 1(2-3),
387-396.
        Solow (1959): “Investment and Technical Progress,” in Mathematical Methods in the
Social Sciences, (Arrow, Karlin, and Suppes, eds.), Stanford University Press.
        Summers, R., and A. Heston, (1991), “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An expanded
set of international comparisons, 1950-1988”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 101(2):327-
368.
        Temple, J. (2003): “Dualism and Aggregate Productivity,” unpublished, University
of Bristol.
        Ventura, J. (1997), “Growth and Interdependence”, The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 112(1):57-84.
        Wagner, K., and B. van Ark, eds. (1996), International Productivity Diﬀerences:
Measurement and Explanations (North-Holland, Amsterdam).
        Weil, D.N. (2001), “Accounting for the Eﬀect of Health on Economic Growth”, Work-
ing Paper (Brown University).
        Wilson, D.J. (2004), “Cross-Country Diﬀerences in Capital Composition”, forthcom-
ing in FRBSF Economic Letter.




                                            69
