NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHARGING Nox EMITTERS FOR HEALTH DAMAGES:
AN EXPLORATORY ANALYSIS
Denise L. Mauzerall
Babar Sultan
Namsoug Kim
David F. Bradford
Working Paper 10824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10824
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Denise L. Mauzerall, Babar Sultan, Namsoug Kinm, and David F. Bradford. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Charging Nox Emitters for Health Damages: An Exploratory Analysis
Denise L. Mauzerall, Babar Sultan, Namsoug Kinm, and David F. Bradford
NBER Working Paper No. 10824
October 2004
JEL No. Q5, H1

ABSTRACT
We present a proof-of-concept analysis of the measurement of the health damage of ozone (O3)
produced from nitrogen oxides (NOx = NO + NO2) emitted by individual large point sources in the
eastern United States. We use a regional atmospheric model of the eastern United States, the
Comprehensive Air Quality Model with Extensions (CAMx), to quantify the variable impact that
a fixed quantity of NOx emitted from individual sources can have on the downwind concentration
of surface O3, depending on temperature and local biogenic hydrocarbon emissions. We also
examine the dependence of resulting ozone-related health damages on the size of the exposed
population. The investigation is relevant to the increasingly widely used “cap and trade” approach
to NOx regulation, which presumes that shifts of emissions over time and space, holding the total
fixed over the course of the summer O3 season, will have minimal effect on the environmental
outcome. By contrast, we show that a shift of a unit of NOx emissions from one place or time to
another could result in large changes in the health effects due to ozone formation and exposure. We
indicate how the type of modeling carried out here might be used to attach externality-correcting
prices to emissions. Charging emitters fees that are commensurate with the damage caused by their
NOx emissions would create an incentive for emitters to reduce emissions at times and in locations
where they cause the largest damage.
Denise Mauzerall
Science, Technology and
Environmental Policy Program
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Namsoug Kim
Science, Technology and
Environmental Policy Program
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

Babar Sultan
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544

David F. Bradford
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
bradford@princeton.edu

1. Introduction
Pollution in economic theory is essentially defined by externalities, negative impacts of
one economic agent on others that are not reflected in market prices. An important input to
corrective policy is the size of the externality, an estimation of the amount of damage done by
the externality-causing action. In this paper we lay out a method of estimating the damage to
human health due to exposure to ozone (O3) formed as a result of emission of nitrogen oxides
(NOx = NO + NO2) from individual large stationary sources in the eastern United States. We
also present quantitative estimates for cases selected to draw attention to sources of variation in
health damage that the present thrust of NOx emissions regulation neglects. We apply the
modifier “proof of concept” to the estimates to reflect the need for further testing and refinement
of the modeling components and for incorporating effects other than O3 -exposure. The longer
term objective is to associate an estimate of external costs due to emissions from any point
source as a function of the prevailing weather conditions and populations exposed. The initial
calculations suggest the possibility of substantial gains (ie. lower total damages for a given
quantity of emissions) from regulatory redesign.
NOx contributes to a wide range of environmental effects including the formation of acid
rain (via formation of nitric acid), PM2.5 (via formation of secondary particulates such as
ammonium nitrate), regional haze, eutrophication of aquatic ecosystems, and elevated O3
concentrations. Due to recent regulatory emphasis on controlling O3 through NOx “cap-andtrade” programs, we focus here on the contribution of NOx emissions from point sources to
ambient O3 concentrations and the resultant damage to human health.
“Cap and trade” is a mechanism for regulating NOx emissions, whereby a limit, or cap, is
placed on total emissions from large point sources (typically during the “ozone season” from
May to October each year). Regulated sources (mostly electric power generating plants) are
obliged to have an allowance for each unit (ton) of NOx emitted. In practice, allowances are
initially allocated to sources based on their historical operating levels. A source that does not
own sufficient allowances for its needs can purchase them from others at a price agreed upon by
the trading parties. The trading of allowances is expected to lower the total cost of whatever level

1

of emissions control is embodied in the cap relative to a prescriptive type of regulatory control.
A premise of such a system is that, because the total emissions are unaffected, such an exchange
has no environmental significance. However, this premise may not be realized in any given
situation and when it fails an exchange of allowances may have either positive or negative
environmental effects.. Our damage estimates allow us to isolate instances where a shift in NOx
emissions can have large effects on environmental damage.
To estimate the damages to human health resulting from NOx emissions we use a model
of the chemical and transport processes in the troposphere to calculate the increase in O3
concentration, at each time and location, that results from a given incremental quantity of NOx
emitted from a power plant under different conditions. These O3 concentration changes are
combined with geographically specific demographic data to estimate the increase in mortality
and respiratory illness that results from that increase in O3. Specifically, we examine how
temperature variations within a single summer month can have a significant effect on the
quantity of O3 produced from a unit of NOx. We also examine how the same quantity of NOx
emissions from a power plant can result in very different O3 production depending on the
quantity of biogenic hydrocarbons emitted in the surrounding region. Finally, we show how the
damage that elevated O3 concentrations cause is proportional to the size of the exposed
population.
In the section relating these exercises to the design of policy, we draw attention to the
standard economic argument for presenting firms with the “right” prices of the resources they
use. In this case the resource used is NOx emissions, for which, in the locations we study, the
price charged is a combination of the price of emission allowances and the implicit price effect
of applicable environmental regulations. The current regulatory regime diverges from one that
would connect NOx emission choices with their economic consequences in at least two respects.
First, the present regulatory regime gives little systematic incentive to shift NOx emissions from
times and places where it has a large negative externality in the form of health impacts to times
and places where the externality is smaller. Our analysis describes the benefits of considering
this variability. Second, the regulatory system is focused on avoiding exceedences of limits on
ambient concentrations in order to comply with the National Ambient Air Quality Standards

2

(NAAQS). The epidemiological studies on which we base our estimates of damages indicate
that health impacts increase linearly with increasing concentration [EPA, 2003; Steib et al.,
2002]. A threshold limit on ambient O3 concentration is a related but distinct objective to the
avoidance of mortality and morbidity that a standard economic approach would imply because it
is not concerned with damages which result from exposures to concentrations below the
NAAQS.
In section 2 we provide background on the science of O3 formation from NOx emissions
and on the regulatory history of NOx and O3. In section 3 we describe CAMx (Comprehensive
Air Quality Model with Extensions), the regional air quality model we use to quantify the O3
produced from NOx emitted from point sources, evaluate its ability to reproduce observed O3
concentrations, and describe the method we use to quantify morbidities and mortalities resulting
from O3 exposure. Section 4 uses CAMx to demonstrate the differences in O3 production
resulting from variability in local temperature and biogenic hydrocarbon emissions, as well as
the importance of the location of high population densities relative to emission sites in
determining resulting mortality and respiratory morbidity. These exercises demonstrate the
potential environmental impact of an exchange of emissions from one time, place, or weather
condition to another, expressed in terms of lives lost or sickness experienced. In the fifth section
we estimate the monetary value of these environmental impacts, using valuation factors taken
from the literature. Section 6 discusses the policy advantages of a damage based incentive
system to control NOx emissions from point sources. Section 7 summarizes our conclusions and
highlights needed future research.
2. Scientific and Regulatory Background
2.1. Ozone Chemistry
O3 is a pollutant that is formed in the lower atmosphere (troposphere) from a complex
series of sunlight-driven reactions between NOx, carbon monoxide (CO), volatile organic
compounds (VOCs) which are largely hydrocarbons, and methane (CH4). The primary source of
NOx to the troposphere is fossil-fuel combustion. In 1998 in the United States, electric utilities
3

accounted for 25% of total NOx emissions, transportation for 53% and industrial sources for 12%
[EPA, 2000]. VOCs are emitted from a range of human activities, including fossil-fuel
combustion, direct evaporation of fuel and solvents, and chemical manufacturing. Terrestrial
vegetation also provides a large natural source of hydrocarbons in summer with isoprene being
the biogenic hydrocarbon emitted in the largest quantity. The emission of biogenic hydrocarbons
varies greatly by location as indicated in Figure1 and increases with temperature. Difficulty
regulating O3 occurs because in regions of high NOx (primarily urban centers and power plant
plumes), O3 formation is limited by the availability of hydrocarbons. In regions of low NOx
(primarily rural areas with abundant emission of natural hydrocarbons), O3 formation is limited
by the availability of NOx [Sillman et al., 1990].
Ozone production from NOx emitted in power plant plumes varies depending on the
availability of hydrocarbons and meteorological conditions. A power plant plume contains large
quantities of NOx, little CO and virtually no VOCs. Hence O3 production from NOx in a power
plant plume is limited by the availability of VOCs in the surrounding environment as it dilutes.
Data from aircraft transects of power plant plumes indicate that higher availability of biogenic
hydrocarbons, principally isoprene, result in higher quantities of O3 produced from the NOx in
the plume [Ryerson et al., 2001]. However, large concentrated plumes can result in less net O3
formation than small plumes per NOx molecule emitted because of the more rapid conversion of
NOx in concentrated plumes to HNO3 [Ryerson et al., 2001]. Hence, in our later analysis all of
our cases use power plants of approximately the same size.
In addition, O3 production occurs more rapidly under conditions of stagnant high pressure
which are frequently accompanied by high temperatures and sunny conditions [Logan, 1989;
Vukovich, 1995]. As a result, the probability of exceeding the NAAQS for O3 increases with
daily maximum temperature [Lin et al., 2001]. In our analysis temperature is used as a proxy for
stagnant meteorological conditions.
2.2. NOx and O3 regulatory history
Legislative and regulatory efforts to control ambient O3 concentrations started with the
passage of the 1970 Clean Air Act (CAA). In 1971 EPA established a NAAQS for O3 of a 1-

4

hour maximum daily average concentration not to exceed 0.08ppm which in 1979 was revised to
0.12ppm [EPA, 2004a]. Based on scientific evidence of the adverse effect of O3 on health, in
1997 EPA again revised the O3 NAAQS and required that a 3-year average of the annual fourth
highest daily 8-hour average concentration not exceed 0.08 ppm [EPA, 2004a; NRC, 2004].
Under the CAA, a state with monitoring stations that fail to meet the NAAQS is regarded as “out
of attainment” and is obliged to specify in its State Implementation Plan (SIP) how it will attain
the NAAQS in the future. No incentive presently exists to reduce O3 further if a state is in
compliance. O3 has a lifetime of approximately 2 days in the boundary layer of the eastern
United States in summer [Fiore et al., 2002] and hence may be transported across state
boundaries. Inter-state transport can make it difficult for states that fail to meet the NAAQS to
become compliant by simply reducing in-state emissions.
Economists have been encouraging the use of market-based policies for controlling
pollution as an alternative to more traditional command-and-control approaches (such as uniform
emission standards or specific technology requirements) for some time. In the late 1960s,
discussion of the concept of markets in pollution rights began in academic circles and entered the
U.S. policy world in 1975 [Atkinson and Tietenberg, 1987]. Economic theory predicts that
tradeable emission permits will induce emitters to find a cost-minimizing emission allocation
when a cap on total emissions is specified [NRC, 2004]. Emitters that can reduce emissions
easily do so and sell permits to those for whom reducing emissions is more costly.
In an attempt to control regional O3 concentrations and to address inter-state transport of
O3 and its precursors to facilitate the compliance of down-wind states with the O3 NAAQS, a
coalition of 13 northeastern states formed the Ozone Transport Commission (OTC) and created a
regional NOx cap-and-trade program. The OTC “NOx Budget program” ran from 1999-2002
during which time NOx emissions from large point sources were reduced approximately 50%
from 1990 baseline levels [EPA, 2004b]. In 2004 the OTC program was replaced by the NOx
State Implementation Plan (SIP) Call budget trading program.

This program developed in

response to the EPA’s call for SIPs to reduce the transport of O3 over large regions of the
country. Under the SIP Call program the trading region has expanded to 19 eastern states and

5

total summer emissions from electric power generators are planned to be reduced by
approximately 80% from 1990 levels [EvoMarkets, 2003].
The theoretical advantages of an emissions cap and trade system depend, however, on the
assumption that only the total amount emitted matters. Under this condition, a shift of emissions
from one time or place to another will have no environmental consequences and minimizing the
cost of abatement is the object of the plan. Recognizing the general problem, the “NOx Budget
program” incorporated “flow control” to require that allowances banked from one summer
season for use in subsequent summers be surrendered on a 2:1 basis if the bank became larger
than 10 percent of the regional budget. Although this controlled for excessively large emissions
in any single summer, it did not control for variations in the time or location of emissions in a
single summer season. In this paper we present evidence that these variations are very
significant.

3. Methods
3.1. CAMx model description
We utilize the Comprehensive Air Quality Model with extensions (CAMx) version 3.0, a
regional Eulerian photochemical grid model [ENVIRON, 2000]. CAMx simulates the emission,
dispersion, chemical and photochemical reactions and removal of tropospheric ozone and its
precursors in the lower troposphere by solving the continuity equation for each chemical species
in a three-dimensional grid. The Eulerian continuity equation relates the time dependency of the
average species concentration in each grid cell volume to the sum of all physical and chemical
processes operating on that volume.
We use the CAMx model in a configuration previously used by the Ozone Transport
Assessment Group (OTAG) to solve for the concentration distribution of ozone and its primary
precursors. Model resolution is 0.33° latitude by 0.5° longitude extending in 5 vertical layers
(100, 500, 1500, 2500, and 4000 meters above ground level) from the surface to 4 km. CAMx
includes a plume-in-grid sub-model to simulate the chemistry of NOx plumes emitted from point
sources such as power plants. The plume-in-grid sub-model tracks individual plume segments,
6

accounting for dispersion and inorganic chemical evolution, until the puff mass can be
adequately resolved by the grid box in which it resides at which time the remaining NOx is
released to the grid. This CAMx configuration uses the Carbon Bond IV (CB-IV) chemical
mechanism with updated radical termination and isoprene oxidation mechanisms based on
[Carter, 1996] including 25 gas species and 96 reactions. Winds are generated by the Regional
Atmospheric Modeling System (RAMS) with horizontal advection provided by the diffusivecorrected algorithm of [Smolarkiewicz, 1983]. Boundary conditions are set to clean background
concentrations for all constituents on all four sides and at the top of the domain (03 = 35ppbv)
with a day/night diurnal cycle imposed on short-lived species. Hourly surface emissions are
included from elevated point sources, gridded low-level point, mobile, biogenic (from the BEIS2
model) and anthropogenic area emissions in the eastern United States. The BEIS2 model
includes the dependence of isoprene emissions on temperature, solar radiation, ecosystem extent
and leaf area [Geron et al., 1994; Guenther et al., 1994]. However, [Palmer et al., 2003]
inferred from GOME satellite measurements of formaldehyde that BEIS2 under-predicts
isoprene emissions by a factor of two. CAMx also includes wet and dry deposition [Wesley,
1989] of gases. Emissions and meteorological fields for the model were obtained from the New
York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) [Sistla and Hao, personal
communication, 2001]. Model simulations were conducted for July 7-17, 1995, with the first
two days of the simulation used for model spin-up.
3.2. CAMx model / EPA-AIRS O3 data comparison
To evaluate the ability of this version of CAMx to simulate accurately ambient O3
concentrations within the region, we compared concentrations of O3 measured as part of the
EPA-AIRS surface measurement network with O3 concentrations obtained from the CAMx
simulation. Locations of the EPA-AIRS O3 measurement sites for July 1995 are shown in Figure
1. Figure 2 shows a comparison of 1-hour daily maximum O3 concentrations calculated by the
CAMx model for July 9-17, 1995 and measured on the same dates by the EPA-AIRS network.
A comparison of 1-hour maximum concentrations is shown because the epidemiological doseresponse functions used later in this paper to estimate both mortality and morbidity use this

7

value.

The comparison indicates that CAMx has a tendency to over-predict maximum O3

concentrations at low and middle concentrations below 75 ppb and to under-predict maximum
O3 concentrations above 75ppb.

Since larger health impacts are caused by higher O3

concentrations, this bias in the model may lead to a slight under-estimate of health effects in our
analysis.
Statistical analysis of the results in Figure 2, with Pi indicating the predicted CAMx O3
values and Oi indicating the observed EPA-AIRS O3 concentrations, result in the following
summary statistics:
1
1 N
Root mean square error (RMSE) =
(Pi − Oi )2 2 = 19.6 ppb;
N i =1
Mean Bias (MB) =

1 N
(Pi − Oi ) = 0.62 ppb;
N i =1

Mean Normalized Bias (MNB) =

1 N (Pi − Oi )
= 6.0 %
N i =1 Oi

This evaluation indicates that although CAMx does not accurately predict the daily maximum
observed O3 concentrations, it is without a large bias.
3.3. Model Simulations
The two goals of the CAMx simulations presented in this paper are first to demonstrate
the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of tropospheric ozone production and the variability in
resulting health damages (morbidity and mortality) that may result from a given amount of NOx
emitted from the same location under different meteorological conditions or from different
locations with varying biogenic hydrocarbon emissions or downwind populations. The second
objective is to provide a proof-of-concept prototype of the feasibility of conducting a full
integrated assessment that links NOx emissions to O3 concentrations to human exposure,
morbidity, mortality and damage valuations.

8

To demonstrate the spatial and temporal heterogeneity of tropospheric ozone production,
we conduct a set of CAMx regional simulations for seven cases. First, we conduct a standard
simulation that includes all regional emissions. This is followed by six perturbation simulations.
In order to quantify the impact of NOx emissions from individual power plants on O3
concentrations, we reduce the NOx emissions from each plant by 62.5 tons (125,000 lbs) in a 24hour period (1.77 x106 moles where NOx emissions from power plants were assumed to be 90%
NO and 10% NO2) and calculate the difference in maximum O3 concentration between the
standard simulation and each perturbation simulation. 62.5 tons of NOx was chosen for the
analyses because it is sufficiently large to generate a discernable effect and sufficiently small that
a single large power plant may emit this quantity or more in a 24-hour period. The perturbation
simulations were chosen to demonstrate the variability in O3 production resulting from identical
NOx emissions from power plants produced during conditions of high and low temperature at the
same location and in locations of high and low biogenic hydrocarbon emissions. They were also
chosen to demonstrate the dependence of total health effects on whether emissions occur upwind
or downwind of regions of high or low populations. Figures 3, 5 and 7 show the increase in
maximum surface O3 concentrations over the model domain between the standard simulation and
perturbation simulations summed over the day of emission and the subsequent 3 days. After 4
days the power plant emissions from the 24-hour period have a non-discernable effect on
regional O3 concentrations. The total increase in 1-hour maximum O3 is shown because it is
incorporated in the dose-response functions used to estimate the mortality and morbidity that
result from exposure to O3.
3.4. Estimating Mortality and Morbidity
The relationship between O3 exposure and resulting health effects can be estimated from
epidemiological studies. Most epidemiological research has made use of time-series analyses
that have focused on the effects of short-term exposures to a pollutant by using records of
hospital admissions and deaths that occur following periods of elevated concentrations. These
studies are unable to include the negative effects of chronic or long-term exposure and hence
presumably underestimate the total health damage due to exposure. Cohort studies, which

9

follow a population over time and do include both acute and chronic impacts, have been
conducted for PM2.5 [Dockery et al., 1993; Pope et al., 2002; Pope et al., 1995] but have not
focused on O3. Hence, in relying in this analysis on time-series studies only (specifically, on
meta-analyses that pool the results of many regional time-series studies [Steib et al., 2002]) we
use an arguably conservative estimate of the mortality and respiratory morbidity that results from
elevated O3 exposure.
The change in the incidence of mortality or morbidity due to exposure to air pollution
(here O3) is usually estimated with the following function [EPA, 1999]:

)

(

∆M = Yo 1 − e − β∆O3 * population

(1)

Here M is the change in the number of mortalities during a 24-hour period, or change in
incidence of hospital admissions for respiratory disease, relative to a baseline number of deaths
or incidence of respiratory disease. For mortality, Y0 is the baseline incidence of daily nonaccidental deaths per person of any age. For morbidity, Y0 is the daily average hospital
admission rate for diseases of the respiratory system. Epidemiological studies often report a
relative risk (RR) (the percentage increase in mortality or morbidity) due to a specific increase in
pollutant concentration. The concentration-response coefficient, , can be derived from the
reported relative risk and the change in pollutant concentration relative to a baseline (here O3),
by solving:

β=

ln( RR )
∆O3

(2)

We discuss the values we use for mortality and morbidity in the following sub-sections.
We obtain the population in equation (1) from 1995 world population data gridded at 0.04167
latitude by longitude resolution [CIESIN et al., 2000]. Population data for the eastern United
States is regridded at the CAMx resolution of 0.3 degrees latitude by 0.5 degrees longitude
(approximately (36 km)2 in the United States). The population within each CAMx grid box is
used to calculate the mortality and morbidity that result from the change in O3 concentrations in
each grid box. Mortality and morbidity incidence is summed over all affected grid boxes over all
days in which the O3 concentration was enhanced due to (or, in some locations, reduced by) the
NOx emitted from the individual power plants.

10

3.4.1. O3 Mortality
To obtain the relative risk of mortality for an increase in O3 concentration resulting from
individual power plant emissions, we use a pooled estimate of percent excess mortality derived
from a compilation of 25 epidemiological time-series analyses of daily 1-hour maximum O3
concentrations during the warm season [Steib et al., 2002]. The pooled estimate of RR is 1.016
for a 31.2 ppb increase in 1 hour maximum daily O3 concentration, which translates into a
value of 0.000509 [Steib et al., 2002]. We estimate Y0 from the total U.S. population in 1995
and calculate an average daily mortality rate of 2.4 x 10-5 (2,312,132 deaths/ 261,638,000
persons / 365 days) [CDC-NCHS, 2003; USCB, 2000].
3.4.2. O3 Morbidity
Hospital admissions for respiratory ailments have been found to be substantially and
consistently associated with O3 exposure.

A synthesis of O3 hospital admission time-series

studies, compiled by Thurston and Ito [1999] is used here to estimate the effect of O3 on
morbidity. Data on hospital admissions for respiratory disease in the United States are not
available. Therefore, to calculate Y0 we assume that the average daily rate of hospital admissions
for respiratory disease is approximately equal to the rate of hospital discharge following a
diagnosis of a respiratory ailment which was 3.41 x 10-5 discharges per day in 1998 (124.6
discharges / 10,000 population / 365 days), the year for which such data are available [CDCNCHS, 1998]. This value is of similar magnitude to values obtained in regional studies of daily
hospital admission for respiratory diseases [EPA, 1999]. The estimate for hospital admissions
for major respiratory ailments due to O3 exposure for all ages was a RR = 1.18 per 100 ppb
increase in daily 1-hour maximum O3 (95% CI, 1.10-1.26) [Thurston and Ito, 1999] which
translates into a value of 0.00166 . In cases where studies in the meta-analysis used other
measures of O3 exposure besides a daily 1-hour maximum concentration, (such as an 8-hour
average O3 concentration) the ratio of the daily 1-hour maximum to the other measures used in
the original analyses were used to compute the increment comparable to a 100 ppb change in
daily 1-hour maximum O3 concentrations [Thurston and Ito, 1999].

11

4. Results
Our results demonstrating the impacts of variability in temperature and biogenic
hydrocarbon emissions on O3 production, and the importance of population density in
determining resulting mortalities and respiratory morbidity are summarized below. These factors
were chosen for examination because of the expected size of their influence and because of the
ability of our model to simulate them. Additional factors may also influence O3 production such
as cloudiness, time of day of emission, proximity of the NOx emission to other anthropogenic
emissions, etc. The importance of these other factors are left for future analyses.

4.1. Temperature variability -- Effect on O3 production and resulting mortality and
morbidity
First, to examine the temporal heterogeneity of tropospheric ozone production due to
temperature variability within a short period of time, a point source was selected which
experienced a range of temperatures between July 9 and 18, 1995. The effects on O3 production
of identical emissions of NOx from a power plant in eastern Pennsylvania on July 9, 1995 and
July 14, 1995 when the 24-hour period temperature ranged over 72 ± 7.7°F and 83.5 ± 6.3°F,
respectively are shown in Figures 3a and 3b. The average increase in 1-hour maximum surface
O3 over the model domain between the standard simulation and perturbation simulations on the
day of emission and the subsequent 3 days, was 0.021 ppbv during the cool period and 0.036
ppbv during the warm period. The increase in 1-hour maximum O3 is shown in Figure 3 because
it is used in the dose-response functions to estimate O3 induced mortality and morbidity. The
model predicts that the same amount of NOx emitted in the warmer period results in more O3
which leads to twice the mortalities as in the cooler period -- 0.185 versus 0.354 persons as
shown in Figures 3c and 3d. Likewise, the number of cases of respiratory morbidity due to O3
exposure was also nearly twice as high during the warm period -- 0.866 versus 1.654 cases as is
shown in Figures 3e and 3f.
These simulations show that, in violation of the preconditions for the use of a cap and
trade system, a shift of a fixed amount of NOx emissions from a single source between the two

12

closely separated time points could have a substantial effect on the quantities of O3 that are
produced, and the consequent health effects. In fact, since energy demand is usually larger when
temperatures are high, emissions are also likely to be larger during periods of high temperature
when the model indicates that more O3 is produced per unit NOx emitted. An emitter using
emission allowances at two different times presently has no reason to favor the time when the
resulting damage is lower. Trading allowances (or variability in the timing of the use of
allowances from a single source) to emit at a price that does not reflect the difference in damage
will lead to too much emission in the high-damage conditions relative to the low-damage
conditions. In the example, the temperature at the emission source and at downwind locations
makes an important difference. The question is naturally raised, whether an alternative
regulatory system might be developed that provides an appropriate incentive for emitters to
reduce their emissions during times of elevated temperature within the ozone season.

4.2. Biogenic hydrocarbon emission variability -- Effect on O3 production and resulting
mortality and morbidity
Isoprene is a hydrocarbon that is naturally emitted from deciduous tree species,
particularly oak, poplar and gum trees. In the United States these species are most abundant in
the south-eastern part of the country and are absent in most of the west. This results in large
spatial variability in biogenic VOC emissions in the United States, as is shown in Figure 4. In
addition, isoprene emissions increase with increasing temperature and sunlight. A unit of NOx
emitted from a power plant in a region of high isoprene emissions can result in larger O3
production than the same amount emitted in a region of low isoprene emissions [Ryerson et al.,
2001]. To examine the impact that biogenic hydrocarbon emissions, particularly isoprene, can
have on O3 production, we examined the quantity of O3 produced from identical emissions of
NOx by two different power plants, one in the south (Mississippi) and the other in the northern
mid-west (Indiana) of the U.S. To control for the effect of temperature on isoprene emissions
and on O3 production, we chose 24-hour periods during which the mean temperature at the two
sites was nearly identical: 87.2° F ± 5.9° F in the high isoprene region and 87.9° F ± 6.3° F in
the low isoprene region. The regional average increase in 1-hour maximum O3, as shown in

13

Figure 5a and 5b, was 0.033 ppbv in the region with low emissions and over three times higher at
0.102 ppbv in the region of high emissions. Due to the apparent factor of two under-prediction
of isoprene emissions by BEIS2 [Palmer et al., 2003], the quantity of O3 produced in our
simulation in the high-isoprene region may be under-predicted.
In this example, the region of higher isoprene emissions was also a region of lower
population density (see Figure 6). Despite this fact, the 3.5 times larger quantity of O3 produced
in the region of higher isoprene emissions resulted in both 30% more mortalities (0.166 versus
0.121 deaths) and morbidities (0.774 versus 0.568 cases) than resulted from the same increase in
NOx emissions in the region of lower isoprene emissions (see Figures 5c-f). By choosing
locations where the region of high isoprene corresponds to a region of lower population, this
scenario is intentionally conservative and is hence understating the potential importance of
variability of isoprene concentration on resulting O3 mortalities.
A regulatory scheme that ignores the variability of biogenic hydrocarbon emissions when
regulating NOx may miss an opportunity to decrease O3 concentrations and could inadvertently
increase mortalities and morbidities by trading from a region of relatively low isoprene
emissions (north-east) to high emissions (south-east). In particular, trades between regions under
a cap-and-trade program in which all NOx emissions from large point sources in a region are
treated identically, could have a substantial effect (up or down, depending on the direction of the
exchange) on the quantities of O3 that are produced, and the consequent health effects. A
regulatory system that provides incentives for emitters to reduce their emissions in regions of
high isoprene emissions would be more effective at reducing ambient O3 concentrations. If these
reductions coincided with high population densities the reductions would also be more effective
at reducing adverse effects on exposed populations than would a regulatory program that
assumes emissions in all locations have identical effects. We discuss the effect of downwind
population density next.
4.3. Downwind Population Density -- Effect on resulting mortality and morbidity

14

Population density in the eastern United States is shown in Figure 6. The north-eastern
Washington D.C. to Boston corridor has among the highest population densities in the United
States. To examine the impact that equivalent reductions of NOx would have from point sources
upwind of regions of high and low population density, point sources in the high-population
density northeast (Maryland) and lower-population density mid-Atlantic region (North Carolina)
were selected. However, average isoprene emissions are substantially larger in North Carolina
than in Maryland. Thus, despite controlling for temperature, the average increase in 1-hour
maximum O3, as shown in Figures 7a and 7b, was more than twice as great (0.081 ppbv versus
0.035 ppbv) when emissions originated from North Carolina in the low population region (Figure
7a) than from Maryland in the high population region (Figure 7b). Despite higher maximum O3
concentrations in the low population region, the resulting incidence of mortalities shown in
Figures 7b and 7d (0.592 versus 0.268 deaths) and respiratory morbidity shown in Figure 7c and
7e (2.771 versus 1.252 cases), is much lower. Thus, for the same NOx emission and a smaller O3
increase, the damage (i.e., higher mortality and morbidity) was substantially greater in the high
population region.
Regulation of NOx emissions that ignores the variability of downwind population density
misses an opportunity to decrease the health effects of emissions. As in the case of variations in
biogenic hydrocarbon emissions from place to place, trades between regions under a cap-andtrade program in which all NOx emissions from large point sources in a region are treated
identically could have a substantial effect (up or down, depending on the direction of the
exchange) on health outcomes. A regulatory system that provides incentives for emitters to
reduce their emissions in regions of high downwind population density would be more effective
at reducing the adverse effects on exposed populations than would a regulatory program that
assumes emissions in all locations will have identical effects. Using an atmospheric chemistrytransport model permits us to identify the locations from which emissions result in more damage
and to quantify the damage so that regulatory policy can be adjusted to minimize harm rather
than emissions alone.

15

5. Monetizing health costs resulting from O3 produced from point source NOx emissions
In the standard economic analysis of externalities, the problem that externalities cause is
an inefficient allocation of resources. Much as a producer of electricity would be expected to use
“too much” coal if it were provided free of charge (and as a result, in a competitive system, the
price of electricity will be “too low”), a producer of electricity who is charged nothing for NOx
emissions may be expected to emit “too much” NOx. A standard corrective in the economic
theory of pollution is to determine the “right” price for the unpriced input (here NOx emissions),
and to charge the firms that use NOx emissions in production via a fee or tax. The argument is
that the producing firm “should” pay the price for these inputs, just as the firm pays for other
inputs, not as a moral matter but as a condition for avoiding a use of resources that result in a
loss of potential value to the ultimate consumers of goods and services and to the general public.
Our analysis indicates potentially large differences in the damage done by incremental
NOx emissions from sources at different locations and under different regional VOC and
meteorological conditions, where the impacts have been expressed in terms of change in
mortality and morbidity risks. The logic of correcting a negative externality calls for expressing
these effects in monetary terms, so that they can be compared with the cost of corrective actions.
In the case of health impacts, the needed valuation is the willingness of people to pay for reduced
risks of suffering them.
A large literature addresses the estimation of the monetary value of health effects. A
deeper analysis than the one we undertake here would consider issues such as whether the
willingness to pay for reduced risk of health effects depends on the age of the affected people,
their incomes, number of dependents, etc. For purposes of the present analysis, we take off-theshelf figures for the value of a statistical life or an illness. Mortality valuation estimates,
obtained from 26 different studies that use both contingent valuation and labor market valuation
methods to approximate the willingness to pay to avoid the occurrence of a premature death, give
values of a statistical life that range from $0.6 million - $13.5 million with a mean of $4.8
million in 1990 U.S. dollars [EPA, 1999; Viscusi, 1992]. The model simulations represent O3
production during July 1995, so in order to calculate the value of the damages caused by the NOx
emissions in our 1995 simulations in contemporary terms, we use the 17% increase in the

16

consumer price index (CPI) between 1990 and 1995 to adjust the mean value of a death to
1995$5.6 million [DoL, 2004]. Due to the increase in CPI between 1995 and 2004 these same
deaths, had they occurred in 2004, would have a valuation 24 % higher than the 1995 value
[DoL, 2004].
For the specified identical quantities of NOx emitted from individual power plants over
24-hour periods, mortalities resulting from the O3 produced over the subsequent several days
ranged from a minimum of approximately 0.1 deaths in the low isoprene region to 0.6 deaths
when emitted upwind from a region of high population density. Using the mean inflationadjusted value of 1995$5.6 million/life, the monetary cost of the deaths in our six cases varies
between a low of $670,000 to a high of $3.3 million. The NOx emission change (62.5 tons) that
gives rise to these impacts is comparable to shutting down a large power plant for a day. For an
emission of this magnitude, the estimated value of the impact per incremental ton emitted ranges
in the six cases from $10,700 to $52,200.
The literature on the cost of morbidity due to an illness indicates substantial variation
depending on the illness. Chronic bronchitis is usually estimated to have the highest cost and a
restricted activity day among the lowest. We utilize a morbidity dose-response function to
estimate the relative risk of a hospital admission due to an increase in daily 1-hour maximum O3
concentrations. We therefore use a health valuation for all respiratory hospital admissions of
1990$6100/case [EPA, 1997] which adjusted for inflation is 1995$7020/case. Thus, for the
identical quantities of NOx used in our exercises, emitted from individual power plants over 24hour periods, the calculated morbidities range from 0.57 cases for the low isoprene region to 2.8
for the high population region. The implied estimated costs of total respiratory effects range
from 1995$4000 to 1995$19,700 or from $64. to $315. per ton NOx emitted. Given valuations
found in the literature, the morbidity impacts of NOx emissions are tiny when compared with the
mortality risk effects.
6. Policy Implications
The implications of our investigation for policy design are potentially wide-ranging.
Focusing only on the mortality effects, which our calculations suggest are of greater policy

17

significance, the estimated impact of an incremental ton of NOx emitted ranges from 0.00195 to
0.00949 fatalities (a factor of almost 5) depending on the ambient temperature and location of
emission. By shifting 13.2 tons of NOx emissions per day from the (relatively) high-damage to
lower-damage location over a ten-day period one could avoid the loss of approximately one life
(on average).
The figures also suggest a significant influence of meteorological conditions on the health
impact of incremental NOx emissions. The mortality impact of emissions from a single location
may vary by a factor of nearly two as the temperature varies within a short span of time. In our
simulations we calculated 0.00566 and 0.00296 deaths per incremental ton of NOx emitted for
the high and low temperature scenarios, respectively. Reducing O3 generation and thus saving
human lives might be brought about, for example, by reallocating electricity production in space
to reduce NOx emissions under high-temperature stagnant weather conditions and by utilizing
pollution control devices more intensely in locations of high population exposure.
Placing monetary value on the damages that result from incremental NOx emissions
(taking into account, as we do here, only the contribution to downwind O3 formation and
neglecting the health damages from secondary PM formation) suggests that the magnitudes are
significant in relation to the costs of abating the emissions. Still considering only fatality effects,
and using mean off-the-shelf estimates of the value of a statistical life saved, the estimated
damage per incremental ton of emissions in our scenarios ranges from 1995$10,700 to
1995$52,200. To get a sense of what these figures mean, we may compare them to the price of
NOx emission allowances under the SIP Call cap and trade system. As reported at
http://www.evomarkets.com/ on 22 July 2004, the last price for NOx emission allowances for
2004 was $2,550, for 2005, $3,750, and for 2006, $3,200. Using a CPI adjustment of 0.8 [DoL,
2004], these prices are equivalent to 1995$2040., 1995$3000., 1995$2560., respectively. These
figures can be read as measures of the cost of incremental NOx abatement during the ozone
season (given the existing regulations governing power plants, which have complex implications
for the marginal cost of abatement). Economic theory predicts that the marginal cost of
abatement of NOx will be driven to the market price of allowances, with the important proviso
that the marginal cost may exceed the allowance price for all levels of abatement. Although the

18

allowance prices cannot be directly compared with our estimate of the marginal damage due to
NOx emissions (since both the year and the underlying emissions picture is different), the figures
certainly suggest the possibility that net gains are possible from more stringent, and as
significantly, more intelligent, NOx control.
The textbook remedy for a defect in the allocation of resources that results in an
environmental externality is a corrective tax or fee (usually called a Pigovian tax after the British
economist A.C. Pigou, who first elaborated the idea) on the action that gives rise to the
externality. The damage done by a marginal unit of NOx emissions under a variety of conditions
would, under ideal competitive conditions, be exactly the emission fees called for in theory to
correct for the polluting effect. Taking those fees into account would induce NOx emitters to
make decisions about how much, when, and where to emit that are “correct” in the usual sense
used in economics, that is, in the same sense that the wages of workers and prices of fuel induce
correct decisions about the quantity of these goods and services to use. The marginal damages
from our calculations can be thought of as preliminary estimates of the needed Pigovian fees.
An important question, which we do not address here, is how much difference it would
make if NOx emitters had to pay for the damage they cause. In economists’ jargon, a lot depends
on elasticities. If, for example, raising the price of electricity to reflect the health costs implied
by our analysis would not affect the amount of electricity demanded (the price elasticity of
demand is low); if raising the cost to producers of emitting NOx, perhaps varying it substantially
over short periods of time, would have little effect on their decisions about how much or where
to produce (the price elasticity of producer demand for NOx emissions as an input to producing
electricity is low), then the substitutions of the sort described above as possible tradeoffs would
not occur, or would not occur to significant degree. If, however, as experience suggests is true in
most areas of economic activity, there is substantial flexibility in the time and place of
production, and substantial flexibility in the commercial and household use of electricity,
especially given time to adjust to a different price regime, then large gains are to be had from a
regulatory regime that provides the “right” incentives to respond to differences at the margins we
have identified: meteorological conditions from the perspective of a given source, differences in

19

the biogenic VOC emissions in source areas, and differences in the population density downwind
of emission sources.
The tendency in the recent evolution of NOx regulation has been to rely on cap and trade
systems. In particular, under the recent OTC and NOx SIP Call trading regimes implemented in
the northeastern United States, fixed totals of emissions are set for the entire ozone season.
Economic theory predicts that trading among sources will tend to equalize the marginal cost of
abatement across emitters, where abatement is measured by reductions in emissions at any point
in the ozone season. This system misses the distinctions identified in this paper that determine
the downstream health impacts of marginal emissions: differences in meteorological conditions
within the ozone season, variations in biogenic hydrocarbon emissions and downwind population
densities. Variations on cap and trade systems that would address these shortcomings are
possible. For example, ambient concentration trading, where totals of allowances to effect a
change in downstream ambient concentration are fixed, (perhaps conditional on the exposed
populations), and traded among sources, each with source-specific coefficients approximating
their downstream impacts. The same sort of modeling work as is carried out in this paper could
be used in the design of such alternatives to guide producers to reduce their emissions at times
and in places where the emissions cause the most damage.

7. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper we present a proof-of-concept use of an integrated assessment that combines
an atmospheric model with economic and demographic information to estimate the health
damage externality due to ozone (O3) formation from nitrogen oxide (NOx = NO + NO2)
emissions from large point sources. We use a regional atmospheric model of the eastern United
States (CAMx) to examine the variation in the amount of O3 produced from a fixed quantity of
nitrogen oxides emitted from power plants within a 9-day period in July 1995 depending on
temperature variations and local biogenic hydrocarbon emissions. Results of the CAMx model
indicate that for the same NOx emission the O3 produced can vary by more than a factor of three.
In addition, we showed that the variation in health damages that the resulting O3 causes depends

20

strongly on the size of the exposed population. Variation in O3 production and downwind
population can together result in a factor of six difference in resulting mortalities for identical
quantities of NOx emitted.
The increasingly widely adopted emission cap-and-trade approach has been very
successful at reducing total NOx emissions from large point sources [EPA, 2004b]. However,
because it does not control for the location or time during the summer that emissions take place
nor for the resulting damages, it is less successful at minimizing the damages that result from the
emissions permitted under the cap. To reduce total damage, consideration could be given to a
system of fees for emitters to provide incentives for them to reduce NOx emissions at times and
in locations where health damages are greatest. This could be achieved by coupling a regional
atmospheric chemistry model that calculates O3 concentrations obtained from NOx emitted from
individual point sources with estimates of resulting health damages and their economic cost.
Such a system would involve a transformation of air quality regulation as it would create an
incentive system to reduce total damages in an economically efficient manner rather than simply
requiring a reduction in total emissions or the achievement of a particular uniform air quality
goal regardless of location or resulting damage.
Although we have suggested the possibility of using model-derived estimates for
purposes of setting emission fees, the details of such a system merit examination. Since the fees
are to depend on weather and other conditions, would they be set after the fact (making the
emitters, in effect, use the model in forecast mode to make their decisions), or would forecasts be
used by the regulator to set fees in advance (based on expected damages). Regardless of which
approach were used, refinements in chemical weather forecasting systems would clearly be
beneficial to enable the regulatory system to estimate more accurately appropriate corrective
fees, providing emitters with the information they need to adjust their power production and NOx
emission plans to minimize total costs which include mortality and morbidity risks as well as
abatement measures.
In addition, to account more fully for the health effects of power plant NOx emissions it is
necessary to include the formation of secondary particulates (PM) and their impact on mortality
and morbidity. Secondary PM, in addition to O3, are formed from NOx emissions in winter as

21

well as summer. Using an integrated assessment model without chemistry, analyses of the
benefits of an annual (rather than just summer) NOx emissions cap were found to yield
substantial net benefits due to reduction of PM2.5 concentrations and its detrimental health
effects [Burtraw et al., 2003; Burtraw et al., 2001]. Additional analyses that include both gas
and aerosol chemistry and an examination of the effects that spatial and temporal variability in
emissions have on PM2.5 formation and resulting health damages and costs would be useful.
Such an analysis would permit a determination of the total health damage NOx emissions cause;
the fees that an emitter might be charged for the total damage could thus be determined.

Acknowledgments
We thank Winston Hao and Gopal Sistla of the New York State Department of Environmental
Conservation for providing us with the version of the CAMx model used by the Ozone Transport
Commission. We thank Arlene Fiore, Sarah Fox, Don Fullerton, Michael Greenstone, Michael
Herz, Larry Horowitz, Quansong Tong, and Jason West for helpful comments on earlier versions
of this manuscript. We are pleased to acknowledge the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and
International Affairs and the Center for Economic Policy Studies at Princeton University for
financial support.

22

References
Atkinson, S.E., and T.H. Tietenberg, Economic implications of emissions trading rules for local
and regional pollutants, Canadian Journal of Economics, 87, 370-386, 1987.
Burtraw, D., R. Bharvirkar, and M. McGuinness, Uncertainty and the net benefits of emissions
reductions of nitrogen oxides from electricity generation, Land Economics, 79 (3), 382401, 2003.
Burtraw, D., K.L. Palmer, R. Bharvirkar, and A. Paul, Cost Effective Reduction of NOx
Emissions from Electricity Generation, Journal of the Air and Waste Management
Association, 51, 1476-1489, 2001.
Carter, W.P.L., Condensed atmospheric photooxidation mechanisms for isoprene, Atmos.
Environ., 30, 4275-4290, 1996.
CDC-NCHS, 1998, Rate of discharges from short-stay hospitals, by age and first-listed
diagnosis: United States, 1998, Center for Disease Control (CDC), National Center for
Health Statistics, accessed: February 3, 2003,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/major/hdasd/nhdstab.htm.
CDC-NCHS, Deaths from 282 Selected Causes by 5-Year Age Groups, Race, and Sex: Each
State and the District of Columbia, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998, Center for Disease
Control, National Center for Health Statistics,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/mortab/98gm3_01.pdf, 2003.
CIESIN, IFPRI, and WRI, Gridded Population of the World (GPW), Version 2, Center for
International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN); International Food Policy
Research Institute (IFPRI); World Resources Institute (WRI),
http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/plue/gpw, 2000.
Dockery, D.W., C.A. Pope, III, X. Xu, J.D. Spengler, J.H. Ware, M.E. Fay, B.G. Ferris, and F.E.
Speizer, An Association between Air Pollution and Mortality in Six U.S. Cities, N. Eng.
J. Med., 329, 1753-1759, 1993.
DoL, 2004, Consumer Price Indexes, U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,
accessed: June 3, 2004, http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm#data.
ENVIRON, User'
s Guide: Comprehensive Air Quality Model with Extentions (CAMx) version
3.00, 2000.
EPA, The benefits and costs of the Clean Air Act, 1970-1990, United States Environmental
Protection Agency Office of Air and Radiation Policy,
http://www.epa.gov/airprogm/oar/sect812/, 1997.
EPA, U.S., Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act: 1990-2010, U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, http://www.epa.gov/air/sect812/copy99.html, 1999.
EPA, U.S., 2000, National Air Quality and Emission Trends Report:1998, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, accessed: May 19, 2004, http://www.epa.gov/oar/aqtrends.html/.
EPA, U.S., Benefits and Costs of the Clean Air Act 1990 - 2020: Revised Analytical Plan For
EPA'
s Second Prospective Analysis, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
http://www.epa.gov/air/sect812/blueprint.html, 2003.
EPA, U.S., 2004a, Ozone and Health - A Timeline, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
accessed: May 19, 2004, http://www.epa.gov/ozonedesignations/timeline.htm.

23

EPA, U.S., 2004b, Ozone Transport Commission (OTC) NOx Budget Program, U.S. EPA Clean
Air Markets - Programs and Regulations, accessed: July 20, 2004,
http://www.epa.gov/airmarkets/otc/.
EvoMarkets, 2003, Environmental Markets - EPA SIP NOx trading program, accessed: July 20,
2004, http://www.evomarkets.com/.
Fiore, A.M., D.J. Jacob, I. Bey, R.M. Yantosca, B.D. Field, and A.C. Fusco, Background ozone
over the United States in summer: Origin, trend, and contribution to pollution episodes,
J. Geophys. Res., 107 (D15), 10.1029, 2002.
Geron, C.D., A.B. Guenther, and T.E. Pierce, An improved model for estimating emissions of
volatile organic compounds from forests in the eastern United States, J. Geophys. Res.,
94, 12,925-12,956, 1994.
Guenther, A., P. Zimmerman, P. Harley, R. Monson, and R. Fall, Isoprene and monoterpene
emission rate variability: Model evaluations and sensitivity analysis., J. Geophys. Res.,
94, 12,925-12,956, 1994.
Lin, C.-Y.C., D.J. Jacob, and A. Fiore, M., Trends in exceedances of the ozone air quality
standard in the continental United States, 1980-1998, Atmos. Environ., 35, 3217-3228,
2001.
Logan, J.A., Ozone in rural areas of the United States, J. Geophys. Res., 94 (D6), 8511-8532,
1989.
NRC, Air Quality Management in the United States, National Research Council of the National
Academies, Washington D.C., 2004.
Palmer, P.I., D.J. Jacob, A.M. Fiore, R.V. Martin, K. Chance, and T.P. Kurosu, Mapping of
isoprene emissions over North America using formaldehyde column observations from
space, J. Geophys. Res., 108 (D6),doi:10.1029/2002JD002153, 2003.
Pope, C.A., III, R.T. Burnett, M.J. Thun, E.E. Calle, D. Krewski, K. Ito, and G.D. Thruston,
Lung Cancer, Cardiopulmonary Mortality and Long-Term Exposure to Fine Particulate
Air Pollution, J. Amer. Med. Assoc., 287 (9), 1132-1141, 2002.
Pope, C.A., III, M.J. Thun, M.M. Namboodri, D.W. Dockery, J.S. Evans, F.E. Speizer, and C.W.
Heath, Particulate Air Pollution as a Predictor of Mortality in a Prospective Study of U.S.
Adults, Amer. J. Resp. Crit. Care Med., 151, 669-674, 1995.
Ryerson, T.B., M. Trainer, J.S. Holloway, D. Parrish, L.G. Huey, D.T. Sueper, G.J. Frost, S.G.
Donnelly, S. Schauffler, E.L. Atlas, W.C. Kuster, P.D. Goldan, G. Hubler, J.F. Meagher,
and F.C. Fehsenfeld, Observations of ozone formation in power plant plumes and
implications for ozone control strategies, Science, 292, 719-723, 2001.
Sillman, S., J.A. Logan, and S.C. Wofsy, The sensitivity of ozone to nitrogen oxides and
hydrocarbons in regional ozone episodes, J. Geophys. Res., 95, 1837 - 1851, 1990.
Smolarkiewicz, P.K., A Simple positive definite advection scheme with small implicit diffusion,
Mon. Wea. Rev., 111, 479-486, 1983.
Steib, D.M., S. Judek, and R.T. Burnett, Meta-Analysis of Time-Series Studies of Air Pollution
and Mortality: Effects of Gases and Particles and the Influence of Cause of Death, Age,
and Season, J. Air & Waste Manage. Assoc., 52, 470-484, 2002.
Thurston, G.D., and K. Ito, Epidemiological Studies of Ozone Exposure Effects, in Air Pollution
and Health, edited by S. Holgate, J. Samet, H. Koren, and R. Maynard, Academic Press,
1999.

24

USCB, Annual Population Estimates by Age Group and Sex, Selected Years from 1990 to 2000,
U.S. Census Bureau, Population Division,
http://eire.census.gov/popest/archives/national/nation2/intfile2-1.txt, 2000.
Viscusi, W.K., Fatal tradeoffs: public and private responsibilities for risks, 306 pp., Oxford
University Press, New York, 1992.
Vukovich, F.M., Regional-scale boundary layer ozone variations in the eastern United States and
their association with meteorological variations, Atmos. Environ., 29 (17), 2259-2273,
1995.
Wesley, M.L., Parameterization of surface resistances to gaseous dry deposition in regional-scale
numerical models, Atmos. Environ., 23, 1293-1304, 1989.

25

Figure 1. EPA-AIRS O3 measurement sites within the CAMx domain, July 1995.

Figure 2. Comparison of 1-hr. daily maximum O3 surface concentrations for July 9-17, 1995
from the EPA-AIRS measurement network and CAMx simulation. Rural, suburban and rural
labels refer to the EPA-AIRS designation for individual measurement sites. O3 concentrations
simulated in a surface CAMx grid box are compared with the measured O3 concentrations at the
EPA-AIRS network stations that fall inside the grid box. Multiple stations within one category
(urban, suburban or rural) that fall within one grid box are averaged together for the comparison.
26

Figure 3. O3 produced by an identical amount of NOx emitted from the same power plant in
eastern Pennsylvania in a 24-hour period on a) 9 July 1995, a cool day (296°K ± 4.3°K; 72° ±
7.7°F) and b) 14 July 1995, a warm day (302°K ± 3.5°K; 83.5 ° ± 6.3 ° F) and the subsequent 3

27

days until O3 production from these NOx emissions cease. The “x” in a) and b) marks the power
plant location. The ‘average increase in 1-hour maximum O3’ is the total increase in maximum
surface O3 concentrations over the model domain between the standard simulation and
perturbation simulations on the day of emission and the subsequent 3 days. Beyond 3 days the
power plant emissions cease to have a significant influence. Here figures c) and d) show the
mortalities and e) and f) show the morbidities that are estimated to result from the increase in
daily maximum O3 occurring in a) and b), respectively.

Figure 4. 24-hour daily average of July isoprene emissions in the United States [CMAQ].

28

Figure 5. O3 produced by an identical amount of NOx emitted on 10 July 1995 from a power
plant in a) a region of relatively low isoprene emissions and b) a region of relatively high
isoprene emissions. The temperatures at both locations were nearly identical (87.9° F ± 6.3° F

29

and 87.2° F ± 5.9° F in the low and high isoprene regions respectively). The rest of the notation
is as described in Figure 3.

Figure 6. Population density in the eastern United States [CIESIN et al., 2000].

30

Figure 7. O3 produced by an identical amount of NOx emitted on 10 July 1995 from a power
plant a) upwind from a relatively low population region and b) upwind of a high population
region. The mean temperature at the two sites was nearly identical: 83.9°F ± 6.3°F in the high

31

population region and 83.4°F ± 5.8°F in the low population region. The rest of the notation is as
described in Figure 3.

32

