                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   CAN CENTRAL BANK TRANSPARENCY GO TOO FAR?

                                          Frederic S. Mishkin

                                         Working Paper 10829
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10829


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




For presentation at the Reserve Bank of Australia’s conference The Future of Inflation Targeting, Sydney,
August 9-10, 2004. I thank Emilia Simeonova for her excellent research assistance. I also thank Don Kohn,
Ken Kuttner, my discussant Warwick McKibbin, and participants at the conference. Any views expressed
in this paper are those of the author only and not those of Columbia University or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Central Bank Transparency Go Too Far?
Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 10829
October 2004
JEL No. E5

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper asks the question: can central bank transparency go too far? Transparency is beneficial
only when it serves to simplify communication with the public and helps generate support for central
banks to conduct monetary policy optimally with an appropriate focus on long-run objectives. This
paper argues that some suggestions for increased transparency, particularly a central bank
announcement of its objective function or projections of the path of the policy interest rate, will
complicate the communication process and weaken support for a central bank focus on long-run
objectives. Transparency can indeed go too far.

However, central banks can improve transparency in discussing that they do care about reducing

output fluctuations . By describing procedures for how the path and horizon of inflation targets

would be modified in the face of large shocks, by emphasizing that monetary policy will be just as

vigilant in preventing inflation from falling too low as it is from preventing it from being too high,

and by indicating that the central bank will pursue expansionary policies when output falls very far

below potential, central banks can show that they do care about output fluctuations. These steps to

improve transparency will increase support for the central bank's policies and independence, but

avoid a focus on the short run that could interfere with the ability of the central bank to do its job

effectively.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Graduate School of Business
Uris Hall 619
Columbia University
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
fsm3@columbia.edu
                                            I.
                                    What Are the Issues?

       Since the beginning of the 1990s, we have seen a revolution in the way central banks

communicate with the markets and the public. In the old days, central banks were generally very

secretive institutions. Not only did they not clarify what their objectives and strategies were, but

they even kept the markets guessing about what were the actual setting of policy instruments.

Central banks were perfectly happy to cultivate a mystique as wise but mysterious institutions,

prompting popular books about central banks to have titles like The Secrets of the Temple

(Greider, 1987).

       The rationale for the secretive behavior of central banks was that, as one former Fed

official put it bluntly, “secrecy is designed to shield the Fed from political oversight.”1 Although

central bank secrecy reflects the natural desire of a bureaucracy to maximize power and prestige

by avoiding accountability, the theory of time-inconsistency of optimal policies articulated by

Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Calvo (1978) suggests that there might be a rationale for

central bank secrecy because as this same Fed official stated, “most politicians have a shorter

time horizon than is optimal for monetary policy.” In order to avoid the pressures from

politicians on central banks to pursue overly expansionary monetary policy to exploit the short-

run tradeoff between employment and inflation, central banks might want to obscure their

actions and avoid the time-inconsistency problem by focusing on the long-run and “just doing it”




       1
       As quoted in “Monetary Zeal: How Federal Reserve Under Volcker Finally Slowed
Down Inflation,” Wall Street Journal, December 7, 1984, p. 23.
as McCallum (1995) has proposed.2 Another way to deal with the time-inconsistency problem is

to appoint conservative central bankers, as suggested by Rogoff (1985), who put more weight on

controlling inflation relative to output than does the general public and thus will resist

inflationary policies. However, for this to work, conservative central bankers need to be

independent of the political process, which is facilitated by central bank secrecy.

       There are several problems with this secrecy approach to dealing with the time-

inconsistency problem. First, having secretive central banks is inherently undemocratic.

Although it makes sense to insulate central banks from short-run pressures to pursue overly

expansionary monetary policy, basic democratic principles require that the central bank be

accountable for its actions: this requires that the public understands what the central bank is

doing. In addition, democratic principles indicate that the preferences of policymaking need to

be aligned with those of the society at large. Furthermore, in the long run a central bank cannot

operate without the support of the public. A secretive central bank may heighten suspicions that

it is not acting in the public interest and so can eventually lead to curbs on its independence.

       With the advent of inflation targeting in the early 1990s, central banks have been taking a

different route to solving the time-inconsistency problem. They now recognize that transparency

and improved communication with the public and the markets is key to having a successful

monetary policy. Inflation targeting has promoted a huge increase in transparency about

inflation objectives and stresses regular communication with the public.3 Inflation-targeting

       2
         The model of Barro and Gordon (1983) has the time-inconsistency problem residing
inside the central bank. But as I have argued elsewhere in Mishkin (2000), the source of the
time-inconsistency problem is in the political process because central bankers are very aware of
the time-inconsistency problem and are indeed extremely adverse to falling into a time-
inconsistency trap.
       3
           For example, see Bernanke et al (1999) and Mishkin (1999).
                                                 -2-
central banks now have frequent, periodic communications with the government, and their

officials take every opportunity to make public speeches on their monetary policy strategy.

These channels are also commonly now used by central banks that have not adopted inflation

targeting such as the Federal Reserve, but inflation-targeting central banks have taken public

outreach a step further: not only have they engaged in extended public information campaigns,

even engaging in the distribution of glossy brochures as in New Zealand, but they have engaged

in publication of Inflation Report-type documents. Inflation Reports are far more user friendly

than previous central bank documents and explain the goals and limitations of monetary policy,

including the rationale for inflation targets, the numerical values of the inflation targets and how

they were determined, how the inflation targets are to be achieved, given current economic

conditions, and reasons for any deviations from targets.

       This emphasis on transparency and communication has produced several benefits for

central banks. By explicitly announcing their objectives on the inflation front, central banks

have been able to increase their credibility and anchor inflation expectations (Levin et al., 2004).

Not only has this helped them achieve low and stable inflation, but output volatility has, if

anything, fallen. The strengthening of the nominal anchor apparently helps move the economy

toward the efficient frontier of the tradeoff between inflation and output gap variability,

generating better performance on both the inflation and the output fronts.4

       Transparency and communication, especially when it demonstrates the success in

achieving a pre-announced and well-defined inflation target, has also helped build public support

for a central bank's independence and for its policies. As documented in Mishkin and Posen

(1997) and Bernanke et al. (1999), the increased transparency of its inflation targeting regime led
       4
           The so-called Taylor curve first outlined in Taylor (1979).

                                                 -3-
to increased support for the Bank of Canada policies, while it led to the granting of operational

independence to the Bank of England in May of 1997. Indeed, when announcing the decision,

Gordon Brown, the Chancellor of the Exchequer (equivalent to the finance minister or the

secretary of the treasury) indicated that a key factor behind granting the Bank of England greater

independence was that the increased transparency of the inflation targeting regime enhanced

political oversight. An important benefit of the transparency of an inflation-targeting regime,

therefore, is that it makes it more palatable to have an independent central bank which focuses on

long-run objectives, but which is consistent with a democratic society because it is accountable.

       Although inflation targeting has increased transparency with substantial benefits,

transparency is far from complete. As seen in Table 1, although almost all inflation-targeting

central banks publish their inflation forecasts in their Inflation Reports (the Bank of Israel and

Central Bank of Turkey being the only exceptions),5 a larger number do not publish output

forecasts (the central banks of Australia, Philippines, Poland, Romania, South Africa, South

Korea and Turkey).6 Furthermore, except for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and most

recently the central banks of Colombia, inflation-targeting central banks do not formally




       5
          The Bank of Israel publishes an inflation forecast based on a survey of private sector
expectations, but not its own inflation forecast. The central bank of Turkey does not officially
call its framework inflation targeting but instead refers to it as “implicit inflation targeting”.
However, the end-of-year inflation target is agreed on by the government and the IMF. Like
Israel, the central Bank of Turkey does not publish its own forecasts, but does publish inflation
forecasts based on a private sector survey. Note that although the European Central Bank does
not call itself an inflation targeter, it does have an explicit inflation objective and so has some
elements of an inflation targeting regime. The European Central Bank does publish its inflation
and output forecasts.
       6
         The central banks of Australia and South Korea do announce output forecasts in other
settings, but the frequency of these forecasts is not as high as in Inflation Reports.

                                                -4-
announce their forecasts for the future path for the interest-rate policy instrument.7 No central

bank describes their objective function for monetary policy, while almost all central banks are

reluctant to discuss publicly their concerns about output fluctuations. This raises the question

whether central banks should increase transparency much further. Some monetary economists,

with the most prominent example being Lars Svensson (2002), suggest that the answer is yes.

Indeed, he advocates not only publication of output and inflation forecasts, but also

announcement of projections of the future policy path and the central bank objective function.

But can transparency go too far?

       To answer this question, we need to keep the following basic question in mind: Does

increased transparency help the central bank to do its job – that is, enable it to conduct monetary

policy optimally with an appropriate focus on long-run objectives? The answer might well be no,

particularly if the increase in transparency violates the KISS (Keep It Simple Stupid) principle.

This paper uses this basic question as the lens through which it evaluates how far transparency

should go. In the next three sections I look at the following three questions: 1) Should the

central bank publish its forecasts including projections of the future path of policy rates? 2)

Should the central bank announce its objective function? 3) How should the central bank talk

about output fluctuations? The final section contains some concluding remarks.




       7
          The central banks of Norway, England, Brazil, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Iceland
and Poland do publish projections of the future policy-rate path, but it is based on market
expectations and is not their assessment of the expected policy-rate path. The central bank of
Norway does have an extensive discussion of future monetary policy in their Inflation Report,
but it is still quite qualitative. Other inflation targeting central banks such as the central banks of
the Czech Republic, Iceland, and Romania have provided less formal discussions of their
assessment of the future policy rate path.

                                                  -5-
                                         II.
                   Should the Central Bank Publish its Forecasts
              Including Projections of the Future Path of Policy Rates?

        Inflation targeting theory, as illustrated in the simple model of Svensson (1997), shows

that inflation forecasts are central to the conduct of monetary policy.      His model comprises an

aggregate supply curve in which the change in inflation is affected by the output gap with a one

period (one year) lag:



                 πt = πt-1 + γyt-1 + εt                                                                  (1)



and an aggregate demand curve in which the output gap is a function of the past output gap to

reflect persistence, and to the real interest rate, again with a one period (one year) lag:



                 yt = ρyt-1 - φ(it-1 - πt-1) + ηt                                                        (2)



where πt = pt - pt-1 = the inflation rate at time t (with pt the log of the price level), yt = the output

gap (the log of the actual to potential output), it = the nominal interest rate, and εt and ηt, i.i.d.

aggregate supply and demand shocks, respectively.

        Optimal monetary policy involves setting the interest rate each period to minimize the

intertemporal loss function:

loss function:


                     ∞
                 E t ∑ δ τ − t Lτ                                                                        (3)
                    τ =t


                                                    -6-
where δ<1 is the authorities' discount rate and where the period-by-period loss function is:



                Lτ = (πτ - π*)2/2 + λyτ2/2                                                          (4)



In the case of λ = 0, where the central bank only cares about inflation fluctuations, Svensson

(1997) has shown that the optimal setting of the interest rate is one in which the following target

rule is followed:



                Etπt+2=π*                                                                           (5)



In other words, the monetary policy instrument is set so as to attain the inflation target at the

horizon over which policy takes effect, which in this model is two periods (years) ahead. If λ >

0, so that monetary policymakers are also concerned about output fluctuations, then the interest

rate instrument is also set according to a target rule in which the approach to the inflation target

is more gradual, i.e.,8



                Etπt+2 - π* = c(Etπt+1 -π*)                                                         (6)




        8
         Models with more forward-looking behavior such as the dynamic new Keynesian model
in Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) would yield similar conclusions.

                                                 -7-
Svensson (1997) calls this type of policy reaction "flexible inflation targeting", and the evidence

discussed in Bernanke et al. (1999) suggests that it is a more realistic approximation of what

inflation targeting countries do in practice.

       Equations 5 and 6 illustrate that central bank decisions about monetary policy necessarily

focus on the inflation forecast, and so inflation targeting is more precisely described as being

“inflation forecast targeting”. Clearly if inflation forecasts are key to the conduct of monetary

policy in an inflation targeting regime then full transparency requires that the inflation forecast of

the central bank be revealed to the public. Because inflation forecasts are generated with

forecasts of other variables, especially output, full transparency also requires that forecasts of

these variables are published as well.9 There are a number of advantages from publication of

forecasts. First, publication of forecasts can help the public and the markets understand central

bank actions, thus making it easier for them to assess whether the central bank is serious about

achieving its inflation goal. Second, publication of forecasts enables the public to evaluate the

quality of central bank forecasts which will enhance central bank credibility if these forecasts

are viewed as constructed using best practice. Third, publication of forecasts increases the

incentives for the central bank to produce good forecasts because a poor forecasting record

would be embarrassing.

       The three advantages above together point to the more general advantage from

publication of forecasts, that it increases central bank accountability. Because of the long lags in

the effects of monetary policy, which in the simple Svensson model is two periods (years),

inflation outcomes are revealed only after a substantial lag. Thus without additional information,


       9
        However, for reasons outlined in the next section, there are arguments against the
publication of forecasts of output gaps.

                                                 -8-
the inflation target is unable to send immediate signals to both the public and the markets as to

whether the current stance of money is appropriate. Because as equation 5 and 6 illustrate,

optimal monetary policy involves “inflation forecast targeting”, publication of forecasts provides

immediate information that helps the public to assess whether the central bank is taking the

appropriate steps to meet its objectives. If the public and the markets do not think that the

central bank’s forecasts are honest, or that the current policy stance is inconsistent with the

inflation forecast, or that the inflation forecast differs too markedly from the stated target, they

can immediately voice their criticisms of the central bank. Increased accountability of the central

bank is then the result.

       However, despite the obvious advantages of publishing forecasts, there are some thorny

problems. The first is the tricky issue: What path of the policy interest rate should the forecast

be conditioned on? There are three choices: 1) a constant interest rate path, 2) market forecasts

of the future policy rates, or 3) a central bank projection of the policy interest rate path. A

constant interest path would almost surely never be optimal because future projected changes in

interest rates will be necessary to keep inflation on the appropriate target path.10 The second

choice is also problematic because, as Bernanke and Woodford (1997) have shown, there is a

circularity if the central bank sets its policy rate on the basis of market forecasts. The markets

forecasts are just guesses of what the central bank will be doing, so if the central bank just does

what the market expects there is nothing that pins down the system and inflation outcomes will

be indeterminate. Theory therefore tells us that the only appropriate and logically consistent

choice is the third one, the central bank projection of the policy path. Clearly, an inflation

forecast is meaningless without specifying what policy it is conditioned on, and this is why

       10
            See Svensson (2003a, 2003b) and Woodford (2003).
                                              -9-
Svensson (2002) argues that in publishing its forecasts the central bank also needs to announce

its projection of the policy- rate path used in producing its forecast, which will almost surely be

time-varying.

       Although Svensson’s argument for announcing the projection of the policy path is

theoretically sound, announcing the policy path is highly problematic. One objection to a central

bank announcing its policy projection, raised by Charles Goodhart (2001), a former member of

the Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank of England, is that it would complicate the decision

making process of the committee that makes monetary policy decisions. The current procedure

of most central banks is to make decisions only about the current setting of the policy rate.

Goodhart argues that “a great advantage of restricting the choice of what to do now, this month,

is that it makes the decision relatively simple, even stark.”11 If a policy projection with time-

varying rates is announced, this clearly requires that the monetary policy committee come to an

agreement on this policy path. Svensson (2002) argues that this could be done by a “simple”

voting procedure, but this procedure is far from simple and I agree with Goodhart that this is

unlikely to work. Forcing committee members to make a decision about the future path of rates

and not just the rate today may complicate matters so much that the decision-making process

could be impaired. Although committee members might have some idea of a future direction for

policy rates, they are likely to have trouble thinking about a precise policy-rate path rather than

just the setting of the rate today. Furthermore, getting committee members to agree on a future

path of the policy rate might be very difficult and could end up being very contentious.12

       11
            Goodhart (2001), page 173.
       12
          Kohn (2000) comes to a similar conclusion. He reports that that members of the Bank
of England’s Monetary Policy Committee stressed the difficulty of getting agreement on a future
path of interest rates.
                                              -10-
       I had a glimpse of the problems with projections of the policy-rate path when I sat in on

FOMC meetings while I was the director of research at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York

from 1994 to 1997. Upon my arrival at the Fed, the green book forecasts (prepared by the Board

staff) were conditioned on a non-constant interest rate path. Several of the FOMC members

objected to this procedure and this was probably for two reasons. First, having a staff projection

of future interest rates might lead to some prejudgement of the committee’s decision. Second, it

is far easier to make a decision just on the rate today and not have to discuss the path for future

policy rates at the same time. The objections eventually won the day: the procedure for

generating the greenbook forecasts was changed so that they are now conditioned on a constant

policy-rate path, at least in the short term. Thus I side with Goodhart. Announcing a projection

for the policy-rate path which would require agreement on this path by the committee deciding

on monetary policy would be counterproductive.

       The second problem with announcing a projection of the policy rate path is that it might

complicate communication with the public. Although economists understand that any policy

path projected by the central bank is inherently conditional because changes in the state of the

economy will require a change in the policy path, the public is far less likely to understand this.

When new information comes in and the central bank changes the policy-rate from its projected

path, the public may see this as a reneging on its announced policy or an indication that the

central bank’s previous policy settings were a mistake. Thus even when the central bank is

conducting its policy in an optimal manner, deviations from its projected policy path may be

viewed as a central bank failure and could hurt the central bank’s credibility. In addition, the

deviations of the policy-rate from its projected path might be seen as flip flops on the part of the



                                                -11-
central bank. As we often see in political campaigns, when a candidate changes his position

even if it reflects changes in circumstances and thus reflects sound judgement, the candidate is

vulnerable to attacks by his or her opponents that he or she does not have leadership qualities.

Wouldn’t central banks be subject to the same criticism when changing circumstances would

force them to change the policy-rate from its previously projected path? The result might be a

weakening of support for the central bank and its independence.

       The recent Federal Reserve experience with the language of their post FOMC statement

illustrates the problem of the public not understanding that projected policy paths are conditional

on the evolution of the data. In order to underscore its commitment to preventing a deflationary

spiral from getting underway in the United States, the FOMC announced in August 2003 that it

would maintain policy accommodation for a “considerable period”. As Eggertsson and

Woodford (2003) have shown, a commitment to keeping the policy rate unusually low beyond

the time when the economy begins to recover is an important policy tool to deal with

deflationary shocks. However, as is clear from Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), the length of

the “considerable period” is dependent on the actual evolution of the economy. The public may

not fully understand this and so if the economy comes back far stronger than is anticipated,

monetary policy may need to be tightened even when there has been a commitment to easy

monetary policy for a “considerable period”. We would then have the problems described

above where the central bank’s credibility might be tarnished. Thus the commitment to a policy

path, even when it is needed, is not without its problems. As is indicated in Ito and Mishkin

(2004), I still believe that deflationary environments, like the one we see in Japan, are

sufficiently damaging that a commitment to the zero interest rate for an extended period is



                                                -12-
needed to reflate the economy. However, the cost of a commitment to a projected policy-rate

path is trickier when the deflation risks are not as serious. This problem has been recognized by

officials at the Fed, and this explains why they have been seeking an exit strategy from their

commitment to a policy-rate path by first changing the language in January 2004 to say that the

FOMC can be “patient” in removing policy accommodation and then in May 2004 to say that

policy accommodation can be removed at a pace that is likely to be “measured”.

       The bottom line is that except in exceptional deflationary circumstances like the one

Japan has experienced, announcement of a policy-rate path does not have much to recommend it.

It is likely to complicate policy discussion within central banks which might impair the quality of

monetary policy decisions, and it also may lead to a loss of credibility of the central bank and a

weakening of the support for central bank policies. Thus announcement of its projection of the

policy-rate path may make it harder for the central bank to conduct monetary policy optimally

with an appropriate focus on long-run objectives.

       The problem with announcing the projection of the future policy path creates a problem

for publishing forecasts. Clearly, in order for a forecast to be evaluated, the central bank must

reveal the policy path that it is conditioned on. But if it does not make sense for central banks to

announce their projection of a time-varying, policy-rate path, then the forecasts that they publish

cannot be based on such a projection. The alternative is for the central bank to publish forecasts

that are either conditioned on the policy-rate remaining unchanged or on market expectations of

future policy rates. Indeed this is what almost all central banks who publish forecasts do. Only




                                                -13-
the central banks of New Zealand and Colombia publish their forecasts based on a projected

policy-rate path which they intend to set in the future.13

       If publishing forecasts based on a projected policy-rate path may do more harm than good,

and yet they are the only logically consistent approach for producing these forecasts, then is

publishing forecasts based on a constant policy-rate or on market expectations of the policy rate

truly transparent? After all, the central bank knows that neither of these interest rate paths is

what it plans to do and the public and markets know this as well.14 Publishing these logically

inconsistent forecasts might even be viewed as non-transparent and so could potentially damage

the central bank’s credibility.15 The case for publishing forecasts is thus no longer clear cut:

there are costs and benefits. However, for central banks that have lower credibility, particularly

those in emerging market economies, there may be a greater need for them to publish forecasts in

order to provide more information to the public, even if the forecasts are not based on the central

bank’s projection of future policy rates.




       13
          However, the central banks of Brazil, the Czech Republic, Norway and the United
Kingdom do publish forecasts based on projections of the future policy-rate path that are based
on market expectations. Norway does have an extensive section in its Inflation Report on the
setting of future policy rates which is qualitative.
       14
        This criticism of the Bank of England’s published forecasts has been raised by Martijn
and Samiei (1999).
       15
          Although a forecast based on a constant-interest-rate path is logically inconsistent, it is
internally consistent: i.e., a forecast can be conditioned on any assumption about an interest-rate
path. Indeed, Edey and Stone (2004, this volume) argue that if a monetary policy committee
makes decisions based on unchanged policy then the publication of these forecasts is consistent
with transparency.

                                                 -14-
                                       III.
              Should the Central Bank Reveal its Objective Function?

       In order for public and the markets to fully understand what a central bank is doing they

need to understand the central bank’s objectives. As argued in the introduction, the

announcement of an explicit, numerical objective for inflation is an important step in the right

direction and has clear cut benefits. However, central banks are not “inflation nutters” (King,

1997): they do care about output fluctuations as well as inflation fluctuations, and so λ > 0 in the

central bank objective function in equation 4. Thus announcing an inflation target is not enough:

full transparency requires that the central bank reveal its objective function (Svensson, 2002).

       Again, we need to ask the question whether revealing its objective function will help the

central bank to do its job? I will argue that the answer is no because pushing transparency

further in this direction again violates the KISS (Keep It Simple Stupid) principle and is likely to

hinder the communication process.

       The first problem with announcing an objective function is that it might be quite hard for

members of a monetary policy committee to specify an objective function. Having watched how

members of a monetary policy committee operate, I can attest that members of monetary policy

boards don’t think in terms of objective functions and would have a very hard time in describing

what theirs is. Indeed, I would suggest that most monetary economists, even brilliant ones,

would have trouble specifying what their λ would be. A counter to this argument is that the λ

could be backed out by revealed preference. Monetary policy committee members could be

confronted with hypothetical choices about acceptable paths of inflation and output gaps and

then their choices would reveal their λ’s. Although, committee members would be able to do



                                                -15-
this when confronted with a real world situation, and this is effectively what was done in Brazil

in early 2003, I think they would find this difficult to do when the choices are hypothetical – I

know I would.

       A second problem, raised by Goodhart (2001), is that it would be difficult for a

committee to agree on its objective function. As mentioned above, committee members might

have trouble defining their own objective function, but also because the composition of the

committee changes frequently and existing members may change their views on objectives

depending on circumstances, they would have to revisit the decision on the committee’s

objective function frequently. Deciding on the committee’s objective function would thus

substantially increase the complexity of the decision process and might also be quite contentious.

This violation of the KISS principle would then have the potential to weaken the quality of

monetary policy decisions.

       A third problem is that it is far from clear who should decide on the objective function. If

the members of the monetary policy board do so, isn’t this a violation of the democratic principle

that the objectives of bureaucracies should be set by the political process? An alternative would

be for the government to do so. But if we think that it would be hard enough for a monetary

policy committee to do this, it would clearly be even more difficult for politicians to decide on

the objective function.

       Even if it were easy for the monetary policy committee or the government to come to a

decision on the objective function, would it be easy to communicate it to the public? If

economists and members of a monetary policy committee have trouble quantifying their

objective function, is it likely that the public would understand what the central bank was talking



                                               -16-
about when it announced it objective function? Announcement of the objective function would

be likely only to complicate the communication process with the public and is another violation

of the KISS principle.

       The announcement of the central bank’s objective function can add a further

complication to the communication process that might have even more severe consequences for

the ability of the central bank to do its job well. The KISS principle argues for articulation of

monetary policy in as simple a way as possible. The beauty of inflation target regimes is that by

focusing on one objective -- inflation -- communication is fairly straightforward. On the other

hand, with the announcement of the objective function, the central bank will be announcing that

the central bank has two objectives, minimizing both output and inflation fluctuations.

Discussion of output as well as inflation objectives can confuse the public and make it more

likely that the public will see the mission of the central bank as elimination of short-run output

fluctuations, thus worsening the time-inconsistency problem.

       One outcome is that it may make it more likely that workers and firms will raise wages

and prices because they know that the monetary authorities are likely to accommodate these rises

by pursuing expansionary policy to prevent output gaps from developing. The result is that a

self-fulfilling equilibrium can occur in which wages and prices rise, then monetary policy

accommodates this rise, and this leads to further rises in wages and prices, and so on, thus

leading to a new equilibrium with higher inflation without a reduction in output fluctuations.

Chari, Christiano and Evans (1998) have described this bad equilibrium as an "expectation trap."

Discussing monetary policy objectives in terms of output fluctuations can thus lead to a loss of




                                                -17-
inflation-fighting credibility for the central bank, with the result that the inflation-output

fluctuations tradeoff worsens.

        Announcement of the objective function not only requires the announcement of λ and the

inflation target, but it also requires the central bank to announce its estimates of the current and

future output gaps and hence its estimate of potential output and its growth rate. The

announcement of estimates of potential output, and particularly its growth rate, may increase the

probability that the public sees them as a target for monetary policy and thus may increase

political pressures on the central bank to eliminate output gaps and pursue high growth in the

short run, with the resulting negative consequences mentioned above. This problem is likely to

be even more damaging because potential output is very hard to measure.

        One measurement problem for potential output occurs because the monetary policy

authorities have to estimate it with real-time data, i.e., data that is available at the time they set

the policy instrument. GDP data is frequently revised substantially and this is one reason why

output gaps are mismeasured in real time. Even more important: it is notoriously hard to know

what potential GDP and its growth rate actually are without hindsight. For example, in the

United States it was not until the 1980s, that policymakers recognized that potential GDP growth

had slowed markedly after 1973: Orphanides (2001) has shown that the errors in measures of

output gaps have been very large in the postwar period.

        An even more severe measurement problem occurs because conceptually the yt that

belongs in the aggregate supply curve in equation (1) is not at all clear and may be quite different

from conventionally measured output gaps. Clarida, Gali and Gertler (1999) point out that new

Keynesian aggregate supply curves should have yt specified as a marginal cost measure rather



                                                  -18-
than an output gap and they find that the marginal cost measure has substantially different

movements and timing than the conventionally measured output gap. McCallum and Nelson

(2000) and McCallum (2001) argue that conventionally measured output gaps which estimate the

gap as deviations from a trend differ substantially from more theoretically grounded measures

based on the output level that would prevail in the absence of nominal price stickiness. It is true

that there are measurement problems with inflation as well as output gaps, but both the

conceptual and real-time measurement problems for inflation are of a far smaller magnitude.

       The severe measurement problems for the output gap could interact with an increased

focus on eliminating output gaps to produce serious policy mistakes as occurred in the United

States in the 1970s. Orphanides (1998) shows that the use of real-time data of output gaps might

lead to such inaccurate estimates that active monetary policy which reacts strongly to output gaps

increases economic instability. Indeed, Orphanides (2002) argues that the reason for the Federal

Reserve's poor performance during the 1970s was not that it was unconcerned with inflation, but

rather that it focused too much on eliminating output gaps.

       Given the objections raised here, it is not surprising that no central bank has revealed its

objective function to the public. Furthermore, the discussion here suggests that even if the

central bank does not announce its objective function, announcement of current and future

potential output and output gap estimates still has the potential to worsen monetary policy

performance. Thus the discussion also argues against the publication of central bank estimates

and forecasts of the potential output and output gap even if publication of inflation and output

forecasts is felt to be beneficial. Indeed although the majority of inflation-targeting central banks

publish output and inflation forecasts, only the central banks of New Zealand, Norway, Iceland,



                                                -19-
the Czech Republic, Hungary and Colombia publish their forecasts of potential output or output

gaps, while the central banks of Canada and Sweden publish only current estimates of the output

gap (Table 1).




                                       IV
             How Should Central Banks Talk About Output Fluctuations?


       One advantage of a central bank announcing its objective function is that it would make

clear the central bank’s views on how it will deal with output fluctuations. But since central

banks do not announce their objective functions, and arguments against doing this are strong,

they still have the problem of how to talk abut output fluctuations. The reality is that central

bankers, whether they inflation target or not, are extremely reluctant to discuss concerns about

output fluctuations even though their actions show that they do care about them. This lack of

transparency is the “the dirty little secret of central banking”. One remarkable manifestation of

this occurred in August of 1994 at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s Jackson Hole

Conference, when Alan Blinder, then the vice-chairman of the FOMC, had the temerity to

mention that a short-run tradeoff between output and inflation exists and that therefore monetary

policy should be concerned about minimizing output as well as inflation fluctuations. Blinder

was then pilloried by many central bankers and in the press, with a Newsweek columnist

declaring that he was not qualified to be a central banker.16 From an academic economist’s

perspective, this was quite amazing since Alan Blinder didn’t say anything that was inconsistent

       16
            Samuelson (1994).

                                                -20-
with what our models tell us or what central bankers deep down believe. However, it does

indicate the discomfort that central bankers as a group have with discussing the role of output

fluctuations in the conduct of monetary policy.

       The problems with revealing the objective function discussed in the previous section

explain why central bankers have difficulty with being transparent about their concerns about

output fluctuations. Central bankers fear that if they are explicit about the need to minimize

output fluctuations as well as inflation fluctuations, politicians will use this to pressure the

central bank to pursue a short-run strategy of overly expansionary policy that will lead to poor

long-run outcomes. Furthermore, a focus on output gaps could lead to policy mistakes similar to

those that occurred in the United States in the 1970s. The response to these problems is that

central bankers engage in a “don’t ask, don’t tell” strategy.

       However, the unwillingness of central banks to talk about their concerns about reducing

output fluctuations creates two very serious problems. First, is that a don’t-ask-don’t tell strategy

is just plain dishonest. Doing one thing but saying another is the height of non-transparency, and

central banks not admitting that they care about output fluctuations can erode confidence in other

elements of their transparency that are clearly beneficial. Second, if central bankers do not

discuss their concerns about output fluctuations, they may end up being characterized as

“inflation nutters”, and this can cause an erosion of support for a central bank’s policies and

independence because this set of preferences is clearly inconsistent with the public’s.

       The case for increasing transparency with regard to central banks’ concerns about output

fluctuations are quite strong. But how can central banks do this?




                                                 -21-
        One answer is that a central bank can discuss the setting of its policy instruments in terms

of the target rule in (6). It can announce that it will not try to hit its inflation target over too short

a horizon because this would result in unacceptably high output losses, especially when the

economy gets hit by shocks that knock it substantially away from its long-run inflation goal.

Inflation targeting banks have been moving in this direction: for example, the Reserve Bank of

New Zealand has modified its inflation-targeting regime to lengthen the horizon over which it

tries to achieve its inflation target.17

        Although inflation-targeting central banks have lengthened the horizon for their targets to

two years or so, with the Bank of England being a prominent example, this still does not solve

the problem because it gives the impression that the horizon for inflation targets is fixed, which

is not flexible enough.18 Up to now, the use of a specific horizon like two years has not been a

problem for inflation targeting in advanced countries like the United Kingdom, because inflation

has not been subject to large shocks, so that inflation has remained close to the target level. In

this case, having the horizon for the target equal to the two-year horizon at which policy changes

take effect, as in equation 5, is consistent with optimal policy. However, as we have seen in

equation 6, when there is a concern about output fluctuations and the inflation rate is shocked

sufficiently away from its long-run target, the path for the medium-term inflation target horizon

needs to be modified.


        17
             See Sherwin (1999), Drew and Orr (1999) and Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2000).

        18
          The fixed horizon is also problematic because it is inconsistent with optimal monetary
policy: e.g. see Woodford (forthcoming). Indeed, critics of inflation targeting, most notably Don
Kohn (forthcoming), who is member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve, have
also worried that inflation targeting may be too rigid because inflation-targeting central banks in
advanced economies have often adopted a fixed horizon for their inflation targets.

                                                  -22-
       A striking example of how large shocks to inflation can be handled occurred in Brazil

recently (Fraga, Goldfajn and Minella, 2003). Brazil experienced a major exchange rate shock in

2002 because of concerns that the likely winner in the presidential election would pursue

populist policies that would lead to currency depreciation. The resulting depreciation then led to

a substantial overshoot of the Brazilian inflation target. In January 2003, the Banco Central do

Brasil announced a procedure for how it would modify its inflation targets. First, the central

bank estimated the regulated-price shock to be 1.7%. Then taking into account the nature and

persistence of the shocks, it estimated the inertia from past shocks to be 4.2% of which 2/3 was

to be accepted, resulting in a futher adjustment of 2.8%. Then the central bank added these two

numbers to the previously announced target of 4% to get an adjusted target for 2003 of 8.5%

(=4% + 1.7% + 2.8%). The central bank then announced the adjusted target in an open letter

sent to the Minister of Finance in January 2003, which explained that getting to the non-adjusted

target of 4% too quickly would entail far too high a loss of output. Specifically, the

announcement indicated that an attempt to achieve an inflation rate of 6.5% in 2003 would be

expected to entail a decline of 1.6% of GDP, while trying to achieve the previous target of 4%

would be expected to lead to an even larger decline of GDP of 7.3%.

       The procedure followed by the Banco Central do Brasil had tremendous transparency,

both in articulating why the inflation target was missed and also in explaining why the new target

path for inflation was chosen. The discussion of alternative target paths, with the explanation

that lower inflation paths would lead to large output losses demonstrated that the central bank did

indeed care about output fluctuations, thus demonstrating that it was not an “inflation nutter” and

that its concern about output losses was aligned with similar concerns by the public.



                                               -23-
       Even though advanced economies have not yet had inflation shocks of the magnitude that

Brazil has recently experienced, outlining the procedures that they will use to respond to any

future adverse shocks provides a vehicle for them to explain that they do indeed care about

output fluctuations.19 By announcing that they would do what the Brazilians have done if a

situation arose in which inflation were shocked substantially away from the long-run goal,

central bankers can get the dirty little secret out of the closet that they do have an appropriate

concern about output fluctuations. Yet , they will still be able to assure the public that they

continue to worry about the long-run and the importance of achieving price stability. A

procedure like the one followed by Brazil conveys that the central bank cares about output

fluctuations in a forward-looking context because it highlights decisions that the central bank

will make about the future path of inflation and the horizon over which inflation will return to

the target. It therefore continues to make clear that the central bank is focused on output

fluctuations in a longer-run and not a short-run context, which is necessary for minimizing the

time-inconsistency problem.

        Monetary authorities can further the public's understanding that they care about reducing

output fluctuations in the long run by emphasizing that monetary policy needs to be just as

vigilant in preventing inflation from falling too low as it is from preventing it from being too

high. They can do this (and some central banks have) by explaining that an explicit inflation

target may help the monetary authorities stabilize the economy because they can be more

aggressive in easing monetary policy in the face of negative demand shocks to the economy
       19
          Central banks in advanced countries do have an awareness of the need to modify the
inflation path if the economy is subjected to large shocks. For example, in the United Kingdom,
the inflation targeting regime stipulates that if inflation is knocked more than 1 percentage point
away from the target (now 2%), then the Bank of England will need to specify the path of
inflation and the length of time that it will take to get back to the target.

                                                 -24-
without being concerned that this will cause a blowout in inflation expectations. However, in

order to keep the communication strategy clear, the explanation of a monetary policy easing in

the face of negative demand shocks needs to indicate that it is consistent with the preservation of

price stability.

        In addition, central banks can also clarify that they care about reducing output

fluctuations by indicating that when the economy is very far below any reasonable measure of

potential output, they will take expansionary actions to stimulate economic recovery. In this case,

measurement error of potential output is likely to swamped by the size of the output gap so it is

far clearer that expansionary policy is appropriate and that inflation is unlikely to rise from such

actions. In this situation, the case for taking actions to close the output gap is much stronger and

does not threaten the credibility of the central bank in its pursuit of price stability.



                                              V.
                                      Concluding Remarks

        Transparency is a virtue, but like all virtues it can go too far. The famous fashion

designer Chanel came up with the marvelous dictum that “You can never be too rich or too thin.”

But you can be too thin – either anorexia or starvation is a killer. Similarly central banks can be

too transparent. Central bank transparency must always be thought of as a means to an end.

Transparency is beneficial when it serves to simplify communication with the public and helps

generate support for central banks to conduct monetary policy optimally with an appropriate

focus on long-run objectives. Some types of transparency may not do this.




                                                  -25-
       This paper has argued that some suggestions for increased transparency, particularly a

central bank announcement of its objective function or projections of the path of the policy

interest rate, will complicate the communication process and weaken support for a central bank

focus on long-run objectives. Transparency can indeed go too far.

       However, there is one area in which the lack of central bank transparency does create

problems: the unwillingness of many central banks to honestly discuss that they do care about

reducing output fluctuations. Here transparency could be substantially improved. By describing

procedures for how the path and horizon of inflation targets would be modified in the face of

large shocks, by emphasizing that monetary policy will be just as vigilant in preventing inflation

from falling too low as it is from preventing it from being too high, and by indicating that the

central bank will pursue expansionary policies when output falls very far below potential,

central banks can get the dirty little secret out of the closet that they do care about output

fluctuations. These steps to improve transparency will increase support for the central bank’s

policies and independence, but avoid a focus on the short run that could interfere with the ability

of the central bank to do its job effectively.




                                                 -26-
                                         References

Ba rro, Robert J., and David Gordon. 1983. "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model." Journal of Political Economy 91, no. 4 (August): 589-610.

Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, Adam S. Posen. 1998. Inflation
Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience (Princeton University Press: Princeton,
N.J., 1999).

Bernanke, Ben S. and Michael Woodford, 1997. “Inflation Forecasts and Monetary Policy,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 29: 653-85.

Calvo, Guillermo. 1978. "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in the Monetary
Economy." Econometrica 46, no. 6 (November): 1411-28.

Chari,, V.V., Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1998), "Expectation Traps and
Discretion," Journal of Economic Theory, vol. 81, no. 2): 462-92.

Clarida, Richard, Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999), "The Science of Monetary Policy,"
Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 34, No. 4 (December): 1661-1707.

Drew, Aaron and Adrian Orr (1999), "The Reserve Bank's Role in the Recent Business Cycle:
Actions and Evolution," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 62, No. 1.

Edey, Malcolm and Andrew Stone. 2004. “A Perspective on Monetary Policy Transparency and
Communication,” presented at Reserve Bank of Australia’s annual conference, The Future of
Inflation Targeting, August 9-10.

Eggertsson, G.B. and M. Woodford. 2003. “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal
Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1: 139-211.

Fraga, Arminio, Goldfajn, Ilan and Andre Minella. 2003. “Inflation Targeting in Emerging
Market Economies,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Greider, W. 1987. The Secrets of the Temple (Touchstone: New York)

Goodhart, Charles A.E., 2001. “Monetary Transmission Lags and the Formulation of the Policy
Decision on Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review (July/August): 165-181.

Ito, T. and F.S. Mishkin, 2004. “Monetary Policy in Japan: Problems and Solutions” Columbia
University mimeo. June.

King, Mervyn, 1997. "Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, 39: 81-97.

                                             -27-
Kohn, Donald L. 2000. “Report to the Non-Executive Directors of the Court of the Bank of
England on Monetary Policy Processes and the Work of Monetary Analysis,” October 18,
www.bankofengland.co.uk/kohn.pdf.

Kohn, Donald L. Forthcoming. “Panel Discussion: Inflation Targeting,” Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis, Review.

Kydland, Finn, and Edward Prescott. 1977. "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of
Optimal Plans." Journal of Political Economy 85, no. 3 (June): 473-92.

Levin, Andrew, Natalucci, Fabio M. And Jeremy M. Piger. 2004. “The Macroeconomic Effects
of Inflation Targeting,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, forthcoming.

Martijn, J.K. and Samiei, H. 1999. “Central Bank Independence and the Conduct of Monetary
Policy in the United Kingdom,” Working Paper 99/170, International Monetary Fund.

McCallum, Bennett T. 1995. “Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence.”
American Economic Review 85, no. 2 (May): 207-11.

McCallum, Bennett T. (2001), "Should Monetary Policy Respond Strongly to Output Gaps?"
American Economic Review, Vol. 91 (May): 258-62.

McCallum, Bennett T. and Edward Nelson (2000), "Timeless Perspective vs. Discretionary
Monetary Policy in Forward-Looking Models," NBER Working Paper No. 7915 (September).

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1986, The Economics of Money, Banking, and Financial Markets (Little
Brown and Co.: Boston)

Mishkin, Frederic S. 1999. "International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy Regimes,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 43, #3 (June): 579-606.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2000. "What Should Central Banks Do?" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis
Review, vol. 82, #6 (November/December): 1-13.

Mishkin, Frederic S. and Adam S. Posen (1997), "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four
Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol. 3, #3 (August):
9-110

Orphanides, Athanasios (1998), "Monetary Policy Evaluation with Noisy Information," Federal
Reserve Board FEDS paper No. 98-50 (October).

Orphanides, Athanasios (2001), "Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data," American
Economic Review, Vol. 91, No. 4 (September): 964-85.


                                             -28-
Orphanides, Athanasios (2002), "Monetary Policy Rules and the Great Inflation," American
Economic Review, 92(2) (May): 115-120.

Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2000). Monetary Policy Statement, March 2000, Reserve Bank
of New Zealand, Wellington, New Zealand.

Rogoff, Kenneth. 1985. “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Target.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, no. 4 (November): 1169-89.

Samuelson, Robert, 1994. “Economic Amnesia,” Newsweek, Sept. 12: 52.

Sherwin, Murray (1999). "Inflation Targeting: 10 Years On," Speech to New Zealand
Association of Economists Conference, Rotorua, New Zealand, July 1.

Svensson, Lars.E.O., 1997. "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring
Inflation Targets," European Economic Review, 41: 1111-1146.

Svensson, Lars E.O., 2002, “Monetary Policy and Real Stabilization,” in Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City, Rethinking Stabilization Policy: 261-312.

Svensson, L.E.O. 2003a, “The Inflation Forecast and the Loss Function,” in Paul Mizen, ed.,
Central Banking, Monetary Theory and Practice: Essays in Honor of Charles Goodhart,
(Edward Elgar: Londona): 135-52.

Svensson, L.E.O. 2003b. “What is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgement in Monetary
Policy Through Targeting Rules,” Journal of Economic Literature, 41: 426-77.

Taylor, John B. 1979. “Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational
Expectations,” Econometrica 47: 1267-1286.

Woodford, M. 2003. Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy (Princeton
University Press: Princeton).

Woodford, Michael. Forthcoming. “Inflation Targeting: A Theoretical Perspective” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review.




                                             -29-
Table 1: Do Inflation-targeting Central Bank Publish Their Forecasts of Inflation, Output, the
Output Gap and Policy Rates?

Central Bank          Policy Rate            Inflation          Output growth           Output gap
                      Projections?           forecasts?         forecasts?              forecasts?
Australia             No                     Yes                No1                     No
Brazil                No♠                    Yes                Yes                     No
Canada                No                     Yes                Yes                     No♦
Chile                 No                     Yes                Yes                     No
Colombia              Yes                    Yes                Yes                     Yes
Czech Republic        No♠                    Yes                Yes                     Yes
Hungary               No♠                    Yes                Yes                     Yes
Iceland               No♠                    Yes                Yes                     Yes
Israel                No                     No                 Yes                     No
Mexico                No                     Yes                Yes                     No
New Zealand           Yes                    Yes                Yes                     Yes
Norway                No♠                    Yes                Yes                     Yes
Peru                  No                     Yes                Yes                     No
Philippines           No                     Yes                No                      No
Poland                No♠                    Yes2               No                      No
Romania               No                     Yes                No                      No
Slovakia4             No                     Yes                Yes                     No
South Africa          No                     Yes                No                      No
South Korea           No                     Yes                No3                     No
Sweden                No                     Yes                Yes                     No♦
Switzerland           No                     Yes                Yes                     No
Thailand              No                     Yes                Yes                     No
Turkey5               No                     No                 No                      No
UK                    No♠                    Yes                Yes                     No


Source: Central Banks web sites as of August 2004
♠
   Indicates central banks which publish the market expectations of future policy rates even though there is no
official policy rate forecast. The central banks of Hungary, Iceland and Poland publish macro forecasts based on a
constant policy rate path, Norway and the Czech Republic based on market expectations of the policy rate path, and
Brazil and the UK based on both a constant policy rate path and market expectations of the policy rate path.
♦
  The central banks of Canada and Sweden publish estimates of the current output gap.
1
  The Reserve Bank of Australia does not publish output growth forecasts in the Statement on Monetary Policy.
However, GDP forecasts are given twice a year in the Governor’s Opening Statements to the House of
Representatives Committee.
2
  The National Bank of Poland publishes extensive survey-based inflation expectations by market participants, but
refrains from making an exact inflation forecast of its own. Instead, a commentary on the likelihood of fulfilling the
inflation target is included in the Inflation Report.
3
  The Central Bank of Korea does not publish output growth forecasts in the Inflation Report. However, GDP
forecasts for the year ahead are given twice a year in their publication Economic Prospects.
4
  The National Bank of Slovakia does not refer to itself as an inflation targeter. However, the ECB defines it as an
“implicit inflation targeter.” Source: “The Acceding Countries Strategies Towards ERM II and the Adoption of the
Euro: an Analytical Review” ECB Occasional Paper No. 10 February 2004
5
  The Central Bank of Turkey does not call its framework “inflation targeting” but rather “implicit inflation
targeting.” However, it follows an end-of-year inflation target, which is negotiated by the government and the IMF.
                                                         -30-
-31-
