                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DEFICIT AND INTERGENERATIONAL WELFARE
                       IN OPEN ECONOMIES




                        Torsten Persson




                     Working Paper No. 1083




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MPL 02138


                         February 1983




This paper was completed while the author was visiting the NBER in
January-February 1983 and he wishes to thank the Bureau for its
hospitality. Thanks also to Elhanan Helpinan and Lars Svensson for
helpful discussions and to participants in seminars at the
Institute for International Economic Studies, at the Universities
of Western Ontario and Rochester, and at the NBER for their com-
ments. Financial support from the Nordic Economic Research Council
and the Jacob Wallenberg Tercentenary Foundation is gratefully
acknowledged. The research reported here is part of the NBER's
research program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
                                                             NBER Working Paper # 1083
                                                                       February 1983




                         DEFICITS AIW INTERGENERATIONAL WELFARE
                                    IN OPEN ECONOMIES


                                         Pstract

          This   paper deals with public debt in open economies, extending

Diamond's overlapping generations model to deal with a small      open econor as
well as an international eciuilibrium of two large economies. It focuses on the

intergenerational welfare redistributions caused by an increase in the public

debt triggered by a period of government budget deficit, and shows that these

effects are markedly     different   in open and closed economies. The   interplay
between the   deficits   in the government budget and the current account is also

analyzed. Here, it is shown how a single period with a deficit in the govern-

ment budget can be followed by a seciuence of periods with a deficit in the

current account.




                                                          Torsten Persson
                                                          Institute for International
                                                          Economic Studies
                                                          s—io6 91 Stockholm
                                                          Sweden

                                                          Tel: (8) 163066, 163075
1.   Introduction

     This paper deals with public debt in open economies. The question of how

public debt issue affects the well—being of future generations, sometimes

referred to as the "burden of the public debt", has a long tradition in econo-

mics going back as far as Ricardo. Not surprisingly, the discussion seems to

have been particularly active after periods with substantial government budget

deficits. Indeed, the sizeable and growing budget deficits in many countries

during recent years is a strong empirical motive for looking further at this

issue today. The present close international integration of goods and capital

markets, as well as the observation that deficits in the government budget tend

to go hand in hand with deficits in the current account, makes it interesting to

analyze the international aspects of the problem.

     One intensive round in the debate, initiated by Buchanan (1958), took place

in the late fifties and early sixties; for a summary of the heated, and some-

times confused, debate, see Ferguson (19614). Much of the confusion was resolved

with the pathbreaking work of Diamond (1965). Diamond's analysis, drawing on an

ingenious construction of Bamuelson (1958), was particularly useful in two

respects: First, by treating an (infinite) number of overlapping generations,

it allowed for a discussion of intergenerational welfare redistributions in a

relatively simple way. Second, by relying on an explicit general equilibirum

framework, it made it possible to pose the central question about the burden of

national debt in terms of lifetime utilities of welfare—maximizing consumers.

     Diamond indeed included external debt in his analysis. However, he chose a

formulation where only the government but not the private sector can borrow

abroad. While sufficient to bring out certain differences between internal and
                                            —2.-




external debt, this is not very plausible today, from an empirical point of

view. Moreover, it makes       the   interesting interplay between the deficits in the

government budget and the current account very trivial.

       In this paper Diamond's analysis is extended to open economies where all

agents, private and public, have access to perfectly integrated world markets.

We look at the short and long—run effects of a period with government deficits,

which manifest themselves in a permanent increase in the public debt. The ana—

ly Si 5    is carried out first in the context of a small open econoriry, then in a

full      world equilibrium of two large economies.

          There already exist some open—economy versions of the Diamond—Samuelson

overlapping generations model in the literature. In particular, there are two

recent studies by Buiter (1981) and Dornbusch (1982). Buiter's model does only

include private borrowing and lending and thus cannot be used to address the

questions pursued here. The work by Dornbusch does include public debt, but the

process whereby this debt is generated —— government deficit spending, that is

——   is    not explicitly modelled and only the long run effects of debt issue are

analyzed. In addition, production is left exogenous in the analysis, and there

is neither capital nor investment.

          The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents the Diamond model of a

closed economy and we look at the short and long run consequences for factor

rewards and welfare of public debt within this framework. This section covers

material most of which now can be found in textbooks; see for example Atkinson

and Stiglitz (1980). It is included here for the sake of completeness and as a

background to the subsequent analysis, however, and can be skimmed through by

readers who are already familiar with the standard overlapping generations

model.
                                      —3—


     Section 3 extends the analysis to a small open economy facing perfect world

goods and capital markets. We look at the consequences of public debt issue for

current and future generations' welfare and indicate the differences to the

closed economy results. The effects on the economy's external debt in the short

and the long run, and the interrelation between the deficits in the budget and

the current account, are also discussed.

     A full world equilibrium with two (large) trading economies is set up in

Section )4, and we analyze the national as well as the international adjustment

in response to a deficit period in one of the economies.

     An obvious and important qualification to the analysis, namely the con-

sequences of introducing private intergenerational transfers a la Barro (197)4),

is taken up in Section 5. This section also summarizes the main points in the

paper and includes some suggestions for further research.



2.   The Diamond Model with Public Debt

     Since growth is not esential for the problem treated here, we assume that

the economy has a stationary population. All people live for two periods, so at

each point in time there is a young and an old generation living side by side.

Young people in period t have a fixed labor supply. They work at wage   w and
pay a lum—sum tax t to the government. They consume part of the resulting

income and save the remainder for the second period of their life. Old people,

who are retired, earn principal and interest on their savings. They pay no

taxes.

     Each young person's consumption in period t is denoted by c, while dt

denotes consumption by each old. The decision problem for young people born at

t is to maximize U(c, dt+1) subject to
                                                — it-.




           c +     1 +        dt÷i = wt —



where u() is a well—behaved utility function and r+1 is the return on assets

held over to period t+1. The solution gives consumption demand as a function of

the after—tax wage          t. and the interest rate; c = C(wt,rt+i). Savings
                                    —

are given accordingly by w — c. It is useful to introduce a variable at,

which expresses private wealth per worker in the beginning of period t. Because

there are no bequests and all generations have equal size a+1 will identically

coincide with savings of the young at t, that is


           a
            t+l
                   =wt —c.
                         t
                                                                                      (i)




Since the savings decision is already bygone, old people have a trivial decision

problem   when retired. Each old person simply consumes all his income, or

            dt
                  = (1 +
                           rt)(wt   i — ct_i)   = (1 +
                                                         r)a.
For   future reference we note that the welfare of a member of the tth generation

may be expressed either by the direct utility function above, or by the indirect

utility function



            itt
                  = V(w,rt1),                                                         (2)


increasing in both its arguments.

      There are two factors of production, (non—depreciating) capital and labor;

because the economy has only one sector, capital is simply non—consumed output.

Production in the tth period, X.,, is carried out according to a well—behaved,

linearly homogenous, neo—classical production function          =              where L is
                                                                    F(L,Kt),
the (constant) labor force and Kt is capital carried over from period t-i.

Production per worker can thus be expressed by
                                          —5—




         x    =f(k),                                                          (3)
          t       t


where k is capital per head. Profit maximizing   behavior   ensures that invest-

ment in period t, or rather the gross amount of capital held over to period t+1,

is implicitly given by


          f (k           =r      .                                            (4)
          k    t+l
                     )
                           t+l


Given constant returns to scale, the two factor returns are related by


              =           —
                  f(kt)       ktfk(kt),                                       (5)



which by (4) gives rise to the standard factor price frontier.

    The government may enter the economy in several ways, taking part both in

consumption and production. To keep the analysis as simple as possible, we

shall assume that its consumption and production are both zero, and that its

only expenditure is interest payments on the public debt. In each period the

government collects lump—sum taxes t from each worker. Any deficit in the

government budget has to be covered by an increase in debt. The government's

debt instruments are one period bonds that pay the current interest rate and

principal in the next period. Denoting the amount of debt outstanding in the

beginning of period t by Gt, the government's deficit is hence


         G
          t+l
                  —Gt =rG
                        tt —tL.
                             t


It will be convenient to express this per worker in what follows. Dividing

through by L, we have


                                                                               (6)
                                             —6—




We   see that if t is set to             net debt per worker is kept constant. We

shall assume that r is strictly positive throughout, which makes taxes positive

in this case.1

      In each period a temporary, or perhaps better a momentary, equilibrium is

established. That equilibrium is recursive in the following sense. Last per—

iod's investment and the labor endowment in period t fixed the econonr's

capital—labor ratio and the (past) real interest rate (the present return on

capital) by (Li). Then the before—tax real wage is also determined via the fac-

tor price frontier.

       Given kt,rt and wt, the individual consumption, savings and investment plans

of young and old consumers, firms, and the government must be made consistent in

the goods and the capital markets. As usual one of the clearing conditions is

redundant,    so      it suffices to state the requirement for equilibrium in the capi-

tal market.       This is, of course, that total savings is equal to investment

                                                                                    (7)
       (a
            t+1—a)—(g
                  t       t+l—g)=k
                              t t+1—k,
                                    t
which is here expressed on per capita form. However, in a closed econonr

a    must always equal          + k) expost and (1) can therefore be restated as


              a
               t+1
                       =kt+1+gt+1   •                                               (8)

Equation (8) states that savings by the young must be sufficient to absorb the

total amount of capital and government debt carried over to the next period.

Both a and kt÷1 are functions of next period's real interest rate; so this

 condition uniquely determines r÷1. This gives next period's capital—labor

 ratio, a new momentary equilibrium is established, and so on.

       There are two different stability conditions for this econonv and we will

 assume that both of them are fulfilled. First, we have the condition for what

 might be termed (static) Wairasian stability, namely
                                                         —7--



                 1
                                                                                           ()
                 +C
           kk          r


When (9) is fulfilled, excess demand in the capital market leads to an increase

in the interest rate. Second, we have the condition which ensures that the

economy's development over time ends up in a stationary state,2 viz.


                                   (1 — c
                     — (k + g)               w
          —l <                                       <                                      (io)
                                   fkk   +   C
                                                 r



Given that (9) holds (and goods are normal so Cw <              i),   the sign of the expres-

sion between inequalities is always positive so joint fulfillment of (9) and

(10) guarantees asymptotic (as opposed to oscillatory) convergence.

     In a stationary state all variables are constant. Such an equilibrium is

described by


          w =    f(k)      —
                               kfk(k)                                                     (ii)

          r =
                 fk(k)                                                                    (12)

          w;—t                                                                            (13)

          trg                                                                             (i1)

          a=    w —    C(w,r)                                                            (15)

          ak+g                                                                           (i6)

          v =   V(w,r)                                                                   (17)

     Let us turn to the effects of increased public debt. We assume that the

government chooses to finance a transfer to the young generation born at date t

by running a deficit rather than by increasing taxes. (The analysis of debt

rather than tax financing of either a transfer to the old generation or

increased government consumption or investment in the tth period would be
                                                —8—


slightly more complicated but yield qualitatively similar results.) With tax

finance net taxes paid by the young are unchanged and there are no effects

either in the long or in the short run. Therefore, the difference between the

two policies can be found by looking at debt finance only.

     What we consider is thus a one—shot decrease in taxes in period t, dtt <               0,
and a corresponding increase in debt, which from the government budget con-

straint (6), satisfies           =              Furthermore, we assume that from period
                                       _dtt.
t+1 and onwards taxes are set so as to keep the public debt per capita constant.

Hence, the increase in debt remains for all future periods and we may use the

simplified notation          =
                                 dg2      .    . . = dg.
     The impact effects are easily determined. Since k is already given by

history, so are r and w., and the adjustment to the increased government

borrowing shows up in a change in r÷1. Differentiating the capital market

equilibrium condition (8) for dg and dtt = —dg, we get

                         C
          drt + 1                dg.                                                     (18)
                      fkk +Cr

The increase in government borrowing creates an excess demand of —C dg in the
                                                                                w
capital market which has to be absorbed by the private sector. An increase in

the interest rate reduces private investment, since               <   0,   and may stimulate

or reduce private savings, since Cr             0. Our assumption of Wairasian stability

guarantees that the net effect is to decrease private excess demand (that is,

the denominator in (18) is negative), however, which means that the interest

rate rises.

     Since the generation born at date t experiences an increase both in its net

wage and the interest rate, the change in each member's welfare from (2)
                                                —9—



          dv
            t
                =Vdw
                  w t
                      +Vdr
                        r t+i


is clearly positive.

     As for the effects in the next period, we already know that the capital—

labor ratio is lower due to the rise in r+1. This in turn decreases gross

wages, along the factor price frontier, by




          dwt+i =     _kt+1dr+1.

Taxes increase due to the greater government debt and due to the higher interest

rate. Fornlly,


          dt
               t+l
                     =rt+idg+g t+1
                                drt+i

and, the total effect on net wages is



          dw+1 _(k+1 +        1)dr1            —



which is bound to be negative. Differentiating (8) once again, using the above

results one obtains


                        i — (i—c
                                   w
                                       )(awt+l /3g)
          dr÷2                                        dg,
                             fi
                              kk
                                 +        r



which is clearly positive and greater than dr÷1. This is easy to understand

since the young generation at t + 1 has a lower income than the young at t but

nevertheless has to absorb the same amount of government debt.

     The (t÷l)th generations' welfare may              either   rise or fall because


          dv
               t+l
                      Vdw
                      w t+l
                            +Vdr
                              r t+2
                                                         —10—


has an ambiguous sign due to the opposite influences of the falling net wage and

the rising interest rate. In other words, it is not clear whether in fact there

is a burden on that generation.

      From the earlier discussion about stability we know that the increase in

interest rates and associated decrease in capital—labor ratios will continue in

subsequent periods as the econorrv approaches its stationary state. The long—run

effects on factor prices are easily found from equations (10) to (iL'), as

           dw     —(k +   g)dr       —   rdg   <   0,                                                 (19)

and
                                 i — (i—c
                                               W
          dv—                                                    dg>0.                                (20)
                          +          +                  +   g)
                                Cr        (l_C)(k
      The change in stationary—state welfare, using (19), is

           dr =   Vdw   +   Vdr       =    [—Vr     -   V(k      +
                                                                     g4 + V   1dg
But by Roy's identity we know that Vr =
                                                             Vd/(l+r)2,   and since d   (w —   c)(l    +   r),
we may thus rewrite the above expression as


                                             ar    w—c ar
           dv =
                  VwL_r
                            —   (k   +
                                          g)-5—
                                                +
                                                  -j--— --—1dg.
                                                                                                      (21)



Each of the terms within brackets has a clear interpretation. The first is the

direct negative welfare effect of increased taxes to service the higher govern-

ment debt. The second, which is also negative, is the combined effect on net

wages of the changes in gross wages and taxes, because of the rise in the inter-

est rate brought about by the rise in g. The third effect, finally, is positive

and measures the gain of a rise in the real interest rate (all young people are

net lenders).

      The net outcome would then seem to be ambiguous, but we may reformulate (21)

by help of (15) and (i6) to
                                          —11—


            dv = V [—r   —
                             a—--—1dg.                                          (22)
                   w          l+r3g

The sum   of   the last two terms in (21) is thus negative and the net effect is an

unambiguous fall in stationary state welfare. To understand this result we note

that the economy underaccumulates capital relative to its golden rule capital—

labor ratio given by fk(k) =      0, already in its initial position. The increase
in the interest rate reduces k further, accentuating this underaccuinulation.3

The resulting welfare loss taist be added to the negative effect of higher taxes.

     Summarizing, we have thus shown that with an increase in the government

debt to finance a transfer payment to the currently young generation, this

generation gains, its nearest descendants may either gain or lose, while all

generations must necessarily lose when the economy has converged to its new sta-

tionary state. Which generation that starts to experience a fall in welfare is

thus an open question.



3.   Deficits and Intergenerational Welfare in a Small Open Economy

     Let us take a look at the same economy in an open economy context. All

agents   act in the same way as before, but they now have access to a perfect

world capital market with a given rate of interest, denoted by r*, as well as a

perfect world market for its single good.

     In autarchy private wealth per worker in each period a must be identically

equal to the capital stock k plus government debt           With international cap—

ital mobility, this would happen only if countries were identical in all

respects, however, and we would generally expect a non—zero foreign debt (per

worker) e, given by


           e(k+g)—a                                                            (23)
                                                              —12—


We may then readily define the current account deficit for period t,      say, as

the increase in foreign debt during that period


            qt =et+1 —e.
                       t
                                                                             (21k)




Using (23), the current account deficit may be expressed as either the sum of

the private sector's and the government's accumulation of financial debt, or,

equivalently as


                 =           —   k)          —
                                                 [(ai — at) ÷1 _)l; —




total investment minus the sum of the two sectors' savings. If desired, the

economy's trade balance deficit bt is easily found. Since the difference bet-

ween      and bt is interest payments abroad, we have


           bt =           — re           =
                                             et+1
                                                    —   (i   +
                                                                 rt)et.      (25)



       The equations describing a momentary equilibrium in the small open economy

are restated here for convenience


                 =           -
                     f(kt)       ktfk(kt)                                     (5)


            rt+l          f(k
                          k t+1
                                     )                                        (]4)



            r        r*                                                      (26)
             t        t


            w.            _t                                                 (2'r)


                             —
            a+1 =      w         C(wt,r+i)                                    Ci)


                                                                             (23)


            q. =e            —e                                              (2L)
             t        t+1        t

            v        V(w ,r          )                                        (2)
             t            t t+1
                                              —13—



Except    for the issues we have just discussed, there is yet a new feature in this

setting. With the given interest rate (and constant returns to scale), the

economy's capital—labor ratio is in fact determined independently of domestic

conditions and hence is also the gross wage.

     If the foreign interest rate is constant, the economy will converge to a

stationary state, the conditions for which are also stated here


                =   f(k)    —
                                kfk(k)                                                   (11)

            r =
                    fk(k)                                                                (12)

            r =     r*                                                                   (28)

            ww—t                                                                         (13)

            trg                                                                          (114)

            a=      w —    C(w,r)                                                        (15)
            e=      (Ic +   g) — a                                                       (29)
            qo                                                                           (30)
            v   =
                    V(w,r)                                                               (17)

Thus the current account is zero in stationary state. The trade balance is not
zero, however. From (25) it is clear that the economy runs a surplus (deficit)

on its trade account to service its external debt (spend the interest income

from its external assets) in the stationary state.14

     We are now prepared to look at expansion of the public debt. As before,

we consider a government deficit in period t; d÷1 =                       0,
                                                                _dt   >        and set

      =             ...    = dg in later periods. To simplify matters, we assume a hor—'
izontal path for the foreign interest rate; r* =         r*,   for all t.

     On impact this results in an increased current account deficit. From (23),

(214) and (27):
                                              —14—


          dqt =det+1          Cdg>O.
                               w
                                                                                    (31)



The young generation which faces an increase in their net wage will absorb some

but not all of the new government debt by increasing its savings. This results

in an aggregate excess demand for credit of                 which, instead of driving up

the interest rate as in the closed econon,r (Cf. equation (18)), can be satisfied

via increased foreign borrowing at the given world interest rate (whether it is

the government or the private sector that actually borrows abroad is, of course

unimportant). It is obvious that the young generation's welfare increases,

although not as much as in the closed econoxr, since there is no magnifying

effect from a rise in the interest rate.

     In the period after the government deficit, workers face increased taxes to

service the higher government debt, but no change in their gross wage. We find

the effect on the current account as


                   =
                       de+2
                              —
                                  de+1
                                         = [1 + (1C )r* —   CIdg,                    (32)




which is clearly positive and greater in value than                 Young people in this

period save less because their income is lower, and old people dissave more

because they saved more when young in period t. Both these reasons make total

private savings in t+l lower than in the period before. This results in a

larger (increase in the) current account deficit than in the period when the

public debt was increased. Unlike in the closed econorr, it is now clear that

the young generation born in t+1 has a lower welfare, since dwt+1 < 0.

     As for the long—run effects, the increase in the foreign debt, from (13),

(i1), (15)   and   (29), satisfies


             de = dg — da =       [1 + (1_C)r*]dg.                                   (33)
                                         —15—


The derivative de/dg thus exceeds unity. This is explained by the private sec-

tor not only being unwilling to hold the higher public debt in the long run, but

also saving less since the taxes have been increased to cover a higher debt ser-

vice in the stationary state. (The expression on the RHS of (33) is the analo-

gue to the numerator in (20).)

      If we solve for de+2 in (37), we find that de+1 +             = de.   In other
                                                             de+2
words, the whole adjustment to the higher foreign debt is accomplished by the

current account deficits we have already investigated, and the economy has

reached its new stationary state only two periods after the initial deficit

episode. We may    note   in passing that the economy has a larger trade surplus

(smaller deficit) in the new stationary state since it now has larger interest

payments abroad (smaller interest income from abroad).

      Since there are no effects on gross factor returns, the sole welfare effect

is the burden of higher taxes, viz.


           dv =            <   0;
                  _Vr*dg

equivalent to the first negative term of the bracketed expression in (22) giving

the welfare loss in a closed economy. The second negative term in (22) does not

appear here, of course, since the capital—labor ratio stays constant.

      Summarizing the conarison of the intergenerational redistribution of

welfare, we have thus been able to show two differences between a closed and

a small open economy (or more precisely between an economy without and with

capital mobility). First, there is no ambiguity about gainers and losers in the

small open   economy; the young generation in   the deficit period being the only

one   to gain and all future generations having to bear the burden of the higher
public debt. Second, because there were no effects on gross factor rewards,
                                              —16—


both the welfare gain of the first generation and the long run welfare losses

are smaller than in the closed econonr. The opportunity of interteniporal trade

at a given interest rate thus eliminates the downward adjustment of the

econonv's capital—labor ratio that was necessary in autarchy and was seen to

constitute part of the burden on future generations of an increased public debt.



4.    World Equilibrium and Public Debt

      We now turn to a full international equilibrium which marries together two

countries    of comparable size. Differences in size are not of prime interest for
the problems addressed here, so we simplify matters by assuming that the two
countries    are identical in the size of their labor endowment. With respect to

technolor, tastes, and government behavior, we allow for any           differences,
however. The two countries are referred to as the home and foreign country, and

the   same notation as before is adopted, but with a *_superscript on foreign
variables.
      In   a momentary equilibrium, the home country still obeys equations (1),

(2), (4)   through       (6), (23), (214), and (27), and there are analogous expressions

for the foreign country; (1*), ...,         etc.   With perfect financial capital mobil-

ity there must be one signie interest rate in the two countries, r =
                                                                              rt,   and we

denote this comnn rate by r. Finally, market clearing requires world savings

equal to world investment, that is

             q   +
                     q   =   0;

the sum    of the two current accounts must equal zero. Since e and —e are
equal, by definition, and already predetermined in period t, we can also express
the equilibrium condition for the world capital market as

             e1 e1 = 0.
                     +                                                                (314)
                                                   —11—


     We assume that the two economies would both be stable in autarchy. That

is, (9) and (10), and analogous conditions for the foreign country, (9*) and

(10*), continue to hold. Then the world econonj will asymptotically converge to

a stationary state.5 A long—run equilibrium is defined by equations (11)

through (i1-), (16), (ii), and (28) through (30) (with and without *), and by the

condition

            e +   e*   =   0.                                                       (35)

     When discussing the comparative statics, it is useful to recall that the

world economy is, of course, a large closed economy. Therefore we should expect

the adjustment to be an intermediate case between that in the single, closed eco-

nomy and that in the small open economy. Indeed, this conjecture is verified

below in the sense that we find effects on factor prices smaller than in the

closed economy case, and effects on external debts and current accounts smaller

than in the small economy case.

     Consider then as before an issue of public debt cum tax cut in the home

country; dg =     — dtt.        To find the effect on the world interest rate, we differ-

entiate (31i) for this change, taking the responses by savers and investors into

account. This yields

                                         C
            dr                            W
                           kk +              +
                                                 (Cr
                                                       +   c*)

which is positive (by (9) and (9*)) and less than in the closed economy;

cf. (18).

    As in the closed economy, the public borrowing creates excess demand in the

capital market, which drives up the interest rate and crowds out private invest-

ment, but now in both countries. This does not affect gross wages of the
                                                —18—


currently young generations at home and abroad, however, who both gain from a

higher interest rate. Consequently the young generation abroad, whose net wage

is constant, as well as the young generation at home, who pays lower taxes,

experience a higher welfare level.

     To find the impact on the current accounts it is easiest to look first at

the foreign country. From (2I*), we have


                =
                    de1    =
                               [(f       +   c) t+l]dg
so it follows that there is an improvement in the foreign country's current

account. The corresponding deterioration in the current account of the home

country is given by


                =          =         +        + Cr)
           dq       de+i       [Cw                     1idg.

Comparing this to (31), we indeed find that the effect is less than in the small

country case, in the sense that the derivative d/dg is smaller. This is

because here the rise in the interest rate increases home savings and decreases

investment.

     The home country will suffer a deterioration in its current account also in

the next period. In that period gross as well as net wages will fall in both

countries, because of the higher interest rate on the now retired generations'

savings in capital and government securities. The generations born t+l are coin—

pensated somewhat, since the interest rate continues to rise. Furthermore, one

can show that the welfare for this generation, both at horr and abroad, can

either rise or fall in the same way as in the closed econoiij. Instead of

developing the rather messy expressions involved, we go to the long run effects,

however.
                                                           —19—


      In the new stationary state net wages fall both at home and abroad, viz.

           dw—(k+g)dr—rdg                                                                                (36)

and

           dw* = _.(k* +     g*)dr,                                                                     (36*)


and the interest rate rises

                                                       1 + (i—c )r
           dr=—                                                     w
                    (r +
                      kk
                             f*kk   )   1
                                                + (C
                                                       r+c*)
                                                          r
                                                                + (i—c )(k+g) +
                                                                      w           (l_C*)(k*+g*)
                                                                                      w
                                                                                                  dg.



      From (ii), (38) and the properties of v(.) we get the welfare change for

future generations in the home country


                                                               c
           dv =   V[—r   —   (k    +
                                       g)- +                       --1dg.                                (21)



This is the same expression as in the closed econonr case and the three terms

have the same interpretation, capturing the increase in taxes due to the higher

debt (at given r), the decrease in net wages due to lower gross wages and higher

taxes, and the increase in the interest rate, respectively. In that case we

could verify that the net effect was always negative implying a burden on future

generations. Here, such an assertion can not be made, however. To see this,

note that by (29), (21) can be reformulated as

                                            1       ar
          dv =               + a                         — e
                  VwI_r(i           1 +         r                  --—]dg,                                 (37)



where the first term, which corresponds to (22), is negative, but the second

term is negative only if e is positive.

      The economic significance of this is clear. A change in the interest

rate redistributes income from workers/taxpayers to wealth holders. If e is
                                                 —20—


positive, some of these are foreigners and hence the consumption possibilities

for the econonr as a whole are reduced. In this case the increase in debt unam—

biguously lays a burden on future generations at home. If the home country is a

net creditor, on the other hand, this intertemporal terms—of—trade effect

instead redistributes income in its favor which alleviates the burden of

increased taxes and a lower capital—labor ratio on future generations. When —e

becomes sufficiently high, the net result is even a welfare gain.

        The probability of the home country being a long—run creditor is higher,

the lower the rate of time preference of consumers —_   cf.   Buiter (1981) ——   the
lower the initial government debt, and the worse the investment opportunities in

the home country; all relative to the foreign country. Since the countries may

very well differ on all these accounts, there is no reason to look upon a posi-

tive stationary—state welfare effect in the home country as a degenerate special

case.

        Similarly, we derive the long—run welfare effect in the foreign country


                                        1'
             dv* =            +   g*)        +                                   (38)
                     vI_(k*

which is equivalent to that in the home country, except that the (direct) tax

burden of higher debt is absent, of course. Rewriting (38) as



             dv* =        — — e*__
                     V*[_a*
                     w l+rg
                              r
                                3g
                                    3r
                                                 ]dg,                            (39)



we see that the outcome depends on the negative effect of the lower capital—

labor ratio plus the ambiguous intertemporal terms of trade effect. Thus, the

result is even more uncertain than for future generations in the home country.6

        A final result is the effect on the countries' net debt positions in sta-

tionary state. For the foreign country we have
                                                    —21—




                     kk + c
                       —1
             de* =                  + (1   —   c*)(k*   +
                                                            g*)dg,
which is negative by our stability assumption (10*). Having said this, we know
that the home country's net debt must increase. Conaring

             de =    [(1 + Ci   —   C)r)       +
                                                   (f   +
                                                            Cr
                                                                 + Ci —   C)(k   +



with   (33), we find (recalling (10)) that the change is smaller than in the small

economy case. In the same way as for the impact effect, the rise in the

interest rate works as a cushion. When it comes to the dynamics there is a

further difference between the present and the small economy case. In the same

way- as the factor rewards, e converges only asymptotically to its new equilib-

rium. Therefore, the adjustment process with deficits in the current account

will be much longer than the small economy's two—period adjustment.

       Let us conclude this section by summarizing our findings regarding the

welfare redistributrions among generations in the two—country case and by com-

paring them to our previous results.

       The   currently   young generations in both countries gain from a deficit in

the home country. Like in the closed economy, but unlike in the small open eco-

nomy, their immediate descendants in the home country may either gain or lose.

The ambiguity extends to the foreign country. th in the closed economy and

the small open economy there was a definite burden on future generations in the

stationary state. Here, however, this is no longer a necessary result. If the

home country is a creditor, the rise in the interest rate may actually redis-

tribute income in its favor to such an extent that future generations gain.

Future generations in the foreign country may either gain or lose. However, it

is clear from (31) and (39) that although welfare may well decline in the long

run in both countries, a welfare improvement in both countries is not possible.1
                                        —22—



5.   Final Remarks

     This paper studied the effects of public debt issue in open economies with

overlapping generations.

     With regard to the intergenerational welfare distribution, we showed the

following: In a small open econonw with access to a perfect world capital

market, the welfare effects are smaller than in a closed econorrr both in the

short and the long run. But the direction of the redistribution; from future to

the present generation is essentially the same. In an econonsj that is large

enough to affect world market prices these results need no longer hold, however.

Future generations in an econony that increases its public debt may then actually

gain because of an intertemporal terms—of—trade effect that redistributes

resources from the rest of the world.

     We also discussed some interesting dynamics in the current account. The

adjustment towards the higher external debt implied by a higher public debt was

shown to involve an extended period of current account deficits following an

initial government budget deficit. This adjustment period was longer in the

large economy.

     It should be pointed out that both these sets of results hinge crucially on

the absence of operative private gifts between generations. The discussion in

Barro (19T') showing how private, non—market, intergenerational transfers can

compensate for government, non—market, intergenerational transfers and thereby

leave the welfare of future generations unaffected applies equally well to open

economies, of course. As is well known, such "dynastic" savings behavior turns

the decision problem for each generation into that of infinitely—lived con—

suiners, meaning that a substitution of debt for taxes would leave consumption

unaffected. In an open economy context, this means that the current account
                                          —23—


would be unaffected by public debt—issue (for given government expenditures) ——

cf.   Sachs (1982).

      However, as discussed for instance by Buiter (1980), for such private coin—

pensating transfers to occur, a number of quite restrictive assumptions have to

be fulfilled. Given this, and the unclear empirical support for the dynastic

savings hypothesis, an exploration of overlapping generations models with life—

cycle savings behavior is by all means warranted.

      An application of such models to problems in international trade and macro

theory is of particular interest because they include maximizing agents with

finite planning horizons that overlap with each other. This means that     there
are agents with marginal propensities to spend ranging from zero (the unborn) to

one (the presently old) and with some in between (the presently young). As a

result the adjustment of such economies to various shocks will be quite differ-

ent from the adjustment of economies with agents that have infinite planning

horizons. The effects of terms—of—trade changes on the current account is one

example where the results in an overlapping generations framework —— see Persson

and Svensson (1983) ——   differ   a great deal from those in an infinite horizon

framework —— see Obstfeld (1982), and Svensson and Razin (1983).
                                               —214—



Footnotes

1.   The assumption that the interest rate is higher than the rate of growth (n)

     also   rules out equilibria that are "dynamically inefficient" in the sense
     that k is above its golden rule value given by fk(k) =             n = 0.

2.   Substituting the factor price frontier and the government budget
     constraint into (8)     one   gets a first—order difference equation in k, and
     (10) expresses the stability requirement dkt+i/dkt < 1.
3.   This result might also be understood by viewing the rise in the interest rate

     and   the associated fall in the wage as a movement along the after-tax fac-

     tor price frontier, obtained by substituting (ii), (12), and (114) into

     (13). The slope of this in (w,r) space is —(k + g); cf. the second term in

     (21). However, since the indirect utility function is flatter than that ——

     its    slope being _Vr/Vw = —(w —      c)/(1      + r); cf. the third term in (21) ——   it
     follows that a rise in the interest rate must lower welfare.

4.   If the rate of growth was n, we would have q = ne.               The trade deficit would

     be b = (n—r)e.       As long as the growth rate was positive and lower than the

     interest rate, the stationary—state trade and current account deficits

     would therefore have opposite signs.

5.   The condition for monotonic convergence is


                  (1 — C )(k + g) + (1     —   C*)(k*
                                                w
                                                         + g*)
             0<
                      (kk      kk )1
                            + f*       +   (cr + c*)
                                                  r
     which    is satisfied if (9), (9*), (10) and (10*) hold.

6.   In the two—country model of Dornbusch (1982) an increase in home country

     debt decreases home welfare and increases foreign welfare without ambi-

     guity. This crucially depends on the assumption that all debt is in the
                                         —25—



     form of consols, meaning that debt service is coupon payments independent

     of the interest rate. Therefore a change in the interest rate cannot

     redistribute consumption possibilities across countries as it does here.

     This assumption and the fact that Dornbusch leaves production and capital

     exogenous also makes his results quantitatively different, since a change

     in the interest rate does not change the econoiuies' capital—labor ratios.

1.   An appropriate measure of the change in world welfare is the sum of the

     wealth equivalents of the two welfare changes. Hence, if we substitute

     from (3T) and (39) into


          dy/V (w,r) +
              w          dv*/V*(w*,r),
                              w
     we find that world welfare unambiguously declines.
                                         26—



References

Atkinson, A.B., and J.E. Stiglitz, 1980, Lectures on Public Economics

     (McGraw—Hill).

Barro, R.J., 1914, "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political

     Economy 82, 1095—1111.

Buchanan, J.M., 1958, Public Principles of Public Debt (Irwin).

Buiter, W.H., 1980, "Crowding Out   of   Private Capital FornRtion by Government

     Borrowing in the Presence of Intergenerational Gifts and Bequests," Greek

     Economic Review 2, 1121142.

Buiter, W.H., 1981, "Time Preference and International Lending and Borrowing in

     an Overlapping—Generations Model," Journal of Political Economy 89,

     169—791.


Diamond, P.A., 1965, "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,"

     American Economic Review 55, 1126—1150.

Dornbusch, R., 1982, "Intergenerational and International Trade," unpublished

     manuscript, MIT.

Fergus son, J.M., ed., 196)4, Public Debt and Future Generations (University of

     North Carolina Press).

Persson, T. and Svensson, L.E.0., 1983, "Terms—of—Trade and the Current Account:

     Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Two   Generations   Later," in preparation.

Obstfeld, M., 1982, "Aggregate Spending and the Terms—of—Trade: Is there a

     Laursen—Metzler effect?" Quarterly Journal of Economics 91, 251—270.

Sachs, J., 1982, "The Current Account in the Macroeconomic Adjustment Process,"

     Scandinavian Journal of Economics 8)4, 1)47—159.
                                         —21—



Samuelson,   P.A.,   1958, "An Exact Consumption—Loan Model of Interest With or

    Without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Econonr 66,




Svensson, L.E.O., and A. Razin, 1983, "The Terms—of—Trade, Spending and the
     Current Account. The Harberger—Laursen—Metzler Effect," Journal of

     Political Econosy 91, 97—125.
