NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STRATEGIC EXTREMISM:
WHY REPUBLICANS AND DEMOCRATS DIVIDE
ON RELIGIOUS VALUES
Edward L. Glaeser
Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto
Jesse M. Shapiro
Working Paper 10835
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10835
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

We are grateful to Alberto Alesina, Gary Becker, Elhanan Helpman, David Laibson, Andrei Shleifer, and
seminar participants at Harvard University for helpful comments. Ponzetto acknowledges financial assistance
from the Marco Fanno Foundation. Shapiro acknowledges financial assistance from the Institute for Humane
Studies, the Center for Basic Research in the Social Sciences, and the National Science Foundation. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Jesse M. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Strategic Extremism: Why Republicans and Democrats Divide on Religious Values
Edward L. Glaeser, Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto, and Jesse M. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 10835
October 2004
JEL No. D72, D78, Z12

ABSTRACT

Party platforms differ sharply from one another, especially on issues with religious content, such as
abortion or gay marriage. Religious extremism in the U.S. appears to be strategically targeted to win
elections, since party platforms diverge significantly, while policy outcomes like abortion rates are
not affected by changes in the governing party. Given the high returns from attracting the median
voter, why do vote-maximizing politicians veer off into extremism? In this paper, we find that
strategic extremism depends on an important intensive margin where politicians want to induce their
core constituents to vote (or make donations) and the ability to target political messages towards
those core constituents. Our model predicts that the political relevance of religious issues is highest
when around one-half of the voting population attends church regularly. Using data from across the
world and within the U.S., we indeed find a non-monotonic relationship between religious
extremism and religious attendance.
Edward L. Glaeser
Department of Economics
315A Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu
Giacomo A. M. Ponzetto
Harvard University
ponzetto@fas.harvard.edu
Jesse M. Shapiro
Harvard University
jmshapir@fas.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

In the United States, support for political parties divides on religious attitudes at least as
much as on income. Figure 1 shows the share of white males between 20 and 55 who voted
Republican in the last election by income bracket using data from the National Election
Study.1 Figure 2 shows the share of respondents who voted Republican by religious attendance using the same selection rule. Attending church is a better predictor of supporting
George Bush than is being rich. Figure 3 shows the strikingly negative relationship between
state per capita income and the share of the state that voted for Bush in 2000. As figure
4 shows, the correlation between income and party aﬃliation has been roughly constant
since the 1960s, but the correlation between religious attendance and party aﬃliation has
risen over this period. This trend has accompanied a rise of extremism on religious issues in
party platforms. In 2004, the Republican party platform says that “the unborn child has a
fundamental right to life that cannot be infringed,” while the Democrats in the same year
“stand proudly for a woman’s right to choose.”
Traditional median voter results (e.g., Hotelling, 1929) make this extremism diﬃcult to
understand. After all, vote-maximizing politicians are supposed to cater to the middle, not
the edges of the distribution (Downs, 1957; Becker, 1958), at least in majoritarian systems
(Cox, 1990). Political theorists who try to explain extremism emphasize the ideological
preferences of the candidate or party leaders (as in Alesina, 1988).2 While such preferences
may exist, in this paper we explain why extremism occurs for purely strategic, i.e. votemaximizing, reasons in a majoritarian system.
Extreme political platforms that deviate sharply from the median voter’s preferences
can be vote-maximizing only when there are two electoral margins: an extensive margin
1

Women and minorities are much more likely to vote Democratic, quite possibly for non-economic reasons
and they are on average less rich, so including them shows a stronger connection between income and
Republicanism.
2
But see Murphy and Shleifer (2004) and Kirchgässner (2003) for recent exceptions. Murphy and Shleifer
(2004) show that the eﬀects of social networks on beliefs can lead to an incentive to move away from the
political center. Fiorina (1999) reviews the political science literature on polarization.

2

where a politician competes for voters from the other party and an intensive margin where
the politician attempts to bring his own voters into the voting booth or elicit financial
contributions (Downs, 1957). If there is no intensive margin and therefore no reason to
cater to the party faithful, politicians will lose votes if they move their policies away from
the preferences of the median voter. But the existence of strategic extremism requires more
than just a second intensive margin. Politicians who deviate from the median gain more
support from their own supporters, but they also energize their opponents’ supporters. For
extremism to be an equilibrium, a move from the center must increase turnout among a
politician’s supporters more than among his opponent’s supporters.
In this paper, we present an information-based theory of strategic extremism. The key
assumption in this theory is that awareness of a politician’s policies is higher among the
politician’s supporters than among his opponent’s supporters. This asymmetry means that
when a politician’s policies deviate from the median, he energizes his own supporters (who
are more likely to be aware of this deviation) more than he energizes his opponent’s supporters (who are less likely to be aware of this deviation). That politicians have an edge
in communicating with their own supporters is reflected in recent eﬀorts by the Bush and
Kerry campaigns. For example, during the Republican National Convention there was a
“closed, invitation-only Bush campaign rally for Christian conservatives” at which “Senator
Sam Brownback of Kansas called for a broad social conservative agenda notably diﬀerent
from the televised presentations at the Republican convention” (Kirkpatrick, 2004b). The
Kerry campaign also appears to be targeting public appearances to reach loyal Democrats
(Borsuk, 2004).
In the model with only one political issue, extremism increases with the variance of
voter preferences, the informational asymmetry between a politician’s supporters and his
opponent’s, and with the ability of politicians to target political messages to their supporters.
When voters diﬀer along two attributes, such as the desire for income redistribution and
abortion-related policies, extremism is more likely along the issue where there is greater
3

heterogeneity of preferences (Mullainathan and Shleifer, 2003; Irmen and Thisse, 1998).
Extremism is also more likely along the issues that determine informational groups. If a
candidate’s audience is particularly defined by religion, then the candidate will be more
extreme in her religious positions. If the candidate’s audience is defined by economics, the
economic policies will become more important. These findings echo Murphy and Shleifer’s
(2004) discussion of the role of social groups in politics.3
After presenting the model, we present evidence on the importance of social organizations in forming political divisions. A key diﬀerence between a model of strategic extremism
and a model in which extremism reflects politicians’ preferences is that, when extremism is
strategic, politicians’ policies will be more moderate than their messages. When extremism
reflects leaders’ preferences, policies will be more extreme than political messages. We examine policies and platforms on tax policy and abortion over the last 25 years to examine these
implications. The economic messages in platforms are extremely moderate, but there are
big diﬀerences in mean tax rates between Democratic and Republican regimes. Conversely,
political messages about abortion tend to extremes, but abortion rates are independent of
the party in power. These results suggest that diﬀerences in economic policies between
the parties reflect preferences of party leaders but that diﬀerences in abortion and other
religion-related policies reflect political strategy.
We then briefly address the issue of voter turnout. Is it plausible that politicians can be
tailoring their messages to increase turnout? Anecdotes about how Democrats and Republicans target specific groups and broadcast more extreme messages to those groups abound.
Both politicians and commentators argue that this targeting reflects a desire to increase
turnout. Voter turnout can increase in races where the politicians diﬀer along key dimensions. For example, between 1976, when Republicans and Democrats barely diﬀered on
religion-related issues, and 1984, when Reagan faced Mondale in a race with much starker
3

We use the term social group to distinguish these groups from pressure groups and interest groups, which
have received considerable attention in the literature (Becker, 1983; Dixit and Londregan, 1995; Grossman
and Helpman, 2002).

4

divisions, turnout among the highly religious rose by seven percentage points.
We end the paper by examining a key prediction of the model: religious determinants
of political orientation will be maximized when about 50 percent of the population attends
church regularly and that economic determinants of political orientation will be maximized
when about 50 percent of the population is in labor unions. We find a strong non-monotonic
relationship across countries between church attendance at the national level and the extent
to which religion determines right-wing orientation. In countries with very low levels of
church attendance, such as Norway or Russia, religion is uncorrelated with political preferences. The same fact is true in those countries, like the Philippines, with very high levels
of religious attendance. The countries with very strong connections between religion and
being right-wing are all those, like the United States, where about one-half of the population
attends church once per month or more.
After looking across countries, we turn to U.S. states. While the problem with unionization across countries was that there were few countries where more than one-half of the
population is unionized, the problem with data on U.S. states is that there are few states
where much less than one-half of the population attends church regularly. As such, we focused on whether church attendance increases the extent that religious determines voting
Republican. In states like Mississippi, with high attendance levels (close to 100 percent),
there is little connection between religion and political orientation. In states like California
(where closer to 50 percent of the population attends church once per month or more), there
is much more connection between religiosity and being a Republican.
Finally, we use our parameter estimates to see whether declining church attendance
and declining union membership can explain the rising importance of religion in American
politics. Unions have declined from being close to 35 percent of non-agricultural employment
in the 1950s to being less than 15 percent of the labor force today (Freeman, 1998; Hirsch,
MacPherson and Vroman, 2001). Church attendance has declined from 1968 when 57 percent
of the population went church once per month or more to 2000 the point when 47 percent of
5

the population went to church this often. Both of these declines should have caused politics
to focus less on economics and more on religion. Using our parameter estimates from the
cross-state and the cross-country regressions, we estimate that these changes can explain
about one-third of the increasing importance of religion and the decreasing importance of
economics in explaining voting patterns.

2

Model

In this model two parties, labeled L and R, compete for votes. Each party chooses a policy
proposal to maximize the diﬀerence between its votes and the votes of its opponent.4 After
a party chooses its policy proposal, a set of voters see that proposal; other voters do not see
the proposal. Citizens who don’t see the proposal base their votes on their prior beliefs about
the politicians’ proposals. We don’t require these beliefs to be rational, but certainly they
can be. Citizens receive utility from voting for politicians whose proposed policies are close
enough to their own, and utility from voting against politicians whose policies are diﬀerent
enough from their own. There are also costs of voting, which diﬀer among individuals, and
people vote only when these utility gains from voting outweigh the costs of voting. By
assuming that people get utility directly from voting, we are deliberately sidestepping the
thorny issue of why people vote. The most straightforward justification for this assumption
is that voters’ decisions are emotional, not based on any estimation of how their votes will
impact government policy (Schuessler, 2000). It is also possible to interpret the changes to
voter utility from voting as reflecting voters’ utility under diﬀerent policy regimes. However,
this interpretation requires policy proposals to be have predictive content (or be binding)
4

This specification would be consistent with politicians maximizing the probability of victory if, for
example, each party’s vote totals were aﬀected by exogenous shocks whose sum is uniformly distributed. We
therefore take it to be an approximation of politicians’ objective function in a deterministic context such as
the one we analyze.

6

and that individuals don’t understand the irrelevance of their vote to political outcomes.5
There exists an n-dimensional policy space represented by [−1, 1]n . We refer to policies
with negative values as left-wing positions and policies with positive values as right-wing
positions. Voters have preferences represented by an ideal point in this space, and parties
propose policies or platforms which are also points in this space. The distribution of citizens’
ideal policies along each dimension of the policy space is independent and symmetric around
the origin. As the origin represents the preferred policy of the median voter, we will refer to
the distance between the origin and parties’ proposed policies as the extent of extremism.
Each citizen is also characterized by a cost of voting, c, which is independent of policy
preferences and characterized by cumulative distribution function Z (c). The timing of the
model is the following:
1. All citizens have a belief x̄P ∈ [−1, 1]n about the political proposal of each party P ,
and potentially an informational aﬃliation with one or both parties.
2. Parties simultaneously choose platforms in the space xP ∈ [−1, 1]n to maximize their
margin of victory, and these platforms are observed by a fraction θ̄ of the party’s
aﬃliates, and by a fraction θ ≤ θ̄ of non-aﬃliates. Citizens who do not observe the
platform maintain their initial beliefs x̄P about party platforms.

3. The election is held and citizens decide whether to vote and if so for which party.
We solve the model recursively starting at period 3 and the voting decision. Each citizen
receives utility from voting for party P equal to
SP = B −

n
X
i=1

n
X
¯¢
¡¯ P
∗¯
¯
µi M x̂i − xi where
µi = 1
i=1

where B measures the psychological gain from expressing support for one’s favorite policy
vector x∗ , the weights µi represents the salience of each dimension of the policy space in
5

The phenomenon of voters basing turnout on the intensity of their preference for the preferred candidate
has sometimes been called “abstention from indiﬀerence” (Guttman, Hilger and Shachmurove, 1994).

7

citizen’s minds, and M (.) is an increasing, convex and bounded function. The function
M (.) captures the fact that citizens will receive less utility if they vote for a candidate
whose perceived policy proposals, x̂P , diﬀer from their own ideal proposals. People also
receive utility from voting against party P equal to OP = −γSP , where γ ≥ 0. If γ equals
one, then individuals compare the losses from each of the two candidates. Diﬀerent values
of γ will reflect particularly caring about whom you vote for or vote against depending on
whether γ is less than or greater than one. The benefit from voting equals:

¯¢ Pn
¯¢ 
¡¯ L
¡¯ R
Pn
∗¯
∗¯

¯
¯
¡
¢
γ i=1 µi M x̂i − xi − i=1 µi M x̂i − xi , 
V x∗ , x̂L , x̂R = (1 − γ) B + max
 γ Pn µ M ¡¯¯x̂R − x∗ ¯¯¢ − Pn µ M ¡¯¯x̂L − x∗ ¯¯¢ 
i=1

i

i

i

i=1

i

i

i

which is less than an upper bound V̄ . Conditional on voting, people will support the party
that is closer to their ideal platform, and as the act of voting imposes a cost c, people will
vote when
¡
¢
c ≤ V x∗ , x̂L , x̂R .

£
¤
We assume that c has full support on the interval 0, V̄ , so that for every possible vector

of voter preferences there are always voters who abstain. Parties anticipate that voters will

make their decisions in this manner and, in period 2 of the game, they select their proposed
policy to maximize their votes minus their opponent’s votes, taking the opponent’s proposed
policy as given. We assumed that citizens have prior beliefs about the parties’ platforms, but
we have not assumed that these beliefs are inaccurate and it may be particularly appealing
to assume that citizens share a common prior that is accurate. Our results do not rely on
any assumptions about the values of these prior beliefs; we require only the possibility that
individuals who observe a politician’s platform can have their beliefs changed.
We make two assumptions about functional forms that greatly simplify calculations:
Assumption 1 The loss function is quadratic
¯¢ ¡
¡¯
¢2
M ¯x̂Pi − x∗i ¯ = x̂Pi − x∗i
8

Assumption 2 The distribution of the cost



0


c
Z (c) =
V̄



 1

of voting is uniform
if

c<0
£
¤
if c ∈ 0, V̄
if

c > V̄

The quadratic loss function implies that V̄ = (1 − γ) B + 4γ. Assuming functional

forms for preferences is costly because we have lost the ability to consider the empirical
implications of diﬀerent forms of loss functions. As loss functions are not directly observable,
this problem may not be too severe. The assumption of a uniform distribution of voting costs
is also restrictive, and in proposition 4 below we consider the implications of a more general
distribution.
We now consider when parties’ platforms diverge from the preferences of the median
voter.

2.1

Political extremism as a result of voters’ preferences

We begin by considering preference-based explanations for political extremism. To simplify
matters, we consider a one-dimensional policy space and perfect information so θ = θ̄ = 1.
Given these assumptions, extremism can still result if γ < 1, so individuals care more about
the policies of the candidate that they vote for than the policies of the candidate that they
vote against. In this case, parties are going to have an incentive to diverge from the median
policy because of the turnout margin. By becoming more extreme, the party’s platform
comes nearer to the preferred policies of some inframarginal voters and these voters are
increasingly induced to vote. Moving away from the center has two negative eﬀects: losing
voters in the middle and increasing turnout among the opponent’s supporters. However
since γ < 1, the impact on the opposing party’s turnout will be less than the impact on the
party’s own turnout. The asymmetric impact on one’s own supporters and the supporters
of one’s opponents makes extremism a possibility (all proofs are in the appendix):
9

Proposition 1 If θ = θ̄ = 1, 0 < γ < 1, then the equilibrium platform choices of the two
parties will diverge from the origin and each other whenever voters’ preferences are suﬃciently heterogeneous. The distance between the two policies and the origin is monotonically
decreasing in γ and increasing in the heterogeneity of voters’ preferences (as measured by the
mean deviation of their distribution).
This proposition emphasizes that voter preferences are enough to generate political extremism and that this model generates a natural comparative static showing that extremism
is linked to voter heterogeneity. There are, however, three reasons for doubting the usefulness of this approach. First, there is no particular reason why γ < 1 is a natural assumption.
The benchmark assumption in the rational choice literature has always been that voters
compare the two politicians and consider the relative benefits of voting for one or the other,
which would be captured by assuming that γ = 1. Indeed, the current rash of popular literature saying that many Democrats are motivated more by hatred of Bush than by fondness
for Kerry suggests that for at least these voters γ > 1. Second, this assumption generates
the testable prediction that voter turnout will be highest for voters whose policies exactly
match those of the candidates, not for voters in the extremes tails of the ideological distribution. Yet Figure 5 shows that voter turnout is monotonically rising with self-described
ideological extremism (data from the General Social Survey, 1972-2000). Third, the degree
of heterogeneity required for the proposition to hold is actually fairly extreme. For example:
Corollary 1 When θ̄ = θ, extremism cannot emerge if the density of voters holding a given
preference is monotone non-increasing away from the origin (x ≤ y ⇔ f (x) ≥ f (y) ∀x, y ∈
[0, 1]).
This corollary says that extremism is only possible if densities rise away from the origin.
Extremism is incompatible with any single-peaked distribution and with the uniform distribution. Explanations for political extremism based solely on voters’ preferences do exist,
but the simple example that we have sketched here illustrates some of the diﬃculties with
10

these explanations. We now turn to explaining political extremism as the result of voters’
information.

2.2

Political extremism as a result of voters’ information

Extremism requires that immoderation has a stronger positive impact on one’s own supporters than it has a negative impact on the opponent’s voters. In the previous section,
diﬀerential impact occurs because people care more about the characteristics of the candidate they support than the characteristics of the candidate they oppose. In this section,
diﬀerential impact occurs because the politician’s supporters are more aware of changes in
the politician’s policies. This diﬀerential awareness might occur because individuals pay
more attention to their own candidate, but it can also result from politicians strategically
targeting where they broadcast their messages. Examples of this targeting include direct
mailing, television ads in particular markets, speeches to the party faithful, and the use of
allies, like religious leaders or unions, to broadcast information to a particular group. The
model requires politicians to have some ability to provide their own supporters with more
information about proposed policies.
We no longer assume that θ = θ̄ = 1 so that we can consider information diﬀerences and
hereafter assume that γ = 1. This assumption means that voters care only about relative
positions. In this section, we also assume that there is only one policy dimension. As such,
a voter whose ideal policy is x∗i and who perceives the two parties as oﬀering policies x̂R
i and
¡
¢
¡
¢
¢
¡
2
2
L
R
x̂Li , will perceive net benefits of 2x∗i x̂R
+ x̂Li −c of voting for the right-wing
i − x̂i − x̂i
L
candidate R. When x̂R
i > 0 > x̂i , then benefits of voting for the right-wing candidate rise

always rise with x∗i and the net benefits of voting for the L candidate always falls with x∗i ,
so these assumptions predict the pattern of voter turnout seen in Figure 5.
Given these assumptions about voting behavior, if a party has some aﬃliates who are
more likely to be aware of the party platform, and if those aﬃliates do not have views that

11

perfectly mirror those of society as a whole, then the median voter result vanishes:
Proposition 2 A party with a positive measure of aﬃliates will adopt a platform that coincides with the position of the median voter if and only if there is no informational diﬀerence
between aﬃliates and non-aﬃliates ( θ̄ = θ) or there is no diﬀerence between the ideal policies
of the average aﬃliate and the average voter.
The proposition tells us that any informational diﬀerence among voters is enough to break
down the rush to the center. We now consider the platform decision of a party with rightwing aﬃliates and the determinants of the extremism of this party’s platform. A natural
measure of extremism is the value of xR which captures the distance between the party’s
platform and the ideal platform of the median voter. Needless to say, perfectly symmetric
results apply to party L when its average supporter is less conservative than the average
voter.
Proposition 3 If party aﬃliates are on average better informed about the party platform
(θ̄ > θ) and more conservative than non-aﬃliates the party will adopt a right-wing platform
so xR > 0.
The party’s extremism (i.e. the value of xR ) is increasing in its ability to convey information to its aﬃliates (θ̄), and decreasing in its tendency to convey information to non-aﬃliates
(θ). The value of xR increases as the number of party aﬃliates increases (holding their average ideal policy constant) and increases as the average ideal policy within party aﬃliates
becomes more conservative (holding the number of party aﬃliates constant).
If right-wing party aﬃliates include all citizens i for whom x∗i > 0 and no others, then
extremism is increasing in the heterogeneity of voters’ preferences (as measured by the mean
deviation of their distribution).
This proposition has three elements. First, it shows that any party whose aﬃliates
are more conservative than the national norm will tend to choose a conservative platform.
12

This result will be true even if both parties have an information advantage in reaching
conservative voters. In that case, both parties will choose conservative platforms, so the first
result highlights that policies will cater to groups that are aware.
The second result in the proposition yields comparative statics on the extent of extremism. Extremism is more likely when the information asymmetry between aﬃliates and
non-aﬃliates is greater. If the news media rapidly ensures that any speech given to the
party faithful is broadcast universally then this will reduce extremism relative to a world in
which these speeches are kept private. Extremism is also a function of the number of party
aﬃliates. When there are few party aﬃliates then it makes little sense to cater to them by
taking an extreme position. As the number of party aﬃliates rises, the gains from appealing
to them also rise. The amount of extremism will also rise with the amount of sorting into
the aﬃliate group. As the group that is particularly aware of changes to party platforms
becomes more extreme, then policies will also become more extreme. The last part of the
proposition makes the further assumption that everyone whose views are right of center is
a party aﬃliate. In that case, extremism rises with the heterogeneity of voters’ preferences.
As there is a greater range of preferences in the population, party platforms will get more
extreme.
Further comparative-statics results can be obtained by generalizing the distribution of
the cost of voting: specifically, we modify the uniform distribution by adding a point mass
in the origin, representing a group of people who always turn out to vote. The larger this
group, the closer the outcome is to the median-voter result:
Proposition 4 If the distribution of the cost of voting is generalized to include a point
mass z0 ∈ [0, 1] of voters with zero cost of voting as well as a uniform density of voters
£
¤
0
z (c) = 1−z
∀c
∈
0,
V̄
, extremism can only emerge if z0 < 1 and its extent (i.e. the value
V̄
of xR ) is monotone decreasing in z0 .

13

2.3

Political competition with two issues

In this section, we focus on the case with two issues A and T where issue T carries weight µ ∈
(0, 1) in voters’ utility function. These letters might stand for taxes and abortion for example.
³
´ ³
´
An individual who perceives the two parties as having platforms T̂L , ÂL , T̂R , ÂR and
whose ideal policies are(t, a) receives benefits from voting for the R candidate equal to two

times:
!
!
Ã
Ã
³
³
´
´
T̂L + T̂R
ÂL + ÂR
∆ (t, a; Ω) = µ T̂R − T̂L
+ (1 − µ) ÂR − ÂL
t−
a−
2
2

´ ³
´´
³³
where Ω is the belief set T̂L , ÂL , T̂R , ÂR . The benefits of voting for the L candidate

are −1 times that amount. The following lemma then characterizes voter behavior:

Lemma 1 A voter votes for L if ∆ (t, a; Ω) ≤ − 2c , abstains if − 2c < ∆ < 2c , and votes for

R if ∆ (t, a; Ω) ≥ 2c . In other words, among all voters characterized by (t, a; Ω), a fraction

Z (−2∆ (t, a; Ω)) vote for L, a fraction Z (2∆ (t, a; Ω)) vote for R (where at least one of these
fractions is nil), and the rest abstain.
Figure 6 illustrates voting behavior in one potential example. The horizontal axis depicts
the range of policies along dimension T and the vertical axis depicts the range of policies
along dimension A. The beliefs about the two parties platforms are described by a small
circle for the right-wing candidate and a small box for the left-wing candidate. The line
running through the origin is the line described by the values of t and a for which the benefit
function, ∆ (t, a; Ω) = 0. All citizens with zero voting costs will support the R candidate if
their ideal policies (i.e. (a, t) values) are above that line. All citizens with zero voting costs
will support the L candidate if their ideal policies are below that line.
The line that runs above the origin reflects the values of t and a for which the benefit
function, ∆ (t, a; Ω) equals some positive value 2c . The line below the origin reflects the values
of t and a for which the negative of the benefit function equals 2c . These two lines describe the
14

voting behavior of an individual whose cost of voting equals c. If the individual’s preferences
lie above the upper line, then that citizen will vote for the R candidate. If the individual’s
preferences lie below the lower line, then that citizen will vote for the L candidate. If the
individual’s preferences lie between the lines, then the individual will abstain. As in the
section immediately before this one, voters with more extreme preferences are more likely to
go to the polls.
We consider the optimal policy choice for party R; the choice for party L remains symmetric. The probability of a voter being an aﬃliate is described by the function π R (t, a) of
his ideal policies. This function is first treated as being exogenous; parties are endowed with
aﬃliates. Extremism in the T dimension equals TR and extremism in the A dimension is
AR , i.e. the diﬀerence between the policy platforms and the preferences of the median voter.
The core results of the previous section extend to two dimensions:
Proposition 5 A party with a positive measure of aﬃliates will adopt a platform that coincides with the position of the median voter if and only if there is no informational diﬀerence
between aﬃliates and non-aﬃliates ( θ̄ = θ) or there is no diﬀerence between the ideal policies
of the average aﬃliate and the average voter along either policy dimension. If party aﬃliates
are on average better informed about the party platform (θ̄ > θ) and more conservative than
non-aﬃliates along both dimensions, then the party will choose a platform that is right-wing
along both dimensions.
The party’s extremism along both dimensions will increase with its ability to convey information to its aﬃliates (θ̄) and to withhold it from non-aﬃliates (−θ); moreover it will
increase as the number of party aﬃliates increases (keeping their average ideal policy constant), or their average conservatism increases (keeping their number constant).
This proposition directly repeats the core results of the previous section. Extremism
occurs whenever there is some ability to target information to a group whose preferences
diﬀer from the preferences of the nation as a whole. Again, extremism rises with the degree
15

to which information can be targeted and also with the size and bias of the group of party
aﬃliates. The next proposition addresses the question of which dimensions will tend to
dominate party politics. Will parties diﬀer from the median voter primarily along dimension
T or dimension A?
Proposition 6 The party platform will be more extreme on the issue where the average preference of aﬃliates is more diﬀerent from the median-voter position (TR Q AR ⇔ E (t|R) Q
E (a|R)).
If all voters for whom t + a > 0 are party aﬃliates, then a monotonic increase in the heterogeneity of voters’ preferences on one issue increases extremism on that issue and reduces
it on the other.
Parties’ extremism is determined by the preferences of their core aﬃliates. If their aﬃliates are particularly chosen on the basis of dimension A then the parties will divide more
clearly over that dimension. As such, if religious views exert a stronger push towards political
involvement, then we might expect religious issues to divide parties. This result, naturally,
only pushes the puzzle back one level, since we have not addressed the determinants of party
aﬃliation, but we will turn to that issue in the next two sections.
The second result in the proposition emphasizes heterogeneity of beliefs in the population
as a whole. This proposition suggests that diﬀerences of opinion, or of real circumstances,
will tend to increase extremism along one issue and decrease extremism along the other issue.
If heterogeneity of opinion over religion-related issues has risen substantially over the past
30 years, then this might explain some part of the rising political diﬀerentiation based on
religion. Presumably, rising income inequality would tend to create further diﬀerentiation
on economic grounds, although this doesn’t seem to have happened over the last 30 years.
There is however a case that rising inequality during the late 19th century led to a political
shift where parties, such as the Democrats with William Jennings Bryan, began to become
more extreme in economic platforms (as opposed to classic divisions based on the Civil War,
16

Prohibition, and religion or “Rum, Romany, and Rebellion”).

2.4

Social organizations and party aﬃliation

In our model, party aﬃliation means diﬀerential access to information about the party
platforms. One way in which parties may gain the ability to broadcast messages is to have
access to a selected subgroup of the population, such as a Church or a Union. In this section,
we take the existence of such subgroups as given, and ask how their existence influences the
choice of political platform. We assume that there is no way to target voters other than
to have access to these particular groups. We assume that there are two groups, whose
membership is deterministic and not exclusive nor exhaustive. The first, which we label
“the church”, comprises all voters with a suﬃciently conservative preference with respect
to issue a; the second, which we label “the union”, comprises all voters with a suﬃciently
progressive preference with respect to issue t. If we further assume that party R has a
relationship with the church and can broadcast its platform to church members, and party
L can broadcast its message particularly to union members, then it follows that:
Proposition 7 If party R has access, through the church, to all voters for whom a > α and
party L has access, through the union, to all voters for whom t < τ , then both parties will
move away from the median-voter position whenever θ̄ > θ. The R party platform will diﬀer
from zero only along the a dimension and the L party platform will diﬀer from zero only
along the t dimension.

³
´
R-party extremism is maximized at a value of α in the interval 0, θ̄−θ
, and L party
θ̄+θ
³
´
extremism is maximized at a value of τ in the interval − θ̄−θ
, 0 . The value of α that
θ̄+θ
maximizes R party extremism is increasing in the party’s ability to convey information to

its aﬃliates (θ̄) and to withhold it from non-aﬃliates (−θ); the value of τ that maximizes
L-party extremism is decreasing in the same parameters.

17

³
´
Since the value of α that maximizes extremism is in the interior of the interval 0, θ̄−θ
,
θ̄+θ

the relationship between extremism and group size is necessarily non-monotonic. Moreover,
extremism is maximized when less than one-half of the population is in the group. As group
size decreases from its extremism-maximizing level, the gains from extremism fall because
the group becomes increasingly small and politically marginalized. As group size increases
from its extremism-maximizing level, the gains from extremism also fall because the group
itself becomes increasing moderate and representative of the country as a whole. When
we make stronger assumptions about preferences, the relationship between extremism and
group size becomes more straightforward. Figure 7 shows the connection between R party
policy along the a dimension and the size of the a-based group that this party can target,
assuming a uniform distribution of preferences on the interval (−1, 1) and that
The assumption that

θ̄−θ
θ̄+θ

of the R party platform is

θ̄−θ
θ̄+θ

= 0.2.

= 0.2 means that the probability that a church member learns
3
2

of the probability that a non-church member learns of that

platform. Given this assumption, extremism is maximized when the church contains 45
percent of the population. When

θ̄−θ
θ̄+θ

< 0.2, so there is less information asymmetry, then the

extremism-maximizing church size lies between .45 and .5. When
maximizing church size is .42 and when

θ̄−θ
θ̄+θ

θ̄−θ
θ̄+θ

= 0.3, the extremism-

= 0.1, the extremism-maximizing church size is

.47.
While formally we assume that the connection between a party and a pre-existing social
organization is exogenous, we can justify this assumption with a sketch of a more complex
model. When a party has no aﬃliates, its optimal position is the origin. If voters originally
believe both party platforms to be located at the origin, then when both parties have no
aﬃliates, these parties will present identical platforms, receive no votes, and the election will
presumably be settled by the toss of a coin. By gaining access to an organization, a party
can improve its electoral chances. With access to a social group, a party will shift its policy
away from the origin and towards the preferences of the members of the organization. If the
opposing party is prevented from also gaining access to the organization, this shift yields an
18

increase in the margin of victory. Given this power, politicians should be willing to pay for
exclusive access to social groups (presumably through political benefits) and the political
equilibrium will reflect the outcome of this first stage in which social groups sell access to
their members. Groups could sell exclusive access to their members to the highest bidding
party.
If parties have the same amount of funds available to bid, we might expect each party
to acquire one group, trading oﬀ the benefits of extra votes with the cost of buying access
to the group. When the political relevance of the two groups is equal, the election results in
a draw when each party caters to one group. More generally, the value of a group does not
solely depend on group size, but also on the salience of the two issues and the distribution
of preferences.

2.5

Endogenous aﬃliation

We have so far assumed that groups are formed exogenously and then used by politicians.
In this section, we allow citizens to choose their own group in an initial stage of the model.
This stage will be based on initial beliefs about party platforms and must occur before
the parties broadcast their platforms. A natural basis for aﬃliation could be the original
position of the parties: specifically, we suggest that the electorate is initially split among
right-wingers and left-wingers based on their relative preference for the platforms x̄L and x̄R
that they originally believe the parties to be adopting. The benefits from aﬃliating with a
party equals:
∗

JP (x ) = Γ −

n
X
i=1

n
X
¡ P
¢
∗ 2
λi x̄i − xi with
λi = 1
i=1

We further assume that this is always positive, which means that everyone will always
aﬃliate with one of the two parties.6 The assumption will tend to reduce extremism since
many moderates will avoid party aﬃliation if aﬃliation can be costly. If moderates are
6

We assume that aﬃliation is randomized with equal probabilities if JL = JR .

19

independent, then the incentives for extremism will rise. A particularly natural assumption
is that the values of λi , that determine aﬃliation, are the same as the parameters, µi ,
that determine voting, but there may be interesting cases where these parameters are not
identical.
In this section, we will assume that people’s initial beliefs about party platforms are
rational in the sense that they correctly anticipate the parties’ platforms; or more formally:
Definition 1 A point ξ ≥ 0 in RN constitutes a symmetric political equilibrium if the par-

ties’ optimal platforms are xL = −ξ and xR = ξ when voters initially hold rational beliefs
x̄L = −ξ and x̄R = ξ.

We start by considering the symmetric political equilibrium with only one policy dimension.
It is possible to have an equilibrium where both parties are expected to choose the median
position, aﬃliation with the two parties is completely random, and parties do therefore continue to choose the median policy. However, this equilibrium is highly unstable in the sense
that it would break down if there is any deviation in aﬃliation, so that both parties don’t
have ideologically identical aﬃliates. As soon as there is any deviation in the distribution of
aﬃliates, the parties have an incentive to choose extreme policies.
We do not find this equilibrium interesting because of this instability and we assume that
there is some diﬀerentiation in initial beliefs about the parties’ platform. As long as there
is some diﬀerence in initial beliefs, even if that diﬀerence is arbitrarily close to zero, citizens
aﬃliate with party R if their ideal policy is x∗ > 0 and with party L if x∗ < 0. Symmetry then
means that both final policies and initial beliefs about policies will be symmetric around the
origin. This is a scenario we have considered previously, so the following proposition follows:
Proposition 8 The one-dimensional political game with endogenous aﬃliation has a unique
symmetric political equilibrium ξ =

θ̄−θ
E
θ̄+θ

(|x|).

Extremism (or ξ ) increases with θ̄, decreases with θ, and increases with the heterogeneity
of voters’ preferences (as measured by the mean deviation of their distribution).
20

In weighing a deviation in party platform away from the center, party R weighs the benefit
of increasing turnout among party R’s aﬃliates against the cost of alienating moderates (who
may not turn out) and energizing the opposition. A move to the center will instead reduce
the turnout of left-wingers and cause some moderates to switch from party L to party R. At
the equilibrium level, costs and benefits must balance out. Crucially, because R’s aﬃliates
are more likely to notice a change in R’s platform than are L’s aﬃliates, convergence to the
ideal policy of the median voter is not an equilibrium.
We now turn to the bidimensional case in which λ, µ ∈ (0, 1). Party aﬃliation is then
determined by the following equation:
Lemma 2 All individuals whose values of t and a imply that:
¶
¶
µ
µ
¡
¡
¢
¢
T̄L + T̄R
ĀL + ĀR
λ T̄R − T̄L t −
+ (1 − λ) ĀR − ĀL a −
>0
2
2

aﬃliate with party R, while individuals whose values of t and a cause this inequality to fail
strictly will aﬃliate with party L.
As λ rises, the T dimension becomes more important in determining voters’ aﬃliation,
and extremism along this dimension becomes stronger. As λ approaches 1, the aﬃliation
divide becomes the A axis: those who prefer positive values of T aﬃliate with party R and
those who prefer negative values with party L. In this case parties will compete only on one
issue, and converge to the median on the other. If initial platforms are such that the parties
are diﬀerentiated only on issue A, and voters’ initial aﬃliations will be determined only by
their preferences on issue A, then any deviation from the median position on issue T would
be observed equally often by own-party and other-party aﬃliates, producing no net gain in
votes. Therefore neither party has an incentive to deviate on issue T . Applying our earlier
results to this setting yields:
Proposition 9 There always exist two symmetric political equilibria, one where τ =
and α = 0 and the other where τ = 0 and α =
21

θ̄−θ
E
θ̄+θ

(|a|).

θ̄−θ
E
θ̄+θ

(|t|)

The extent of diﬀerentiation among the parties in these equilibria is increasing in the
fraction of own aﬃliates that would notice a change, decreasing in the fraction of the opponent’s aﬃliates that would notice a change, and increasing in the heterogeneity of voters’
preferences (as measured by the mean deviation of their distribution).
The stability of these equilibria depends on the independence of the two attributes.
Once a party’s aﬃliates are determined by one dimension, independence ensures that the
party has aﬃliates with far-ranging preferences along the other dimension. Heterogeneity
among aﬃliates along the other dimension ensures that the party does not want to become
extreme along that dimension, and remains extreme only along the dimension that drives
its aﬃliation. These two equilibria universally exist, and in many cases, they are the only
stable equilibria. For example, when preferences are uniformly distributed:
Proposition 10 When voters’ preferences are uniformly distributed on both issues, the only
stable equilibria are those where diﬀerentiation is restricted to only one of the two issues.
Parties can divide only along dimension A when λ < .4 and they can divide only along
dimension T when λ > .6.
Using the results from the previous proposition, in the uniform case, the distance between
the two party platforms equals

θ̄−θ
,
θ̄+θ

so extremism depends entirely on the informational dif-

ferences between the two groups. The second part of the proposition tells us that both
equilibria only exist when λ takes on values close to .5. When one of the issues becomes particularly important in driving the aﬃliation decision, then political division and extremism
must center on this issue.
2.5.1

A generalization

To consider the role of heterogeneity of preferences, we now extend our previous results
on endogenous aﬃliation beyond the uniform distribution. We assume a generalization of
22

the uniform distribution for preferences with density h (t, a) = 1+π+ρ
− ρ2 |t| − π2 |a| with
4
£
¤
π, ρ ∈ − 12 , 12 . The parameters ρ and π can be thought of as measuring the concentration of

preferences on issues T and A, respectively. Higher values of these parameters imply greater
concentrations of voters in the center of the preference distribution. The distribution has
the characteristic shape of a roof when they are both positive, and its mirror image when
they are negative; of course, preferences can also be concentrated on one issue and polarized
on the other. Given this functional form, we no longer need the assumption that preferences
are independent along the two issues.
Using Proposition 8 above, when preferences are distributed with density f (x) = 1+ψ
−
2
£ 1 1¤
3−ψ
ψ |x| , ψ ∈ − 2 , 2 the unique symmetric equilibrium is ξ = θ̄−θ
E (|x|) = θ̄−θ
. In the
θ̄+θ
θ̄+θ 6

two-dimensional case, diﬀerentiation is more likely to occur on an issue that is more salient
and on which preferences are less concentrated. Therefore, to restrict the space of possible
equilibria, it is convenient to assume that neither issue has at the same time a low salience
and a high concentration of preferences. Given this restriction, it follows that:
Proposition 11 If preferences are distributed according to the density function h (t, a), if
³
´2
¡
¢2
3ρ
λ
λ
π > 0 then 1−λ
≤ 12 2+2π−ρ
,
if
ρ
>
0
then
≥
2
, and max {4π + ρ, π + 4ρ} ≤
3π
1−λ
2−π+2ρ

2 then the only stable equilibria are those where diﬀerentiation is restricted to one only of
the two issues.
Diﬀerentiation can occur on issue A if and only if
only if

λ
1−λ

>

λ
1−λ

<

3−π
,
2+2π−ρ

and on issue T if and

2+2ρ−π
.
3−ρ

The assumptions needed for this proposition require that if preferences are concentrated
on issue A (π > 0 ) then this issue is at least somewhat salient in the aﬃliation decision
and likewise if preferences are concentrated on issue T (ρ > 0 ) then this issue is also
somewhat salient. The assumption max {4π + ρ, π + 4ρ} ≤ 2 ensures that there is not too
much concentration on both issues at the same time.
The proposition tells us that diﬀerentiation is more likely to occur along one issue the
23

more salient it is, the lower the concentration of voters’ preferences on it, and the higher the
concentration of voters’ preferences on the other issue. The equilibrium is identical to the
one that would obtain if the other issue were completely irrelevant in voters’ preferences, as
described in Proposition 9 above. This confirms the intuition that when more voters take
extreme positions on an issue candidates are more likely to be diﬀerentiated on that issue.

2.6

Incorporating policy outcomes

Thus far we have focused our attention on party platforms, rather than policy outcomes. But
the preferences of politicians and parties may well aﬀect political outcomes, and a complete
theory of the electoral process requires some accounting of how these preferences weigh oﬀ
against the considerations we have modeled above. In this subsection, we address the policy
decisions of politicians after they have been elected. We assume that politicians weigh their
desire to fulfill their own policy preferences against their desire not to contradict their stated
party platforms. We assume that politicians’ choices in the election are not impacted by
these ex-post considerations. This assumption can be justified if politicians’ preferences are
lexicographic and they care about winning more than anything else.
The party that wins the election subsequently decides which policy to enact by weighing
two considerations: the personal preferences of the politician in oﬃce, and the political cost
of being seen to deviate from one’s electoral platform. Specifically, we assume that
UP (x) = G − β

n
X
i=1

ν i L (|xi −

x∗i |)

− (1 − β)

n
X
i=1

n
X
¯¢
¡¯
P¯
¯
ν i L xi − xi
νi = 1
where
i=1

where x∗ denotes the preferences of the politician and xP his electoral platform, and L (.)
is an increasing and strictly convex function on R+ such that L (0) = 0. We assume that
R-party politicians have preferences that are equally conservative on all issues x∗ : x∗i =
x∗R ≥ 0∀i = 1...n while analogously L-party politicians have preferences that are equally
progressive on all issues x∗ : x∗i = x∗L ≤ 0∀i = 1...n.
24

For simplicity, suppose that L (.) is quadratic, so that L (z) = z 2 for all z. Then considering the standard case where party R’s platform is unambiguously right-wing and party
L’s unambiguously left-wing (xR ≥ 0 ∧ xL ≤ 0), the first-order condition for a maximum
immediately proves the following:
Proposition 12 The enacted policy is a linear combination of the electoral platform and
the elected politician’s ideal policy
x = βx∗P + (1 − β) xP ∀i = 1...n
where P denotes the party of the electoral winner. Therefore, the enacted policy is more
extreme on one issue than on another if and only if the electoral platform is.
This provides some intuition about the issues on which policy extremism ought to exceed
platform extremism, and vice versa. In particular, consider a two-dimensional case in which
party R wins the election. Let (TR , AR ) denote the party’s platform, and x∗R its ideal policy
on both issues. It then follows immediately that
Corollary 2 The enacted policy of party R is more conservative than its platform on issue
T and less conservative than its platform on issue A if and only if TR < x∗R < AR
This corollary leads us immediately to the next section. If extremism is driven by strategic
concerns, not preferences, then we should expect to see extreme platforms, and less diﬀerence
in actual policies. If extremism is driven by preferences, then platforms will be more moderate
than eventual policies.

3

Strategic vs. Preference Extremism

The most significant existing theory of political extremism that diﬀers from our model is
that this extremism reflects the preferences of party leaders. The previous section suggested
25

that this model can be tested against our model by comparing the relative extremity of
platforms and policies. If extremism is based on supplier preferences, then platforms will
be less extreme than policies. If extremism comes from trying to appeal to voters, then
platforms will be more extreme than policies. We now examine these implications.
Over the last three decades, Republican and Democratic platforms have moved definitively away from the center on religious values. Consider, for example, trends in party
platform statements about abortion. Between 1976, the first year in which either party’s
platform mentioned abortion, and 2004, the Republican party moved to the right on this
issue:
We protest the Supreme Court’s intrusion into the family structure through
its denial of the parents’ obligation and right to guide their minor children. The
Republican Party favors a continuance of the public dialogue on abortion and
supports the eﬀorts of those who seek enactment of a constitutional amendment
to restore protection of the right to life for unborn children. (Republican Party
Platform, 1976).
As a country, we must keep our pledge to the first guarantee of the Declaration of Independence. That is why we say the unborn child has a fundamental
individual right to life which cannot be infringed. We support a human life
amendment to the Constitution and we endorse legislation to make it clear that
the Fourteenth Amendment’s protections apply to unborn children. Our purpose is to have legislative and judicial protection of that right against those who
perform abortions. We oppose using public revenues for abortion and will not
fund organizations which advocate it. We support the appointment of judges
who respect traditional family values and the sanctity of innocent human life.
(Republican Party Platform, 2004).
At the same time, the Democratic platforms trended leftward:
We fully recognize the religious and ethical nature of the concerns which
many Americans have on the subject of abortion. We feel, however, that it is
undesirable to attempt to amend the U.S. Constitution to overturn the Supreme
Court decision in this area. (Democratic National Platform, 1976).
We will defend the dignity of all Americans against those who would undermine it. Because we believe in the privacy and equality of women, we stand
26

proudly for a woman’s right to choose, consistent with Roe v. Wade, and regardless of her ability to pay. We stand firmly against Republican eﬀorts to
undermine that right. At the same time, we strongly support family planning
and adoption incentives. Abortion should be safe, legal, and rare. (Democratic
National Platform, 2004).
At the same time, much of the verbiage in both platforms on economic issues seems
quite moderate, and similar across platforms. Indeed, both parties appear to be sending the
message that they will reduce the tax burden on American businesses:
We believe that the private sector, not government is the engine of economic
growth and job creation......Under John Kerry and John Edwards, 99 percent of
American businesses will pay less in taxes than they do today. (Democratic Party
Platform, 2004)
Small business .... deserve far better treatment from government than they
have received. We will provide it through many of the initiatives explained elsewhere in this platform: lower tax rates, ending the death tax, cutting through
red tape... (Republican Party Platform, 2004)
We now turn to the reality of policy implementation and ask whether, as the preferencebased model would suggest, policy outcomes are more extreme than platforms. To look
at abortion policy, we focus on one particularly critical abortion outcome: the number of
abortions per 1000 live births. The data, which come from the CDC, are available from
1970 to 2000. To look at economic policies, we look at the mean tax rates as a share of
GDP over the fiscal years 1970-2000. Table 1 shows the results of a simple comparison of
mean abortion rates and tax rates between years in which the White House was Democratic
and years in which it was Republican. The diﬀerence in mean abortion rates is small and
statistically indistinguishable from zero (p = 0.4710). However, in the case of taxes the
data show more divergence in policy than in rhetoric. As Table 1 shows, mean tax rates
as a share of GDP diﬀered considerably between Republican and Democratic presidential
administrations during fiscal years 1970-2000. The diﬀerence is statistically distinguishable

27

from zero (p = 0.0002) and large, representing about one standard deviation in the tax share
over this time period.
The results of this section present a mixed message. Economic policy divergence is
accompanied by platform uniformity. This suggests that economic extremism is driven by
political preferences not strategic considerations. Conversely, divergence of platforms on
abortion is accompanied by no observable diﬀerence in abortion rates during the years of
Democratic and Republican presidents. This combination is consistent with the view that
abortion extremism is driven by strategic considerations, not political preferences.

4

Is there a Turnout Margin?

Our model depends on the idea that party leaders believe that they can increase turnout by
targeting specific populations. There is abundant anecdotal information that supports the
view that politicians target specific populations and tailor their messages to increase enthusiasm in that population. Platforms, and citizens’ information about these platforms, can
meaningfully aﬀect voter turnout. Current mobilization eﬀorts make it clear that politicians
are trying to increase turnout by using organizations, such as churches, to communicate
platforms and stimulate voter participation. At the West County Assembly of God outside
of St. Louis,
They hold open meetings for parishioners each month. They inform church
members about socially conservative electoral issues. They register them to vote
at stands outside the sanctuary on designated “voter registration” Sundays. Last
week, the “moral action team” even drove church members to the polls, and they
plan to do the same for this fall’s general election as well...
According to campaign memorandums, [the Bush campaign] has asked "people of faith team leaders” to help identify thousands of “friendly congregations”
around the country. It asked religious outreach volunteers to petition their pastors to hold voter registration drives, and to speak on behalf of the campaign to
Bible studies and church groups. (Kirkpatrick, 2004a)

28

These coordination activities are part of a more general strategy which puts “top priority
on maximizing voter turnout among conservative constituencies already disposed to back
the president” (Calmes and Harwood, 2004). Such anecdotes support the idea that political messages sent to these groups are more extreme than the messages broadcast to the
general public. While the Republican and Democratic conventions both tried to present a
mainstream message, there were abundant reports of much more extreme discussions behind
closed doors.
Are politicians right? Is turnout an important margin that can shape presidential elections? Certainly, there have been examples where turnout changed significantly at least
in part due to more extreme political platforms. The Republican (and Democratic) move
towards extremes on abortion was discussed above. If turnout responds to these more extreme views, then we should expect to see increased turnout among particularly pro-choice
or pro-life voters during this period. To examine this possibility, we looked at changes in
turnout between 1976 and 1984 by religious attendance. In 1976, both Carter and Ford were
relatively centrist on religious issues. In 1984, there was a big gap between the platforms of
Reagan and Mondale.
As Figure 8 illustrates, the move away from the center on religious issues appears to
have had a disproportionately positive impact on turnout among more religious Americans.
Among those who attend church more than once a week, the probability of an eligible
citizen voting increased by some seven percentage points. Reagan’s more extreme policies
on abortion and other issues appears to have had a significant impact on the level of voter
turnout among religious Americans. Evidence such as this suggests that voter turnout does
create incentives for candidates to move their platforms away from the political center.

29

5

Evidence on Organization Size and Political Extremism

The previous section emphasized that strategic extremism is a function of social organizations and underlying belief heterogeneity. In our empirical work we will focus on social
organizations, largely because organization size is more straightforward to measure in a way
that is comparable across space and time. Additionally, heterogeneity in beliefs seems more
likely to itself be caused by political strategies, which seems a less significant concern in the
case of organization strength.
We will focus on two of the developed world’s most important social organizations: trade
unions and churches. These two types of organizations are without peer for their combination
of size, significance to their members and history. Within the United States, eighty-nine
percent of respondents in the General Social Survey since 1990 report being a member of a
religious group. Unions are far less significant in America today, although they were more
important in the past and they remain more important in other countries.
Churches and unions are also particularly natural topics of investigation because we
know that they regularly connect with politics. The political involvement of unions is a
historical fact. They endorse candidates and in many European countries the connection
between one of the major parties and the labor unions has sometimes been almost seamless
(e.g. the pre-Blair Labour party in the U.K.). The political influence of the church is only
somewhat less subtle. In many European countries, while the Church does not explicitly
endorse candidates, in many cases church resources and preaching have backed Christian
Democratic candidates. Within the U.S. as well, right-wing candidates today regularly seek
support from church leaders and the opportunity to connect to the church faithful.
Churches and unions are natural social organizations also because they each have obvious
policy domains. Unions inherently include people with a common set of economic interests.
They do not particularly sort on religious views or foreign policy opinions. As such, the model
30

predicts the union density will be particularly connected with polarization along economic
lines. Likewise, churches do not naturally sort along economic or foreign policy lines, and as
such, we should particularly expect to see links between the size of religious organizations
and the degree to which politics is polarized along religious grounds.
We will focus on the key, and perhaps somewhat surprising, implication of the model
about the role of social groups that the link between group size and political polarization
along the issue related to that group is non-monotonic. This leads us to three related tests
of the hypothesis. First, in situations where group size varies between zero and one, we will
test for the existence of a non-monotonic relationship between group size and the relevance
of the group’s issue. This will be the test that we use for the relationship between religious
attendance and the political importance of religion across countries. Second, in situations
where the group size is mostly less than one-half of the population, we will look for an
increasing relationship between group size and the relevance of the group’s core issues. This
is the relevant case for considering heterogeneity in union density across countries or across
states within the U.S. Third, in situations where the group size is mostly greater than onehalf of the population we will look for a decreasing relationship between group size and the
political relevance of the group’s core issue.
Our basic measure of polarization along economic or religious grounds is the extent that
income or religious attendance predicts supporting the right-wing candidate. In almost no
cases is there a reversal where religious people or rich people are more likely to support the
left. If there is a tight connection between income and supporting the right-wing candidate,
we will consider a place to be highly polarized along economic grounds. If there is a tight
connection between religion and supporting the right-wing candidate, we will consider a
place to be highly polarized along religious grounds.
As such, for our cross-country work on church size, our core regression will take the form:

31

Support for the Right

=

b*Religious Belief+c*Religious Belief*National Church Size
+d*Religious Belief* (National Church Size)2
+Controls +Country and Year Fixed Eﬀects

The model predicts that c will be positive and d will be negative and that the maximum
impact of religious belief occurs in countries where around one-half of respondents attend
church regularly.
In our cross-country or cross-state work on unions, our core regression is:

Support for the Right

=

b*Income+c*Income*Union Size
+Controls+Country and Year Fixed eﬀects

The model predicts that c will be positive. In our cross-state work on religion, we will
estimate:

Support for the Right

=

b*Religious Beliefs+c*Religious Beliefs*Church Size
+ Controls + State and Year Fixed Eﬀects

The model predicts that c will be negative in this case, since more than one-half of the
population are generally religious adherents. Before turning to the regressions, we discuss
our data sources and core stylized facts.

5.1

Data Sources: The World Values Survey and the General Social Survey

Our work uses two primary data sets: the World Values Survey (Inglehart et al, 2000) and the
General Social Survey (Davis, Smith and Marsden, 2003). The General Social Survey (GSS)
32

is an annual survey taken of a random sample of U.S. residents. It contains questions on a
host of demographics as well as religion. Religious attendance is scored on a nine-category
scale ranging from never attending a religious institution to attending more than once per
day. The key political variable will be whether the respondent voted for a Republican in the
last election. We will eliminate those observations where individuals either did not vote or
voted for an independent.
The World Values Survey (WVS) was loosely modeled on the General Social Survey and
its questions are quite similar. The survey was conducted in three major waves in 1981-84,
1990-93 and 1995-97, and we will use data from all three waves. Like the General Social
Survey, the World Values Survey has questions on many basic demographic variables and a
categorical variable on church attendance. Instead of using votes in the last election, since
electoral diﬀerences across countries make this quite problematic, we will use respondents’
self-reported political orientation as our measure of support for the right. The World Values
Survey asks people to self-report their political orientation (left vs. right) on a 10 point
scale which we have standardized by subtracting the mean for each country-wave pair and
dividing by the standard deviation. Our measure of support for the right will be a person’s
value on this scale.
We also require measures of union and church size. To measure union size for our crossnational regressions, we will rely Blanchflower’s (1996) data on union density. For U.S.
data on unions, we take data from Hirsch and Macpherson’s (2003) database. In both
cases, we believe that these are credible measures of the prevalence of unions although the
heterogeneity in the structure of unions across space makes even these measures less than
perfect. We take attending once per month or more as our measure of membership in a
religious organization. For many purposes, it makes sense to rely on diﬀerent cutoﬀ values,
and our results are robust to slightly diﬀerent definitions, but we believe that monthly
attendance comes closest to the spirit of the model. People who attend less than once per
month are unlikely to receive much information either from the pulpit or from other church33

related activities. People who attend once per month or more can be thought of as regularly
receiving some form of information through the church.
All of our regressions will include country or state fixed eﬀects to capture the extent
that political support diﬀers over space. We also allow income and religion to have diﬀerent
eﬀects in diﬀerent elections. In our fixed eﬀect regressions, we also include an interaction
between country (in the World Values Survey) or state (in the General Social Survey) and
the key variable of interest (i.e. religiosity or income).7

5.2

Cross-National Evidence on Church Size and Unions

Our first regressions look at the connection between church size and religious polarization
in politics. There is remarkable heterogeneity in the World Values Survey in the amount of
church attendance across countries. In some places, such as the Scandinavian countries or
the Russian Federation, ten percent or less of the population attends church once per month
or more. In the United States in wave 3 of the survey around 60 percent of respondents
attend church once per month or more. In the Philippines 90 percent attend church once
per month or more. As such, cross-national investigation of church attendance gives us our
best chance of measuring the connection between organizational size and polarization for a
wide range of organizational size.
There are many diﬀerent measures of religious belief that we can use. In the regressions
in Table 2, we use self-reported answers to the question: how important is God in your
life? This question is scored on a 10 point scale ranging from “not at all” to “very”. We
have standardized this measure by subtracting the mean for the country-wave and dividing
by the standard deviation, so that a unit increase can be interpreted as an increase of one
7

As the World Values Survey and the General Social Survey contain many observations with missing
data, especially for income, and since these missing observations do not appear to be randomly selected, we
include observations that are missing one or more of the control variables. We then give that observation
a value for missing variable equal to the mean in the control and include a set of dummy variables each of
which takes on a value of one when a particular control variable is missing. We never impute values for any
of the variables that are reported in the table.

34

standard deviation from the mean. Our results are generally robust to alternative measures
of religious belief. Our regressions include controls for gender, income, age, age squared, and
years of completed schooling.
In the first column of Table 2, we show the basic connection between identification with
the political right and people’s opinions about the importance of God. The coeﬃcient on
the importance of God is .16 meaning that as the importance of God to the respondent
rises by one standard deviation, the respondent’s tendency to support the right rises by .16
standard deviations. This coeﬃcient is extremely significant statistically, and it also seems
economically significant to us.
This pooled regression masks the considerable heterogeneity that exists within countries.
Figure 9 shows the connection coeﬃcients from country-level versions of regression (1) where
the tendency to identify with the right is regressed on self-reported importance of God. In
some countries, such as India or Turkey, the correlation is more than double our pooled
estimated (.36 and .32 respectively). The estimated coeﬃcient in the United States is slightly
higher than that for the world as a whole. Then there are many countries such as Japan,
Norway, Bangladesh and the Philippines were the coeﬃcient is essentially zero.
The model predicts a non-monotonic relationship and indeed that is exactly what we
see. With the exception of Bulgaria, there is no country with religious attendance below 25
percent that has a particularly strong connection between religious identification and rightwing status. There is also no country with religious attendance above 60 percent that has an
above-average connection between right-wing status and religiosity. All of the countries with
extremely tight connections between religion and political orientation have monthly church
attendance values between .3 and .7.
Perhaps it is unsurprising that the countries with little religion also have little connection
between religion and political orientation. It seems to us somewhat more counterintuitive
that there is no connection between religion and politics in those countries with extremely
high levels of religious attendance, although this is exactly what is predicted by the model.
35

The countries that don’t conform well with the theory (apart from Bulgaria) are four countries with church attendance that includes between 45 and 55 percent of the population and
still have very little political polarization along religious grounds: Chile, Brazil, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela. One potential explanation for these observations is the history
of liberation theology and left-wing clerics opposing military regimes.
To test for the non-monotonic impact of church membership on the religion-right-wing
connection, in regression (2) of Table 2, we interact the self-report of the importance of God
with the share of the country’s respondents attending church more than once per month and
the square of that variable. We also include the raw values of the church attendance variable
in the regression and allow importance of God to diﬀer during the diﬀerent waves of World
Value Survey. Regression (2) shows both a strong positive interaction between national
church attendance and the impact of the importance of God for low levels of national church
attendance and a strong negative quadratic term. Both the linear and quadratic terms are
highly significant statistically. The connection between right-wing status and self-reported
importance of God appears to be maximized when about 45 percent of the population attends
church.
In the third regression of the table, we repeat regression (2) only for those countries with
Polity III democracy scores averaging at least 5 from 1970-1995. We believe that political
competition also occurs in countries that aren’t democracies and certainly people identify
with the left and the right even when they don’t have a chance to vote. Nonetheless, our
model is specifically based on political competition in a democratic setting, so it makes
sense to ensure that these results are robust to excluding non-democracies for the sample.
In this case, the linear term remains significantly positive and the quadratic term remains
significantly negative. The importance of religion on being right-wing is now maximized
when 48 percent of the population attends church at least once per month.
In regression (4), we return to our entire sample of countries and allow each country to
have a diﬀerent inherent connection between religiosity and right-wing status. This specifi36

cation is akin to a country fixed eﬀects specification where the country fixed eﬀect is not in
the level of right-wing status (we always have that fixed eﬀect) but rather in the connection
between religious intensity and being right-wing. In this case, all of our identification comes
from changes in church attendance over time. In this specification, we again find a significant
positive linear impact of national church attendance on the importance of God coeﬃcient
and a significant negative quadratic impact of national church attendance on the same coefficient. In this case, the impact of importance of God is maximized when 37 percent of the
population attends church once per month or more.
In regression (5), we turn to the impact of income on right-wing identification and differences in union density across countries. Our information on union density (from Blanchflower, 1996) is available only for OECD countries and as such our sample is considerably
smaller. We also include only those observations for which income is not missing. The
income variable runs from 1 to 10 and reflects the person’s income relative to the country
average. For example, 1 reflects being in the bottom decile of the income distribution and
10 in the top decile of that distribution. We have normalized this variable by subtracting
the country-wave mean and dividing by the country-wave standard deviation to make it
comparable with the religion variable.
Regression (5) in Table 2 reports the overall coeﬃcient on income which is .09. This
variable includes the same basic set of age and gender controls, as well as country and year
fixed eﬀects. This variable is both statistically significant and economically meaningful. A
one standard deviation increase in the income variable is associated with a .09 standard
deviation increase in right-wing status. Of course, it is hardly surprising that richer people
are more right-wing.
Just as in the case of religiosity, there is considerable heterogeneity across countries in the
connection between income and right-wing status. Figure 10 shows the relationship between
this variable and trade union density for wave 2 of the World Values Survey. In some
countries, such as France and Austria, the coeﬃcient is less than .05 (the U.S. coeﬃcient
37

is also quite low). In other places such as the Netherlands or the United Kingdom, the
coeﬃcient is much larger and there is a strong connection between income and right-wing
status. The figure shows a strong tendency of the coeﬃcient on income to rise with trade
union density for trade union density levels below 40 percent and then little pattern after
that. In the case of trade unions there is no clear non-monotonic relationship.
One explanation for this absence is that we only have four countries with levels of trade
union density above 50 percent and these countries are all in Scandinavia. Moreover, church
membership is actually based on self-reported attendance to church, union membership is
often based on administrative rules that reflect little about true connection to the union.
As such, these countries with very high trade union membership may have large portions of
the population with little actual political connection to the union so that these places may
actually be closer to have an eﬀective union membership around 50 percent.
In regression (6) of Table 2, we interact the coeﬃcient on income with national trade union
density and its square. We also allow this coeﬃcient to diﬀer by survey wave. The impact
of income on right-wing status appears to rise with trade union density. Because we have so
few countries with extremely high levels of unionization, our attempt to estimate a quadratic
eﬀect of union density resulted in standard errors too large to permit meaningful inferences.
We also do not have enough time-series variation within these countries to duplicate the
fixed eﬀects methodology of regression (4). These trade union density regressions show that
the connection between income and being right-wing rises with trade union density across
countries, but there is little evidence either to confirm the view that this impact disappears
for suﬃciently high levels of union density.
Overall, the country-level regressions suggest that the importance of religion is likely
to rise as religious attendance declines towards 50 percent of the population and that the
importance of economics is likely to fall as union membership declines from some number
below 50 percent of the population towards zero. These international results suggest that the
switch within the U.S. from economic polarization to religious polarization might be related
38

to the simultaneous decline of both unions and church attendance.

5.3

United States Evidence on Church Attendance

For our United States evidence we will focus entirely on church size. Unfortunately, the
range of union density levels across states within the U.S. is actually quite modest. Ninety
percent of the respondents in our GSS sample live in states with union density levels between
6 and 26 percent in the 1990s; 50 percent live in states with levels between 8 and 20 percent.
These low level of union density make it essentially impossible to estimate any compelling
relationship between union density and political polarization based on income within the
United States. As such, we focus our attention on church attendance in these regressions.
In Table 3, we regress voting for a Republican in the last election on church attendance,
and controls for income, education, age, age squared, and gender. We include state and year
fixed eﬀects. Reported coeﬃcients are marginal eﬀects from a probits evaluated at sample
means. The first specification looks at the impact of going to church at least once per month
on voting Republican. There is a strong positive eﬀect. People who attend church once
per month are ten percent more likely to vote Republican than people who attend church
less frequently than that. This basic result can be found using a large number of diﬀerent
measures of religiosity such as the continuous measure of church attendance or qualitative
variables about the importance of God.
This basic coeﬃcient on religious attendance obscures the considerable variation that
exists within states. Figure 11 shows the coeﬃcients from regressions like regression (1)
that were run separately for each state. In some places, like Washington or Oregon, the
coeﬃcient is more than .2. In other places, such as the Carolinas, the coeﬃcient is less than
.05. Figure 11 shows the relationship between these estimated coeﬃcients and the share of
respondents in the state that attend church at least once per month. Since these shares are
generally more than 50 percent across states (and almost always more than 40 percent), the

39

model predicts a negative relationship and that is indeed what we observe in the graph. The
highly religious states have less connection between religion and voting Republican than the
moderately religious states.
In regression (2) of Table 3, we estimate the interaction between the share in the state
attending church at least once per month and the individual’s own religious attendance. We
also include an interaction between the year of the last election and religiosity to allow for
the fact that the connection between religion and voting Republican has changed over time.
The impact of religion on voting republican decreases sharply with the share of the state
that is itself religious.
In regression (3), we include interactions between state dummies and individual religious
attendance. This procedure duplicates our methodology in the previous table where we
allowed each country to have its own connection between religion and right-wing orientation.
This estimation relies on changes in religious attendance within the state, not on variation
across states. The estimate of the cross eﬀect between average religious attendance in the
state is still negative and not statistically distinguishable from the estimate in regression
(2). However, the standard error on this estimate is so large that it is also not statistically
distinguishable from zero. Our variation in state church attendance over time is extremely
noisy and as such it is unsurprising that are results are not precise.
In regression (4), we repeat regression (2), using the categorical variation for church
attendance as our measure of religiosity. The raw eﬀect of this variable on voting Republican
is quite positive, and the eﬀect gets smaller as the state becomes suﬃciently religious. The
coeﬃcients are in this case quite statistically significant. We have duplicated this regression
using a wide variety of diﬀerent measures of religiosity and confirmed that these results are
quite robust to diﬀerent ways of capturing religion. In all of these methods, those states with
more religious attendance have a weaker connection between religion and voting Republican.
Table 4 reproduces the specifications of Table 3 using the American National Election
Studies (Sapiro and Rosenstone, 2002). The National Election Studies (NES) have been
40

conducted since 1948, and are designed to track the determinants of voter behavior over
time. As in Table 3, our main interest will be in asking whether church attendance matters
less for voting behavior in highly religious states.
In specification (1) of Table 4, we reproduce the basic finding that monthly churchgoers
are significantly more likely to vote Republican during the period 1972-2000. In specification
(2), we interact the monthly attendance dummy with a measure of the share of people who
attend church monthly or more in the respondent’s state and election year. As in Table 3,
we find a statistically significant negative interaction: church attendance has less of an eﬀect
on the probability of voting Republican in highly religious states. The coeﬃcient is similar
in magnitude to the analogous coeﬃcient in Table 3. Column (3) of Table 4 repeats the
specification of column (2), allowing the eﬀect of monthly attendance to diﬀer freely by state.
Again we find a significant negative interaction, although the standard errors are larger due
to the inclusion of state fixed eﬀects interacted with monthly attendance. Finally, column
(4) shows that the results are robust to using a categorical measure of church attendance
rather than a binary variable for monthly attendance.

5.4

Can Our Results Explain the Rise of Religious Polarization
within the United States?

Can the broad secular trend in religious adherence explain the rise of religion as a determinant
of political aﬃliation in the United States? For the purposes of this exercise, we will take this
trend as being exogenous, even though political factors interact with religion. This exercise
is best thought of as a calibration where we ask whether the observed changes in religion
are large enough, given our parameter estimates, to explain the changing pattern of U.S.
politics.
In column 1 of Table 5, we show the impact of religion and income on voting Republican
in 1968 and 1992. These are marginal eﬀects estimated from probit regressions where other

41

variables are held constant. In column 1, we show that the coeﬃcient on religion rose from
0.07 to 0.16 over this period. In column 2 of the table, we show that monthly religious
attendance in the United States declined from 57 percent to 49 percent over this same time
period. This change is not continuous and is concentrated in the early years of the period.
In general, our framework seems to oﬀer more possibility of understanding the broad trend
rather than of understanding the exact timing of changes in politics. Using the coeﬃcient
of -.35 estimated from the state regressions, this predicts an increase in the importance of
religion of 2.9% in voting Republican over this time period or 33 percent of the total change.
These results suggest that changing membership can explain some, but not all, of the
rise of religion in politics. Hopefully future work will focus on other causes of this shift. One
natural candidate explanation is the rise of technologies, such as direct mail, that facilitate
sending targeted messages to a party’s supporters.
Turning to the political importance of income, our estimates from international regressions predict that the decline in unionization from 26.9 percent in 1968 to 15 percent in
1992 would produce a decline in the eﬀect of a one standard deviation increase in income on
right-wing orientation of about .02 standard deviations. Though diﬃcult to compare with
our estimates for the US, this relatively small decline does not seem inconsistent with the
mild time trends in the eﬀects of income (as compared with the eﬀects of religion) presented
in Figure 4.

6

Conclusion

Even in majoritarian systems, there are often major diﬀerences in policies between political
candidates. There is rarely complete convergence by candidates to the views of the median voter. In the U.S. today, the gulf between the Republican and Democratic parties on
religiously-oriented issues like abortion is quite significant. In this paper, we have explored
the reasons why political platforms might be extreme rather than moderate.
42

Our core model emphasizes the role of the intensive margin of getting voters into the
voting booth and informational asymmetries in creating extremism. If politicians care only
about attracting the median voter and have little interest in inducing their core supporters to
show up, then there will be little extremism. Even with an important voter turnout margin,
a second asymmetry is required so that when politicians deviate from the center they benefit
more from attracting their own supporters than they lose from alienating their opponent’s
supporters. The heart of our model is that when a politician deviates from the center, his
own supporters are more aware of this deviation than his opponent’s supporters. With a
single relevant policy dimension, extremism is more likely when the information asymmetry is more extreme and when informational groupings are more closely tied to political
tastes. Extremism is also, unsurprisingly, more common when underlying preferences are
more extreme.
The model with two issues predicts that the relevance of organizations to political extremes is non-monotonic in the size of the organization. When the organization is quite
small, it is politically irrelevant. When the organization is very large (i.e. more than 50
percent of the population), it no longer creates the opportunity for the transmission of targeted messages. Looking across countries in the world, we confirm this non-monotonicity in
the case of religion. Countries with either very high or very low levels of church attendance
have little connection between religiosity and right-wing orientation. Extreme connections
between religion and politics occur only for countries where church attendance is around
50 percent. We also find a positive association between union density and the connection
between income and conservation orientation. Across U.S. states, we find a negative relationship where more church decreases the connection between religiosity and voting Republican.
These parameter estimates suggest that declining church attendance in the U.S. can explain
one third of the rise in the connection between religious attendance and voting republic
between 1972 and 2000.
In this paper, we have avoided discussing institutions that might tend to further or
43

modify extremism, but this is clearly an important topic for future research. Some of these
institutional links have already been examined by Cox (1990) and others, but this paper
suggests further directions for research on constitutional design. For example, if geography
creates a natural ability for politicians to target their messages, i.e. if people in your own
area are more aware of your policies than people elsewhere, then national systems are always
at risk of politicians proposing extreme regional policies. One way to counter this tendency
is to have voting systems, like the U.S. electoral college, that limit the value of getting extra
votes in one particular geographic area.

44

References
[1] Alberto Alesina. Credibility and policy convergence in a two-party system with rational
voters. American Economic Review, 78(4):796—805, September 1988 1988.
[2] Gary S. Becker. Competition and democracy. Journal of Law and Economics, 1:105—109,
October 1958.
[3] Gary S. Becker. A theory of competition among pressure groups for political influence.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 98(3):371—400, August 1983.
[4] David G. Blanchflower. The role and influence of trade unions in the OECD. Report to
the Bureau of International Labor Aﬀairs, U.S. Department of Labor, August 1996.
[5] Alan J. Borsuk. Bush, Kerry preach to faithful; non-supporters unlikely to get close to
candidates. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, page A1, August 23 2004.
[6] Jackie Calmes and John Harwood. Campaign ’04—mobilization plan: Bush’s big priority:
Energize conservative Christian base—unusual strategy plays down importance of swing
vote as demographics shift—a coordinator in each church. Wall Street Journal, page A1,
August 30 2004.
[7] Gary W. Cox. Centripetal and centrifugal incentives in electoral systems. American
Journal of Political Science, 34(4):903—935, November 1990.
[8] James A. Davis, Tom W. Smith, and Peter V. Marsden. General Social Surveys, 19722002, volume 3728. ICPSR, Ann Arbor, MI, 2003.
[9] Avinash Dixit and John Londregan. Redistributive politics and economic eﬃciency.
American Political Science Review, 89(4):856—866, December 1995.
[10] Anthony Downs. An economic theory of political action in a democracy. Journal of
Political Economy, 65(2):135—150, April 1957.
[11] Morris P. Fiorina. Whatever happened to the median voter?
Mimeograph, 1999.

Stanford University

[12] Richard B. Freeman. Spurts in union growth: Defining moments and social processes.
In Michael D. Bordo, Claudia Goldin, and Eugene N. White, editors, The Defining
Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century,
chapter 8. The University of Chicago Press, 1998.
[13] Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. Special Interest Politics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, August 2002.
45

[14] Joel M. Guttman, Naftali Hilger, and Yochanan Schachmurove. Voting as investment
vs. voting as consumption: New evidence. Kyklos, 47(2):197—207, 1994.
[15] Barry T. Hirsch and David A. Macpherson. Union membership and coverage database
from the current population survey: Note. Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
56(2):349—354, January 2003.
[16] Barry T. Hirsch, David A. Macpherson, and Wayne G. Vroman. Estimates of union
density by state. Monthly Labor Review, pages 51—55, July 2001.
[17] Harold Hotelling. Stability in competition. Economic Journal, 39(153):41—57, March
1929.
[18] Ronald Inglehart et al. World Values Surveys and European Values Surveys, 1981-84,
1990-93, and 1995-97, volume 2790. ICPSR, Ann Arbor, MI, 2000.
[19] Andreas Irmen and Jean-Francois Thisse. Competition in multi-characteristics spaces:
Hotelling was almost right. Journal of Economic Theory, 78:76—102, 1998.
[20] Gebhard Kirchgässner. Abstention because of indiﬀerence and alienation, and its consequences for party competition: A simple psychological model. University of St. Gallen
Discussion Paper, 2003.
[21] David D. Kirkpatrick. Churches see an election role and spread the word on bush. New
York Times, August 9 2004a.
[22] David D. Kirkpatrick. The Republicans: The convention in New York—the religion issue.
New York Times, page P1, September 1 2004b.
[23] Sendhil Mullainathan and Andrei Shleifer. The market for news. December 2003.
Harvard University mimeo.
[24] Kevin M. Murphy and Andrei Shleifer. Persuasion in politics. American Economic
Review, 94(2):435—439, May 2004.
[25] Virginia Sapiro and Steven J. Rosenstone. American National Election Studies Cumulative Data File, volume 8475. ICPSR, Ann Arbor, MI, 2002.
[26] Alexander A. Schuessler. A logic of expressive choice. Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 2000.

46

Figure 1 Income and Republicanism

1
0.9

Share voting Republican

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0-16 percentile

17-33 percentile

34-67 percentile

68-95 percentile

96-100 percentile

Income category

Notes: Data are from National Election Study Cumulative File. Data shown are for years
1988-2000 and include only white males between the ages of 20 and 55 who voted for a
Democratic or Republican candidate in the previous presidential election.

47

Figure 2 Church attendance and Republicanism

1
0.9

Share voting Republican

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Never / no religious
preference

A few times a year

Once or twice a
month

Almost every week

Every week

Religious attendance category

Notes: Data are from National Election Study Cumulative File. Data shown are for years
1988-2000 and include only white males between the ages of 20 and 55 who voted for a
Democratic or Republican candidate in the previous presidential election..

48

Figure 3 State income and Republicanism in the 2000 election

0.7

Wyoming

UtahIdaho
0.65

Share of total vote for Bush in 2000

Nebraska
North
Dakota
Oklahoma
South
Dakota
0.6

Mississippi

0.55

0.5

Texas
Kansas
South Carolina Indiana
Kentucky
Alabama
North Carolina
Georgia

Alaska

Montana

Louisiana
West Virginia
Arkansas

Virginia
Tennessee
Arizona
Missouri
Ohio

New Mexico

0.45

Iowa

Colorado
Nevada
Florida
New Hampshire

Wisconsin
Oregon
Pennsylvania
Michigan
Minnesota
Washington
Maine
Illinois
Delaware
California
Vermont

0.4

Maryland New Jersey
Connecticut

Hawaii
New York

0.35
Rhode Island

Massachusetts

0.3

9000

11000

13000

15000

17000

19000

21000

Per capita income in state, 1989

Notes: Data on per capita income are from the US Census. Figure excludes Washington,
DC.

49

Figure 4 Trends in the determinants of voting Republican

0.1800
0.1600
0.1400

Coefficient

0.1200
0.1000
log(income)
church attendance

0.0800
0.0600
0.0400
0.0200
0.0000
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Year

Notes: Data are from the General Social Survey. Data reflect marginal eﬀects evaluated at
sample means from probit models of the propensity to vote Republican. Sample includes
respondents who voted for a Democratic or Republican candidate in the previous presidential
election. All regressions include controls for years of schooling, age, age2 , race, gender, and
a dummy for missing income data.

50

Figure 5 Ideology and voter turnout

1
0.9

Share voting in last election

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Strong
Democrat

Not very strong Independent,
Democrat
close to
Democrat

Independent
(Neither, No
response)

Independent, Not very strong
close to
Republican
Republican

Strong
Republican

Party identification

Notes: Data are from the General Social Survey 1972-2000 cumulative file. Data reflect
shares of respondents in each group participating in the most recent presidential election.

51

Figure 6 The voting decision

a

1

0.5

0
-1

-0.5

0

0.5

1
t

-0.5

-1

Notes: The horizontal axis depicts the range of policies along dimension T and the vertical
axis depicts the range of policies along dimension A. The beliefs about the two parties
platforms are described by a small circle for the right-wing candidate and a small box for
the left-wing candidate. The line running through the origin is the line described by the
values of t and a for which the benefit function, ∆ (t, a; Ω) = 0. All citizens with zero voting
costs will support the R candidate if their ideal policies (i.e. (a, t) values) are above that
line. All citizens with zero voting costs will support the L candidate if their ideal policies
are below that line. The line that runs above the origin reflects the values of t and a for
which the benefit function, ∆ (t, a; Ω) equals some positive value 2c . The line below the origin
reflects the values of t and a for which the negative of the benefit function equals 2c . These
two lines describe the voting behavior of an individual whose cost of voting equals c. If
the individual’s preferences lie above the upper line, then that citizen will vote for the R
candidate. If the individual’s preferences lie below the lower line, then that citizen will vote
for the L candidate. If the individual’s preferences lie between the lines, then the individual
will abstain.

52

Figure 7 Group size and extremism

A

0.1

0.075

0.05

0.025

0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1
Pi

Notes: Graph presents the relationship between group size and extremism (party deviation
from the center).

53

Figure 8 Religion and voter turnout, 1976-1984

0.08

Change in share voting, 1976-1984

0.07

0.06

0.05

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0
Never
-0.01

Less than About once
once a year or twice a
year

Several
times a
year

About once 2-3 times a
Nearly
Every week
a month
month
every week

Several
times a
week

Frequency of church attendance

Notes: Data are from the General Social Survey 1972-2000 cumulative file. Data reflect
shares of respondents in each group participating in the most recent presidential election.

54

Figure 9 The political role of religion across countries

0.4
India

Effect of religiosity on right-wing orientation

0.35
Turkey
0.3

Spain
Croatia
Slovenia

0.25
Argentina

Bulgaria
Lithuania

0.2

United States
Finland

0.15

0.1

Japan

Germany
Bosnia And Herzegovina

Ukraine

Latvia

Switzerland
Uruguay
Australia
TaiwanArmenia

Puerto Rico
Chile

Moldova
Russian Federation
Georgia
Norway
Belarus
Azerbaijan
Sweden
Montenegro

0.05

Colombia
Mexico
Brazil
Dominican Republic
South Africa
Bangladesh

Venezuela

Peru

0

0
-0.05

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

Philippines
Nigeria

0.7

Estonia

0.8

0.9

1

Ghana

-0.1

Share attending church at least once per month

Notes: Data are from Wave 3 of the World Values Survey. Vertical axis shows the estimated
eﬀect of a one standard deviation increase in the importance of God in the respondent’s life
on the respondent’s identification with the political right. Horizontal axis shows the share of
respondents in the country who report attending church (or analogous religious institution)
once a month or more.

55

Figure 10 Unions and the political importance of income across countries

Effect of income on right-wing orientation, wave 2

0.25

United Kingdom

0.2

Finland
Netherlands
Norway

0.15
Sweden
Spain

Germany
Belgium

Japan

0.1

Canada
Italy
Portugal

Denmark

Switzerland
United States

0.05
Austria
France

0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Trade union density, 1994

Notes: Data are from Wave 2 of the World Values Survey. Vertical axis shows the estimated
eﬀect of a one standard deviation increase in income on the respondent’s identification with
the political right. Horizontal axis shows Blanchflower’s (1996) measure of trade union
density in 1994.

56

Figure 11 The political role of religion across US states

Effect of monthly attendance on probability of voting
Republican

0.4

0.3

South Dakota

Alaska

Oregon
Washington
0.2
Pennsylvania
Michigan
Minnesota

Colorado

Virginia
0.1

California

Florida
Oklahoma
New York

Arizona

Indiana
Wisconsin
Missouri

Illinois

South
Carolina
North
Carolina

Iowa
0

0.35

-0.1

0.4

0.45

Alabama

Georgia
Louisiana
Tennessee

Montana

0.5

Texas

0.55

0.6

Kansas

0.65

0.7

Mississippi

Arkansas

-0.2

Share attending church at least once a month

Notes: Data are from General Social Survey cumulative file, 1972-2000. Only respondents
voting for either Democrat or Republican in previous election have been included. Vertical
axis shows the marginal eﬀect of monthly church attendance from probit models evaluated
at sample means. The dependent variable is a dummy for Republican vote in the previous
presidential election and all specifications are run separately for each state, including dummies for year of most recent election, race, gender, and controls for the log of real income,
age, age2 , years of completed schooling, and a dummy for missing income data. Sample
excludes Utah residents.

57

Table 1 Party eﬀects on policy outcomes, 1970-2000
(1)
(2)
White House Abortions per 1000 Income tax as %
party
live births
of GDP
Democrat
(n = 12)

312.7
(11.08)

11.22
(0.2149)

Republican
(n = 19)

294.4
(20.81)

10.04
(0.1285)

Diﬀerence
(n = 31)

17.25
(23.58)

1.175
(0.2504)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors allow unequal variances by party.
Data on abortions per 1000 live births from CDC Abortion Surveillance, http://www.cdc.gov/reproductiveh
Data on income tax as % of GDP from Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, taken from
Congressional Budget Oﬃce, http://www.cbpp.org/10-21-03tax.htm.

58

Table 2 Cross-country determinants of right-wing orientation
Dependent variable: Respondent’s identification with the political right (standardized)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Importance of God
in life (standardized)

0.1658
(0.0147)

Share in country-wave
attending church monthly

-0.1336
(0.1071)

-0.01431
(0.2117)

-0.1315
(0.1082)

(Share monthly)2

0.0262
(0.1550)

-0.1178
(0.2796)

0.0259
(0.1585)

Importance of God ×
Share monthly

0.8173
(0.1885)

0.7718
(0.3235)

1.2090
(0.3082)

Importance of God ×
(Share monthly)2

-0.9030
(0.2083)

-0.8046
(0.4007)

-1.6197
(0.3662)

Imp. of God × wave?

NO

YES

YES

YES

—

—

Imp. of God × country?

NO

NO

NO

YES

—

—

Income (standardized)

0.0921
(0.0140)

Trade union density
in country-wave

-0.0007
(0.0013)

Income × trade
union density

0.0013
(0.0004)

Income × wave?

—

—

—

—

NO

YES

Income × country?

—

—

—

—

NO

NO

All

All

Democracies

All

OECD

OECD

114454

114454

68837

114454

37075

37075

Sample
N

Notes: Data are from World Values Survey cumulative file, waves 1-3. All estimates are
from OLS regressions. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for correlation within
country of residence. All specifications include dummies for country of residence, survey
wave, gender, and controls for income, age, age2 , years of completed schooling, and dummies
for missing data on these controls.

59

Table 3 Church attendance and the role of religion in voting (GSS)
Dependent variable: Did respondent vote for Republican candidate in last presidential election?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Attend church at least once a month

0.0995
(0.0113)

Share in state-election attending
at least once a month

0.2951
0.1958
0.3944
(0.1141) (0.1647) (0.1258)

Attend at least once a month ×
Share attending at least once a month

-0.3511 -0.1647
(0.1144) (0.2068)

Church attendance frequency ×
Share attending at least once a month

-0.0706
(0.0205)

Attend at least once a month × election?
Attend at least once a month × state?
N

NO

YES

YES

YES

NO
16298

NO
16298

YES
16298

NO
16298

Notes: Data are from General Social Survey cumulative file, 1972-2000. Only respondents
voting for either Democrat or Republican in previous election have been included. All
estimates are marginal eﬀects from probit models evaluated at sample means. Standard
errors in parentheses are adjusted for correlation within state of residence. All specifications
include dummies for state of residence, year of most recent election, race, gender, and controls
for the log of real income, age, age2 , years of completed schooling, and dummy for missing
income data. Samples exclude Utah residents.

60

Table 4 Church attendance and the role of religion in voting (NES)
Dependent variable: Did respondent vote for Republican candidate in last presidential election?
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
Attend church at least once a month

0.1237
(0.0115)

Share in state-election attending
at least once a month

0.4829
0.5026
0.6890
(0.1383) (0.1426) (0.1911)

Attend at least once a month ×
Share attending at least once a month

-0.3419 -0.3820
(0.1464) (0.1756)

Church attendance frequency ×
Share attending at least once a month

-0.1303
(0.0508)

Attend at least once a month × election?

NO

YES

YES

YES

Attend at least once a month × state?

NO

NO

YES

NO

N

8882

8882

8882

8882

Notes: Data are from National Election Study cumulative file, 1948-2000. Only years 19722000 are used due to a change in the survey question about religious attendance beginning
in 1970. Only respondents voting for either Democrat or Republican in previous presidential
election have been included. All estimates are marginal eﬀects from probit models evaluated
at sample means. Standard errors in parentheses are adjusted for correlation within state
of residence. All specifications include dummies for state of residence, year of most recent
election, race, gender, income category (as shown in Figure 1), and controls for the age, age2 ,
and years of completed schooling.

61

Table 5 Explaining time trends in the determinants of voting
(1)
(2)
Election Eﬀect of monthly attendance Share attending
year
on voting Republican
monthly
1968

0.0740

56.8%

1992

0.1627

48.5%

Change

0.0887

-8.3%

Notes: Data are from General Social Survey cumulative file, 1972-2000. Only respondents
voting for either Democrat or Republican in previous election have been included. All estimates are marginal eﬀects from probit models evaluated at sample means. All specifications
include dummies for state of residence, race, gender, and controls for the log of real income,
age, age2 , years of completed schooling, and dummy for missing income data. Samples
exclude Utah residents.

62

A

Appendix

A.1

Proof of Proposition 1 and Corollary 1

Consider without loss of generality party R: letting f (x) be the density of voter having ideal
preference x, its margin of victory equals
Z

1
xL +xR
2

¡
¢
Z (1 − γ) B + γ (xL − x)2 − (xR − x)2 f (x) dx+
−

Z

xL +xR
2

−1

whose derivative with respect to xR is
−2

Z

1
xL +xR
2

¢
¡
Z (1 − γ) B + γ (xR − x)2 − (xL − x)2 f (x) dx

¡
¢
z (1 − γ) B + γ (xL − x)2 − (xR − x)2 (xR − x) f (x) dx+

− 2γ

Z

xL +xR
2

−1

¡
¢
z (1 − γ) B + γ (xR − x)2 − (xL − x)2 (xR − x) f (x) dx+
Ã
"
¶2 #! µ
¶
µ
xL + xR
xR − xL
f
− Z (1 − γ) B −
2
2

We naturally assume that a right-wing voter will always derive a psychological benefit
from supporting any right-wing candidate against any left-wing opponent, formally that
(1 − γ) B + γ (xL − x)2 − (xR − x)2 ≥ 0∀x ≥
"

(1 − γ) B −

µ

xR − xL
2

¶2 #

xL + xR
∀xR > xL
2

≥ 0∀xR > xL

γ <1⇒B ≥1∧γ >1⇒B ≤0
so that by the uniform distribution of the cost of voting this reduces to
"
µ
¶2 # µ
¶
Z
Z xL +xR
2
xR − xL
xL + xR
2γ
1−γ
2 1
B−
f
(xR − x) f (x) dx−
(xR − x) f (x) dx−
−
2
2
R
V xL +x
V
V
−1
2
It is immediate that this is always negative if voters are mainly motivated by a taste for

63

opposition, namely if γ > 1 (and B ≤ 0), since then
−2

Z

1
xL +xR
2

(xR − x) f (x) dx−2γ
< −2

Z

Z

−1

(xR − x) f (x) dx−(1 − γ) B −

1
xL +xR
2

"

xL +xR
2

(xR − x) f (x) dx − 2γ

Z

xL +xR
2

−1

µ

xR − xL
2

¶2 # µ
¶
xL + xR
f
2

(xR − x) f (x) dx =

" Z xL +xR
#
¶ µ
µ
¶¶¸
· µ
Z 1
2
xL + xR
xL + xR
+ 1−F
xR +2 γ
xf (x) dx +
xf (x) dx ≤
= −2 γF
xL +xR
2
2
−1
2
· µ
¶ µ
µ
¶¶¸
xL + xR
xL + xR
≤ −2 γF
+ 1−F
xR < 0∀xR > 0
2
2
which implies that the optimal platform choice is represented by a corner solution, with the
party converging to the position of the median voter, namely the origin; which, symmetrically,
is also the equilibrium strategy for party L.
The median-voter result still obtains when γ = 1, since the first-order condition for the
optimal platform choice is then
Z 1
(xR − x) f (x) dx = 0 ⇒ xR = E (x) = 0
−1

regardless of the opponent’s strategy (which will be identical).
If instead voters are keener on supporting a party than on opposing its rival, i.e. γ < 1
(and B ≥ 1), extremism may emerge: a symmetric equilibrium such that xR = −xL > 0 is
defined by the condition
Z 1
Z 0
¡
¢
−2
(xR − x) f (x) dx − 2γ
(xR − x) f (x) dx − (1 − γ) B − x2R f (0) = 0
0

−1

(1 − γ) f (0) x2R − (1 + γ) xR + (1 − γ) (E (|x|) − Bf (0)) = 0

so long as voters’ preferences are heterogeneous enough for the density of voters with exactly
median preferences to be small compared to the mean deviation of the distribution:
f (0) <

E (|x|)
≤ E (|x|)
B

Then the derivative is a convex quadratic function Q (x) such that Q (0) > 0 ∧ Q (1) < 0,
which implies that the first-order condition for a maximum is satisfied at the unique value
xR ∈ (0, 1) : Q (xR ) = 0, namely
q
(1 + γ) − (1 + γ)2 − 4 (1 − γ)2 f (0) (E (|x|) − Bf (0))
>0
xR =
2 (1 − γ) f (0)
64

so that

(1 − γ)
∂xR
=q
>0
∂E (|x|)
2
2
(1 + γ) − 4 (1 − γ) f (0) (E (|x|) − Bf (0))

while
∂xR
=
∂γ

·
¸
(1+γ)+4(1−γ)f (0)(E(|x|)−Bf (0))
1− √
(1 − γ)
2
2
(1+γ) −4(1−γ) f (0)(E(|x|)−Bf (0))

+
2 (1 − γ)2 f (0)
·
¸
q
2
2
(1 + γ) − (1 + γ) − 4 (1 − γ) f (0) (E (|x|) − Bf (0))
<0
+
2 (1 − γ)2 f (0)

because
∂xR
<0⇔
∂γ

q
(1 + γ)2 − 4 (1 − γ)2 f (0) (E (|x|) − Bf (0)) < (1 + γ)

which is always satisfied when E (|x|) > Bf (0).
If x ≤ y ⇔ f (x) ≥ f (y) ∀x, y ∈ [0, 1] it follows that the uniform distribution is a limiting
case, hence
Z 1
1
1
xf (x) dx ≤
f (0) ≥ ∧
2
4
0
so that

f (0) ≥ 2

Z

1

xf (x) dx = E (|x|)

0

and therefore the optimal policy choice will be the corner solution with the party locating
in the origin.

A.2

Proof of Propositions 2, 3 and 4

Denoting as Ω = (x̂L , x̂) the position of the parties as perceived by a given voter and as
Θ (Ω) the distribution of beliefs, the margin of victory for party R is
¶¶
µ
¶¶¶
µ
µ
Z 1Z µ µ
x̂R + x̂L
x̂R + x̂L
Z 2 (x̂R − x̂L ) x −
− Z −2 (x̂R − x̂L ) x −
dΘ (Ω) f (x) dx
2
2
−1 Ω
whose derivative with respect to xR is
µ
¶¯¶
Z 1
Z µ ¯
¯
¯
+
x̂
x
R
L
¯ χ (x̂R = xR ) dΘ (Ω) f (x) dx
2 (x − xR ) z 2 ¯¯(xR − x̂L ) x −
¯
2
−1
Ω
65

where we denote with χ (.) the characteristic or indicator function.
Thus, considering the uniform distribution of costs and the assumptions on the availability
of updated information on the party platform, and letting the probability of a voter being
an aﬃliate be described by the function π (x) of his ideal policy, the optimal platform choice
for the party, regardless of initial beliefs and of the opponent’s actions, is
¡
¢R1
θ̄ − θ −1 xπ (x) f (x) dx
xR =
¡
¢R1
θ + θ̄ − θ −1 π (x) f (x) dx
Notice that

ΠR =

Z

1

−1

π (x) f (x) dx ∈ [0, 1]

equals the size of the group of party aﬃliates, which can also be interpreted as the unconditional probability of a voter being an aﬃliate; while the ideal policy of the average party
aﬃliate is
Z 1
1
E (x|R) =
xπ (x) f (x) dtx ≥ E (x) = 0
ΠR −1
where the inequality is derived from the natural assumption that R-party aﬃliates are on
average more conservative than voters as a whole.
Therefore
¡
¢
θ̄ − θ ΠR
¡
¢
E (x|R)
xR =
θ + θ̄ − θ ΠR
It follows immediately that, when ΠR > 0, the median-voter result obtains in two cases
only: in the absence of informational asymmetries: θ̄ = θ; or in the absence of any diﬀerence
in the preferences of the average aﬃliate and non-aﬃliate: E (x|R) = E (x) = 0. Whenever
there are both an informational and an ideological diﬀerence between aﬃliates and nonaﬃliates xR > 0.
Furthermore, the party’s extremism is then monotone increasing in its ability to convey
information to its aﬃliates
∂xR
θΠR
=£
¡
¢ ¤2 E (x|R) ≥ 0
∂ θ̄
θ + θ̄ − θ ΠR

and to withhold it from non-aﬃliates

−θΠR
∂xR
=£
¡
¢ ¤2 E (x|R) ≤ 0
∂θ
θ + θ̄ − θ ΠR

as well as increasing in the number of aﬃliates (keeping their average conservatism constant)
¡
¢
θ θ̄ − θ
∂xR
=£
¡
¢ ¤2 E (x|R) ≥ 0
∂ΠR
θ + θ̄ − θ ΠR
66

and in the average conservatism of aﬃliates (keeping their number constant)
¡
¢
θ̄ − θ ΠR
∂xR
¡
¢
=
≥0
∂E (x|R)
θ + θ̄ − θ ΠR
If π (x) = χ (x > 0), ΠR =

1
2

and E (x|R) = E (|x|), so that
xR =

θ̄ − θ
E (|x|)
θ̄ + θ

which immediately shows that extremism is increasing in the heterogeneity of voters’ preferences, measured again by the mean deviation of their distribution.
When the distribution of the cost of voting is generalized to include a point mass z0 ∈
£ [0, 1]
¤
1−z0
of voters with zero cost of voting as well as a uniform density of voters z (c) = V̄ ∀c ∈ 0, V̄ ,
the margin of victory for party R is
µ
¶
¶
¶
µ
µ
Z
Z Z
x̂R + x̂L
x̂R + x̂L
1 − z0 1
dΘ (Ω) f (x) dx+z0 1 − 2 F
dΘ (Ω)
(x̂R − x̂L ) x −
2
2
2
−1 Ω
Ω
whose derivative with respect to xR is
¶
Z
Z µ
£
¡
¢
¤
xR + x̂L
1 − z0 1
(x − xR ) θ + θ̄ − θ π (x) f (x) dx − z0 f
χ (x̂R = xR ) dΘ (Ω)
2
2
−1
Ω
As shown above, the first term is a decreasing function of xR that equals zero when
¢
¡
θ̄ − θ ΠR
¡
¢
E (x|R) > 0
xR =
θ + θ̄ − θ ΠR

under the weak assumption that R aﬃliates are on average more conservative than nonaﬃliates. The second term, instead, is always negative. Hence the modified distribution
generates less extremism than the uniform.
(θ̄−θ)ΠR
In the limit, as z0 → 0 we have our standard result xR = θ+ θ̄−θ Π E (x|R) and as z0 → 1
( ) R
convergence to the mean as a corner solution when voters’ beliefs are rational.
By the second-order condition, the second derivative of the margin of victory with respect
to xR is negative; since the cross derivative with respect to z0 is negative by inspection
∂xR
<0
∂z0

67

A.3

Proof of Propositions 5 and 6

The margin of victory for party R is
Z 1Z 1Z
(Z (2∆ (t, a; Ω)) − Z (−2∆ (t, a; Ω))) dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dtda
−1

−1

Ω

whose gradient with respect to the platform choice of party R, (TR , AR ), is

´
³

R
R1 R1
2µ −1 −1 (t − TR ) Ω z (2 |∆ (t, a; Ω)|) χ T̂R = TR dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dtda
³
´


R
R1 R1
2 (1 − µ) −1 −1 (a − AR ) Ω z (2 |∆ (t, a; Ω)|) χ ÂR = AR dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dtda

Considering our usual assumptions on the distribution of costs and preferences and on
the informational structure, the optimal platform choice for the party, regardless of initial
beliefs and of the opponent’s actions, is

θ̄−θ Π

 TR = ( ) R E (t|R)
θ+(θ̄−θ)ΠR
θ̄−θ Π

 AR = ( ) R E (a|R)
θ+(θ̄−θ)ΠR
where

ΠR =

Z

1

−1

Z

1

−1

π (t, a) f (t, a) dtda ∈ [0, 1]

is the size of the group of party aﬃliates (or the unconditional probability of a voter being an
aﬃliate), and by the assumption that R-party aﬃliates are on average at least as conservative
as voters as a whole on each of the two dimensions
(
R1 R1
E (t|R) = Π1R −1 −1 tπ (t, a) f (t, a) dtda ≥ 0
R1 R1
E (a|R) = Π1R −1 −1 aπ (t, a) f (t, a) dtda ≥ 0
Mirroring the one-dimensional case, this shows that convergence to the position of the
median voter for a party with a positive mass of aﬃliates (ΠR > 0) requires the absence
either of informational asymmetries (θ̄ = θ) or of any diﬀerence in the average preferences
of aﬃliates and non-aﬃliates (E (t|R) = E (t) = 0 ∧ E (a|R) = E (a) = 0). The eﬀect of the
diﬀerent variables is also identical; moreover
TR Q AR ⇔ E (t|R) Q E (a|R)
which shows that, unsurprisingly, the divergence of the party from the median-voter position
is greater on the issue where the diﬀerence in preferences between aﬃliates and non-aﬃliates
is on average greater.
68

If π (t, a) = χ (t + a > 0), considering that by independence f (t, a) = fT (t) fA (a) and
thus by symmetry f (t, a) = f (−t, a) = f (t, −a) = f (−t, −a)
Z 1Z 1
Z 1
1
f (t, a) dadt =
FA (t) fT (t) dt =
ΠR =
2
−1 −t
−1
and
E (t|R) = 2
= 2

Z

1

−1
Z 1
0

t

Z

1

fA (a) dafT (t) dt = 2

−t

Z

1

tFA (t) fT (t) dt =

−1

tfT (t) (2FA (t) − 1) dt ∈ (0, E (|t|))

We say that the distribution G (x) is monotonically more heterogeneous that F (x) if
and only if g (x) − f (x) is monotone non-decreasing on [0, 1] (and thus monotone nonincreasing on [−1, 0]), or equivalently G (x) − F (x) is convex on [0, 1] (and thus concave on
[−1, 0]), or equivalently (since by symmetry F (0) = G (0) = 12 while F (1) = G (1) = 1)
G (x) ≤ F (x) ∀x ∈ [0, 1] (and thus G (x) ≥ F (x) ∀x ∈ [−1, 0]).
Therefore, a monotonic increase in the heterogeneity of FT (weakly) increases E (t|R)
because t (2FA (t) − 1) is (weakly) increasing on [0, 1], while it (weakly) reduces E (a|R)
because tfT (t) is (weakly) positive on [0, 1].

A.4

Proof of Proposition 7

Consider without loss of generality party R, for
R 1 which π R (t, a) = χ (a > α): we have ΠR =
1
1 − F (α), E (t|R) = 0 and E (a|R) = 1−FA (α) α afA (a) da ≥ 0 so that
(
TR = 0
R1
1
AR = θ +1−F (α) α afA (a) da ≥ 0
θ̄−θ

Notice that, obviously, α = ∓1 ⇒ AR = 0, because an organization comprising everyone
or nobody has no relevance as a channel for informational diﬀerentiation; moreover
½Z 1
µ
¶¾
∂AR
fA (α)
θ
=³
afA (a) da − α
+ 1 − FA (α)
´2
∂α
θ̄
−
θ
θ
α
+ 1 − FA (α)
θ̄−θ
so that

∂AR
> 0∀α ≤ 0
∂α
and the maximum eﬀect of the organization on extremism is attained at α∗ > 0 such that
µ
¶
Z 1
θ
∗
FA (a) da = α
1−
+1
θ̄ − θ
α∗
69

The left-hand side of this equation
£ is
¤ an increasing convex function L (α) such that
L (1) = 1 and L0 (α) = FA (α) ∈ 12 , 1 ∀α ∈ [0, 1], while the right-hand side is a line
through the origin with
than 1,which ensures uniqueness of the maximum.
R 1 slope greater
1
1−α
Since FA (0) = 2 ⇒ α FA (a) da > 2 ∀a ≥ 0 we also know that
α∗ <

and indeed

A.5

θ̄ − θ
θ̄ + θ

∂α∗
α∗ θ
¤ ≥0
¢£
¡
¢
=¡
∂ θ̄
θ̄ − θ θ + θ̄ − θ (1 − FA (α∗ ))

∂α∗
α∗ θ̄
¤ <0
¢£
¡
¢
= −¡
∂θ
θ̄ − θ θ + θ̄ − θ (1 − FA (α∗ ))

Proof of Proposition 9

Recall that the margin of victory for party R is
Z Z Z
1 1 1
∆ (t, a; Ω) dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dadt
2 −1 −1 Ω

whose gradient with respect to the platform choice of party R, (TR , AR ), is


´
R R1
R ³
µ 1
dΘ
(Ω)
f
(t,
a)
dtda
(t
−
T
)
χ
T̂
=
T
R
R
R
Ω
 2 R−1 R−1
´

R ³
1
1−µ 1
(a − AR ) Ω χ ÂR = AR dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dtda
2
−1 −1
so that the first-order condition for a maximum is
 R R
´
R ³
 1 1 (t − TR ) χ T̂R = TR dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dtda = 0
Ω
−1 −1
´
R ³
R R
 1 1 (a − AR ) χ ÂR = AR dΘ (Ω) f (t, a) dtda = 0
−1

−1

Ω

and a symmetric political equilibrium is defined by
( R1 R1
£
¤
(t − τ ) θ̄χ (λτ t + (1 − λ) αa > 0) + θχ (λτ t + (1 − λ) αa < 0) f (t, a) dtda = 0
−1
−1
£
¤
R1 R1
(a − α) θ̄χ (λτ t + (1 − λ) αa > 0) + θχ (λτ t + (1 − λ) αa < 0) f (t, a) dtda = 0
−1 −1
If τ = 0 ∧ α > 0 this condition simplifies to the one-dimensional optimum
α=

θ̄ − θ
E (|a|)
θ̄ + θ

and analogously if τ > 0 ∧ α = 0

θ̄ − θ
E (|t|)
θ̄ + θ
Therefore, these two degenerate equilibria exist for any distribution of preferences that satisfies the assumption of independence on the two dimensions.
τ=

70

A.6

Proof of Proposition 10

¢
¡
When preferences are uniformly distributed on both issues so that f (t, a) = 14 χ t, a ∈ [−1, 1]2
and initial beliefs on the platforms of the two parties are symmetric around the origin, the
first-order condition becomes
( R1 R1
£ ¡
¢
¡
¢¤
(t − TR ) θ̄χ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a > 0 + θχ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a < 0 dadt = 0
−1
−1
£ ¡
¢
¡
¢¤
R1 R1
(a − AR ) θ̄χ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a > 0 + θχ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a < 0 dadt = 0
−1 −1
Suppose that λT̄R ≤ (1 − λ) ĀR ; then, letting θ̃ =
(

θ̄−θ
,
θ+θ̄

λ T̄R
TR = θ̃3 1−λ
R
h
¡ Ā
¢
1
λ 2
θ̃
AR = 2 1 − 3 1−λ

2
T̄R
Ā2R

This determines two political equilibria

(τ , α) : λτ ≤ (1 − λ) α ∧
namely
(τ , α) =

Ã

(

θ̃
0,
2

the condition can be rewritten as

i

θ̃ λ τ
hτ = 3 1−λ
¡ λα ¢2
1
θ̃
α = 2 1 − 3 1−λ

!

τ2
α2

i

∀λ ∈ (0, 1)

which is identical to what would obtain in the pure one-dimensional case; and
!
Ã r
1
3
λ θ̃ λ
θ̃
,
iﬀ ≤ λ <
3−2
(τ , α) =
3
1−λ 31−λ
2
5
Symmetrically, we also have
(τ , α) =
and
(τ , α) =

Ã

Ã

θ̃ 1 − λ θ̃
,
3 λ 3

!
θ̃
, 0 ∀λ ∈ (0, 1)
2

r

3−2

1−λ
λ

!

iﬀ

2
1
<λ≤
5
2

It is graphically immediate to distinguish two kind of equilibria: one has diﬀerentiation
only on an issue whose salience is greater than 25 ; the other is the continuous locus shown in
the figure below (with τ the thinner, α the thicker line and θ̃ = 0.2)
71

a, t 0.125

0.1

0.075

0.05

0.025

0

0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1
lambda

Figure A.1: Unstable equilibria
In fact, it turns out that only the first kind can be considered stable. Consider a sequential
process whereby parties choose their optimal platform (TP , AP )t+1 given that voters hold
beliefs (TR , AR )t−1 about the platform of party R and (TL , AL )t−1 = − (TR , AR )t−1 about
λ
that of party L. By the first-order condition above, letting x = ATRR and κ = 1−λ
for ease of
notation, we have the recursive equation
xt+1 =
whose fixed points 0 and

√
3−2κ
κ

2κxt
1
∀xt ≤
2
2
3 − κ xt
κ

coincide with our equilibria. The slope of this function is
3 + κ2 x2t
dxt+1
= 2κ
2
dxt
(3 − κ2 x2t )

so that

dxt+1
3
2
(0) = κ < 1 ⇔ λ <
dxt
3
5

while
dxt+1
dxt

µ√
¶
3 − 2κ
3−κ
3
=
>1⇔λ<
κ
κ
5

This proves that the equilibrium with diﬀerentiation on issue A alone is stable only if
λ < 35 , while the one with diﬀerentiation on both issues, which only exists when λ < 35 , is
always unstable. E.g. for λ = 12 both equilibria exist, but only the former is stable, as shown
in the figure below (where the thinner line is the 45◦ line and the thicker curve the recursive
72

relationship).
t+1

1

0.75

0.5

0.25

0
0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1
t

Figure A.2: Stability of the equilibrium
Symmetrically, in the case where xt ≥ κ1 it can be proven that the equilibrium with
diﬀerentiation on issue T alone is stable only if λ > 25 , while the one with diﬀerentiation on
both issues, which only exists when λ > 25 , is always unstable.

A.7

Proof of Proposition 11

1+π+ρ
ρ
π
When
£ 1 1 ¤preferences are distributed with density h (t, a) = 4 − 2 |t| − 2 |a| with π, ρ ∈
− 2 , 2 the first-order condition becomes

¢ ¸
¡
·
¡ 1+π+ρ ρ
¢ θ̄χ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a > 0 +
R1 R1

π

¢ dadt = 0
¡
− 2 |t| − 2 |a|
 −1 −1 (t − TR )
4
¡ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a < ¢0 ¸
· +θχ
¡
¢ θ̄χ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a > 0 +
R1 R1

ρ
π

¢ dadt = 0
¡
−
|t|
−
|a|
 −1 −1 (a − AR ) 1+π+ρ
4
2
2
+θχ λT̄R t + (1 − λ) ĀR a < 0
θ̄−θ
Suppose that λT̄R ≤ (1 − λ) ĀR ; then, letting again θ̃ ≡ θ+
and κ ≡
θ̄
can be rewritten as

h
i
 TR = θ̃ κ T̄R 4 + 4π − 2ρ − 3πκ T̄R
12 ĀR
ĀR
h
i
2
3
 AR = θ̃ (3 − π) − 1 (2 + 2π − ρ) κ2 T̄R2 + πκ3 T̄R3
6
2
Ā
Ā
R

λ
,
1−λ

the condition

R

This determines the political equilibria
(
£
¤
θ̃ τ
κ α 4 + 4π − 2ρ − 3πκ ατ
τ = 12
h
i
(τ , α) : λτ ≤ (1 − λ) α ∧
1
θ̃
2 τ2
3 τ3
α = 6 (3 − π) − 2 (2 + 2π − ρ) κ α2 + πκ α3
73

clearly including the one found above for the one-dimensional case
¶
µ
3−π
θ̃ ∀λ ∈ (0, 1)
(τ , α) = 0,
6
To proceed, consider the recursive equation for x =
xt+1 =
so that

TR
AR

in the sequential process

κxt [2 (2 + 2π − ρ) − 3πκxt ]
1
£
¤
≤
∀0
≤
x
t
1
κ
2 (3 − π) − 2 (2 + 2π − ρ) κ2 x2t + πκ3 x3t

dxt+1
3−π
(0) < 1 ⇔ κ <
dxt
2 + 2π − ρ
which proves that the one-dimensional equilibrium with diﬀerentiation on issue A is stable
λ
3−π
if and only if 1−λ
< 2+2π−ρ
. This condition is more easily satisfied by lower values of λ,
indicating greater salience of issue A; higher values of ρ, indicating greater concentration of
preferences on issue T ; and lower values of π, indicating lower concentration of preferences
on issue A.
It remains to be shown that this is the unique stable equilibrium. Consider the equilibrium condition
³
ρ´ 2 2 3 2
3 3
xt+1 = xt ⇔ x = 0 ∨ πκ x − 1 + π −
κ x + πκ x + 3 − π − (2 + 2π − ρ) κ = 0
2
2

and focus on the last equality.
Define the auxiliary function
³
ρ´ 2 2 3 2
3 3
κ x + πκ x + 3 − π − (2 + 2π − ρ) κ
x
−
1
+
π
−
g (x; κ, π, ρ) = πκ
2
2
such that
3
gx (x; κ, π, ρ) = 3πκ3 x2 − (2 + 2π − ρ) κ2 x + πκ2
2
and observe that
g (0; κ, π, ρ) = 3 − π − (2 + 2π − ρ) κ > 0 ⇔ κ <
g

µ

1
; κ, π, ρ
κ

¶

Therefore, so long as

=2−π+

3−π
2 + 2π − ρ

´
ρ ³
π
4 − 2π + ρ
− 2+ −ρ κ≤0⇔κ≥
2
2
4 + π − 2ρ

¸
µ
1
gx (x; κ, π, ρ) < 0∀x ∈ 0,
κ
74

for 0 < κ < 4−2π+ρ
the only equilibrium such that x ≤ κ1 is the one-dimensional equilibrium
4+π−2ρ
3−π
x = 0, which is stable; for 4−2π+ρ
≤ κ < 2+2π−ρ
there are two equilibria with x ≤ κ1 : the one4+π−2ρ
dimensional x = 0, which is stable, and a unique, unstable equilibrium with diﬀerentiation
3−π
on both issues; if κ ≥ 2+2π−ρ
the only equilibrium such that x ≤ κ1 is the one-dimensional
equilibrium x = 0, but it is unstable.
The condition required is then
¸
µ
3 2
1
3 2
2
3πκ x − (2 + 2π − ρ) κ x + πκ < 0∀x ∈ 0,
2
κ
which is satisfied if π ≤ 0, or if π > 0 and the quadratic has two real roots greater than κ1 ,
a suﬃcient condition for which is that
µ
¶2
1 2 + 2π − ρ
κ≤
∧ 4π + ρ ≤ 2
2
3π

The case of diﬀerentiation on issue T alone, i.e. with λT̄R ≥ (1 − λ) ĀR , follows by
symmetry as usual.

75

