NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHY DO COMPUTERS DEPRECIATE?
Michael J. Geske
Valerie A. Ramey
Matthew D. Shapiro
Working Paper 10831
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10831
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

We have benefited from the insightful comments of Kate Antonovics, Richard Carson, Jerry Hausman,
Charles Hulten, Daniel Sichel, and participants in seminars at the NBER Summer Institute, UCSD, and the
University of Michigan. We gratefully acknowledge the support of National Science Foundation Grant SBR9617437. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Michael J. Geske, Valerie A. Ramey, and Matthew D. Shapiro. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Why Do Computers Depreciate?
Michael J. Geske, Valerie A. Ramey, and Matthew D. Shapiro
NBER Working Paper No. 10831
October 2004
JEL No. C81, O33

ABSTRACT
The value of installed computers falls rapidly and therefore computers have a very high user cost.
The paper provides a complete account of the non-financial user cost of personal computers –
decomposing it into replacement cost change, obsolescence, instantaneous depreciation, and agerelated depreciation. The paper uses data on the resale price of computers and a hedonic price index
for new computers to achieve this decomposition. Once obsolescence is taken into account, agerelated depreciation – which is often identified as deterioration – is estimated to be negligible. While
the majority of the loss in value of used computers comes from declines in replacement cost, this
paper shows the second most important source of decline in value is obsolescence. Obsolescence is
accelerated by the decline in replacement cost of computers. Cheaper computing power drives
developments in software and networks that make older computers less productive even though their
original functionality remains intact.
Michael J. Geske
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 49109-1220
mgeske@umich.edu
Valerie A. Ramey
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508
and NBER
vramey@ucsd.edu
Matthew D. Shapiro
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
shapiro@umich.edu

Personal computers rapidly lose economic value. Within two years after purchase, the price of a
used computer falls to one-third of its price when new. This rapid loss in value occurs even
though the two-year-old computer can do exactly the same computations it did when it was new
and suffers only small changes in reliability, physical appearance, or in other observable
attributes. The two-year-old computer can typically produce the same documents, run the same
regressions, and connect to the same server as it did when new. Hence, by most measures, it can
produce the same output. Thus, economic depreciation takes place with little or no physical
deterioration or loss of productive capacity.
The general source of this economic depreciation is not a puzzle. New computer models
are typically both cheaper and more powerful than older ones. Hence, the value of old
computers falls to bring the value of the computing power they can deliver in line with its current
replacement cost. Computers also become obsolete because they become incompatible with new
operating systems or software, or do not have hardware that becomes standard in new models
(e.g., CD readers, Internet adapters).
Though the economics of depreciation of computers is relatively clear, there are
substantial gaps in measuring this phenomenon. Specifically, we know of no research that
explicitly links new and used personal computer prices to measure depreciation rather than
presuming a rate of depreciation from the change in prices of new computers.1 The estimates of

1

Oliner’s (1992, 1993) important work on computer depreciation focuses on mainframe
computers and computer peripheral equipment. Berndt and Griliches (1993) use hedonic price
regressions based on new PCs only. Since this paper was presented at the conference in 2003,
Dunn, Doms, Oliner, and Sichel (2004) have produced estimates of depreciation using the same

depreciation of computers in the National Income and Product are based, for example, on
changes in the price of new computers. In this paper, we estimate directly the change in value of
personal computers by comparing the price of used computers to the price of the same computer
when new. Our data set links new and used prices of several thousand computers, the years sold
when new and used, the age, and a precise description of important characteristics. The richness
of our data allows us to overcome a common problem in the measurement of depreciation—that
the effects of vintage, age, and time are typically not separately identified. [See Hall (1968),
Hulten (no date).] The method of this paper extends the procedure of Ramey and Shapiro
(2001), which estimated such changes in value of used equipment as a function of age and
measures of flexibility of the equipment in alternative uses, by including measures of the
obsolescence of the used equipment. This paper also presents estimates of a hedonic price index
of new computers that is an important ingredient in the calculation of depreciation and user cost.
Precise measurement of the change in value of existing computers, as well as a precise
decomposition of its sources, is important for addressing several economic issues. First,
depreciation estimates are a necessary ingredient in the measurement of the value of the capital
stock. Personal computers have become an increasing fraction of both business and household
capital. As measures of depreciation are important for estimating the net value of capital, our
estimates should be useful for this purpose.
Second, it is important to understand the change in value of computers to understand
investment in new computers. The user cost of computers is among the highest for any type of
equipment because of the rapid fall in replacement cost and the high rate of economic
depreciation. For investment to be positive, computers must have very high marginal products to
data source as used in this research. Wykoff (2003) presents estimates of obsolescence of laptop

2

balance the high cost of owning them. That is, computers are purchased with the knowledge that
investment in them will have to be amortized over a short period of years. This paper will
provide a decomposition of the user cost of computers into change in replacement cost and
economic depreciation, with economic depreciation decomposed into age-related deterioration
and into obsolescence.
Third, to calculate an index of capital services for total factor productivity measurement,
it is necessary to have a reliable estimate of the user cost of the various types of capitals
(Jorgenson and Griliches, 1967). Given the importance of information technology investment in
the recent acceleration in total factor productivity, having a good estimate of the user cost of
computers can make an important contribution to measuring the pace of technological change.
Fourth, the estimates of the impact of obsolescence on the value of installed capital can
provide valuable insights into the propagation and effects of new technologies. Our results
suggest that part of the estimated rate of obsolescence is directly related to the decline in the
hardware prices. Thus, the estimates imply that a slowdown in the rate of technological progress
would reduce the depreciation rate on used computers.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 1 sketches our theoretical
framework. Section 2 discusses our data. Section 3 outlines our empirical implementation.
Section 4 presents the estimation results. Section 5 presents their implication for user cost.
Section 6 gives our conclusions.

computers using data on new prices of computers observed at different points in time.
3

1.

Theoretical Framework

The work of Hall and Jorgenson (1967) on user cost and the work of Hall (1968, 1971), Hulten
and Wykoff (1981, 1996)), Oliner (1993), Jorgenson (1996) and others on depreciation provides
the framework for this analysis. Consider first the definition of user cost,

R K ≡ P I (r + δ − π I ) ,

(1)

where P I is the constant-quality price of new investment goods in period t, r denotes the nominal
opportunity cost of funds, δ is the depreciation rate, and π I is the rate of change of P I . The
user cost relationship is derived from an intertemporal arbitrage between purchasing new
equipment currently versus purchasing new equipment in the future, in which the capital stock
evolves according to K = I − δ K where I is gross investment.2 Absent adjustment costs, the
marginal product of having a unit of capital installed at time t should equal the user cost, that is,
the sum of the opportunity costs of funds, the economic depreciation, and the capital loss from
selling the equipment in the future.
This paper will use a second arbitrage, between new and used equipment, to quantify the
economic depreciation component of user cost. Specifically, the paper will use the wedge
between the new and used price of the same computer to quantify economic depreciation.
Consider, qtNOM
,t − v , nominal ratio of used to new computer prices,
qtNOM
,t − v ≡

2

PtU,t −v
Pt −Nv

,

This equation may be derived from a continuous time dynamic optimization problem. It can
also be viewed as an approximation from a discrete time problem. In the case of computers,
though, the rates δ and π are so large that the approximation is not very good.
4

(2)

where PtU,t −v is the price of a used piece of equipment at time t that was new at time t-v and Pt −Nv is
the price of the equipment when it was new. Note that in our analysis, the prices refer to a
specific piece of equipment, not to a price index.
What makes qtNOM
,t − v deviate from unity? Suppose that the only change in the environment
were the change in the replacement cost of new equipment. That is, suppose that the same piece
of equipment were available at time t as at time t-v and there were no technological change
except for potentially a change in the cost of the new equipment. (In the computer example, this
would correspond to a decline in the price of a CPU or RAM of a given quality.) Moreover,
suppose that the used piece of equipment suffered no deterioration whatsoever, and that there
were no costs of adjustment, installation, or resale. In this case, contemporaneous arbitrage
would require that the price of the used computer fall by the amount that replacement cost had
NOM
t ,t − v

declined. That is, with no economic depreciation, q

≡

PtU,t −v
Pt −Nv

=

Pt N
. In practice, we do not
Pt −Nv

typically observe Pt N , the current price of the new good, and instead substitute the constantquality new (replacement) investment good price index Pt I . Hence, if there is no economic
depreciation qtNOM
,t − v ≡

PtU,t −v
Pt −Nv

t

=

Pt I
≡ exp(π tI,t −v ) . Note that π tI,t −v = ∫ π I ( s )ds denotes the
Pt −I v
t −v

cumulative rate of change of constant quality new investment good prices as defined in the user
cost formula (1).
To create a variable that adjusts for this change in the price of new goods, define q as
qt ,t −v ≡

PtU,t −v
N
t −v

P

I
exp(−π tI,t −v ) = qtNOM
,t − v exp( −π t ,t − v ) .

5

(3)

Under the special circumstances just outlined, qt,t-v would be equal to one and user cost would
come only from the change in replacement cost.
Now consider the more general case, where new and used equipment are not perfect
substitutes because of economic depreciation. The variable q measures the fraction of original
real value left, so under the assumption of exponential but not necessarily constant decay, it is
linked to the depreciation rate δ by

qt ,t −v = exp(−δ t ,t −v ) ,
where δ t ,t −v =

t

∫ δ (s)ds

(4)

and δ(s) is the depreciation rate at instant s. We will decompose

t −v

economic depreciation into three components.
Age-related depreciation or deterioration, denoted δ v , captures the wedge in value
between new and used equipment that is strictly a function of age. It is frequently modeled as a
geometric function of time. We will consider that specification, as well as more general cases.3
Age-zero depreciation, denoted δ 0 , captures the loss in value the instant that a piece of
equipment is sold. This instantaneous depreciation can arise from lump-sum costs of adjustment,
installation costs, and transactions costs.4 Additionally, it may also represent the discount from
customization, i.e., that a purchaser of a new computer may get to choose its precise
configuration while the buyer of the used computer does not.5

3

Deterioration may also be a function of intensity of use. Depreciation in use does not appear,
however, to be an important factor for computers, and is not considered in this paper.
4
Adjustment costs are another reason for q to differ from one. We believe these are wellcaptured by the instantaneous depreciation.
5
The instantaneous depreciation could also represent a lemons discount owing to adverse
selection. As with the case of machine tools (Ramey and Shapiro, 2001), we argue that lemons
6

Obsolescence, denoted δ s , represents the change in value of used computers because
they have fallen behind the current technology. Our empirical strategy is to use measures of
obsolescence to quantify δ s . We discuss in detail below how we implement this empirical
strategy.
We will treat the three components of depreciation as additive in rates of change, so

δ = δv + δ0 + δs .

(5)

Obsolescence is in no sense a residual. The average discount of used relative to new computers
that we cannot account for with observed measures of obsolescence or with age will be counted
as age-zero depreciation.
Scrappage is another source of user cost. Old computers are often discarded or given
away. Our data set, which contains information on the value of computers that are sold, does not
provide any information about computers that are disposed of by other methods. Since the value
of scrapped computers is zero (or even negative if there is a cost of disposal), our estimates will
not account for the entire user cost of the computers. Our discussant Daniel Sichel makes this
point clearly, and we agree with it. Dunn, Doms, Oliner, and Sichel (2004) use the same data as
used in this study, together with parametric assumptions about scrappage rate, in order to account
for this important component of user cost.
We can combine equations (3), (4), and (5) to characterize the decomposition of the
components of nominal q as
t

t

t −v

t −v

I
qtNOM
,t − v = exp[ ∫ π ( s ) ds ] ⋅ exp[ − ∫ (δ 0 ( s ) + δ v ( s ) + δ s ( s )) ds ]

or
discounts are unlikely to be substantial in the used PC markets because PCs rarely are lemons,
7

(6)

t

NOM
t ,t − v

q

t

⋅ exp[− ∫ π ( s )ds ] = qt ,t −v = exp[− ∫ (δ 0 ( s ) + δ v ( s ) + δ s ( s ))ds ],
I

t −v

(6’)

t −v

that is, q equals cumulative economic depreciation. The use of the contemporaneous arbitrage
between new and used prices to quantify depreciation in (6) provides a link to the intertemporal
arbitrage in the user cost relationship (1).
It is important to emphasize that technological change can impact user cost through two
very different channels. First, technological changes can make new capital goods cheaper over
time. This first channel for technological change is captured by π I in the user cost expression.
When the price of replacement investment goods is falling, this channel adds substantially to
user cost even if there is no deterioration or obsolescence.
Second, technological change can lead to obsolescence of old capital by making new
capital goods better over time. This change does not directly reduce the intrinsic productivity of
existing capital; it can still perform its previous functions (e.g., a steam locomotive can still pull
a train in the age of diesel). Nonetheless, technological progress can make existing capital
obsolete. There are three separate effects within this channel. First, new capital might perform
the same tasks faster, better, or with less labor input. Second, the new capital may be able to
work with complementary inputs, such as software, in a manner that is impossible for the old
capital. Third, the new capital may have better network abilities, such as sharing documents,
exchanging data, and connecting to the Internet. All three of these effects are potentially
important for computers. The IBM AT computer that this paper might have been written with 15
years ago would have gotten the job done almost as well as the Pentium IV laptop. Certainly, the
current statistical software and word processing software is easier to use and runs faster, but the
15-year-old technology would have sufficed to get the job done, presumably with no effect on
and because the rare lemon is easy to detect.
8

the quality of the analysis or quality of the writing. Using the 15-year-old technology to write
this paper now would, however, be considerably more difficult. Media for storing and
transferring data have changed. Old software does not work with new printers. The old
computer cannot run new software, and new software might have been necessary to read a
dataset. Hence, even though the old AT could have once performed the task and is still
physically operational, i.e., has not depreciated physically, its productivity has declined. As
technology evolves, a serviceable old technology becomes unproductive as the network and
infrastructure for operating it vanish.6
Obsolescence as a result of technological change is not well modeled either as physical
deterioration or as a reduction in the price of new computers owing to the decline in production
costs of delivering computing power. One of the main goals of this paper is to measure this type
of obsolescence and to quantify its role in the user cost of computers.

2.

Data

The data consist of information on used computers gathered from the Orion Computer Blue
Books. The Orion Research Corporation has been publishing used pricing guides for a wide
range of consumer products since 1973. The products covered by the guides include
audio/visual equipment, cameras, musical instruments, copiers, vintage collectibles, and
televisions. They have been publishing their computer price guide quarterly since 1982. The
Orion Blue Books are currently used by retail dealers, insurance companies, computer
manufacturers (including Dell, Gateway, and Micron), and the Internal Revenue Service to
provide an accurate reflection of the used computer market.

6

To pursue the rail analogy, steam engines are not productive without water towers.
9

Orion determines used computer prices through surveys given to used computer dealers
nationwide. Dealers are asked to provide the asking price, selling price, and days the computer
was in stock before it was sold. The used price listed in the book is the average price of a
computer that was sold in less than 30 days. Computers which were sold after being on the
market for longer periods did not have their selling prices included in this computation. The
Orion Blue Books also include a retail price (price when new) of the used computers listed in the
book. Using computer company advertisements in back issues of PC Magazine and PC World
we were able to determine that the retail price listed reflects the new price of the computer
approximately nine months to one year after the model was first introduced. The range of dates
the specific computer model was manufactured is also given, as are the specific attributes of the
model, including monitor type and size (if one was included in the purchase price of the
computer), speed, amount of random access memory (RAM), hard drive storage space, type of
hard drive, type and speed of CD-ROM or DVD-ROM, Ethernet card or modem, and type of
processor (Pentium, Celeron, 286, AMD Athelon, etc.). They include prices from nearly 700
manufacturers, including all major computer companies.
We limit our analysis to Compaq and Gateway computers. Many manufacturer listings in
the blue books were inconsistent from year to year in which models were included in the pricing,
making analysis of the same model’s used price over a long period of time difficult. This
problem was encountered for many major computer manufacturers listings, including IBM and
Dell. Compaq and Gateway have a thorough listing of prices across numerous models and over
a long time period, making it well suited for our analysis.
We coded the attributes of the computer available from the blue books. These include the
dates the model was sold, the new price, the used price, and some characteristics of the

10

computer. These include the amount of RAM, the size of the hard drive, the speed of the CPU,
the type of CPU, the speed of the CD drive (if any), and the make. After deleting computer
models with missing data, we have 3,112 observations. Some models are observed in several
years; we have observations on 1,170 distinct models. We observe used prices in years from
1990 to 2001 (excluding 1991 and 1994, years for which we could not obtain the source data).
The computers we observe were produced between 1984 and 2001. The computers range in
price when new from a minimum of $499 to a maximum of $32,880. The median new price of a
computer was $2,490. Used prices range from $7 to $14,140. The median used price is $333.
The computers ranged in speed from 8 to 933 megahertz (MHz), with the median computer
having a 100 MHz processor. Random access memory (RAM) varies from 512 kilobytes (KB)
to 256 megabytes (MB), with a median of 16 MB. Hard drive space ranged from 1 to 40
gigabytes (GB). The median size 1 GB. We exclude diskless machines from the sample.
These data are summarized in Tables 1, 2 and 3. Table 1 shows the attributes by year
when the computer was new. Several aspects are noteworthy. The rate of quality improvement
in computers is striking. From 1984 to 2001 (with adjustments for 2001 where the medians are
affected by the small numbers of computers produced in 2001 and resold in the same year), the
median RAM in our sample rose 250 times, the median speed rose 87 times and the median hard
drive capacity rose 1000 times. At the same time, the median price fell 72 percent.
Interestingly, median prices rose during the 1980s, and then started plummeting during the
1990s. The speed up in technological progress during the late 1990s is also evident from the
table.
Tables 2 and 3 show the data from the vantage point of when the computer was sold.
Table 2 shows the attributes by the year that it was sold. The values for q (the ratio of used to

11

new price, adjusted for the change in the price of new computers) show that in most years, the
average computer sold used had lost close to 70 percent of its value. (See Appendix Table 1 for
averages.) Table 3 shows the attributes by the age when it was sold. One-year old computers lost
34 percent of their real value on average and two-year old computers lost 42 percent of their
value, as shown by the values of q in the last column.

3.

Empirical Framework

3.1.

Hedonic model for new computer prices

For goods such as computers, where the quality of new goods is changing rapidly, much of the
decline in the resale price of existing capital derives from competition with new models that are
both better, and possibly cheaper, than the older models. This environment does not alter
conceptually the user cost framework, but it does provide a substantial measurement challenge.
A constant quality, e.g. hedonic, price index can be used to adjust the acquisition price of a used
computer to make it comparable to a new computer.
While not the focus of the paper, we use our data set to estimate a hedonic model of new
computer prices. We regress the log of new computer prices, log( Pt −Nv ) , on a constant, year
dummies, and attributes to measure the quality. These attributes include the log of the CPU
speed, the log of the size of the hard disk drive, the log of the size of the random access memory
(RAM), a dummy for whether the computer has a CD drive, a dummy for whether the computer
is made by Compaq, and a set of dummies for six generations of CPU (Intel 80286, 80386,
80486, Pentium I, Pentium II (and non-Intel competitors AMD K-6, Celeron, Duron, Cyris), and
Pentium III or IV or AMD Athelon).

12

We experimented with allowing the prices of the attributes to vary with time as
recommended by Pakes (2003). The estimates (fitted values) were extremely noisy. (Estimation
error is also given substantial attention by Pakes.) Our data set is not designed for estimating
hedonic models along lines Pakes suggests, i.e., it is relatively small and not designed explicitly
so that competing models of different attributes are marketed simultaneously, so it is not a good
test bed for Pakes’s recommended procedure. Therefore, we use time-dummy estimates, which a
recent National Academy panel has labeled as Griliches-neutral (see Schultze and Mackie, 2002,
p. 151).
Table 4 reports the estimates of the hedonic equation for new computer prices. Even this
simple model explains two-thirds of the variance of the log of price. The year dummies show a
sharp and relatively steady rate of decline in prices.

3.2.

Modeling depreciation

The estimation equation we consider follows from taking logarithms of both sides of equation (6)
or (6’) and then considering alternative functional forms for the various components of
depreciation. Noting that cumulative change in constant value replacement cost is
t

∫π

I

( s )ds = log( Pt I / Pt −I v ) , the basic equation is

t −v

t

log(qt ,t −v ) = log( Pt / P ) −
NOM

I

I
t −v

∫ (δ

0

( s ) + δ v ( s ) + δ s ( s))ds

(7)

t −v

or
t

log(qt ,t −v ) = − ∫ (δ 0 ( s ) + δ v ( s ) + δ s ( s ))ds
t −v

13

(7’)

where log(qt ,t −v ) = log( PtU / Pt −Nv ) − log( Pt I / Pt −I v ) . Recall that the used and new prices, PtU and
Pt −Nv , are specific to a particular observation, while the constant-quality price index Pt I is either a
function of time only (in the case of the BEA index) or of time and attributes of the computer (in
the case of our hedonic index). We will estimate relationship (7) or (7’) over our sample of
computers.
We observe the same computer models at two points in time, so our data have a panel
structure. Note, however, that the theoretically-mandated specification above takes the
difference (used versus new price) as the dependent variable rather than differencing an
expression in the level of price, so the coefficients of time-invariant parameters (such as
characteristics of the computer) are identified, and time-invariant unobserved effects of the
computer remain in the disturbances. These disturbances are implicit in the integrals of the
components of depreciation in the expressions above. They will be made explicit in what
follows. Though we observe different computers at different points in time, our econometric
specification is a cross-section of changes of price from new to used because we do not follow
particular computers at more than two points in time.7
The following subsections consider alternative parameterizations of the economic
depreciation function.

7

For many models, we observe linked new/used prices at different dates when the used computer
was sold. In our econometric specifications, it is reasonable to assume that these observations
within model are correlated across time. Accordingly, we correct standard errors in our
regression estimates for clustering by model.
14

3.3.1. Age-related depreciation
To model age-related depreciation, we consider several functional forms for how the value of
qt ,t −v depends on the age of the computer. In the most general formulation, we allow
depreciation to be a general function of the age v of the computer. To do so, consider the
relationship
V −1

log(qt ,t −v ) = α 0 + ∑ α v D v + ε

(8)

v =1

where α 0 is instantaneous (time-zero) depreciation, α v is the cumulative age-related
depreciation as of age v, and D v are dummies that equal one for observations with age v and zero
otherwise, and V is the maximum age of a piece of equipment in our sample. The variable ε is a
mean zero, idiosyncratic disturbance. The α’s in this regression correspond in most cases to the
negative of the δ’s in the depreciation model of the theoretical section.
In the estimates, we consider a different formulation. Let Dv be a dummy variable that
equals one for a piece of equipment of age v or greater and zero otherwise. We will estimate the
relationship
V

log(qt ,t −v ) = α 0 + ∑ α v Dv + ε

(9)

v=2

where the α v are the annual rates of depreciation between ages v-1 and v. Note that equation (9)
fits the data identically to equation (8), but is easier to compare with annual estimates of
depreciation. There are a few observations in our sample where the year when new is the same
as the year when sold. We have coded these as one-year old pieces of equipment, so that age 1
depreciation is not separately identified from the α 0

15

We also consider the restriction that the annual rate of depreciation is constant or a
polynomial function of age. Specifically, we estimate
K

log(qt ,t −v ) = α 0 + ∑ α k v k + ε

(10)

k =1

where K is the order of the polynomial, v k is the kth power of age, and α k are parameters. With
K equal to one, we have standard case of constant geometric depreciation, i.e., that the
coefficients α v in equation (8) are equal. This specification identifies age-related depreciation
for all ages.

3.3.2. Obsolescence
We then generalize equations (8) and (9) to allow for shifters of the discount for used capital
relative to new capital. Ramey and Shapiro (2001) emphasize how specificity of capital can lead
to such discounts over and above physical depreciation. Personal computers are highly fungible
across industry and activity, so these considerations seem very unlikely to be relevant.
Computers may, however, be less fungible over time. As discussed in the introduction,
computers can lose productivity because of changes in technology. This reduction in
productivity relates not to the physical operation of the computer, but to its interoperability with
other computers or with current software. Even before the Internet, such network economies
related to common software, media, and data formats drove much of the value of computers.
Increasing incompatibility with the current state of technology is a source of
obsolescence and therefore of user cost that is not well modeled either as physical deterioration
or as a reduction in the price of new computers owing to the decline in production costs of
delivering computing power. This paper will attempt to measure obsolescence and quantify its
role in the user cost of computers. Specifically, we augment equation (9) or (10) as
16

log(qt ,t −v ) = f (age) + X ′β + ε

(11)

where f(age) is the dummy-variable or polynomial function of age discussed above, X is a vector
of indicators of obsolescence, β is a vector of parameters to be estimated.
To indicate obsolescence, we consider how the attributes of the used computer—the
speed of its CPU, the amount of its RAM, and the size of its hard disk—stand in relationship to
attributes of current new computers. Again, current software and operating systems are designed
to make use of power and capacity of current new computers. Often, the owner of an older
computer does not have the choice of running new software. The decline of replacement cost of
hardware helps drive the development of new software. Incompatibilities with such new
software accelerate the obsolescence of older computers.
The specific measures we consider are the deviation of the logarithm of the computer’s
speed, RAM, or disk size from the median log speed, RAM, or disk size of current new
computers. We also consider a composite of these measures, defined as a weighted sum, where
the weights are the coefficients of the attributes in a hedonic regression of new computer prices.
The estimates of these hedonic coefficients are given in Table 4.
Table 5 reports the mean values of these measures of obsolescence by year sold and age
when sold.8 Table 5 shows how rapidly attributes of computers get out of date. At an age of one
year, the RAM of a used computer is 48 percent that below the median RAM of a new computer,

8

We have few observations on new computers produced in 2001 because very few were resold
within the year. The median RAM of the 2001 computers that we observe actually fell from
2000. For this calculation only, we recode the median RAM in 2001 to equal 128MB, the same
value as in 2000. For all earlier years, there are sufficient observations of new computers in our
sample to get reliable estimates. Note that the observations of new computers are perhaps not a
representative sample. To get into the sample as a new computer, the computer must have a
resale price. If prices of computers for which there is a secondary market differs systematically
from the representative new computer, this feature of the data set leads to a potential source of
bias.
17

its speed is 36 percent slower, and its hard disk is 52 percent smaller. The value metric of the
composite attribute shows a 33 percent decline. For older ages, the decline is rapid and
continues for all but the oldest ages.
The other measure of distance of the used computer from the current technological
frontier is how many generations its CPU is behind the generation of the best CPU available in
new computers. We classify CPUs according to the six generations discussed above in the
specification of the hedonic model. The last column of Table 5 reports the average number of
generations a used computer is behind the frontier by year sold and by age. There is an upward
trend in number of generations the CPU is behind with year sold. In earlier years, there are
fewer generations of CPUs available. With age sold, the number of generations behind increases
from just under one on average for one-year old computers to four generations for the oldest
ones.

4.

Estimates of Depreciation

In this section we present estimates of the depreciation of personal computers based on
estimating how resale price falls as a function of the age of the computer [equations (9) and (10)]
and how this function shifts when the controls for obsolescence are included [equation (11)].

4.1.

Age-related depreciation

Table 6 reports estimates of age-related depreciation for the dummy variable specification (9)
and the polynomial specification (10). The left-hand side variable is logarithm of nominal q.
The right-hand side variables include the change in the new price index. In columns (1) through
(6), the coefficient of the price index is constrained to equal 1, so the regressions have implicitly

18

the log of q on the left-hand side and no price variable on the right-hand side. The last two
columns relax this restriction.
Table 6 present estimates using two measures of the price of new computers, the Bureau
of Economic Analysis (BEA) deflator for computers, denoted Pt BEA , and the hedonic price index
reported in Table 4, denoted Pt HED . The index Pt BEA is a function only of year, while Pt HED is a
function of year and the attributes of the computer included in the hedonic equation, so it is more
closely matched to the specific computers in our sample than the BEA index.
The first column of Table 6 reports the age-dummy estimates of age-related depreciation
using the BEA deflator to measure price change on new computers. All specifications also
include a dummy variable that is one if the used computer is sold without a CRT. The CRT
represents a substantial—approximately one-quarter—fraction of the value.9
The constant of –0.280 indicates instantaneous depreciation of more then 28 percent.
Depreciation is 29 percent in year 2, 26 percent in year three, 9 percent in year 4, and 19 percent
in year five. (These rates are measured a log differences. In Tables 8 through 10, we convert the
estimates to levels and compute percent changes.) Later years have lower rates on average and
they are more variable. Though the restriction that the annual rates of depreciation are equal,
which is imposed in column (2), is rejected at any standard level of statistical significance, there
is only a negligible reduction in R2 from imposing the restriction. Allowing a quadratic term in
column (3) yields a significant coefficient, but adds only modestly to the goodness of fit. The
annual rate of depreciation of 24 percent is very high—much higher than is plausible for physical

9

The value of the CRT enters multiplicatively in the specification. An alternative would be to
enter it additively, though that would be more awkward econometrically. We do not know
anything about the quality or value of the original CRT. Our specification assumes that is varies
proportionately with the value of the computer.
19

deterioration. Together with the constant of 41 percent, these estimates fit the facts that
computers loss over half their value over the first two years of their lives.
The estimates in columns (4), (5), and (6) based on our hedonic price index yield similar
patterns of age-related depreciation, but point estimates that correspond to about half the annual
rate of depreciation.10 The average geometric rate of depreciation is 13 percent based on the
estimates with our hedonic price index, which, though lower than the estimates based on the
BEA price index, is still very high relative to our priors about the deterioration of computers.
The last two columns present an informal specification check. We relax the restriction
that the coefficient is one for each of the measures of new computer price change. For the BEA
index, the unrestricted coefficient jumps to nearly one and a half with a substantial downward
effect on the annual rate of depreciation. (With a bigger coefficient on price change, which
increases with age, the coefficient of age takes on a lower value.) Though the coefficient of
price change differs from one when price change is measured with our hedonic index in column
(8), it is much closer to one. Consequently, the annual rate of depreciation is affected less. We
use our hedonic price index in the remainder of our estimation. We will return to the
specification test based on inclusion of the price index in the estimation equation once we have
considered the measures of obsolescence.

4.2.

Obsolescence

As discussed above, an advantage of our data set is its rich detail about the characteristics of the
computers sold. By including measures of computer characteristics in our specifications, we can
separate the effects of age, time, and obsolescence. We explore the effect of several measures of

10

The R2 falls because the implicit left-hand side variable is more variable.
20

obsolescence of personal computers on the discounts of used computers relative to their reflated
acquisition cost. These results are reported in Table 7. The first column of Table 7 includes the
quadratic in age specification from Table 6, Column (6), for reference.

4.2.1. Obsolescence of attributes
Columns (2) and (3) of Table 7 present estimates for the determination of depreciation for used
computers by age and by these measures of obsolescence, as measured as deviation of the
attribute of the computer from the median new computer at the time when it was sold used (see
above). Column (2) includes the speed, RAM, and hard disk measures separately. Column (3)
includes the composite measure based on the weighted sum of the three separate measures. In
column (2), the obsolescence measures based on the individual attributes have jointly significant
incremental explanatory power and, except for RAM, are individually statistically significant.
The obsolescence of the attributes has negative effects on depreciation. The effects of
obsolescence can be quantitatively significant. For example, having a CPU that is half the
median speed lowers the value of the used computer by 19 percent all other things equal.
Imposing the restriction that these measures enter as the weighted sum in column (3) has
only a negligible effect on the fit. The estimated effect of obsolescence on depreciation is
substantial. The average two-year old computer has a composite obsolescence of 0.61, that is,
the hedonic value of the hard disk/speed/RAM bundle has fallen by 61 percent (see Table 5).
Multiplying this amount by the coefficient of –0.538 yields a predicted depreciation from
obsolescence of 33 percent.
Controlling for these measures of obsolescence has a substantial effect on the estimates
of the age-related depreciation, whether entered individually in column (2) or as a composite in

21

column (3). Age-related depreciation is estimated to be small and insignificant. Hence,
controlling for obsolescence essentially eliminates the age-related component of depreciation.

4.2.2. Distance of Used CPU from Frontier
We construct a variable CPU lag that indicates how many generations the computer’s CPU is
behind the frontier. If the computer has the latest CPU, then this variable is equal to 0. The
number of generations the CPU is behind the frontier is broadly a measure of incompatibility of
an existing computer with current software and operating systems.
Table 7, Column (4) reports estimates for CPU lag entered as dummy variables for
lagging one to four generations. The zero lag is the omitted category; there are no computers in
our sample sold with a lag of five generation. This set of variables has more explanatory power
than the measures of attributes. A lag of one has little effect on value, a lag of two reduces it by
almost half, and a lag of three or four eliminates most of value.
Columns (5) and (6) of Table 7 present estimates where both CPU lag and the measures
of obsolescence of the CPU speed, RAM, and hard disk are included as explanatory variables.
Though the speed variable remains significant, as does the composite attribute, these variables
add little to the explanatory power of the CPU lag dummies. The coefficient of RAM has the
“wrong” sign, but given its interaction with other factors such as CPU generation, this coefficient
should not be overinterpreted.

4.3.

Specification test

Recall that in last two columns of Table 6, when the restriction that the new price change has a
unit coefficient is relaxed, the restriction is rejected. If the measures of age and obsolescence are

22

correctly accounting for depreciation, then the new price change should have unit effect on the
nominal used/new price ratio. Table 7, Column (7) reports an estimate that allows us to test this
restriction. When the coefficient of log ( Pt HED Pt −HED
v ) is freely estimated, it is 0.871, with a

standard error of 0.05, close to the theoretically mandated value of one. Hence, the attributes we
include in the equation are appropriately controlling for change in value insofar as they are
correlated with the change in replacement cost measured by the deflator.

4.4.

Age-related depreciation revisited

Once obsolescence is taken into account, age-related depreciation of personal computers is
negligible. In contrast, when obsolescence is not controlled for, age-related depreciation is
substantial. Given that the physical deterioration and failure rates of computers are very small,
our finding of low rates of age-related depreciation once obsolescence is controlled for brings the
econometric estimates in line with what one would expect. The results also demonstrate the risk
of estimating depreciation from age alone, and then identifying that estimate with loss of
productive efficiency. Computers lose value long before they become unable to do the tasks for
which they were designed.
Even controlling for obsolescence, computers have a substantial instantaneous
depreciation of about one quarter of their value. We attribute this instantaneous depreciation to
installation and resale costs, and the value of customizing a new system to the specifications of a
buyer.

23

4.5.

Premia for oldest computers

Though there are powerful factors pushing down the price of used computers, there are aspects
of our results that older is not uniformly less valuable. First, the quadratic term in age-related
depreciation is positive, so the rate of depreciation falls with age. In the next section, we will see
that the quadratic term indeed dominates the negative linear term for the older vintages. Second,
the coefficient of the CPU generation for lagging four generations is about the same as those
lagging three generations. Hence, for surviving older models, there are factors pushing against
deterioration and obsolescence that add to value. Ramey and Shapiro (2001) found similarly that
there was a premium for some very old machine tools that were no longer manufactured. This
finding could be accounted for by survivorship bias in these very old models or the value of
being able to run older applications.

5.

Decomposing the Decline in Value of Used Computers

Using the estimates from the last section, we can now decompose the decline in computer value
into its key components: (i) the change in price of new computers; (ii) instantaneous
depreciation; (iii) age-related depreciation; and (iv) obsolescence. Specifically, the decline in
value of used computers can be decomposed as
HED
NOM
I
log(qtNOM
/ Pt −HED
,t − v ) − log( Pt
v ) = log( qt ,t − v ) − π t ,t − v = log( qt ,t − v ) = − (δ 0 + δ v + δ s ) + ε ,

(12)

that is, instantaneous depreciation, age-related depreciation, obsolescence, and a residual. Tables
8, 9, and 10 summarize the key findings of the paper through this decomposition of user cost.
For these tables, we convert the variables on the left-hand side and the fitted value on the righthand side of equation (12) to levels by exponentiation, compute percent changes for individual
observations, and then average. Tables 8, 9, and 10 then report the average cumulative or

24

annualized percent change in value. The average exponentiated values differ from the
exponentiation of the averages because of heterogeneity. The appendix tables give the averages
in terms of logarithms, the units in which equation (12) is estimated.
Table 8 gives the cumulative and annualized values of the variable by age sold. The
average nominal decline in value for a used computer relative to its nominal acquisition cost in
our sample is 77 percent.11 The decline in replacement cost is 66 percent on average over the
interval between acquisition and sale, or 32 percent per year of age. The decline in q is 41
percent over this interval, or 18 percent per year.12 Hence, the decline in replacement cost
looms very large in the loss in value of used computers.
The last three columns of Table 8 decompose the q, the discount of used price relative to
new price adjusted for the change in replacement cost. On average, age-related depreciation δ v
is 7 percent cumulatively and 3 percent per year of age. This accords with the prior that
deterioration of computers is negligible. Instantaneous depreciation of 21 percent is substantial,
but is much less than what is found for other capital goods. For example, Ramey and Shapiro
(2001) find that the instantaneous discount for forklifts, the most fungible of the aerospace
equipment they study, was about 40 percent.
The majority of economic depreciation, 28 percent of value cumulatively or 8 percent per
year of age, is attributable to our observed indicators of obsolescence. Recall that this loss of
value owing to obsolescence of used computers is above and beyond the loss of value because of
11

The annual rate of decline per year of age is 45 percent. The average cumulative change in
value is –2.19 in logarithms (see Appendix Table A-1). Exp(–2.19) is 0.11, which corresponds
to an 89 percent decline in value. The difference between the 77 percent value in Table 8 and
this value illustrates the importance of taking into heterogeneity in taking averages.
12
The percent changes in Table 8 are multiplicative and corrected for heterogeneity, so they do
not add up either across columns or down rows. The log changes in the appendix tables are

25

the decline in the replacement cost of a computer of constant quality, which is controlled for by
 P HED 
the log  t HED  term in equation (12) shown in the third column of Table 8.
 Pt −v 

Table 8 also shows the user cost decomposition by age sold. Age-related depreciation
depresses value in the first years of the computers life by a modest amount. It accounts for
approximately a 10 percent cumulative decline in value in the first two to three years of life. The
rate of decline in value attributable solely to age then gets smaller. At high age, the quadratic
term dominates, so the age-specific component adds to value. As noted above, this finding can
arise from selectivity or a premium (other things equal) for old models that can operate old
software. Given the thinness of markets for very old computers, the results for the earlier ages
where the linear term dominates are of greater interest and are also more reliable.
Obsolescence increases substantially with age. The rate of increase, shown in the lower
panel of the table, increases for moderate age, but then levels off. Obsolescence accounts for
most of the decline in q at all ages once instantaneous depreciation is taken into account. This
finding is clearest in the logarithmic results shown in Appendix Table 1, which are additive
across columns and down rows. For example, a five year old computer changes in value by –
0.82 on log scale. Of this, –0.12 owes to age-related depreciation, –0.23 owes to instantaneous
loss of value, and –0.55 owes to obsolescence.13
Table 9 shows the cumulative components of user cost by year sold. The corresponding
results in logarithms are reported in Appendix Table 2. Our hedonic price index declines on

additive. Note that first three columns in the appendix tables do not add to the last three columns
because of the residual in equation (12) except for the averages.
13
Note that these figures do not sum to –0.82 because of the residual in equation (12), which
only averages to zero for the whole sample, not for a particular age.
26

average of 32 percent per year.14 Our estimate bounces around somewhat from year to year.
There is no clear trend in the rate of change of the index. While the estimates of obsolescence
also have a lot of variation from year-to-year, its rate increases somewhat over time. Recall that
the coefficients of the measures of obsolescence are time-invariant, so this increase in
obsolescence with time is coming from the declining relative attributes of used computers.
Given that personal computers were relatively new products at the beginning of our sample, this
pattern is not surprising, and would not be expected to apply to mature products.
Table 10 takes a closer look at obsolescence by time, age, and CPU generation. The top
panel shows how the increase in obsolescence with age gets more pronounced over time. The
bottom panel shows how obsolescence increases over time within generation of CPU. There is a
distinct pattern of slow aging of CPUs until the next generation is introduced, and then higher
rates of obsolescence within several years of the introduction. The 80286 had experienced
substantial obsolescence at the beginning of the sample. (The 80386 was introduced in the mid1980s.) The obsolescence of the 80386 becomes significant in 1993. The 80486 does not
become significantly obsolete until 1998 while the Pentium I becomes significant obsolete one
year later in 1999. We do not discern a pattern of faster or slower obsolescence of computers
over time.

6.

Conclusion

This paper has sought to provide a detailed answer to the question of why computers lose their
economic value so quickly. In order to answer the question, we gathered data on the

14

The BEA price index for personal consumption of computers declined at an annual rate of 25
percent over the 1990 to 2001 time period. We do not have an explanation of the differences in
these rates.
27

characteristics of over 3,000 computers, including the new and used price, detailed features of
the computer, and age. By linking the ratio of the used and new price of the computer to
observable characteristics, we were able to estimate the key components of the user cost of
computers.
The typical computer, when it is sold, has experienced about a 77 percent decline in value
compared to its price when new. About half of this decline in value can be accounted for by the
decline in replacement cost of computers of constant quality. That is, even if nothing intrinsic
has happen to the computer, it can be replaced at much lower cost. What accounts for the
remaining decline in the value of this computer? This paper shows that obsolescence accounts
for most of the remaining decline. Though instantaneous depreciation is important (accounting
for a 20 percent decline in the used price relative to the new price), age-related depreciation is
small. By using a parsimonious set of variables to quantify obsolescence, we can account for the
remaining quarter of the decline in the value of computers to when they are sold new, or over
half of the drop in the q of a three-year old computer. Without accounting for obsolescence, the
estimated age-related depreciation is between 15 and 25 percent per year. Therefore, the
standard procedure of attributing all age-related depreciation to deterioration can be seriously
misleading.
The paper has identified the forward movement in the technological frontier as the source
of obsolescence. The interactions of the improvements in hardware with the design of software
magnify the effects of technological progress. The high rate of obsolescence during the period of
study is in large part the outcome of the unique interaction of hardware and software in
computers. During this time period, technological change in hardware manufacturing drastically
lowered the cost of RAM, speed and hard disk space. The lower cost by itself would not cause

28

obsolescence. For example, the real price of new microwaves has also fallen over time, but
obsolescence of existing microwaves has been minimal because the only network component of
microwaves is electricity, which has not changed. In contrast, the lower cost of computer
hardware spurred software designers to write more versatile programs that were more demanding
on the hardware. The newer software does not run well on the limited capabilities of older
machines. Moreover, one cannot simply set up two or more older machines to achieve the same
capabilities of a newer machine: if a program needs 400 MHz to run well, setting up two 200
MHz machines will not solve the problem.
Without the decline in replacement cost, it is unlikely that obsolescence would have
proceeded so quickly. If the rate of technological progress in the production of computer
hardware slows down, one would expect the rate of obsolescence of used computers to decrease
as well.

29

References

Berndt, Ernst R. and Zvi Griliches. “Prices Indexes for Microcomputers: An Exploratory
Study.” In Price Measurements and Their Uses, eds. Murray F. Foss, Marilyn E. Manser,
and Allan H. Young. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Dunn, Wendy E., Mark E. Doms, Stephen D. Oliner, and Daniel E. Sichel. “How Fast Do
Personal Computers Depreciate? Concepts and New Estimates. Tax Policy and the
Economy 18, ed. James Poterba. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004.
Fraumeni, Barbara M. “The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and
Product Accounts.” Survey of Current Business 77 (July 1997) 7-23.
Jorgenson, Dale W. and Zvi Griliches. “The Explanation of Productivity Change.” Review of
Economic Studies 34 (July 1967) 239-280.
Hall, Robert E. “Technical Change and Capital from the Point of View of the Dual.” Review of
Economic Studies 35 (January 1968) 34-46.
Hall, Robert E. “The Measurement of Quality Changes from Vintage Price Data.” In Price
Indices and Quality Change, ed. Zvi Griliches. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 1971.
Hall, Robert E. and Dale W. Jorgenson. “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.” American
Economic Review 57 (April 1967) 391-414.
Hulten, Charles. “Quality Change in Capital Goods and Its Impact on Economic Growth.”
Unpublished paper, no date.
Hulten, Charles and Wykoff, Frank. “The Estimation of Economic Depreciation Using Vintage
Asset Prices.” Journal of Econometrics (April 1981) 367-96.
Hulten, Charles and Wykoff, Frank. “Issues in the Measurement of Economic Depreciation.”
Economic Inquiry 34 (1996) 10-23.
Hulten, Charles, Robertson, James, and Wykoff, Frank. “Energy, Obsolescence and the
Productivity Slowdown.” In Technology and Capital Formation, eds. Dale Jorgenson
and Ralph Landau/ Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 1988.
Jorgenson, Dale W. “Empirical Studies of Depreciation.” Economic Inquiry 34 (January 1996)
24-42.
Oliner, Stephen. “Constant-Quality Price Change, Depreciation, and Retirement of Mainframe
Computers.” In Price Measurements and Their Uses, eds. Murray F. Foss, Marilyn E.
Manser, and Allan H. Young. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 1993.

30

Oliner, Stephen. “New Evidence on the Retirement and Depreciation of Machine Tools,”
Economic Inquiry 34 (1996) 57-77.
Orion Computer Blue Book. Durango, CO: Orion Research Corp, 1990-2001.
Pakes, Ariel. “A Reconsideration of Hedonic Price Indices with an Application PC’s.” American
Economic Review 93 (December 2003) 1578-1596.
Ramey, Valerie A. and Matthew D. Shapiro. “Displaced Capital: A Study of Aerospace Plant
Closings.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (October 2001) 958-992.
Schultze, Charles and Christopher Mackie. At What Price? Conceptualizing and Measuring
Cost-of-Living and Price Indexes. Washington, D.C: National Academies of Science,
2002.
Wykoff, Frank C. “Obsolescence in Economic Depreciation from the Point of View of the
Revaluation Term.” Unpublished paper, Pomona College, 2003.

31

Table 1. Attributes of New Computers by Year Produced

Year
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

N
16
7
37
58
38
89
136
154
354
319
205
206
217
330
559
291
94
2

RAM
0.512
0.512
1
1
1
2
4
4
4
8
8
16
16
32
32
128
128
96

Speed Hard disk
8
30
8
30
20
70
20
60
20
40
33
320
25
120
25
120
33
120
50
270
66
540
100
1000
133
1600
200
2500
300
4300
500
13000
650
10000
700
30000

Has CD
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.02
0.18
0.44
0.59
0.42
0.72
0.72
0.80
0.85
1

Compaq
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0.52
0.75
0.88
0.41
0.64
0.88
0.59
0.76
0.54
0.72
1

CPU
286
286
386
386
386
386
386
486
486
486
486
PI
PI
PI
PII
PIII/IV
PIII/IV
PIII/IV

Price
5145
4799
7999
7495
5190
12499
9999
2560
2359
2480
2490
3040
2930
2470
1999
1899
1431
1525

Year = year when new; N = number of observations; RAM = Random access memory, megabytes (median); Speed=Clock speed of
CPU, megahertz (median) Hard disk=Size of hard disk, megabytes (median); Has CD=1 if has a CD drive (mean); Compaq=1 if a
Compaq computer and 0 if a Gateway (mean); CPU=generation of processor: 386=80386, 486=80486, PI= Pentium I, PII=Pentium II,
PIII/IV=Pentium III or IV (median); Price=price of new computer, nominal dollars (median).

Table 2. Attributes of Used Computer by Year Sold

Year
1990
1992
1993
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

N
26
73
118
155
233
284
382
553
595
693

RAM
1
2
4
4
4
8
8
16
32
32

Speed Hard disk No CRT Has CD Compaq
20
65
1
0
1
20
84
0.95
0
0.95
25
120
0.83
0.01
0.81
33
120
0.81
0.06
0.80
33
270
0.67
0.17
0.76
50
340
0.70
0.24
0.79
75
650
1.00
0.38
0.75
150
1800
0.82
0.50
0.73
200
3000
0.67
0.56
0.67
300
4300
0.61
0.65
0.67

Age
3
3
2
4
4
4
4
2
2
3

CPU
386
386
386
486
486
486
PI
PI
PI
PII

Price q (BEA) q (Hedonic)
3840
0.68
0.82
1470
0.42
1.03
574
0.23
0.44
499
0.30
0.55
417
0.39
0.51
340
0.44
0.55
320
0.43
0.47
327
0.33
0.44
132
0.16
0.23
239
0.36
0.40

Year = year when sold; N = number of observations; RAM = Random access memory, megabytes (median); Speed=Clock speed of
CPU, megahertz (median) Hard disk=Size of hard disk, megabytes (median); No CRT=1 if used computer sold without a monitor; Has
CD=1 if has a CD drive (mean); Compaq=1 if a Compaq computer and 0 if a Gateway (mean); Age=Age of the computer when sold,
years (median); CPU=generation of processor: 386=80386, 486=80486, PI= Pentium I, PII=Pentium II (median); Price=Retail price of
used computer, dollars (median); q=Resale price over acquisition price, reflated by BEA price index for computers, or reflated by
estimated hedonic price index (median).

Table 3. Attributes of Used Computers by Age When Sold

Age
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

N
666
606
500
349
273
237
198
141
89
35
19
13
7
2

See notes to Table 2.

RAM
32
32
16
8
8
4
4
4
4
2
1
1
1
0.512

Speed Hard disk
300
4300
200
3200
166
2000
66
630
50
340
33
270
33
240
33
210
33
120
20
84
16
40
20
60
16
40
12
30

No CRT
0.54
0.59
0.77
0.92
0.89
0.87
0.90
0.97
1
1
1
1
1
1

Has CD
0.63
0.63
0.54
0.38
0.24
0.20
0.07
0.01
0
0
0
0
0
0

Compaq
0.70
0.67
0.75
0.70
0.74
0.74
0.76
0.80
0.83
1
1
1
1
1

CPU
PII
PI
PI
PI
486
486
486
486
486
386
386
386
386
286

Price
934
562
306
220
155
70
25
17
14
16
47
15
9
15

q (BEA) (Hedonic)
0.62
0.66
0.47
0.58
0.34
0.46
0.29
0.38
0.22
0.35
0.14
0.27
0.10
0.19
0.08
0.17
0.07
0.18
0.07
0.23
0.07
0.27
0.04
0.17
0.03
0.16
0.09
0.30

Table 4: New Computer Price Hedonic Equation
Dependent variable: log( Pt N )

log of CPU speed
log of RAM
log of hard disk size
CPU 386
CPU 486
CPU Pentium I
CPU Pentium II
CPU Pentium III or IV
Compaq
Has CD drive
Year 1985
Year 1986
Year 1987
Year 1988
Year 1989
Year 1990
Year 1991
Year 1992
Year 1993
Year 1994
Year 1995

0.410
(0.070)
0.250
(0.035)
0.127
(0.029)
0.045
(0.100)
0.273
(0.103)
0.516
(0.120)
0.164
(0.151)
0.419
(0.169)
0.138
(0.037)
-0.041
(0.023)
-0.004
(0.074)
-0.184
(0.117)
-0.376
(0.117)
-0.526
(0.139)
-0.432
(0.152)
-0.800
(0.120)
-1.697
(0.123)
-2.148
(0.133)
-2.619
(0.146)
-2.849
(0.153)
-3.240
(0.173)

[Table 4, continued]
Year 1996
Year 1997
Year 1998
Year 1999
Year 2000
Year 2001
Constant
Observations
R2
SEE

-3.515
(0.186)
-3.974
(0.199)
-4.282
(0.207)
-5.015
(0.229)
-5.336
(0.242)
-5.439
(0.254)
7.225
(0.208)
3112
0.68
0.35

Note: Dependent variable is the log of the price of computer when new. Excluded CPU is
80286. Excluded year is 1984. Standard errors corrected for heteroskedacity and clustering by
model are in parentheses.

Table 5. Attributes of Used Computers Relative to Current New Models

Deviation from Median Attribute of New Computers
Composite
RAM
Speed
Hard disk

CPU lag

Year sold
1990
1992
1993
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

0.506
0.425
0.637
1.109
1.018
1.238
1.131
1.399
1.077
1.020

1.301
0.785
1.041
1.477
1.164
1.658
1.228
2.039
1.497
1.228

0.290
0.471
0.656
1.189
1.188
1.380
1.398
1.440
1.279
1.094

0.483
0.281
0.845
1.988
1.887
2.025
1.975
2.354
1.403
2.082

1.2
1.0
1.6
1.4
1.1
0.9
1.6
2.1
1.6
1.3

Age sold
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

0.332
0.606
0.930
1.209
1.520
1.765
2.133
2.313
2.401
2.512
2.583
2.818
3.125
3.151

0.478
0.826
1.205
1.566
1.958
2.278
2.765
3.005
3.105
3.512
3.665
4.047
4.545
4.135

0.357
0.678
1.030
1.351
1.704
1.986
2.386
2.587
2.684
2.733
2.758
2.999
3.309
3.624

0.521
0.954
1.622
2.078
2.610
3.003
3.644
3.949
4.126
4.040
4.215
4.537
4.972
4.965

0.7
1.0
1.3
1.6
1.8
2.2
2.6
2.8
2.9
3.0
3.1
3.5
3.7
4.0

Note: The first four columns report means of log deviation of the attribute of the used computer
relative to the median log attribute for the new computer in the year when sold. Composite is the
weighted average of Hard disk, Speed, and RAM, with the weights taken from their coefficients
in the hedonic regression reported in Table 4. The CPU lag is the number of generations the
CPU of used computer is behind the latest CPU being marketed when the used computer is sold.
Generations defined as 80286, 80386, 80486, Pentium I, Pentium II, and Pentium III or IV.

Age=2
Age=3
Age=4
Age=5
Age=6
Age=7
Age=8
Age=9
Age=10
Age=11
Age=12
Age=13
Age=14
Age
Age2

log ( Pt BEA Pt −BEA
v )
log ( Pt HED Pt −HED
v )
No CRT
Constant
R2
SEE

Table 6. Explaining the Resale Price of Computers by Age
 PtU,t −v 
NOM
Dependent variable: log(qt ,t −v ) = log  N 
 Pt −v 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
-0.287
-0.206
(0.027)
(0.024)
-0.261
-0.170
(0.038)
(0.035)
-0.090
-0.077
(0.043)
(0.042)
-0.191
-0.044
(0.047)
(0.048)
-0.341
-0.207
(0.054)
(0.054)
-0.423
-0.299
(0.055)
(0.053)
-0.247
-0.155
(0.066)
(0.067)
-0.227
-0.036
(0.067)
(0.068)
-0.306
0.148
(0.177)
(0.147)
0.354
0.335
(0.209)
(0.174)
-0.498
-0.408
(0.194)
(0.156)
-0.195
-0.128
(0.232)
(0.161)
0.902
0.557
(0.260)
(0.235)
-0.244 -0.242
-0.134 -0.200 -0.074 -0.133
(0.008) (0.020)
(0.009) (0.019) (0.030) (0.035)
-0.000
0.007 -0.005
0.006
(0.002)
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002)
1.0

1.0

1.0

1.465
(0.066)
1.0

1.0

1.0

1.164
(0.075)
-0.425 -0.412 -0.412 -0.368 -0.377 -0.360 -0.398 -0.346
(0.030) (0.029) (0.029) (0.030) (0.030) (0.030) (0.029) (0.031)
-0.280 -0.052 -0.054 -0.225 -0.138 -0.038 -0.081 -0.045
(0.020) (0.022) (0.032) (0.026) (0.028) (0.035) (0.032) (0.037)
0.60
0.59
0.59
0.36
0.34
0.35
0.86
0.85
0.57
0.58
0.58
0.58
0.59
0.58
0.57
0.58

[Notes to Table 6]
Note: Dependent variable is the log of the ratio of the used to new price. Pt BEA and Pt HED are the
BEA’s and the authors’ hedonic price indexes for new computers. In columns (1) through (6),
the price index for new computers is included in the regression with a coefficient of one. Taking
the price index to the left-hand side of the equation makes the dependent variable the log of q.
Standard errors corrected for heteroskedacity and clustering by model are in parentheses. Age
dummies are defined so the coefficient is the annual age-related depreciation (log difference).
Age (v) is measured in years. No CRT is a dummy for the used computer being sold without a
monitor. 3112 observations.

Table 7. Explaining the Resale Price of Computers by Age and Obsolescence
 PtU,t −v 
NOM
Dependent variable log(qt ,t −v ) = log  N 
 Pt −v 
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
Age
-0.200
-0.001
-0.021
-0.093
-0.037
-0.060
-0.105
(0.019) (0.022) (0.023) (0.020) (0.022) (0.023) (0.034)
0.007
0.001
0.002
0.008
0.006
0.007
0.008
Age2
(0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.002) (0.001) (0.002) (0.002)
Hard disk deviation
-0.055
-0.016
(0.022)
(0.021)
RAM deviation
-0.041
0.064
(0.031)
(0.028)
CPU speed deviation
-0.383
-0.208
(0.058)
(0.058)
Composite deviation
-0.538
-0.145
-0.145
(0.046)
(0.057) (0.056)
CPU lag=1
0.014
0.035
0.045
0.014
(0.030) (0.030) (0.032) (0.032)
CPU lag=2
-0.459
-0.400
-0.374
-0.424
(0.045) (0.053) (0.054) (0.057)
CPU lag=3
-1.204
-1.052
-1.043
-1.107
(0.072) (0.092) (0.091) (0.096)
CPU lag=4
-1.240
-1.057
-1.029
-1.139
(0.111) (0.119) (0.116) (0.135)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.871
log ( Pt HED Pt −HED
v )
(0.065)
-0.360
-0.229
-0.231
-0.270
-0.248
-0.255
-0.253
(0.030) (0.034) (0.035) (0.029) (0.030) (0.031) (0.031)
Constant
-0.038
-0.138
-0.121
-0.217
-0.250
-0.233
-0.221
(0.035) (0.037) (0.040) (0.031) (0.030) (0.032) (0.032)
0.35
0.42
0.42
0.49
0.50
0.49
0.49
R2
SEE
0.58
0.55
0.55
0.52
0.51
0.51
0.51
HED
Note: Dependent variable is the log of the ratio of the used to new price. Pt
is the authors’
hedonic price indexes for new computers. In columns (1) through (6), the price index for new
computers is included in the regression with a coefficient of one. Taking the price index to the
left-hand side of the equation makes the dependent variable the log of q. Standard errors
corrected for heteroskedacity and clustering by model are in parentheses. Age (v) is measured in
years. Hard disk, RAM, and CPU speed deviation are the median value of those variables for the
year when the used computer is sold minus the value of those variables for the used computer.
The composite deviation is the weighted value of those variables using the hedonic coefficients
reported in Table 4 as weights. The CPU lag variable are dummies for number of generations
the CPU of the used computer is behind the most recent CPU in production when the used
computer is sold. The generations are defined as 80286, 80386, 80486, Pentium I, Pentium II,
and Pentium III or IV. No CRT is a dummy for the used computer being sold without a monitor.
3112 observations.
No CRT

Table 8. Explaining the Price of Used Computers by Age

Age sold

Nominal q

v

log(qtNOM
,t − v )

Average
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Average
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

New Price
 Pt HED 
log  HED 
 Pt −v 

q
log(qt ,t −v )

Depreciation
Age-related Age-zero Obsolescence

δv

δ0

Cumulative decrease in value (percent)
77
66
41
7
21
47
32
20
5
21
69
54
33
9
21
82
70
41
11
21
87
78
44
12
21
91
85
44
11
21
95
90
52
9
21
98
94
65
6
21
99
95
71
1
21
99
97
71
-5
21
99
98
67
-14
21
99
98
60
-25
21
100
98
74
-39
21
100
99
79
-57
21
99
99
62
-80
21
Annual rate decrease in value per year of age (percent)
45
32
18
3
10
47
32
20
5
21
46
33
20
4
11
46
33
19
4
7
43
32
17
3
6
42
32
14
2
5
42
32
15
2
4
44
33
17
1
3
43
32
17
0
3
42
32
15
-1
3
41
33
13
-1
2
36
30
9
-2
2
38
30
11
-3
2
37
29
11
-4
2
32
26
7
-4
2

δs
28
4
12
20
30
39
52
62
68
70
68
70
76
77
77
8
4
7
8
9
10
12
14
14
13
11
11
11
11
10

Notes to Table 8: The percent decreases are calculated by exponentiating the logarithmic values
and then averaging. The first panel contains averages of cumulative percent decreases. The
second panel contains averages of percent decreases per year of age. The first column is change
in nominal q, the second column is the change in the new price holding attributes constant, the
third column is the change in q (the difference of the first two columns), and the last three
columns gives the estimates of components of depreciation from the regression in Table 7,
column (6).

Table 9. Explaining the Price of Used Computers by Year

Age sold

Nominal q

v

log(qtNOM
,t − v )

Average
1990
1992
1993
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Average
1990
1992
1993
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

New Price
 Pt HED 
log  HED 
 Pt −v 

q
log(qt ,t −v )

Depreciation
Age-related Age-zero Obsolescence

δv

δ0

Cumulative decrease in value (percent)
77
66
41
7
21
41
38
4
9
21
71
77
-35
9
21
79
64
40
8
21
80
73
25
8
21
79
66
37
8
21
80
71
30
7
21
76
63
39
6
21
76
72
36
6
21
81
67
57
8
21
74
60
51
8
21
Annual rate decrease in value per year of age (percent)
45
32
18
3
10
20
19
1
4
11
35
40
-8
3
8
54
38
26
4
12
39
32
11
3
7
41
29
16
3
8
41
32
13
3
8
41
28
18
3
10
49
42
11
3
11
53
35
28
3
10
41
25
21
3
9

See notes to Table 8.

δs
28
11
8
24
26
19
21
27
40
30
25
8
3
3
11
7
5
5
6
15
9
7

Table 10. Obsolescence ( δ s ) by year, age sold, and CPU type: Cumulative decrease in value (percent)
Age sold
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
CPU
80286
80386
80486
Pentium I
Pentium II
Pentium III/IV

1990

1992

1993

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

-2
18
3
1
42
42

0
8
-1
3
12
14
43
43

10
21
31
27
42
48
41
73
73

3
6
20
27
35
38
46
53
46
75
75

3
7
8
20
29
36
35
48
54
48
76
76

6
8
12
13
26
31
39
39
51
56
51
77
77

0
5
7
28
41
54
58
70
67
76
76
76
77
77

10
36
43
45
62
71
75
76
76
76
78
77
78

0
12
36
44
45
62
71
75
76
75

2
3
14
38
45
47
62
71
76
77

41
1
-2

41
1
-2

72
38
1

74
44
8
5

75
45
9
4

76
48
14
8

76
74
45
4
0

76
75
43
3

75
75
43
3
1

76
44
5
3

Note: Cumulative obsolescence (percent decrease) based on estimates from Table 7, Column (6). See also note to Table 8.

APPENDIX TABLES

Age sold
v

Average
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14

Table A-1. Explaining the Price of Used Computers by Age
Depreciation
Age-related Age-zero Obsolescence
Nominal q New Price
q
HED
P

log(qtNOM
- δ0
-δs
log  t HED  log(qt ,t −v )
- δv
,t − v )
 Pt −v 
-2.19
-0.70
-1.30
-1.91
-2.31
-2.76
-3.35
-4.11
-4.60
-5.02
-5.35
-4.93
-5.70
-6.09
-5.31

Cumulative change in value (log levels)
-1.46
-0.73
-0.08
-0.42
-0.29
-0.05
-0.81
-0.50
-0.09
-1.22
-0.69
-0.11
-1.53
-0.78
-0.12
-1.94
-0.82
-0.12
-2.33
-1.03
-0.10
-2.78
-1.33
-0.06
-3.10
-1.49
-0.01
-3.49
-1.53
0.05
-3.97
-1.38
0.13
-3.88
-1.05
0.22
-4.25
-1.46
0.33
-4.51
-1.58
0.45
-4.28
-1.03
0.59

Notes: Log levels. See also notes to Table 8.

-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23

-0.42
-0.05
-0.15
-0.26
-0.38
-0.55
-0.81
-1.07
-1.22
-1.27
-1.21
-1.27
-1.45
-1.49
-1.49

Age sold
v

Average
1990
1992
1993
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001

Table A-2. Explaining the Price of Used Computers by Year
Depreciation
Age-related Age-zero Obsolescence
Nominal q New Price
q
HED
P

log(qtNOM
- δ0
-δs
log  t HED  log(qt ,t −v )
- δv
,t − v )
 Pt −v 
-2.19
-0.57
-1.31
-1.89
-2.01
-1.97
-2.08
-2.01
-2.38
-2.57
-2.16

Cumulative change in value (log levels)
-1.46
-0.73
-0.08
-0.49
-0.08
-0.09
-1.55
0.24
-0.10
-1.27
-0.63
-0.08
-1.62
-0.39
-0.09
-1.41
-0.56
-0.08
-1.63
-0.45
-0.07
-1.45
-0.56
-0.06
-1.68
-0.71
-0.06
-1.46
-1.10
-0.08
-1.26
-0.90
-0.08

Notes: Log levels. See also notes to Table 8.

-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23
-0.23

-0.42
-0.15
-0.10
-0.34
-0.35
-0.25
-0.27
-0.42
-0.65
-0.47
-0.38

