                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      QUANTITATIVE GOALS FOR MONETARY POLICY

                                             Antonio Fatás
                                              Ilian Mihov
                                            Andrew K. Rose

                                         Working Paper 10846
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10846


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




Fatás is Professor of Economics and Area Coordinator, and CEPR Research Fellow. Mihov is Associate
Professor of Economics, and CEPR Research Associate. Rose is Rocca Professor of International Business,
NBER Research Associate and CEPR Research Fellow. Rose thanks INSEAD, the Reserve Bank of
Australia, and the Monetary Authority of Singapore for hospitality while this paper was written. A current
version of this paper and the data set are available at Rose’s website. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Antonio Fatás, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew K. Rose. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Quantitative Goals for Monetary Policy
Antonio Fatás, Ilian Mihov, and Andrew K. Rose
NBER Working Paper No. 10846
October 2004
JEL No. E52

                                           ABSTRACT

We study empirically the macroeconomic effects of an explicit de jure quantitative goal for monetary
policy. Quantitative goals take three forms: exchange rates, money growth rates, and inflation
targets. We analyze the effects on inflation of both having a quantitative target, and of hitting a
declared target; we also consider effects on output volatility. Our empirical work uses an annual data
set covering 42 countries between 1960 and 2000, and takes account of other determinants of
inflation (such as fiscal policy, the business cycle, and openness to international trade), and the
endogeneity of the monetary policy regime. We find that both having and hitting quantitative targets
for monetary policy is systematically and robustly associated with lower inflation. The exact form
of the monetary target matters somewhat, but is less important than having some quantitative target.
Successfully achieving a quantitative monetary goal is also associated with less volatile output.

Antonio Fatás
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau, France
fatas@econ.insead.edu

Ilian Mihov
INSEAD
1 Ayer Rajah Ave
Singapore 138678
mihov@econ.insead.edu

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction and Motivation

          The economics profession has gradually moved to the view that transparency in monetary

(and other) policies is desirable. For instance, the IMF believes that transparent policies are both

more effective and enhance accountability. Accordingly, the Fund encourages countries “… to

state clearly the role, responsibility and objectives of the central bank. The objectives of the

central bank should be clearly defined, publicly disclosed and written into law.”1 But while the

theoretical advantages of transparency have been much analyzed, there is less in the way of

empirical support. One objective of this paper is to help fill that gap.

          We find that in practice, countries with transparent targets for monetary policy achieve

lower inflation. We identify “transparent” targets for monetary policy with “quantitative”

targets. Quantitative targets are easily measured, allowing the monetary authority’s successes (or

lack thereof) to be determined mechanistically. That is, quantitative targets are transparent since

they can be assessed without (much) debatable personal judgment.

          In practice, central banks have used three types of quantitative monetary targets (with

varying degrees of success): exchange rates, money growth rates, and inflation targets. A

number of economists in the past have analyzed the effects of one of these regimes. For

instance, there is a large and growing literature on countries with inflation targets. There is an

even larger literature which compares the merits of fixed and floating exchange rate regimes.

Rather than focusing on any one of these targets, we use all three. In part this is because we are

interested in estimating the effect of transparency in monetary policy, and transparency can take

different forms. Indeed, when we compare the inflationary effects of different quantitative

targets for monetary policy (exchange rate/money growth/inflation), we find differences, but

they are small compared to the presence of any transparent target.
1
    http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/mtransp.htm


                                                           1
          Still, we combine together different types of targets for monetary policy for a more

important reason, which is best explained with an example. Fixed exchange rates are well-

defined monetary policies, and are often compared with floating exchange rate regimes. But a

float is not a well-defined monetary policy! Similarly, central banks that do not target inflation

have to do something else. By using data for all quantitative monetary regimes, we can

reasonably compare the merits of having a transparent monetary policy to the alternative, which

we consider to be “opaque monetary objective(s).”

          In section 2, we review the extensive literature of relevance; our methodology and data

set are presented afterwards. The core of our paper is in section 4 which presents our results for

inflation, along with sensitivity analysis. We then analyze the effects of quantitative targets on

the short run/business cycle volatility of output. A brief conclusion closes.



2. Literature Review

          Our work is related to a number of other classic problems in economics. One is the

choice of monetary instrument. Different instruments have different degrees of transparency (as

well as other attributes); accordingly, the question of whether central banks should use the

exchange rate, the money growth rate, or something else has been addressed by many scholars.2

Most of this literature is concerned with exchange rate regimes. There is an enormous literature

that compares the attributes of fixed and floating exchange rate regimes, both theoretically and

empirically. Still, to repeat a standard but important criticism of this area, a fixed exchange rate

is a well-defined monetary policy, but a floating exchange rate regime is not. If the monetary

authorities are not pegging the exchange rate, they must be doing something else. Because of the

recent increase in the adoption of inflation targets, we have seen a shift in the literature towards
2
    See e.g., Atkeson and Kehoe (2001) NBER WP 8681.


                                                       2
the study of inflation targeting regimes. Another related literature is that of the optimal degree of

transparency in monetary policy.3

          There is also a literature that has focused on the role of domestic institutions in the

conduct of monetary policy, most of which is centred on the effects of independence of central

banks, and/or, more recently, on inflation targets. Although these areas of the literature are

ultimately addressing the same issue (how monetary policy regimes affect macroeconomic

outcomes), it is fair to say that, to a large extent, they have been developed separately. We now

review some of the key papers in each of these strands of literature, summarizing their main

insights.



Exchange Rate Regimes

          The macroeconomic effect of the exchange rate regime is still an open question, one that

is associated with many controversies in both the international and monetary economics

literatures. There is a broad literature that deals with the theoretical analysis on the costs and

benefits of different exchange rate arrangements and there is a consensus on the main factors that

shape these costs and benefits. However, there are still many disagreements on the relative

empirical importance of these factors. As a result, when it comes to the best monetary policy

regime for a given country, most of the predictions are inconclusive as they depend on a variety

of assumptions that can only be validated empirically. Relative to the theoretical literature, there

have been fewer papers that have taken these assumptions to a test or that, more generally, have

empirically estimated the implications of monetary policy regimes.

          One of the first papers to provide a comprehensive empirical study of the effects of

different exchange rate regimes on macroeconomic outcomes is Baxter and Stockman (1989).
3
    See e.g., Faust and Svensson (2002), and Cukierman and Meltzer (1986).


                                                         3
Using a cross-section of countries with different exchange rate regime, they looked at the

association between the exchange rate regime and variables such as output, consumption, trade

flows, government consumption and the real exchange rate. Their conclusion was that the

exchange rate regime did not matter for most of the macroeconomic variables, with the exception

of the real exchange rate (that was more volatile under flexible exchange rate systems).

        Most of the studies that have followed Baxter and Stockman (1989) have had a narrower

focus; they look mainly into the consequences on inflation and output volatility. Recent studies

by Ghosh et al. (1997, 2002) and Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) provide detailed

analyses of the effects of exchange rate regimes on inflation. The approach is to look initially at

the marginal effect of the exchange rate regime, after controlling for the effect of money growth.

The hypothesis is that the exchange rate regime has a direct effect on the relationship between

money and inflation, beyond any potential indirect effect through the conduct of monetary policy

(i.e. on money growth rates). There is evidence that inflation is lower under fixed rate regimes.4

        Both Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) and Ghosh et al. (1997) also study the

effects on business cycle volatility and growth. Regarding business cycle volatility, their results

are consistent: fixed exchange rate regimes are associated to greater output volatility. Regarding

growth effects, the papers reach different conclusions. While Ghosh et al. (1997) do not find

strong evidence in any direction Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) conclude that growth is

higher for floaters.



Domestic Institutions


4
  In the case of Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) there is also a test of the indirect effect of the regime on
inflation via money growth. Money growth is regressed on GDP growth (lagged), money growth lagged, openness,
budget balance, a set of regional dummies and the exchange rate dummies. Once again long pegs are the only cases
where there seems to be a significant negative effect on inflation, in this case through lower money growth.


                                                        4
       Even for countries where the discussion on exchange rate regimes is not important (in

most cases because of the adoption of floating exchange rates), there has been an active recent

debate on optimal monetary policy. The two key issues are typically whether the central bank

should have instrument-independence, and whether it should have an explicit inflation target.

       Regarding the independence of central banks, the literature has focused on the observed

negative correlation between inflation and central bank independence as documented in Alesina

and Summers (1993), Cukierman (1992) or Grilli et al. (1991).

       The other main features of monetary policy that have been studied in this literature are

the effects of explicit targets and transparency. Initially the analysis was centred on money

targets, but as countries moved away from these targets into inflation ones, the focus of the

literature has moved accordingly. Because of the lack of a large number of observations, the

literature tends to be descriptive, based on case studies rather than cross-country regressions.

Mishkin (1999) and the books by Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999) and Loayza and

Soto (2002) present good surveys and case studies of money and inflation targeting. Overall the

evidence is mixed. While there is evidence that inflation targets have helped countries reduce

their inflation rates (Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel, 2002), others argue that this effect is the

result of factors other than the monetary regime (Ball and Sheridan (2003)).



Regimes

       In all the literature reviewed above, two issues appear repeatedly: the characterization of

monetary policy regimes (especially when it comes to exchange rate regimes) and the problem of

endogeneity.




                                                 5
         Classification of regimes: words or actions? When it comes to the classification of

exchange rate regimes, there are two possible approaches. The first is to look at the officially

declared de jure regime. The problem with this approach is that we often observe in practice that

countries sometimes peg their exchange rate without a clear de jure commitment (or intervene

frequently despite having declared a floating exchange rate, the “fear of floating” as defined by

Calvo and Reinhart, 2000). As an alternative one can look at actions and classify regimes but

looking at the actual behaviour of exchange rates (or the target set by monetary policy), i.e. the

de facto regime. This is the approach of Reinhart and Rogoff (2004) and Levy Yeyati, Eduardo

and Federico Sturzenegger (2003). Their results show that looking at a de facto classification

might provide very different results. The distinction between words and actions also matters for

other monetary policy targets such as money and inflation targets. For example, there is plenty

of evidence that central banks that declared themselves to be money targetters were not behaving

as such (see, for example, Bernanke and Mihov (1997) for the case of the Bundesbank).

         Rather than attempt to resolve this issue on a conceptual level, we simply look at both the

de facto regime and whether or not it is actually hit in practice.

         Dealing with endogeneity. The interpretation of the existence of a correlation between

inflation (or output volatility) and the exchange rate regime is problematic because of

endogeneity. Is inflation lower because of the fixed exchange rate regime? Or are countries with

low inflation (or more distaste of inflation) more likely to adopt fixed exchange rate regimes?

The literature has dealt with the issue of endogeneity by using a set of instrumental variables

based on either economic or political arguments.5 Levy-Yeyati, Sturzenegger and Reggio (2002)

or von Hagen and Jizhong Zhou (2004) provide a comprehensive study of the endogeneity of

5
 A separate but related issue is the need to control for variables other than the monetary policy regime in the
determination of inflation. Romer (1993) or Lane (1997) are examples of papers that have studied how the
determinants of the incentives of governments to inflate their economies.


                                                          6
exchange rate regimes. Frieden, Ghezzi and Stein (2000), within the context of Latin America,

use a similar framework. Alesina and Wagner (2003) provide an analysis of how institutions

affect decisions by countries to abandon fixed exchange rate regimes and to dissemble why such

regimes are in place.

       The arguments about what determines the choice of an exchange rate regime are based on

theories that highlight the economic costs and benefits of the regimes, as well as the political

institutional environment in which different regimes might be preferable. The economic

variables are related to the optimum currency area debate. What makes a country a better

candidate to adopt the currency of a different country? Openness, size, geographical

concentration of country’s trade, the type of shocks (volatility of terms of trade, volatility of

other nominal versus real shocks), financial dollarization all matter to assess these costs and

benefits and have been used as instrumental variables in the literature.

       The political arguments are more institutional, and concern the benefits of committing to

a certain monetary policy. From a theoretical point of view, fragmentation of power (measured

by e.g., the fraction of seats in congress held by government, years in office, or a Herfindahl

index of political parties) or political instability shape the benefits and costs of commitment

when it comes to monetary policy or the exchange rate regime. There is evidence that these

variables matter (Frieden, Ghezzi and Stein (2000) or Edwards (1996)).

       The issue of endogeneity has rarely been studied in the case of money or inflation targets.

One of the few exceptions is Gerlach (1999) in the context of inflation targets. His results show

that the adoption of inflation targets is more likely with low degree of central bank

independence, less openness, countries that export a low number of goods and among members

of the EU.




                                                  7
3. Methodology

3.a Benchmark model

        Our benchmark model is the following:


        Πit = β1DJTargetit + β2Successit

            + γ1Openit + γ2Budgetit + γ3BusCycleit + γ4GDPpcit + γ5 GDPit + εit



where i denotes a country, t denotes a year, and

•   Π denotes the annual inflation rate in percentage points
•   DJTargett is a dummy variable that is one if the country had a quantitative monetary policy
    target during period t, and zero otherwise,
•   γi is a set of nuisance coefficients,
•   Success is a dummy variable that is one if the country hit its de jure quantitative target during
    t, and zero otherwise,
•   Open is trade (exports plus imports) as a percentage of GDP,
•   Budget is the government budget surplus (+) or deficit (-), as a percentage of GDP,
•   BusCycle is the difference between real GDP growth and average GDP growth, measured in
    percentage points,
•   GDPpc is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita,
•   GDP is the natural logarithm of real GDP, and
•   ε is a well-behaved residual term for all other inflation determinants.


        The coefficients of interest to us are β1 and β2. The first coefficient is of greatest interest;

it represents the effect of having a formally declared de jure quantitative monetary target on

inflations, ceteris paribus. Of slightly less interest to us is β2 which shows the effect on inflation

of successfully hitting a quantitative monetary target.



                                                   8
       The other regressors control for “nuisance” factors that affect inflation and might be

correlated with the monetary policy regime, but are not of direct interest to us. Romer (1993)

argues that more open economies have lower inflation because the costs of monetary expansion

are high when the country has high trade-to-GDP ratio. More open economies might also opt for

a fixed exchange rate relative to their trading partners as argued by the literature on the optimal

currency areas. This argument prompts us to include Open as a regressor. The budget balance

(Budget) can affect inflation by imposing requirements for money-financed deficits or through

aggregate demand. At the same time the success in hitting a monetary target can be affected by

fiscal policy outcomes. We also include the state of the business cycle (BusCycle) as a measure

of aggregate demand pressures on the price level and as a covariate which might be correlated

with the success of the monetary regime. GDP per capita (GDPpc) enters the regression to

account for the fact that rich countries have more sophisticated financial sectors, which implies

higher opposition to inflation (as in Posen, 1995) and lower optimal inflation tax because of

better developed standard tax instruments. Posen’s argument also suggests that rich countries

have low incentives to adopt an explicit target given that there is already pressure to achieve low

inflation. Finally, the level of GDP is included to account for the market size. Since market size

can affect productivity as in the models of Romer (1986) or Lucas (1988), a larger country may

have lower inflation ceteris paribus. On the correlation between country size and explicit

targets, one might argue that larger countries are less likely to adopt an exchange rate target.

       Our benchmark regression is similar to those used by Levi-Yeyati and Sturzenegger

(2003), and Ghosh et al. (2002). The theoretical motivation for their econometric specification

is quite similar to ours, except that these studies focus only on the exchange rate regime.

Campillo and Miron (1996) provide also a cross-sectional investigation of determinants of




                                                  9
inflation and the regressors are almost identical to the ones we use, but they do not include any

variable that captures the nature of the monetary regime.

        We estimate the model with least squares, and use robust standard errors. Still, we are

cognizant of a number of potential econometric pitfalls associated with this strategy (e.g.,

simultaneity). Accordingly, we do perform extensive sensitivity analysis to take into account a

variety of different issues.



3.b Data Description

        A data appendix describes in detail the sources and the list of variables used in our

empirical analysis. Our annual data set spans 1960 through 2000, and includes all countries with

1960 GDP per capita of at least $1000 dollars in the Penn World Table database for which

comprehensive data are available. There is significant variation in monetary policy practices both

over time and across countries in the data set. Exchange rate pegs are more common in the

1960s, money targets disappear from many countries during the 1980s, inflation targeting only

appears in the 90s. For most of our analysis we use annual frequency (given that we are not

interested in high-frequency properties of the data), but we provide sensitivity analysis by

replicating our results using five-year averages.

        We use two variables to characterize the monetary policy regime: whether or not there

was an announced de jure target and whether or not the target was hit de facto. Our approach is

complementary to that of the previous literature. As mentioned in our literature review, previous

papers have struggled with the issue of “words versus actions”. Central banks often claim to

have adopted strict monetary policy targets, whether they are monetary aggregates, exchange

rates, or inflation targets. In many cases these claims are not validated by their actions or the




                                                    10
data. Some obvious examples of this behavior include: countries that intervene on foreign

exchange markets extensively despite having a floating exchange rate policy; missed targets for

monetary aggregates; and missed inflation targets. Our strategy is to capture with our de jure

classification of monetary regimes the stated announcements of central banks, and then also to

look separately at whether or not the target was hit in practice.

         Establishing a de jure classification for exchange rate and inflation targets is not

conceptually complicated, though there is much debatable minutiae.6 In the case of targets for

monetary aggregates, there are several cases where a judgment call needs to be made; many

central banks use monetary aggregates as reference indicators for their monetary policy without

formally targeting money growth. We try not to take this logic too far, because we are still

interested in words (not actions) for our de jure classification. For example, the Bundesbank is

classified as having a target for money even though we know that in practice the commitment to

the target was weaker than the Buba’s words.

         There is one complication that we have to address before we proceed with the estimation

of our benchmark model. Sometimes countries change their monetary regimes in mid-year. This

presents a problem for our estimation because for the year when there is a change we will use

data for the dependent variable and the controls that correspond to two regimes at the same time.

Had we known the exact date of the regime change, we could remove that year. Unfortunately

we do not have this information for a good number of observations.7 In our benchmark results

we proceed conservatively and delete adjacent years with different regimes (so that each regime

shift entails two dropped observations).



6
  Our classification is consistent with several recent papers.
7
  When we know the date of a regime shift, we follow the convention of dating it to the year when it was first in
place for at least six months.


                                                         11
         Our de facto classification of monetary policy regimes provides a measure of whether or

not the announced targets were met. In the case of the exchange rate targets we make use of the

Reinhardt and Rogoff classification that characterizes exchange rate regimes by their actions (not

their words). In the case of inflation and money targets we simply compare the outcome

(inflation or money growth) with the announced range for the target. Still, we face several

difficulties in making this comparison. First, targets are sometimes expressed as a single

number, while for others a range is provided. When an explicit range is provided we simply

assess whether or not the outcome is within the range. If there is no band around the announced

target, we either consider the target as a maximum (by establishing a range from 0 to the

announced value) or we build a range around the target. We consider the value as a maximum

when the central bank is clearly trying to bring inflation down and establishes a series of

decreasing targets for the years ahead. We add a range to the target when this is consistent with

previous or future behavior of that central bank. For example, there are also instances where

central banks switch from an explicit range to a single point. In those cases we add a band of

around the announced target of the same size as the band that was in place in previous years.8

         The second difficulty associated with determining whether or not a target was hit is

measuring the outcome. Money and inflation targets are established for a specific measure of

inflation or a monetary aggregate. In some cases, the information about the precise measure

being used is unavailable. In others, we know the variable used, but have not been able to find

the data. As a result, we are missing some observations. In the case of inflation, we use the CPI




8
 In the very few cases where we cannot find information or a historical reference to establish a band, we use the
convention of adding one percentage points to each side of the target. Details are provided in the data appendix.


                                                         12
as our measure of the price index. In the case of monetary aggregates, we normally use

information on both target and outcome that originate from the same source.9



4. Empirics

4.a Benchmark Results

         OLS estimation of our model results in the benchmark estimates presented in Table 1.

The coefficient of greatest interest to us is β1, the effect on inflation of a country’s having a

quantitative target for monetary policy of any type (whether an inflation target, a money growth

target, or an exchange rate target). The effect is both economically and statistically significant;

the existence of a de jure target is estimated to lower annual inflation by about sixteen

percentage points, with a t-statistic greater than five in absolute value (and hence different from

zero at all conventional significance levels). This effect is enhanced if the quantitative target is

actually hit. A monetary target that is successfully achieved reduces inflation by another five

percentage points, a result that is again highly statistically and economically significant.

         Our basic framework is perturbed in three ways in Table 1. First, we drop the dummy

variable for successful implementation of a quantitative monetary target. Second and

symmetrically, we also drop the dummy representing the existence of a quantitative target. Each

of the coefficients remains economically and statistically significant if the other is set to zero.

Finally, we drop all the conditioning variables (that is, we set γ1=γ2=…=γ5=0).

         At first blush it seems that countries with transparent (quantitative) de jure monetary

targets experience lower inflation. Actually hitting the target lowers inflation further. While the

preliminary findings are positive, caveats certainly exist. For one thing, the model fits the data


9
  If this is not the case and the information on the specific monetary target being used is not available, then we leave
the observation as missing.


                                                          13
poorly. While many of the auxiliary regressors are correctly signed (more open economies have

lower inflation; tight fiscal policy lowers inflation; richer economies have lower inflation), some

are not (observations with higher-than-average growth display lower inflation). Furthermore, a

number of potentially important omitted variables and econometric complications come to mind

quickly. Accordingly, we now engage in sensitivity analysis.



4.b Sensitivity Analysis

         Table 2 checks the sensitivity of the results with respect to the precise sample used for

estimation. First we drop observations before 1975. Next we drop all observations where the

(country x year) observation is for a country with real GDP per capita below $5,000. Next we

drop outlier observations.10 Our last two changes are to add in Argentina and Brazil, two high

inflation countries, and then to drop all high inflation countries, defined as a country which

experienced inflation exceeding 100% annually at any point in our sample (Chile, Israel, Mexico,

Turkey and Uruguay). It is striking that our key coefficient of interest – β1 – remains

economically large and statistically significant in all of these perturbations. (The size of the

effect of course varies with the sample; excluding high-inflation countries reduces considerably

the potential and actual influence of a quantitative monetary target.) Further, β2 is also

significantly negative (in both the economic and statistical senses) in all cases except when

Argentina and Brazil are included in the sample.

         In Table 3 we check the robustness of our results with respect to unobserved country- and

time-specific factors. We do this by adding successively: a) country-specific intercepts; b) year-

specific intercepts; and c) country- and year-specific intercepts simultaneously. The last column


10
  The latter are defined as observations with a residual estimated to lie more than 1.5 standard deviations from the
mean of zero.


                                                         14
of the table adds dynamics to the perturbation with both sets of fixed effects by modeling the

error term as an AR(1) disturbance rather than serially uncorrelated. Again, our key coefficient

remains negative and significant throughout (though adding country effects eliminates the

significance of the effect of achieving a monetary target).

        Table 4 explores whether the three types of quantitative monetary policy targets –

inflation, money growth, and exchange rate – have similar effects on inflation. When the three

different regimes are allowed to take on different coefficients, the inflation targeting regime

seems to have more of a dampening effect on inflation than the (similar) effects of either

exchange rate or money growth targets. The differences between the three targets are significant

at conventional confidence level. The effect of a successfully-hit monetary target on inflation

also varies by the type of target; surprisingly, the effect of successfully hitting an inflation target

has a positive coefficient. A closer inspection of the data reveals that several countries have

indeed missed the target by having inflation that is below the target range. For example, Sweden

in the 1990s had a range between 1% and 3% inflation, but in four years inflation was below 1%.

        Table 5 shows that the effects of political instability on inflation are of negligible

importance. Neither revolutions nor coups (the variables used by Campillo and Miron, 1996)

much affects inflation.

        Table 6 uses instrumental variables estimation to account for possible simultaneity in the

equation. We are particularly concerned with the possibility that high inflation induces the

authorities to introduce or use quantitative targets. There is also the possibility that a low

inflation environment may encourage the authorities to lock in stability with a transparent

monetary policy.




                                                  15
       As instrumental variables for both our de jure monetary dummy, and the dummy variable

for de facto success in hitting this target, we use three political variables and two variables

capturing social characteristics. They are: a) political constraints (used by Henisz, (2000)); b) a

dummy for (country x year) observations with a presidential electoral system (taken from

Persson-Tabellini (2001)); c) a comparable dummy for observations with majoritarian electoral

systems (again taken from Persson-Tabellini, (2001)) d) the percentage of males over 25 years

old with completed primary education; and e) the percentage of males over 25 years with

completed secondary education. We use these variables for a number of reasons. The presence

of political constraints in the country reveals an overall preference for rules. In addition,

countries with more political constraints have more disciplined fiscal policy. With more

discipline on the fiscal side it is more likely that that a monetary regime is sustainable. A

somewhat different argument is that if political constraints restrict fiscal policy, then society

might prefer to leave monetary policy unconstrained and assign to it a bigger role in smoothing

business cycle fluctuations. The nature of the political system (presidential vs. parliamentary)

affects regime choice in a similar way. Presidential regimes are often characterized by better

separation of powers than parliamentary ones, because the president cannot be subjected to a no-

confidence vote by the parliament (except under rare circumstances of impeachment). The

executive in a parliamentary system, on the other hand, can be more easily removed. The

separation of powers in a presidential system again makes fiscal policy rather constrained, which

boosts the case for having flexible monetary policy. The electoral system matters because

countries with majoritarian systems are associated with stronger governments relative to those

with proportional representation. Proportional systems often lead to the need for coalitions to

form a government; Levy-Yeyati, Sturzenegger and Reggio (2002) argue coalition governments




                                                 16
are more prone to be influenced by special interests. To avoid a situation where special interests

affect monetary policy, the society might opt for a regime with an explicit target. Hence

majoritarian systems should be linked with a more flexible regime. Finally the two education

variables are used since more educated societies may insist on having institutions for low

inflation, while education has no direct effect on inflation.

       We provide four different perturbations of our IV results: benchmark; with country-fixed

effects; with year intercepts; and with both. The standard errors for the coefficients of interest

are considerably higher, indicating that the first-stage regressions do not fit well. That is, our

instrumental variables do not work particularly well. This is even more obvious from the

dramatic increase in the size of the effects; the IV estimates of β1 are approximately three times

the magnitude of the OLS estimates. Once we control for unobserved country fixed effects, the

coefficient on monetary success in hitting a quantitative target becomes positive and significant.

It is difficult to provide a reasonable interpretation of this reversal. The effect of de jure regime

on inflation is, however, consistently negative and highly significant. The final four columns add

as instrumental variables lags of de jure and de facto regimes. These instruments help with

addressing issues of omitted variables (e.g. a beneficial supply shock that leads to lower inflation

and also helps the central bank hit the target). The results are highly significant and consistent

with the findings of our benchmark model.

       Our final set of experiments moves away from the annual domain to consider data

averaged over mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive five-year intervals between 1960 and

1999 (1960-64, 1965-69, and so forth). These are contained in Table 7, which tabulates our key

coefficients estimated twelve different ways. For convenience, the auxiliary regressors

(openness, the budget deficit, and so forth) are included in the regressions but not explicitly




                                                  17
tabulated. The benchmark equation is presented in the top row. The other eleven perturbations

we consider include: a) dropping observations before 1975; b) dropping all (time period x

country) observations with real GDP per capita below $5,000; c) dropping all controls (i.e.,

setting γ1=γ2=…=γ5=0); d) adding Argentina and Brazil; e) dropping our five high inflation

countries (Chile, Israel, Mexico, Turkey and Uruguay); f) adding country intercepts; g) adding

time-period effects; h) adding both country- and time-period fixed effects; i) adding an AR(1)

residual to the country- and time-period intercepts; j) using IV on the benchmark equation; and

k) using IV with country and time-period intercepts. Our key coefficient, β1, remains negative,

economically large and statistically significant except when we exclude our high inflation

countries and when we estimate the model by IV with time and country effects. Also when we

include AR(1) errors into panel estimation the significance drops to about 10% level. This is

grounds for some caution, but not perhaps too much. Smoothing the data and excluding

countries that have ever experienced high inflation may simply reduce the variation in inflation

too much to allow the effects of a quantitative target to be detectable.


4.c Output Volatility

       Our benchmark model for the volatility regression is analogous to that for inflation:



       σit = β1DJTargetit + β2Successit + γ1Openit + γ2Budgetit + γ3GDPpcit + γ4 GDPit + εit



where i denotes a country, t denotes a 5-year period, and

•   σ denotes output volatility (defined carefully below), and
•   other variables are as defined above.




                                                 18
        For output volatility, we initially use the five-year average absolute deviation of output

growth from mean growth (calculated from annual data). That is, we first compute the country-

specific mean growth rate using the entire span of annual data, denoted ∆GDPi ≡ (1 / T )Σ t GDPit ,

then compute our regressand as σ it ≡ (1 / 5)Σ τ | GDPit − ∆GDPi | for non-overlapping, mutually

exclusive five-year periods, where GDP denotes the natural logarithm of GDP.

        We start directly with five-year averages in order to provide a better estimate of business

cycle volatility. The coefficients of interest again are β1 and β2. The benchmark results for the

volatility equation are reported in Table 8. From the first column we conclude, that the

coefficients on both de jure and de facto regimes are not statistically significant at the 5% level

of significance. This implies that having an explicit target does not affect output volatility – that

is, average absolute deviation of output growth from its mean. If the target is successfully

achieved, however, then the volatility is reduced by about half of a percentage point. This result

should not be over-interpreted as it is significant only at the 10% level.

        The rest of Table 8 reports several sensitivity checks. In column 2 we drop the dummy

for “Success in achieving the target” and in column 3 we drop the de jure variable. In both cases

the estimates of the regime remain insignificant. Adding a lag of our volatility measure does not

change the main conclusion that explicit targets do not affect significantly volatility of output.

        In Table 9 we explore the sensitivity of these results in several dimensions. We start by

including Argentina and Brazil in column (1) and by removing all of the high inflators in column

(2). Again, hitting the target has a negative effect on volatility but statistically this result is

significant at the 10% level at best. Adding unobserved time effects increases the significance of

the success variable, but overall we find that there is little evidence to support any claim on the

effect of policy regimes on output volatility.



                                                   19
          Table 10 dis-aggregates the effects of monetary regimes on output volatility into those

due to inflation, money growth, and exchange rate targets. There are no significant results that

one can interpret here. Table 11 pursues instrumental variable estimation so as to account for

endogeneity. When we use our political and education variables as instrumental variables, and

also when we add lagged regimes, the effects of de jure and de facto regimes remain statistically

insignificant, which could be again a signal that these are poor instruments or that volatility is

indeed unrelated to the monetary policy regime. Finally, in Table 12 we provide analogues to

OLS and IV estimation of our default model, but measuring output volatility in three different

ways: a) the average absolute value of the deviation of real GDP from HP-filtered real GDP (in

logs), b) the average absolute value of deviation of output growth from a ten-year average

growth rate, or c) the standard deviation of output growth computed over (mutually exclusive)

decades of annual data.11 The estimates of having a de jure quantitative monetary target are

insignificant, but the estimates for successfully hitting this target are typically but not

overwhelmingly statistically significant.

          The conclusion from the volatility regressions is that, at a minimum, having an explicit

monetary target does not increase the volatility of the economy. On the contrary, our evidence

suggests that the coefficients on successfully hitting a target are negatively and significantly (in

the economic sense) associated with lower volatility. Under several perturbations of our model

these coefficients are statistically significant at the 10% level.



5. Conclusions

          In this paper we investigate the effect of quantitative targets for monetary policy on

inflation and business cycle volatility. We combine data for three types of targets for monetary
11
     We use a smoothing parameter of λ=100.


                                                   20
policy (exchange rate targets, money growth targets, and inflation targets), so as to be able to

compare the effects of both having and hitting transparent objectives for monetary policy against

the alternative of having unclear or qualitative goals. Using a panel of macroeconomic data

covering over forty years of annual data and countries, we find that having a quantitative de jure

target for the monetary authority tends to lower inflation and smooth business cycles; hitting that

target de facto has further positive effects. These effects are economically large, typically

statistically significant and reasonably insensitive to perturbations in our econometric

methodology.

       During the past decade, there has been much emphasis placed on the importance of

transparent goals for monetary authorities; the current consensus is that central banks should

independently pursue well-defined goals in a transparent fashion. Our results lead us to conclude

that this emphasis seems justified.




                                                 21
References:

Agenor, Pierre-Richard (2002), “Monetary Policy under Flexible Exchange Rates: An
Introduction to Inflation Targeting”, in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto (eds.) Inflation
Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges, Central Bank of Chile.

Alesina, Alberto and Lawrence Summers (1993), “Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence,” Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 25:151- 62.

Alesina, Alberto and Alexander Wagner (2003), “Choosing and Reneging on Exchange Rate
Regimes,” Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion paper no. 2008.

Atkeson, Andrew and Patrick J. Kehoe (2001), “The Advantage of Transparent Instruments of
Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper no. 8681, December.

Ball, Laurence and Niamh Sheridan (2003), “Does Inflation Targeting Matter?” NBER Working
Paper no. 9577 March.

Baxter, Marianne and Alan Stockman (1989), “Business Cycles and the Exchange Rate System:
Some International Evidence,” Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 377-400.

Bernanke, Ben, Thomas Laubach, Frederic Mishkin and Adam Posen (1999), Inflation
Targeting. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Bernanke, Ben and Ilian Mihov (1997), “What Does the Bundesbank Target?” European
Economic Review 41.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2002), “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, 379-408.

Campillo, Marta and Jeffrey Miron (1997), “Why Does Inflation Differ Across Countries?” in
C. Romer and D. Romer (eds.) Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.

Cottarelli, Carlo and Curzio Giannini (1997), “Credibility Without Rules? Monetary Frameworks
in the Post-Breton Woods Era”, IMF Occasional Paper No. 154.

Cukierman, Alex and Allan Meltzer (1986), “A Theory of Ambiguity, Credibility, and Inflation
under Discretion and Asymmetric Information,” Econometrica 54, 1099-1128.

Cukierman, Alex (1992), Central Bank Strategy, Credibility and Independence: Theory and
Evidence. MIT Press, Cambridge.

Edwards, Sebastian (1996), “The Determinants of the Choice Between Fixed and Flexible
Exchange Rate Regimes,” NBER Working Paper No. 5756.



                                              22
Faust, Jon and Lars Svensson (2002), “The Equilibrium Degree of Transparency and Control in
Monetary Policy,” Journal Of Money Credit And Banking, May.

Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer (1999) “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American Economic
Review, vol. 89 June.

Frieden, Jeffry, Piero Ghezzi and Ernesto Stein (2000), “Politics and Exchange Rates: A Cross-
Country Approach to Latin America,” Inter-American Development Bank Working paper no. R-
421.

Gerlach, Stephen (1999), “Who Targets Inflation Explicitly?” European Economic Review 43,
1257 – 1277.

Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, Jonathan Ostry, and Holger Wolf (1997), “Does the Nominal
Exchange Rate Regime Matter,” NBER Working Paper no. 5874.

Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf (2002), Exchange Rate Regimes,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Grilli, Vittorio, Donato Masciandaro and Guido Tabellini (1991), “Political and Monetary
Institutions and Public Financial Policies in the Industrial Countries”, Economic Policy, 341-302.

Henisz, Witold J. (2000), “The Institutional Environment for Economic Growth,” Economics
and Politics 12(1).

Lane Philip. (1997) ``Inflation in Open Economies,'' Journal of International Economics, 42,
May 1997, No.3/4, 327-346.

Levi-Yeyati, Eduardo and Federico Sturzenegger (2003), “To Float or to Fix: Evidence on the
Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth”, American Economic Review 93(4).

Levi-Yeyati, Eduardo, Federico Sturzenegger, and Reggio (2002), “On the Endogeneity of
Exchange Rate Regimes,” manuscript.

Loyaza and Soto (2002) (eds.), Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges, Central
Bank of Chile.

Lucas, Robert (1988), “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics 22, 3-42.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1999), “International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy
Regimes,” NBER Working Paper No. 7044.




                                               23
Mishkin, Frederic S. and Schmidt-Hebbel Klaus (2003), “A decade of Inflation Targeting in the
World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know? in Norman Loayza and Raimundo
Soto (eds.) Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges, Central Bank of Chile.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini (2001), “Political Institutions and Policy Outcomes: What
are the Stylized Facts?” CEPR Discussion Paper No 2872.

Posen, Adam (1995), “Declarations Are Not Enough: Financial Sector Sources of Central Bank
Independence,” in B. Bernanke and J. Rotemberg (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 10,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 253-274.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2004), “A Modern History of Exchange Rate
Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119(1), pp. 1-48.

Romer, David (1993), “Openness and Inflation: Theory and Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 108, 869-903.

Romer, Paul (1986), “Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy
94, pp.1002-37

Siklos, Pierre L. (1999), “Inflation-Target Design: Changing Inflation Performance and
Persistence in Industrial Countries”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, March/April.

Sterne, Gabriel (2002), “Inflation Targets in the Global Context” in Norman Loayza and
Raimundo Soto (eds.) Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges, Central Bank of
Chile.

von Hagen, Jurgen and Jizhong Zhou (2004), “The Choice of Exchange Rate Regime in
Developing Countries: A Multinational Panel Analysis”, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 4227.




                                              24
Table 1: Benchmark OLS Inflation Results
De Jure Quant.              -16.5         -20.8                    -16.8
Monetary Target            (3.16)        (3.02)                   (3.07)
Quant. Monetary             -5.52                     -14.8        -4.88
Success                    (1.05)                     (1.79)       (.90)
Openness                    -.024         -.027       -.022
(% GDP)                    (.009)        (.009)       (.008)
Budget Deficit               -.46          -.49         -.46
(% GDP)                     (.17)         (.17)        (.18)
BusCycle (Growth –          -1.01         -1.08       -1.00
Avg Growth)                 (.53)         (.52)        (.54)
Log Real GDP p/c            -4.63         -4.54       -5.83
                           (1.10)        (1.11)       (1.27)
Log Real GDP                -1.31         -0.98       -1.53
                            (.44)         (.42)        (.46)
Observations                1200          1340         1200        1408
R2                           .19           .19           .16        .13
Regressand is inflation. Annual data, 1960-2000 for 42 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.




Table 2: Sample Sensitivity
                         Without         GDP p/c      Without        With       Without
                         pre-1975         at least    outliers    Argentina,      High
                                          $5,000                    Brazil      Inflators
De Jure Quant.              -15.1          -12.1        -13.2        -77.2         -3.11
Monetary Target              (2.6)         (2.24)      (2.14)       (21.2)         (.98)
Quant. Monetary             -4.14          -4.88        -5.69        11.2          -3.57
Success                      (.99)         (1.02)      (1.01)       (6.78)         (.53)
Openness                    -.017          -.013        -.019        -.037         -.015
(% GDP)                     (.009)         (.008)      (.007)        (.04)        (.004)
Budget Deficit               -.61           -.65         -.52        -1.27          -.13
(% GDP)                      (.25)          (.17)       (.15)        (.99)         (.04)
BusCycle (Growth –           -.99           -.53         -.45        -5.69          -.45
Avg. Growth)                 (.75)          (.20)       (.18)       (3.31)         (.14)
Log Real GDP p/c            -7.29          -7.17        -3.61        -30.4         -2.17
                            (1.52)         (1.33)       (.82)       (9.73)         (.42)
Log Real GDP                 -.97          -1.11        -1.16        12.3           -.74
                             (.56)          (.50)       (.42)       (5.09)         (.18)
Observations                  817            989        1198         1232          1067
R2                            .25            .31          .27         .08           .24
Regressand is inflation. Annual data, 1960-2000 for 40 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.
High Inflation countries are: Chile, Israel, Mexico, Turkey, and Uruguay.




                                                        25
Table 3: Robustness Checks
                             Country      Year Fixed      Country,       Country,
                              Fixed        Effects          Year           Year
                             Effects                       Effects        Effects
De Jure Quant.                -12.7          -16.2          -12.6          -15.8
Monetary Target               (2.5)           (2.2)         (2.5)          (3.5)
Quant. Monetary                -2.4           -6.8           -3.2           .97
Success                       (2.1)           (2.0)         (2.1)         (1.85)
Openness                        .16          -.025           .12            .07
(% GDP)                       (.04)          (.014)         (.04)          (.06)
Budget Deficit                 -.55           -.29           -.41           -.12
(% GDP)                       (.15)           (.14)         (.16)          (.17)
BusCycle (Growth –            -1.26           -.93          -1.19           -.41
Avg Growth)                   (.20)           (.23)         (.21)          (.13)
Log Real GDP p/c              -17.1          -3.74          -21.6          5.38
                              (7.5)          (1.33)         (7.4)         (16.8)
Log Real GDP                    3.1          -1.22          13.8           -24.1
                              (5.4)           (.57)         (6.4)         (13.0)
AR(1) Coefficient                                                           .87
Observations                  1200           1200            1200          1161
R2                             .09            .19             .06           .01
Regressand is inflation. Annual data, 1960-2000 for 40 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.



Table 4: Dis-Aggregating Monetary Regimes
De Jure Inflation               -20.2             -13.2
Target                          (2.5)            (1.83)
Inflation Target                 4.1
Success                         (1.9)
De Jure Money                   -11.2              -7.6
Growth Target                   (2.7)             (1.9)
Money Growth Target             -2.43
Success                        (3.23)
De Jure Exchange Rate           -10.9             -16.7
Target                          (4.0)             (2.3)
Exchange Rate Target            -10.2
Success                         (2.7)
Openness                        -.021             -.027
(% GDP)                        (.009)            (.009)
Budget Deficit                   -.47              -.51
(% GDP)                         (.19)             (.18)
BusCycle (Growth –              -1.05             -1.08
Avg Growth)                     (.58)             (.54)
Log Real GDP p/c                -4.59             -4.89
                               (1.26)            (1.19)
Log Real GDP                    -1.11             -1.09
                                (.51)             (.47)
Observations                    1023              1200
R2                               .18                .17
Regressand is inflation. Annual data, 1960-2000 for 40 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.




                                                        26
Table 5: The Role of Political Stability
De Jure Quant.                     -16.4         -16.5
Monetary Target                    (3.2)          (3.1)
Quant. Monetary                    -5.42         -5.45
Success                           (1.05)         (1.05)
Openness                           -.024         -.024
(% GDP)                           (.009)         (.009)
Budget Deficit                      -.46          -.46
(% GDP)                            (.17)          (.17)
BusCycle (Growth –                 -1.03         -1.04
Avg Growth)                        (.54)          (.53)
Log Real GDP p/c                   -4.43         -4.80
                                  (1.18)         (1.13)
Log Real GDP                       -1.45         -1.34
                                   (.43)          (.44)
Revolutions                        1.86
                                  (1.89)
Coups                                           -6.23
                                                (2.65)
Observations                    1195             1197
R2                               .19              .19
Regressand is inflation. Annual data, 1960-2000 for 40 countries unless noted.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.



Table 6: Instrumental Variable Results
Instrumental                                 Political                                 Political and lagged regime
variables
                         Bench-        Country         Year       Country,     Bench-      Country         Year      Country,
                         mark            Fixed         Fixed        Year        mark        Fixed         Fixed         Year
                                        Effects       Effects      Effects                  Effects       Effects      Effects
De Jure Quant.             -41.2          -33.4        -34.6        -29.4       -13.6        -11.2         -12.9        -10.5
Monetary Target           (16.9)         (11.3)        (16.3)      (11.8)        (3.2)       (2.9)         (2.6)        (2.9)
Quant. Monetary            -1.31          29.1         -13.5         33.8         -9.3        -5.6         -11.7         -7.0
Success                   (11.2)         (12.3)        (10.2)      (19.8)        (1.7)       (3.1)         (2.6)        (3.2)
Openness                    -.02           .14          .002          .10       -.022         .17          -.019         .13
(% GDP)                   (.009)          (.06)         (.02)       (.06)       (.008)       (.05)        (.014)        (.05)
Budget Deficit             -.393           -.80         -.20         -.54        -.47         -.51          -.31         -.40
(% GDP)                   (.161)          (.21)         (.16)       (.21)        (.17)       (.16)         (.14)        (.16)
BusCycle (Growth            -.86          -1.56         -.95        -1.47        -.99        -1.29          -.96        -1.23
– Avg Growth)              (.53)          (.25)         (.26)       (.27)        (.55)       (.21)         (.24)        (.22)
Log Real GDP p/c           -2.64          -35.7         -.41        -49.7       -5.29        -15.7         -4.15        -21.6
                          (2.11)         (15.5)        (2.11)      (20.2)       (1.17)       (8.2)        (1.38)        (8.2)
Log Real GDP               -1.97          22.6         -2.18         32.9       -1.78         .46          -1.67        13.0
                          (0.74)         (13.6)         (.74)      (15.5)        (.49)       (6.2)         (.60)        (7.0)
Observations               1149           1149          1149        1149         1149        1149          1149         1149
R2                          0.09            .01          .17          .01         .20         .09            .19         .06
Regressand is inflation. Annual data, 1960-2000 for 40 countries.
IV with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.
Political instrumental variables for de jure quantitative monetary target and quantitative monetary success are: a)
political constraints (Henisz); b) Presidential Electoral System (Persson-Tabellini); c) Majoritarian electoral system
(Persson-Tabellini); d) Percentage of males over 25 years old with primary education (Barro-Lee); and e) Percentage
of males over 25 years old with secondary education (Barro-Lee);




                                                          27
Table 7: Using Five-Year Averaged Data
                            De Jure Quantitative                        Quantitative Monetary
                           Monetary Target (β1)                            Target Hit (β2)
              Benchmark            -11.8                                         -3.5
                                    (4.4)                                        (1.5)
       Without pre-1975            -10.8                                        -3.12
                                    (4.2)                                       (1.62)
 GDP p/c at least $5,000           -11.4                                         -2.9
                                    (4.7)                                        (1.7)
       Without Controls            -12.3                                         -3.5
                                    (4.0)                                        (1.3)
 With Argentina, Brazil            -87.4                                         19.7
                                   (56.2)                                       (19.3)
 Without High Inflators             -1.6                                        -4.24
                                    (1.9)                                       (1.15)
   With Country Effects             -7.8                                         -2.5
                                    (2.7)                                        (2.1)
      With Time Effects            -11.9                                         -3.8
                                    (2.4)                                        (2.2)
With Time and Country               -7.9                                         -3.3
                  Effects           (2.6)                                        (2.1)
With Year and Country               -5.5                                         -2.4
 Effects, AR(1) Residual            (3.3)                                        (2.6)
          IV, Benchmark            -40.6                                          5.3
                                   (13.8)                                        (9.0)
  IV, Time and Country             -1.31                                         -5.0
                  Effects           (7.7)                                       (12.8)
Regressand is inflation. Data in 5-yr averages, derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 40 countries.
Controls added but not recorded: openness; budget deficit; business cycle growth deviation from mean; and logs of
real GDP and real GDP per capita.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.
High Inflation countries are: Chile, Israel, Mexico, Turkey, and Uruguay.
Instrumental variables for de jure quantitative monetary target and quantitative monetary success the following
political variables: a) political constraints (Henisz); b) Presidential Electoral System (Persson-Tabellini); and c)
Majoritarian electoral system (Persson-Tabellini). d) Percentage of males over 25 years old with primary education
(Barro-Lee); and e) Percentage of males over 25 years old with secondary education (Barro-Lee);




                                                         28
Table 8: Effects of Regimes on Output Volatility: Benchmark Results.
De Jure Quant.              .17        -.18                         .13         -.56
Monetary Target            (.35)       (.29)                       (.51)        (.33)
Quant. Monetary             -.43                      -.33          -.55         .33
Success                    (.24)                      (.22)        (.31)        (.26)
Openness                   -.002       -.002         -.002         -.001
(% GDP)                   (.002)       (.002)        (.002)       (.002)
Budget Deficit              -.03        -.03          -.03          -.03
(% GDP)                    (.02)        (.02)         (.02)        (.02)
Log Real GDP p/c            -.32        -.31          -.31          -.24
                           (.18)        (.18)         (.17)        (.19)
Log Real GDP                -.30        -.27          -.29          -.37
                           (.08)        (.08)         (.08)        (.10)
Lag of volatility                                                   .11
                                                                   (.08)
Observations               211           211           211          153          237
R2                          .21          .20           .21           .31         .01
Regressand is the average absolute value of the deviation of output growth from the mean growth rate.
Data in 5-year averages derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 40 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.



Table 9: Output Volatility; Robustness Checks.
                         With         Without        With         With        With time
                       Argentina,       High         time       country           and
                         Brazil       Inflators     effects      effects       country
                                                                                effects
De Jure Quant.              -.07          .61           .14          -.15         .04
Monetary Target            (.33)         (.37)         (.34)        (.48)        (.48)
Quant. Monetary             -.26         -.46           -.52         .21          .07
Success                    (.23)         (.25)         (.25)        (.38)        (.40)
Openness                   -.002        -.001         -.001         -.012        -.015
(% GDP)                   (.002)        (.002)        (.002)       (.007)       (.008)
Budget Deficit              -.03         -.02           -.03         -.05         -.07
(% GDP)                    (.02)         (.02)         (.02)        (.02)        (.02)
Log Real GDP p/c            -.45         -.33           -.24         -.97         -.78
                           (.18)         (.18)         (.19)       (1.11)       (1.12)
Log Real GDP                -.23         -.27           -.31         .47         1.33
                           (.09)         (.08)         (.08)        (.78)        (.87)
Observations                219           196           211          211          211
R2                          .18           .21           .24         .001          .05
Regressand is the average absolute value of the deviation of output growth from the mean growth rate.
Data in 5-year averages derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 40 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated




                                                        29
Table 10: Output Volatility and Dis-Aggregated Monetary Regimes
De Jure Inflation                -1.06              -.40
Target                           (.57)             (.34)
Inflation Target                  .72
Success                          (.83)
De Jure Money                    -.004               .15
Growth Target                    (.65)             (.25)
Money Growth Target               -.48
Success                         (1.15)
De Jure Exchange Rate             .93               -.26
Target                           (.81)             (.23)
Exchange Rate Target             -1.28
Success                          (.81)
Openness                         -.002             -.002
(% GDP)                         (.002)            (.002)
Budget Deficit                    -.03              -.03
(% GDP)                          (.02)             (.02)
Log Real GDP p/c                  -.23              -.29
                                 (.19)             (.18)
Log Real GDP                      -.31              -.30
                                 (.09)             (.09)
Observations                      182               211
R2                                .21                .21
Regressand is the average absolute value of the deviation of output growth from the mean growth rate.
Data in 5-year averages derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 40 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated

Table 11: Effects of policy regime on output volatility. Instrumental Variable Results
Instrumental Variables         Political       Political        Political,     Political,
                                                                 Lags             Lags
                                                Country,                      Country,
                                                  Year                           Year
                                                 Effects                        Effects
De Jure Quant.                     .56             -1.8            .19             .82
Monetary Target                  (1.85)            (1.5)          (.54)           (1.3)
Quant. Monetary                   -1.24            -.58            -.67            -.10
Success                          (1.85)            (2.5)          (.43)           (1.1)
Openness                          -.001            -.01           -.001          -.005
(% GDP)                          (.002)            (.01)         (.002)           (.01)
Budget Deficit                     -.02             -.06           -.03            -.08
(% GDP)                           (.02)            (.03)          (.02)           (.03)
Log Real GDP p/c                   -.30            1.17            -.22          -2.94
                                  (.22)           (2.41)          (.19)          (2.12)
Log Real GDP                       -.36             -.10           -.43           2.40
                                  (.11)           (1.75)          (.10)          (1.55)
Observations                       202              202            147             147
R2                                 .17              .00             .30            .11
Regressand is the average absolute value of the deviation of output growth from the mean growth rate.
Data in 5-year averages derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 40 countries. IV with robust standard
errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated. Instrumental variables for de jure quantitative monetary
target and quantitative monetary success are: a) political constraints (Henisz); b) Presidential Electoral System
(Persson-Tabellini); c) Majoritarian electoral system (Persson-Tabellini) d) Percentage of males over 25 years old
with primary education (Barro-Lee); and e) Percentage of males over 25 years old with secondary education (Barro-
Lee); “Lags” adds: d) lag of de jure quantitative monetary target; and e) lag of quantitative monetary success.



                                                           30
Table 12: Volatility from Different Trend Models
                           HP-           HP-        Decadal       Decadal       Decadal       Decadal
                         Filtered      Filtered Deviations Deviations Std. Dev. Std. Dev.
                           OLS            IV          OLS            IV           OLS            IV
De Jure Quant.              .23          2.95          .33          3.54            .65         5.80
Monetary Target            (.43)        (2.19)        (.46)        (1.64)         (.70)        (2.47)
Quant. Monetary            -.72         -3.33         -.57         -2.36           -.94        -3.74
Success                    (.31)        (1.32)        (.34)        (1.16)         (.56)        (1.81)
Openness                   .003          .004         .001          .001          .002          .002
(% GDP)                   (.002)        (.002)       (.002)        (.002)        (.002)        (.003)
Budget Deficit             -.05          -.04         -.04          -.04           -.06         -.06
(% GDP)                    (.02)         (.03)        (.02)         (.03)         (.02)         (.04)
Log Real GDP p/c           -.35          -.49         -.13          -.30           -.17         -.43
                           (.18)         (.27)        (.19)         (.26)         (.24)         (.37)
Log Real GDP               -.24          -.42         -.32          -.40           -.43         -.53
                           (.11)         (.15)        (.11)         (.14)         (.15)         (.21)
Observations                211           147           90           86             90            86
R2                          .17            -           .32            -             .30            -
Regressand is: a) average absolute value of the deviation of real GDP from HP-filtered real GDP (in logs), b)
average absolute value of deviation of output growth from a ten-year average growth rate, or c) decadal standard
deviation of output growth.
Data derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 40 countries.
OLS/IV with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.
Instrumental variables for de jure quantitative monetary target and quantitative monetary success are: a) political
constraints (Henisz); b) Presidential Electoral System (Persson-Tabellini); c) Majoritarian electoral system (Persson-
Tabellini); d) Percentage of males over 25 years old with primary education (Barro-Lee); and e) Percentage of males
over 25 years old with secondary education (Barro-Lee);




                                                         31
Appendix: Growth

        We briefly turn in passing to the effects of the monetary policy regime on economic

growth. This question has been an issue of heated debate. The most recent evidence on the issue

comes from the paper of Levi-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) who document that in a large set

of countries a fixed exchange rate regime leads to lower economic growth. To address this

question in our data set we use as a benchmark model following specification:



        ∆yit = β1DJTargetit + β2Successit

                + γ1Openit + γ2GovSpendit-1 + γ3GDPpcit-1 + γ4 PopGRit-1 + γ4 Secondaryit-1+ εit

where i denotes a country, t denotes a five-year period, and t-1 denotes the average over the

previous (non-overlapping) five-year period. The other variables are:

•   ∆y denotes the five-year average growth rate of country i calculated from annual data
•   DJTargett is a dummy variable that is one if the country had a quantitative monetary policy
    target during period t, and zero otherwise,
•   γi is a set of nuisance coefficients,
•   Success is a dummy variable that is one if the country hit its de jure quantitative target during
    t, and zero otherwise,
•   Open is trade (exports plus imports) as a percentage of GDP,
•   GovSpend is government spending as a percentage of GDP,
•   GDPpc is the natural logarithm of real GDP per capita from the previous five-year period,
•   PopGR is the growth rate of population
•   Secondary is the percentage of males over 25 years old with completed secondary degree of
    education
•   ε is a well-behaved residual term for all other growth determinants.




                                                  32
       The specification of the controls in the growth regression is standard. The initial GDP

per capita is expected to have a negative sign under the conditional convergence hypothesis,

openness should enter with a positive sign as more open economies are expected to grow faster

(Frankel and Romer, 1999), higher government spending will slow down economic growth,

which implies a negative sign for γ2; population growth can be positively correlated with real

growth and negatively with the growth rate of real GDP per capita; and, education is expected to

be positively correlated with output growth. We have decided to use again five-year averages

because most of the theories cited above refer to long-term growth rates and the five-year

average seems to be the shortest period for which one can reasonably argue that the variables

capture long-term growth rates.

       Table A1 starts with the benchmark results in the first column. The first coefficient of

interest, which captures the effect of an explicit target on growth, is insignificant statistically and

it implies that the economic impact of an explicit target is negligible. The success in

implementing the target is negative, but again insignificant. Although the fit of the regression is

relatively good with an R2 of 50%, it seems that neither having, not hitting the target affects

economic growth in our sample of countries.

       In Table A2, we report some standard robustness checks. In general we do not find much

evidence to support a claim that monetary targets affect growth positively or negatively. Only

when time effects are included in the regression, there is some evidence that having a target is

significant the 5% level.

       Overall we find some evidence that the having an explicit target leads to faster economic

growth, but we quickly point out that this evidence is quite fragile and most of the time

insignificant at conventional levels.




                                                  33
Table A1: Policy Regime and Growth: Benchmark Results.
De Jure Quant.             1.28         1.01                      -1.13
Monetary Target            (.81)        (.72)                     (.62)
Quant. Monetary             -.40                      .20          2.33
Success                    (.52)                     (.50)        (.55)
Log Real GDP p/c           -2.24       -2.18        -2.28
(lagged)                   (.61)        (.61)        (.61)
Openness                    .01          .01          .01
(% GDP)                   (.003)       (.003)       (.002)
Government                  -.03       -.038          -.03
spending                   (.02)       (.020)        (.02)
(% GDP, lagged)
Population growth          .06           .05          .09
                          (.40)         (.40)        (.40)
Percentage of males        .01           .01          .02
with secondary            (.02)         (.02)        (.02)
school (lagged)
Observations               106          106           106           237
R2                          .50          .50           .48          .08
Regressand is the average growth rate of output over five-year periods.
Data in 5-year averages derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 42 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated.




Table A2: Policy Regime and Growth: Robustness Checks.
                         With         Without         With         With       With time
                       Argentina,       High          time       country         and
                         Brazil       Inflators      effects      effects     country
                                                                               effects
De Jure Quant.              1.27          .73         1.51        -.003           .04
Monetary Target            (.77)         (.73)        (.74)        (.85)        (.78)
Quant. Monetary             -.39          .42          -.29         .52          .38
Success                    (.52)         (.51)        (.54)        (.73)        (.69)
Log Real GDP p/c           -2.23        -2.37         -2.51       -2.80         -3.54
(lagged)                   (.61)         (.59)        (.52)       (1.06)       (1.32)
Openness                    .014         .014         .014          .05          .05
(% GDP)                   (.003)        (.003)       (.003)        (.02)        (.02)
Government                  -.03         -.03          -.05         .02          -.02
spending                   (.02)         (.02)        (.02)        (.04)        (.05)
(% GDP, lagged)
Population growth           .07         -.06           -.09         1.0          1.18
                           (.40)        (.39)         (.37)        (.52)         (.48)
Percentage of males         .01          .01          .009          .03           .01
with secondary             (.01)        (.01)        (.012)        (.04)         (.03)
school (lagged)
Observations                108          103           106          137           137
R2                          .50          .53           .58          .37           .45
Regressand is the average growth rate of output over five-year (non-overlapping) periods.
Data in 5-year averages derived from annual observations 1960-1999 for 42 countries.
OLS with robust standard errors in parentheses. Intercepts included but not tabulated




                                                        34
Appendix: Classification of Monetary Policy Regimes

Data on exchange rate regimes comes from Reinhart and Rogoff (2004). The de jure
classification (downloaded from Carmen Reinhart’s web site) is based on the official IMF
classification. We label all observations as having an exchange rate target with the exception of
those in the category freely floating. As a de facto classification we use their natural
classification (see the appendix of their paper and additional materials available at Carmen
Reinhart’s web site for detailed analysis of each of the countries in our sample).

The data on inflation and money targets comes from different sources. We will refer to several
references below. For recent years, web sites of the corresponding central bank have also been
used as confirmation. In some cases, there were disagreements about the sources on the starting
year. Our main references are Cottarelli and Gianoni (1997) (CG) for all regimes and Mishkin
and Schmidt-Hebbel (2002) (MS) for inflation targets. In addition, for developed countries, we
also use Agenor (2002). Other general references for inflation and money targets are Sterne
(2002), Siklos (1999) and Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin and Posen (1999).

Inflation targets

When it comes to the classification of inflation targets, there are very few cases of disagreement
on the years were inflation targets were present. There are some minor disagreements on the
exact month were the policy was started (and in those cases we make a judgement call). Same is
true for the ranges set for the inflation target that we use to assess whether the target was hit or
not. The biggest complication is to define a range when a single point is used as a target. In some
cases we take the single number as maximum and set a range for 0% to that number. We do this
when there is clear evidence that the central bank is trying to reduce inflation. In some other
cases we set a band around this central point. We look for a historical reference within the same
central bank to establish the size of the band (for example, a band set in previous years or in the
years that follow). In the absence of any historical reference, we use +/– 1%.

Money Targets

The classification of money targeters is a much more difficult one. The reason is that there are a
large number of central banks that use money aggregates as references but cannot be properly
considered as having a target for money (for the same reason that most central banks use
inflation forecasts but we have not included them as targeting inflation). At the same time, we do
not want to be too strict because we want to base our classification as much as possible on the
words they use and not on their actions given that we will be checking later whether they met
their targets or not. What we have done is to collect as much information as possible on each of
the central banks and make a judgement call on whether or not the central bank had a target for a
monetary aggregate that was meaningful.




                                                35
De jure Classification of Monetary Policy Regimes

Argentina                                       Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1978                       Yes                     No                      No
                1979                            Yes                     No                      Yes
                1979-1988                       Yes                     No                      No
                1989-1990                       No                      No                      No
                1990-2000                       Yes                     No                      No
Comments: Money target was in place in 1979 according to CG who claims “the central bank announced the
commitment to monitor the attainment of the announced (credit) targets”.

Australia                                       Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1975                       Yes                     No                      No
                1976-1983                       Yes                     No                      Yes
                1984                            No                      No                      Yes
                1985-1992                       No                      No                      No
                1993-2000                       No                      Yes                     No
Comments: Monetary targeting starts in March 1976 and finishes in January 1985. Source: CG, Edey (1997) and
Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin (October 1997). Inflation targeting starts in January 1993. Range for inflation is
2-3%.

Austria                                         Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1998                       Yes                     No                      No
                1999-2000                       No                      Yes                     Yes
Comments: After 1999, Austria becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.

Belgium                                         Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1998                       Yes                     No                      No
                1999-2000                       No                      Yes                     Yes
Comments: After 1999, Belgium becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.

Botswana                                        Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1969                       Yes                     No                      No

Brazil                                          Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1976                       Yes                     No                      No
                1977                            Yes                     No                      Yes
                1978-1989                       Yes                     No                      No
                1990-1993                       No                      No                      No
                1994-1998                       Yes                     No                      No
                1999-2000                       No                      Yes                     No
Comments: In 1997 Brazil adopts a money target on top of the exchange rate target (source: CG). Inflation targeting
starts in June 1999. Source for inflation target and range: MS.

Canada                                          Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1969                       Yes                     No                      No
                1970-1975                       No                      No                      No


                                                         36
                1976-1982                       No                      No                      Yes
                1983-1990                       No                      No                      No
                1991-2000                       No                      Yes                     No
Comments: Money target First announced in November 1975 and dropped in November 1982. Sources: CG,
Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin (October 1997). Inflation targeting starts in February 1991. Source for inflation
target and range: MS.

Chile                                           Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1961                       Yes                     No                      No
                1962-1964                       No                      No                      No
                1965-1990                       Yes                     No                      No
                1991-1999                       Yes                     Yes                     No
                2000                            No                      Yes                     No
Comments: Inflation targeting starts in January 1991 (Source: MS). Range for inflation is replaced by single point
ranges in the period 1995-2000. We add a range of +/- 1% to those years, which is consistent with the range that
existed prior to 1994 (and also the range in place for 2001).

Colombia                                        Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1992                       Yes                     No                      No
                1993-1998                       Yes                     No                      Yes
                1999                            No                      No                      Yes
                2000                            No                      Yes                     Yes
Comments: Years for money targeting from: CG (Target announced in November 1992) and Informe de Inflacion,
Central Bank of Colombia (recent years). Inflation target adopted in September 1999. We interpret the target of 10%
as a maximum (consistent with inflation reports by central bank).

Costa Rica                                      Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1991                       Yes                     No                      No
                1992-1994                       No                      No                      No
                1995-2000                       Yes                     No                      No

Denmark                                         Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-2000                       Yes                     No                      No

Finland                                         Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1991                       Yes                     No                      No
                1992                            No                      No                      No
                1993-1995                       No                      Yes                     No
                1996-1998                       Yes                     Yes                     No
                1999-2000                       No                      Yes                     Yes
Comments: Starting date for inflation targeting is February 1993 (source: MS). After 1999, Finland becomes part of
EMU so policies are ECB policies. For the targets before 1999 we interpret 2% as a maximum, which is consistent
with the way we interpret ECB policies after 1999.

France                                          Exchange Rate           Inflation               Money
                1960-1976                       Yes                     No                      No
                1977-1998                       Yes                     No                      Yes



                                                         37
               1999-2000                      No                     Yes                    Yes
Comments: Sources for money target years: CG and Bank of France. After 1999, France becomes part of EMU so
policies are ECB policies.

Germany                                       Exchange Rate          Inflation              Money
               1960-1970                      Yes                    No                     No
               1971                           No                     No                     No
               1972-1974                      Yes                    No                     No
               1975-1998                      Yes                    No                     Yes
               1999-2000                      No                     Yes                    Yes
Comments: After 1999, Germany becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.

Greece                                        Exchange Rate          Inflation              Money
               1960-1969                      Yes                    No                     No
               1970-1994                      Yes                    No                     Yes
               1995-1999                      Yes                    No                     No
               1999-2000                      No                     Yes                    Yes
Comments: Source for Money target years: CG. After 1999, Greece becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB
policies.

Hong Kong                                     Exchange Rate          Inflation              Money
               1960-2000                      Yes                    No                     No

Ireland                                       Exchange Rate          Inflation              Money
               1960-1998                      Yes                    No                     No
               1999-2000                      No                     Yes                    Yes
Comments: After 1999, Ireland becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.

Israel                                        Exchange Rate          Inflation              Money
               1960-1976                      Yes                    No                     No
               1977-1984                      No                     No                     No
               1985-1991                      Yes                    No                     No
               1992-2000                      Yes                    Yes                    No
Comments: Inflation target adopted in January 1992 (source: MS). We add a range of +/- 1% added in years where
single point range is announced, which is consistent with the years where the band was explicit.

Italy                                         Exchange Rate          Inflation              Money
               1960-1971                      Yes                    No                     No
               1972-1973                      No                     No                     No
               1974-1978                      No                     No                     Yes
               1979-1991                      Yes                    No                     Yes
               1992-1995                      No                     No                     Yes
               1996-1998                      Yes                    No                     Yes
               1999-2000                      No                     Yes                    Yes
Comments: Source for Money target years: CG and annual reports Bank of Italy. After 1999, Italy becomes part of
EMU so policies are ECB policies.




                                                       38
Japan                                          Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1972                      Yes                    No                      No
                1973-2000                      No                     No                      No

Korea                                          Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1978                      Yes                    No                      No
                1979-1996                      Yes                    No                      Yes
                1997                           No                     No                      Yes
                1998-2000                      No                     Yes                     Yes
Comments: Source: CG (until 1994) and document “Monetary Policy in Korea” (Bank of Korea). Money stopped
being a target in 2001. Notice that from 1997 onwards the monetary aggregate that was targeted was changed and
that there was a double domestic target (inflation and money) “based on the ECB”. Range for inflation target from
MS and confirmed by web site of Bank of Korea.

Malaysia                                       Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1997                      Yes                    No                      No
                1998                           No                     No                      No
                1999-2000                      Yes                    No                      No

Mauritius                                      Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1997                      Yes                    No                      No
                1998-2000                      No                     No                      No

Mexico                                         Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1993                      Yes                    No                      No
                1994-1998                      No                     No                      No
                1999-2000                      No                     Yes                     No
Comments: Date of adoption of inflation target is January 1999 (source: MS). Point targets interpreted as maximum.

Netherlands                                    Exchange Rate           Inflation              Money
                 1960-1998                     Yes                     No                     No
                 1999-2000                     No                      Yes                    Yes
Comments: After 1999, the Netherlands becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.

New Zealand                                    Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1983                      Yes                    No                      No
                1984-1989                      No                     No                      No
                1990-2000                      No                     Yes                     No
Comments: Date of adoption inflation target is March 1990 (source: MS).

Norway                                         Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1991                      Yes                    No                      No
                1992-1994                      No                     No                      No
                1995-2000                      Yes                    No                      No

Panama                                         Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money


                                                        39
               1960-2000                      Yes                    No                    No

Paraguay                                      Exchange Rate          Inflation             Money
               1960-1989                      Yes                    No                    No
               1990-1997                      No                     No                    No
               1998-2000                      No                     No                    Yes

Portugal                                      Exchange Rate          Inflation             Money
               1960-1998                      Yes                    No                    No
               1999-2000                      No                     No                    No
Comments: After 1999, Portugal becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.

Singapore                                     Exchange Rate          Inflation             Money
               1960-1962                      No                     No                    No
               1963-2000                      Yes                    No                    No

South Africa                                  Exchange Rate          Inflation             Money
               1960-1982                      Yes                    No                    No
               1983-1985                      No                     No                    No
               1986-1999                      No                     No                    Yes
               2000                           No                     Yes                   No
Comments: Money targets replaced by Inflation targeting in February 2000 (Source: CG until 1994 complemented
for recent years with document named “Monetary Policy in South Africa” downloaded from the web site of the SA
Central Bank).

Spain                                         Exchange Rate          Inflation             Money
               1960-1973                      Yes                    No                    No
               1974-1975                      No                     No                    No
               1976-1977                      Yes                    No                    No
               1978-1983                      Yes                    No                    Yes
               1984-1988                      No                     No                    Yes
               1989-1994                      Yes                    No                    Yes
               1995-1998                      Yes                    Yes                   No
               1999-2000                      No                     Yes                   Yes
Comments: Source for money target years is CG and Sterne (Bank of England, 2000) who confirm that the Bank of
Spain dropped money targets in 1994 and adopted inflation targets in 1995 (“a new framework based on inflation
targeting was announced in January 1995”). After 1999, Spain becomes part of EMU so policies are ECB policies.
Source for inflation target and range: MS.

Sweden                                        Exchange Rate          Inflation             Money
               1960-1992                      Yes                    No                    No
               1993-2000                      Yes                    Yes                   No
Comments: Date of adoption inflation target is January 1993 (source: MS).

Switzerland                                   Exchange Rate           Inflation            Money
                1960-1972                     Yes                     No                   No
                1973-1974                     No                      No                   No


                                                       40
                 1975-1977                       No                      No                       Yes
                 1978                            Yes                     No                       Yes
                 1979                            Yes                     No                       No
                 1980-1981                       Yes                     No                       Yes
                 1982-1999                       No                      No                       Yes
                 2000                            No                      Yes                      No
Comments: Source for Money target years: CG, Rich (JME 1997) and Annual reports Bank of Switzerland. Annual
target was put in place in 1975 and abandoned in the Fall of 1978. Reinstated later in 1980 and replaced in 1990 by
medium-term targets for 5 year periods. Inflation target starts in January 2000. Source for inflation target and range:
MS and confirmed by Central Bank web site.

Thailand                                         Exchange Rate           Inflation                Money
                1960-1996                        Yes                     No                       No
                1997-1999                        No                      No                       No
                2000                             No                      Yes                      No
Comments: Inflation target adopted in April 2000. Source for inflation target and range: MS.

Trin&Tob.                                        Exchange Rate           Inflation                Money
                1960-1969                        No                      No                       No

Tunisia                                          Exchange Rate           Inflation                Money
                1960-2000                        Yes                     No                       No

Turkey                                           Exchange Rate           Inflation                Money
                1960-1989                        Yes                     No                       No
                1990-1992                        Yes                     No                       Yes
                1993-2000                        Yes                     No                       No
Comments: Source for Money target years: CG and Sterne, who confirms that it was abandoned during 1992.

Uruguay                                          Exchange Rate           Inflation                Money
                1960                             No                      No                       No
                1961                             Yes                     No                       No
                1962-1963                        No                      No                       No
                1964                             Yes                     No                       No
                1965                             No                      No                       No
                1966-1969                        Yes                     No                       No
                1970-1973                        Yes                     No                       Yes
                1974-1981                        Yes                     No                       No
                1982-1985                        No                      No                       No
                1986-1989                        No                      No                       Yes
                1990-1992                        No                      No                       No
                1993-2000                        Yes                     No                       No
Comments: Source for Money target years: CG.

UK                                               Exchange Rate           Inflation                Money
                1960-1971                        Yes                     No                       No


                                                          41
                1972-1976                      No                     No                      No
                1977-1990                      No                     No                      Yes
                1991-1992                      Yes                    No                      Yes
                1993-1996                      No                     Yes                     Yes
                1997-2000                      No                     Yes                     No
Comments: Source for money target years Edey, Reserve Bank of Australia Bulletin, October 1996 and Sterne,
Band of England. Inflation target starting in October 1992 (source: MS). We use a range of +/- 1% around central
inflation target.

USA                                            Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1972                      Yes                    No                      No
                1973-1974                      No                     No                      No
                1975-1995                      No                     No                      Yes
                1996-2000                      No                     No                      No
Comments: Source for Money target years: CG and annual reports Federal Reserve. After reading annual reports,
the word “Target” stops appearing in the 1996 report so we pick 1995 as a .

Venezuela                                      Exchange Rate          Inflation               Money
                1960-1988                      Yes                    No                      No
                1989-1993                      No                     No                      No
                1994-2000                      Yes                    No                      No




                                                        42
