                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               CHARLES KINDLEBERGER:
                        AN IMPRESSIONIST IN A MINIMALIST WORLD

                                             Edward J. Kane

                                         Working Paper 10847
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10847


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Charles Kindleberger: An Impressionist in a Minimalist World
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 10847
October 2004
JEL No. G12, N2

                                            ABSTRACT

Minimalist economists stubbornly resist Charles Kindleberger's characterization of investor
expectations in a financial bubble as "irrational." This paper seeks to resolve the controversy by
imbedding Kindleberger's well-researched, impressionistic theory of financial crises into an
expanded, but still-minimalist model of rational expectations. Introducing the concepts of malicious
disinformation and rational overpromotion creates an informational environment in which it is time-
consuming and costly to distinguish fact from fiction. Rationality still requires that expectations and
market fundamentals move together over long periods of time, but dishonorable overpromoters can
earn substantial profits in the interim.

Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02458
and NBER
kaneeb@bc.edu
                                                                                October 12, 2004


          CHARLES KINDLEBERGER: AN IMPRESSIONIST IN A MINIMALIST WORLD∗
                                 Edward J. Kane
                                 Boston College


                                          ABSTRACT
         Minimalist economists stubbornly resist Charles Kindleberger’s characterization
of investor expectations in a financial bubble as “irrational.” This paper seeks to resolve
the controversy by imbedding Kindleberger’s well-researched, impressionistic theory of
financial crises into an expanded, but still-minimalist model of rational expectations.
Introducing the concepts of malicious disinformation and rational overpromotion creates
an informational environment in which it is time-consuming and costly to distinguish fact
from fiction. Rationality still requires that expectations and market fundamentals move
together over long periods of time, but dishonorable overpromoters can earn substantial
profits in the interim.



        During the last five decades of Charles Kindleberger’s distinguished career,
composers, painters, and economists developed a strong professional commitment to
minimalism. By minimalism, I mean a determination to pare one’s work down to an
abstract and elemental core.
        In music, the arch-minimalist is Philip Glass, who consistently turns handfuls of
repeated notes into intriguing rhythmic and harmonic structures. In painting, drip
painters and monochromaticists celebrate a similarly sparse aesthetic of beauty.
Minimalist economics values theoretical and statistical models in part by the degree to
which they simplify the portrayal of complex phenomena or processes.
        During Charlie’s academic years, three intertwined minimalist paradigms
ascended to prominence in financial economics: the Modigliani-Miller Theorem and the
twin hypotheses of rational expectations and financial market efficiency. The
Modigliani-Miller Theorem clarifies that sometimes it doesn’t make any difference
whether a corporation loads a little or a lot of debt into its capital structure. One of the
several conditions needed to produce this result is that debt and equity markets be
informationally efficient. Markets are described as semistrong-form efficient when
equilibrium prices are based on expectations that rationally incorporate at least all public

∗
 The author wishes to thank David Chapman, Wayne Ferson, Burton Malkiel, Robert Solow, Richard
Sylla, and Peter Temin for valuable comments on an earlier draft.


                                          Page 1 of 12
                                                                           October 12, 2004


information. Strong-form efficiency requires that even private information is fully
captured in equilibrium prices.
         As a self-styled literary economist, Kindleberger resisted the simplifications
embodied in the Modigliani-Miller and rational-expectations paradigms with all his
might. In my mind’s eye, I envision Charlie as trying to explain to a class of
monochromatic painters that they need to enrich their palettes if they want to get things
right.
         In contradistinction to minimalist models in finance, Kindlebergers’s fact-rich,
impressionistic theory of financial crises (1978, 1996) posits that irrationally optimistic
expectations frequently emerge among investors in the late stages of major economic
booms. When this occurs, investors grossly overestimate the future profitability of hot
firms. These overestimates lead even well-meaning managers to issue unsupportable
amounts of debt and unscrupulous managers to overpromote their firms vigorously and to
issue bogus debt and equity with abandon. The more a firm’s managers sincerely
overestimate their growth opportunities or successfully promote a Ponzi-style fraud, the
more securities they try to issue. When the unrealistically optimistic profits fail to
develop as predicted, debt and stock values collapse. Markets for overpromoted financial
assets may even dry up. The more severe the price decline, the more the collapsing value
of previously high-flying assets spreads insolvency to creditors of both the overexpanded
firms and their stockholders.
         As an homage, this paper attempts to reconcile Charlie’s theory of speculative
bubbles and financial crises with the rational-expectations and market-efficiency
hypotheses by adding the color of endogenous asymmetric information to the minimalist
palette. I hope to persuade minimalists to recognize the advantages of dipping their brush
in a daub of behavior I call rational overpromotion. Rational overpromotion occurs
when dishonorable persons can earn profits for a nonnegligible period of time by framing
false opinions and data in ways that fool a great many people.
         Charlie emphasized that market participants “are from time to time driven by
emulation” (Kindleberger, 1994). The historical evidence he so thoroughly investigated
(especially his chapter on swindles) shows that overpromoters’ ability to disinform
potential suckers in a persuasive manner can play a central role in amplifying and



                                        Page 2 of 12
                                                                           October 12, 2004


prolonging speculative bubbles. In Manias, Panics, and Crashes (3rd Ed., 1996, pp. 24-
25), Kindleberger observes that in a bubble speculation “often” develops in two stages.
In the first “sober” stage of investment, seasoned professional investors and analysts are
gradually persuaded that bubble assets offer a good chance of high returns. In the second
stage, “professional company promoters—many of them rogues interested only in quick
profits—tempted a different class of investors, including ladies and clergymen.”
       My friendly extension of this insight is twofold: to claim that “rogues” play a
critical part in all bubbles and that rogues are at work at other times as well. I doubt that
Charlie would warmly welcome this cynical extension of his theory. He was a man of
such admirable moral standards that he preferred to think that rigorous recruitment
procedures assured that the standards of most top corporate and government officials
were equally high. On many occasions, both in conversation and in correspondence,
Charlie advised me that he found it aesthetically unpleasant to place lying and other
dishonorable activities—as I am wont to do—at the epicenter of models of corporate and
(especially) government behavior. During my student days, my fascination with
incentives for tax and regulatory avoidance and my insistence that traders in forward
markets possess a potentially valuable option to renege led him to wonder how I could
possess such a devilish mindset. About a year before he died, the two of us finally agreed
on the compromise proposition that—at least in recent years (though not necessarily in
other trying times)—legal and cultural controls against faithless managerial, regulatory,
and trader behavior seem to have lost a great deal of incentive force.


I. Limits of Metaphorical Language


       Language is metaphorical and even the hardest sciences have their “black holes,”
“big bangs,” and “asteroid belts.” The problem with colorful metaphors is that they
convey misleading entailments as well as instructive ones.
       Both in musical composition and in painting, impressionism involves the use of
strong tonal colors to evoke moods and situation. In writing, impressionism is the theory
and practice of emphasizing larger aspects of objects or actions without dwelling on




                                        Page 3 of 12
                                                                            October 12, 2004


details. In both senses, Charlie’s research on financial crises lies firmly in the
impressionist camp.
       In various editions of Charlie’s Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of
Financial Crises, Charlie states his belief that “markets generally work but occasionally
break down” (1996, p. 4). Soon thereafter (1996, p. 6), he characterizes markets as
irrational when speculation becomes destabilizing.
       Everyone knows that, as mere mechanisms for trading things (or better claims to
things), markets themselves cannot literally be described as either rational or irrational.
Nor is it fair to say that a market is not working when speculative traders base their trades
on mistaken judgments. In fact, during the run-up phase of a price bubble, market-
makers typically execute a substantial volume of orders for members of the misherded
“herd.” Finally, markets do not truly “break down” at the top of the bubble when traders
suddenly learn that their previous expectations have proved wildly inaccurate. What we
observe is a sudden “rush for the exit” that creates an order imbalance, whose clearing
price takes fearful but rational market-makers a while to locate and support.
       Garber (2000, p. 9) notes that Kindleberger defined a bubble as “an upward price
movement over an extended range that then implodes” and that this definition is neutral
as to the source of the bubble. In contradistinction to Charlie, Garber attributes three
famous 17th and 18th Century bubbles to “fundamentals” rather than to trader or market
“irrationality.” He didn’t push the bubble metaphor quite so far, but we might reinterpret
Garber’s challenge as asking which of two pumps actually supply the gasses a bubble
encloses.
       In my first term at MIT, I heard Charlie articulate what he called “Kindleberger’s
Law of Alternatives.” According to this law, the answer to every sensible either-or
question that can be formulated in economics is “both.” The law applies neatly in this
case. As interacting drivers of asset prices, fundamentals and irrationality are
impressionistic names for forces whose effects cannot in the end be sharply
distinguished.
       The value of minimalism lies in stressing the benefits of reining in the profusion
of colorful images conveyed by impressionistic names for crisis phenomena: crashes,
manias, panics, bubbles, irrationality, herding, stampedes, and breakdowns. Garber’s



                                        Page 4 of 12
                                                                            October 12, 2004


attack on Kindleberger’s theory of crises seems to me to emphasize distracting elements
rather than the central features of the colorful word mania. Charlie’s analysis holds up
equally well if we replace mania by the milder word fad or even by Shiller’s (2000)
colorless, but telling phrase positive feedback loops.
        To explain a bubble economically, one needs only to provide a unified account for
two contrasting phases of price movement: a lengthy up followed by a sudden large
decline: A large and long-lasting overvaluation that is corrected in something like one fell
swoop. In minimalist financial economics, upward and downward asset-price
movements can be driven by either homogeneous or heterogeneous expectations among
individuals that change over time. Minimalism only requires that the path of individual
expectations must eventually track evidence of fundamentals in a logically consistent
way. This means that expectations and fundamentals are simultaneously determined.
The economic (i.e., market) process of converting today’s expectations into tomorrow’s
fundamentals and the psychological process of converting evidence on the past and
current behavior of fundamentals into expectations are twin activities that adaptively
influence the time path that each other follows.
        With rational expectations and symmetric information, what minimalists call a
“rational bubble” may exist. In a rational bubble, investors are assumed to be aware that
the securities they hold are trading at higher prices than are justified by their current
dividends (Leroy, 2004). Kindleberger deals with cases where information is
asymmetric. However, he does not assume (á la Mishkin, 1999) that differences in
insider and outsider expectations are exogenous. This paper explains expectational
divergences by distinguishing between information and disinformation and by formally
introducing the disinformational efforts of an “overpromoting” team of profit-
maximizing entrepreneurs who strive to influence the expectations held by the investing
herd.


II. Hyper-rational Expectations vs. Herded Rationality


        Financial information may be deemed perfectly true and timely only if it
conforms to all relevant facts that are knowable at a given time. Disinformation consists



                                         Page 5 of 12
                                                                             October 12, 2004


of false and half-true statements or opinions that interested parties convince others to take
seriously. Its message is designed to be negatively correlated with unfavorable
information that insiders manage to withhold from outsiders and sometimes (through the
psychological mechanism of denial) even from themselves. Financial disinformation
relies on deceptive reports and misleading claims about upside and downside risks. The
spurious elements or false implications of these claims are shaped for the express purpose
of preventing outside counterparties from grasping the full-information or “inside” risks
inherent in holding a particular class of assets (Kane, 2004).
       Rational expectations is a dynamic equilibrium concept, in which “expectations
generate outcomes which confirm the original expectations” (Savin, 1992, p. 285). The
governing intuition is that rational individuals must eventually perceive that they are
making persistent systematic forecast errors (if they make them) and adapt their ways of
forecasting to eliminate such errors. “Eventually” is what Charlie liked to call a weasel
word. The error-learning that the rational-expectations hypothesis entails should be rapid
if: (a) the stochastic part of the process being forecast is stationary and asymptotically
mean-convergent and (b) data on reported outcomes can be verified costlessly. Let us
suppose that data on the current value of the determinants Xt of the future values of any
variable Yt+k (k = 1, 2, . . .) contain both relevant information (It) and disinformation (Dt).
       In the case where assumptions (a) and (b) both obtain,


               E(Yt+k Xt) = E(Yt+k It + Dt) = E(Yt+k It), k = 1, 2, . . .                    (1)


In words, (1) assumes a benign informational environment, which allows a “Hyper-
Rational Expectations Hypothesis” to hold. It requires that consensus expectations of any
financial variable conditional on the sum of existing information and disinformation are
unaffected by the disinformation (no matter how cleverly the disinformation might be
framed and conveyed).
       Charlie would laugh if someone were to ask him to analyze the consequences of
relaxing the stochastic assumptions (a), but it is fully consistent with his way of thinking
to reject assumption (b). The resulting “Herded Rationality Hypothesis” assumes instead
that the cost (Vt) to outsiders of fully verifying current data reported by entrepreneurs



                                         Page 6 of 12
                                                                              October 12, 2004


makes disinformation effective and that this cost increases with the amount, complexity,
and novelty of the disinformation that herders imbed in their reports. The larger this cost,
the more reasonable it becomes for investors to use low-effort substitutes for hyper-
rational calculation.
        Of course, rationality requires that the influence of disinformation on future
values of Y must vanish asymptotically (cf. Kane, 1996). If we conceive Yt to be the
price of one or more speculative assets, the purpose of rational overpromotion is to
increase current expectations of future values above E(Yt+k It), so that effects of
disinformation on expectations must now be written as E(Yt+k Dt;Vt) and these effects
must be positive at least for a subset of nearby k. I propose to redefine rationality so that
it requires only that the influence of Dt on expectations of future prices eventually
declines with their futurity k. As the great impressionist Paul Cézanne opined in the year
before his death: “Time and reflection . . . modify little by little our vision, and at last
comprehension comes to us.”
        Cézanne held that our preconceptions routinely limit our ability to see and to
reason, a view confirmed by experiments performed by cognitive psychologists. Arrow
(1982) notes that the scientific method does not allow adherents to hypotheses about the
rationality of expectations formation to neglect this robust experimental evidence.
Tversky and Kahneman (1974 and 1981) pioneered the idea that it may be irrational for
individuals faced with uncertainty not to shirk some of the time-consuming and
burdensome intellectual tasks of cataloging all possible outcomes and the risks that attach
to them. They and others have empirically supported the hypothesis that, in forming and
modifying judgments about the future in response to events that introduce or resolve
particular risks, individuals make use of low-effort rules of thumb or “heuristics.” Like a
minimalist’s model, a heuristic deliberately simplifies the processing of incoming
information. In taking a heuristic shortcut, an individual makes a calculated gamble
much like the act of investing itself. The user rationally (but perhaps to his or her future
regret) accepts a higher incidence of mistakes in exchange for a saving in the time and
energy allocated to assembling a provisional probability distribution. However, there is
no reason to assume the existence of a universal heuristic that applies to all situations.




                                         Page 7 of 12
                                                                           October 12, 2004


       Arrow goes on to cite two well-documented heuristics that, as alternatives to the
hyper-rational expectations hypothesis, go a long way toward explaining the existence of
occasional asset-pricing bubbles. The first is the representativeness heuristic (RH). The
RH roots excessive market reactions to current information in individuals’ well-
documented habit of judging the likelihood of a future event by the similarity of current
evidence to it. This heuristic rationalizes a dual tendency for individuals both to
undervalue older information (especially distant history) in a long-lived price run-up and
to expend little effort on exploring the potentially superficial quality of the information
and disinformation they may have currently in hand. Since bubbles and crises are
infrequent, the RH implies that perceptions of the threat these events pose declines as
fewer and fewer members of the population have directly experienced them.
       The second heuristic fosters an opportunity for promoters to generate income by
manipulating the informational environment to make disinformation persuasive. This
heuristic posits that the framing of issues and questions—i.e., the precise way in which
various situations are formulated—can and does affect the opinions most individuals will
express or draw about them. Glaeser (2003) relates such context-dependence to
situationalism: the behavioral hypothesis that decisions are based disproportionately on
local influences and short horizons. This heuristic implies that, during times of great
technological and social transition, credulous investors may prove extraordinarily easy to
deceive.
       Experiments in the burgeoning field of behavioral finance identify several other
situational elements and heuristics (Ricciardi, 2003), each of which might assist an
overpromoter to implant or spread disinformation. Glaeser (2003) notes that self-
interested investors are more likely to accept and to hold overlong to beliefs that make
them happier (i.e., promise to make them wealthier) and more likely to indoctrinate
others in these beliefs when their missionary work promises to increase the price of assets
they hold. However, there is no reason to assume that a single set of heuristics applies to
all situations. In choosing a particular expectations-information shortcut, an individual
makes a calculated subjective gamble that closely resembles the act of investing itself.
As a testable empirical statement about the limits of arbitrage opportunities and the




                                        Page 8 of 12
                                                                                     October 12, 2004


rationality of producing and spreading disinformation, the concept of herded rationality
turns on whether profits can be earned by one or more malicious shepherds.


III. Rational Overpromotion


       To make overpromotion rational, we need to make assumptions about the costs
and benefits of producing disinformation. When managers’ wealth is sensitive to their
firm’s stock-price or accounting performance, they may be able to benefit by hiding
adverse information or exaggerating their firm’s prospects. Moreover, it may pay brokers
and financial analysts to join in the overpromotion.
       The benefits in question will be temporary and will be offset to some degree by
the discounted value of anticipated personal stress (Pt) that unsavory behavior and
accompanying prospects of reputational and career damage generate. Rational executives
must expect labor markets and the government to eventually punish executives that are
found to have engaged in fraud or negligent misrepresentation.
       Holding externally imposed legal and career penalties fixed, the value of Pt will
vary directly with an executive’s sense of honor and inversely with his or her personal
discount rate (á la Fisher, 1930). For opportunistic individuals with a high rate of time
preference, the disincentive exercised by distant and uncertain punishments is easily
overcome by the promise of nearby rewards. Other things equal, such persons are more
likely to serve as overpromoters.
       We assume that anticipated personal benefits Bt(Dt;Vt) net of penalties may be
expressed as a weighted integral of equation (1) between t and t+h, where h is the
anticipated life of the scam:


                                                  t +h
                                Bt(Dt;Vt) =              bk E(Yt+k Dt; Vt)dk – Pt.                (2)
                                              t




In (2), bk is nonnegative and declines on average with k.
       For individuals for which internal and external ethical codes and penalties are
severe enough, (2) itself may be negative. Otherwise, rational individuals must weigh the



                                        Page 9 of 12
                                                                            October 12, 2004


benefits of producing disinformation against its production cost. We presume that the
nominal costs of framing and disseminating effective disinformation are the same for
everyone and increasing both in the amount of disinformation to be produced and in the
time that the effort to mislead investors has been underway. We represent the discounted
value of these costs as Ct(Dt). On average, the marginal cost of maintaining the
overpromotion rises over time as the overpromoters’ credibility is undermined and finally
destroyed by convincing whistleblowers or by the uncontrollable buildup of persuasive
contrary evidence. At each date, the overpromoter chooses Dt to maximize:


                                  (Dt) = Bt(Dt;Vt) - Ct(Dt; Vt).                            (3)


In cases where transparent counterevidence suddenly drives Vt toward zero, a dramatic
price adjustment occurs: (say) at date t + h*. Under these circumstances, prices collapse
to the risk-adjusted value of E(Yt+h* It+h*) and the further production of disinformation
about the assets encased in the bubble ceases to be profitable.
       Besides explaining asset bubbles, recognizing the potential profitability of
overpromotion accounts for the existence of watchdog professions and government
securities and exchange commissions. Of course, watchdog institutions operate under
incentive conflicts and restraints on their authority that are bound to limit their
effectiveness (Kane, 2004).


IV. Casting a Long Shadow


       W.H. Auden once remarked that “poets adore explosions, thunderstorms,
tornadoes, conflagrations, ruins, scenes of spectacular carnage.” So it was with Charlie.
His poetic representation of financial carnage evoked a follow-on round of academic
explosions. These explosions shook the very foundations of the long-dominant hyper-
rational paradigm of finance. For that, he is justly regarded as a founding father of the
neo-impressionist school of behavioral finance. For economists who want their
assumptions to preserve as much rationality as they can, my paper offers a more




                                        Page 10 of 12
                                                                         October 12, 2004


measured way to respond to Charlie’s challenge: by recognizing that entrepreneurs and
securities firms often have a rational incentive to engage in overpromotion.




REFERENCES


Arrow, Kenneth J., 1982. “Risk Perception in Psychology and Economics,” Economic
       Inquiry, 20(January), 1-9.

Fisher, Irving, 1930. The Theory of Interest. New York: Macmillan.

Garber, Peter M., 2000. Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Glaeser, Edward L., 2003 “Psychology and the Market,” Harvard Institute of Research
       Discussion Paper 2023, Unpublished (December)

Kane, Edward J., 1996. “De Jure Interstate Banking: Why Only Now?,” Journal of
       Money, Credit and Banking, 28(May), 141-161.

_____________, 2004. “Continuing Dangers of Disinformation in Corporate Accounting
      Reports,” Review of Financial Economics, 13 (Issue 1-2), 149-164.

Kindleberger, Charles P., 1978. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial
       Crises, New York: Basic Books.

_____________, 1994. “Theory Vs. History: Reply to Horvitz,” Critical Review, 8 (Fall)
      pp. 609-614.

_____________, 1996. Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 3rd
      Ed., New York: Wiley.

Leroy, Stephen F., 2004. “Rational Exuberance,” Journal of Economic Literature, 42,
       783-804.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1999. “Asymmetric Information and Financial Crises: An Historical
      Perspective,” in R. Glenn Hubbard (ed.), Financial Markets and Financial Crises,
      Chicago: U. of Chicago Press for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 68-
      108.




                                      Page 11 of 12
                                                                        October 12, 2004

Ricciardi, Victor, 2003. “A Risk Perception Primer: A Narrative Research Review of the
       Risk Perception Literature in Behavioral Accounting and Behavioral Finance,”
       Middle Island NY: Golden Gate University (July 20): Unpublished.

Savin, N.E., 1992. “Rational Expectations: Econometric Implications,” in Peter
       Newman, Murray Wingate, and John Eatwell (eds.), The New Palgrave
       Dictionary of Money and Finance, Vol. 3, 285-292.

Shiller, Robert J., 2001. Irrational Exuberance. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Tversky, A., and D. Kahneman, 1974. “Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and
      Biases,” Science, 185, 1124-1131.

_____________, 1981. “The Framing of Decisions and the Psychology of Choice,”
      Science, 211, 453-458.




                                     Page 12 of 12
