                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DOES IMMIGRATION AFFECT THE LONG-TERM
                         EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES OF NATIVES?
                            QUASI-EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE

                                             Eric D. Gould
                                              Victor Lavy
                                          M. Daniele Paserman

                                         Working Paper 10844
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10844


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




We thank Joshua Angrist and seminar participants at the Hebrew University, the conference on “Inequality,
Minorities and Social Exclusion” at Bar-Ilan University, and the CEPR conference on “Inequality in Labour
Markets.” Vadim Krimsky provided expert research assistance. All errors are our own. The views expressed
herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Eric D. Gould, Victor Lavy, and M. Daniele Paserman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Does Immigration Affect the Long-Term Educational Outcomes of Natives? Quasi-Experimental
Evidence
Eric D. Gould, Victor Lavy, and M. Daniele Paserman
NBER Working Paper No. 10844
October 2004
JEL No. I20, J24

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper uses the mass migration wave to Israel in the 1990s to examine the impact of immigrant
concentration in elementary school on the long-term academic outcomes of native students in high
school. To identify the causal effect of immigrant children on their peers, we exploit random
variation in the number of immigrants across grades within the same school. The results suggest that
the overall presence of immigrants had essentially no effect on the quality of the high school attended
by native Israelis and on dropout rates, and at most a mild negative effect on high school
matriculation rates. However, when we break up the sample by parents' education and by ethnic
origin, we find that disadvantaged children were more likely to have been adversely affected by a
higher immigrant concentration in elementary school. Focusing on the impact of Ethiopian
immigrants who are from a much lower socio-economic background, we find stronger evidence of
adverse effects, especially for disadvantaged students and in classes where immigrant concentration
was particularly high.

Eric D. Gould                  Victor Lavy                      M. Daniele Paserman
Department of Economics        Department of Economics          Department of Economics
Hebrew University              Hebrew University                Hebrew University
Mount Scopus                   Mount Scopus                     Mount Scopus
91905 Israel                   91905 Israel                     91905 Israel
mseric@mscc.huji.ac.il         and NBER                         dpaserman@nn-shum.cc.huji.ac.il
                               msvictor@mscc.huji.ac.il
1. Introduction

         An increasingly important issue faced by Western countries at the turn of the 21st

century is the social tension created by growing numbers of immigrants from less developed

countries. Questions about the effects of immigration on the labor market, on the wage

distribution, on the welfare system, and on crime and personal security, are hotly debated in

both the United States and Europe. Social tensions may manifest themselves particularly

acutely inside the school system. A disproportionate share of school resources is likely to be

devoted to immigrants, for at least two important reasons. First, the gap in fertility rates

between immigrants and the native-born implies that a large and growing share of the school

population is made up by immigrants or immigrants’ children. For example, in 2003, more

than 50 percent of first-grade children in California’s public schools were classified as

Hispanic/Latino, as opposed to only 42 percent among eighth-graders.1 Second, immigrant

children have to cope with the difficulties associated with the adoption of a new language, and

therefore may necessitate more one-to-one teaching, remedial classes, adjunct teachers, and so

forth. It is then natural to ask whether the presence of immigrants in a school has adverse

effects on the academic achievements and human capital accumulation of native students.

         This question is linked to the broader issue of how the environment and peers affect

individual outcomes. Despite the important theoretical advances in the analysis of social

interactions, question marks still abound, mainly because of the inherent difficulty in

providing convincing empirical evidence on their existence and magnitude. The main problem

is that if members of the same group are observed to behave similarly, it is generally

impossible to infer whether this is due to true peer effects, or to individuals sorting themselves

endogenously into groups that share common characteristics. In the classroom context, since

essentially all the variation in the quality of one’s peers is due to the endogenous choices of

parents and school administrators, the identification problem is particularly acute.


1
    Source: California Department of Education.

                                                  1
     In this paper, we exploit a unique opportunity to identify peer effects in the classroom

using the mass migration wave from the former Soviet Union ("FSU") to Israel in the early

1990's. In particular, we examine the impact of immigrant concentration in fifth grade on the

long-term academic outcomes of native students in high school. The focus on the long-term

outcomes of natives, around seven years after their exposure to the “treatment,” is one of the

distinguishing features of this paper.

     The population under investigation is that of Jewish children who were enrolled in 5th

grade during the 1993-1994 school year. The extent of the exposure of native children to

immigrant peers is determined primarily by the residential distribution of immigrants across

the country. Upon landing in Israel, immigrants were directed either to temporary housing

made available by a selected number of municipalities, or to dedicated absorption centers

located throughout the country. The initial absorption locality was chosen by FSU immigrants

before their arrival in Israel, and they tended to locate in poorer areas where housing costs

were low. As a result, although immigrants can be found over the whole spectrum of Israeli

public schools, schools with larger immigrant concentrations also tended to have native

students with lower average achievements. This non-random sorting of immigrants into

locations invalidates an estimation strategy based on a simple regression of native outcomes

on the fraction of immigrants in the same school.

     Instead, we exploit random variation in the number of immigrants across grades within

the same school. More specifically, we argue that conditional on the total number of

immigrants in a given school in grades 4 to 6, the actual number of immigrants in grade 5 is

determined by random factors such as variation in the year of birth among the pool of

immigrant children in the school district. This natural experiment is best thought of as the

random drawing of balls from an urn in which one third of the balls are marked with the

number “4”, one third with the number “5”, and one third with the number “6”. Conditional

on the total number of balls drawn, the number of “5” balls is as good as randomly assigned.


                                              2
Conditioning on the total number of immigrants in the advanced grades in elementary school

removes much of the heterogeneity across schools that may confound our estimates: schools

that absorbed the same number of immigrants are likely to be similar among themselves, not

only in their propensity to absorb immigrants, but also in other characteristics.

     Indeed, a set of balancing tests indicate that, conditional on the number of immigrants in

grades 4 to 6 and the total number of children (natives and immigrants) in grade 5, there is

essentially no correlation between observable background covariates (such as parental

education) and the percentage immigrants in 5th grade. This finding justifies our identifying

assumption that there is no correlation between unobservable characteristics of native children

and the percentage immigrants in 5th grade, after conditioning on the same set of controls.

     We use administrative panel data on school enrollment and test scores to follow each 5th

grade child from the 1993-1994 school year until the 2000-2001 school year, the year this

cohort was scheduled to graduate from high school. After regressing the high school

achievements of native students on the percentage of immigrants in their 5th grade, we find

that the concentration of immigrants in elementary school has essentially no effect on the

quality of the high school attended by native children and on their dropout rates, while it has

at most a mild effect on high school matriculation rates. However, after performing the

analysis separately on different samples of natives according to their parents’ years of

schooling and ethnic origin, a consistent pattern emerges whereby disadvantaged children

appear more likely to have been adversely affected by a higher concentration of immigrants

among their peers. We also replicate our analysis looking only at the concentration of

Ethiopian immigrants who arrived in May 1991 in “Operation Solomon.” We do find stronger

evidence of adverse effects in this specification, and especially so for disadvantaged students

and in schools where the immigrant concentration was particularly high.

     In spite of some unique characteristics of the mass migration wave to Israel, we believe

that the paper is relevant beyond the local context for several reasons. First, the number of


                                                3
immigrants to Western Europe and the United States from the former communist countries of

Central and Eastern Europe has also risen steeply in the past decade. This number is expected

to grow following the enlargement of the European Union. As a result, it is likely that a large

fraction of future immigrants to Western European countries will share many of the

characteristics of immigrants to Israel. Second, as more Western countries debate whether to

move toward a more skill-biased immigration policy, it may be important to learn and

implement the lessons from the highly skilled migration wave to Israel. We should also keep

in mind that the number of highly skilled immigrants in the West is already non-negligible. In

the United States in the year 2000, the fraction of recent immigrants with a college degree is

slightly larger than that of natives (22.0 percent versus 20.9 percent), and in some states it is

substantially larger.2

      While there is a vast literature on the effects of immigration on native labor market

outcomes,3 the question of whether immigration affects natives’ educational outcomes has

received relatively little attention. Exceptions include Betts (1998), who examines whether

immigration reduces the contemporaneous high school graduation rate of natives, and Hoxby

(1998) and Borjas (2004), who look at whether immigrants crowd-out natives from slots in

college and graduate programs. In a similar vein, Betts and Fairlie (2003) investigate whether

immigration in California induced native flight from public to private schools. Closely related

to our paper is also the literature on desegregation and classroom peer effects: Angrist and

Lang (2002) study the effects of Metco, a long-running desegregation program that sends

minority children out of the Boston public school district to a large and affluent suburban

district. Overall they find little evidence that the test scores of non-Metco students are affected

by the presence of disadvantaged peers, although there seems to be some evidence of a

2
 In Ohio, the fraction of immigrants with a college degree is 37.4 percent, versus 17.6 percent among natives; in
Michigan, it is 33.2 percent among immigrants versus 17.2 among natives; in Pennsylvania, it is 33.1 percent
among immigrants versus 19.0 among natives. Source: 2000 Census of Population.




                                                       4
negative effect on the test scores of non-Metco minority students. Guryan (2001) studies the

effects of desegregation from the 1950s to the 1980s, and concludes that black dropout rates

fell as a result of desegregation, while desegregation did not affect the dropout rates of whites.

Hoxby (2000a) uses an identification strategy similar to our own, exploiting idiosyncratic

variation in gender and race composition of adjacent cohorts in Texas public schools, and in a

wide range of specifications she finds that children’s elementary school test scores are

affected by those of their peers, with intra-race peer effects appearing to be particularly

strong.4 In contrast to Hoxby, our focus is on the effect of immigrants on natives and we

examine long-run effects, rather than the contemporaneous effects of peers.

       Sacerdote (2001) and Zimmermann (2003) study peer effects in a university setting, and

find that academic and social outcomes of college students are affected by the quality of

randomly assigned roommates. Recent years have also seen a flurry of research that uses

exogenous variation created by true or natural experiments to study the effects of peers and

the environment at the neighborhood level on a variety of educational, health, and economic

outcomes (Katz, Kling and Liebman, 2001; Edin, Fredriksson and Åslund, 2003; Oreopoulos,

2003; Jacob, 2003; Weinberg, Reagan and Yankow, 2004). In our previous study (Gould,

Lavy and Paserman, 2004), we found that Ethiopians who arrived during Operation Solomon

generally benefited from attending better schools. However, before claiming that sending

immigrants to better-performing schools represents a net gain from the point of view of

society, it is crucial to assess whether children in immigrant or minority-receiving schools are

affected by the influx of disadvantaged peers, as we set out to do in the current study.

      The rest of the paper is structured as follows: the next section presents a brief

background of the immigration to Israel in the 1990s and describes our data. Section 3


3
  See for example Card (1990, 2001); Altonji and Card (1991), Lalonde and Topel (1991), Hunt (1992), Borjas,
Freeman and Katz (1996), Borjas (2003); in the Israeli context, see Friedberg (2001) and Cohen-Goldner and
Paserman (2004a, 2004b).
4
  An identification strategy based on random variation in cohort size at the school level is also used by Angrist
and Lavy (1999) and Hoxby (2000b) to estimate the effects of class size on student achievements.

                                                       5
describes the empirical methodology and the identification strategy. Section 4 presents the

basic results on the effect of immigration on natives’ long-term scholastic achievements.

Section 5 repeats the analysis using the percentage of Ethiopian immigrants from Operation

Solomon as the explanatory variable. Section 6 concludes.



2. Background and Data

     The mass migration from the former Soviet Union to Israel since 1989 can be viewed as

a unique laboratory for the social sciences. More than one million immigrants moved to Israel

since 1989, increasing its population by a remarkable 20 percent within a decade. The

migration wave was also highly concentrated, with approximately 330,000 immigrants

arriving in 1990 and 1991. The fall of the Berlin wall in November 1989 was the trigger that

started the whole process, as a number of factors combined to induce migration. First, the

Soviet Union lifted its emigration restrictions. Second, the political instability and the

uncertain economic climate in the beginning of the 1990s greatly increased the incentives to

migrate. Third, Israel was one of the few viable options, as it imposed no entry restrictions

and no lengthy waiting periods. Along with the mass migration from the former Soviet Union,

the early 1990s also saw the exodus of 15,000 Ethiopian Jews in the context of Operation

Solomon in May 1991, and increasing immigration rates from other countries, mainly the

United States and Argentina.

     Not surprisingly, there are large differences in the family background of immigrants

from Ethiopia versus the former Soviet Union, and the overall immigrant population is quite

different in family background from native Israelis. These differences are displayed in Table

1, which shows the background characteristics of 5th grade students in 1994 according to data

collected by the Ministry of Education, and the characteristics of households with children

between the ages of 8 and 12 from the 1995 Census. Table 1 reveals that immigrant children

from the former Soviet Union generally have parents who are more educated than native


                                             6
Israeli children (a little more than one additional year of education for each parent), but come

from smaller families (1.10 siblings versus 2.41 for native Israelis). In contrast, Ethiopian

immigrant children come from much larger families (an average of 4.28 siblings) but have

parents with only one or two years of education. However, the vast majority of immigrants

during this period came from the former Soviet Union, so the characteristics of the overall

immigrant population are dominated by the characteristics of the Russian immigrants.

     While it appears that native Israeli children were exposed to a new immigrant population

with more favorable family background characteristics, it is also true that the new immigrant

population displayed several signs of social and economic distress. Compared to native

Israeli children, Table 1 reveals that immigrant children came from poorer households which

tend to rent rather than own their own homes, and where the head of the household is much

more likely to be unemployed or female. Once again, the Ethiopian immigrants display much

larger signs of weakness compared to the Russians, but both groups of immigrants are less

favorable compared to the native Israeli population. So, while it is true that the overall

immigration wave of this period flooded the country with immigrants who were generally

more educated than the average Israeli, the overall picture reveals that these immigrants

displayed several signs of socio-economic difficulties, which made them weaker in many

ways than the native population.

     To examine whether the influx of this immigration wave into elementary schools

influenced the high school outcomes of native Israeli children several years later, we link

detailed information on each child's school environment in the 5th grade to the achievements

of each student throughout high school. The data comes from administrative records collected

by Israel’s Ministry of Education on the universe of Israeli elementary schools in the 1993-

1994 school year, the first year a computerized file is available. The data is based on reports

from school authorities to the Ministry of Education at the beginning of the school year. The

file contains an individual identifier, a school and class identifier, and detailed demographic


                                               7
information on all immigrant pupils in grades 1 to 6, and all pupils in grades 1, 2, and 5. We

are able to exactly identify pupils by their country of origin and date of immigration (month

and year), so we know precisely who is a native Israeli student and how many immigrant

children were present in the 5th grade class of each elementary school. We focus our attention

on the 5th grade cohort in 1993-1994 for two reasons. First, the data for native Israeli pupils

is incomplete for 4th and 6th grades. Second, 5th grade students in the 1993-1994 school year

had enough time within our sample period (which ends with the 2000-2001 school year) to

finish high school if they progressed through the system without repetition.

     We link the elementary school records to individual data on high school enrollment and

matriculation exam outcomes in the 1998-1999, 1999-2000, and 2000-2001 school years.

Therefore, we are able to follow each native Israeli student from 5th grade in 1993 all the way

through the advanced stages of high school. We study three different high school outcomes:

the quality of the high school attended (measured by the average passing rate of high school

students in the same school on the matriculation exams from 1996-1998), dropping out before

completing 12th grade, and passing the matriculation exams.            The latter outcome is

particularly important in Israel since it is required to attend college. Similar high school

matriculation exams are found in many countries and in some states in the United States.

Examples include the French Baccalaureate, the German Certificate of Maturity

(Reifezeugnis), the Italian Diploma di Maturità, the New York State Regents examinations,

and the recently instituted Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System.

     Table 2 presents summary statistics for various measures of the 5th grade learning

environment faced by native Israeli students. We classify the learning environment variables

into two groups, “peer characteristics” and “school characteristics”.              The “peer

characteristics” describe the family background of the native Israeli 5th grade students in the

school. The “school characteristics” contain additional aspects measured at the school level

(average scores for the 4th and 5th grade students on the 1991 standardized math and verbal


                                               8
tests5 and a 1991 socio-economic index of students in each elementary school6), and several

characteristics of the population in the school's district (income per capita, unemployment

rate, welfare recipiency rate, and local high school passing rate on matriculation exams).7 All

of the “school characteristics” are taken from data from the 1991 school year, which is two

years before the sample of native students used in Table 2 attended 5th grade.

       Summary statistics are presented in four columns in Table 2, whereby the sample used

in each column is defined by the total number of immigrants absorbed into the elementary

school in grades 4 to 6. For example, the first column presents summary statistics only for the

native Israeli 5th graders who attended an elementary school in 1993-1994 where the total

number of post-1989 immigrants in grades 4 to 6 was between 1 and 10. The next column

uses a range of immigrants in 4th to 6th grades between 11 and 20, and the next two columns

use ranges of 21-30 and 31-40 respectively.

       A close inspection of the numbers in Table 2 reveals why it is important to break down

the sample in this manner. When comparing the means across columns, a clear pattern

emerges: schools with larger numbers of total immigrants in grades 4 to 6 are increasingly

worse off in terms of the characteristics of the native Israeli students in the same school. For

example, as the number of immigrants in the school increases, the parental education of native

students falls, the percent of students with origins from Asia and Africa (which is widely

considered to be a disadvantaged ethnic group in Israel) increases, the average math and

verbal scores of the elementary school fall, and the socio-economic index of the school falls.


   5
      In June of 1991, near the end of the school year, all fourth and fifth grade students were given achievement
tests designed to measure mathematics and Hebrew reading skills. The scores used here consist of the average
score on some of the basic and all of the more advanced questions in the test, so that scores are scaled from 1 to
100. The low average and the high variation of scores on this achievement test generated considerable public
controversy in Israel, leading to the abandonment of the national testing program in 1992. This is the same data
used in Angrist and Lavy [1999].
    6
      The socioeconomic index is based on a function of the pupils’ fathers’ education and continent of birth, and
of family size. The raw index is recorded as the percentage of students in the school who come from what is
defined to be a disadvantaged background. Our socioeconomic status index is obtained by standardizing this
variable and multiplying it by –1, so that high socioeconomic status schools have a high value of the index.
    7
      This data was originally collected from a variety of administrative sources by Shitrit and Dor [1994] and
Applebaum, Dor and Heimburg [1996].

                                                        9
In addition, immigrants represent only 4.04 percent of the 5th grade class when the total

number of immigrants in 4th to 6th grades is between 1 and 10, but increases to 15.47 percent

when there are 31-40 immigrants in the same three grades. Overall, a clear pattern emerges

where larger numbers of immigrants in grades 4 to 6 are associated with larger concentrations

of immigrants in 5th grade, weaker native Israeli students based on their family background,

and weaker schools based on the performance of students in the school in previous years.

These results are not very surprising since new immigrants were not placed or directed to

areas where the best schools and most-educated parents are likely to be. Instead, immigrants

typically started out in areas with lower-cost housing, and therefore native Israelis from

disadvantaged backgrounds and lower-performing schools were more likely to attend schools

with higher concentrations of immigrants.

      The lower panel of Table 2 presents the high school outcomes of native Israeli students

according to the number of immigrants in grades 4-6 in their school in 1993-1994 while they

were in 5th grade. Not surprisingly, the lower panel of Table 2 indicates that native students

who attended schools with a larger concentration of immigrants in 5th grade also had lower

outcomes in high school: they attended lower quality high schools,8 dropped out of high

school more often, and were less likely to pass the matriculation exams.

      However, it is impossible to determine that natives who attended elementary schools

with more immigrants achieved less in high school because of the increasing presence of

immigrants, or whether a larger concentration of immigrants is simply correlated with other

observed and unobserved background and school-level characteristics which are responsible

for their success or failures. Because the enrollment of immigrants across schools was not

random, it is not valid to draw inferences about a causal relationship when we know that a

disproportionate number of immigrant students winded up with native Israeli students who


8
  While the assignment of children to elementary schools is based on zoning, enrollment in high schools is
determined by a selection process reflecting choices by students, parents, and schools. Therefore, the quality of
high school attended can be reasonably viewed as an outcome variable.

                                                      10
were weaker in family background and were attending elementary schools with lower

performance records.         Therefore, our empirical strategy will try to overcome this

identification problem by comparing the exposure of immigrants in the fifth grade, while

holding the number of total immigrants in the school to within a narrow range.



3. Identification Strategy

     To estimate a causal effect of the presence of new immigrants on their native Israeli

peers, we need variation in the presence of immigrant children in the classroom that is

uncorrelated with the background and school characteristics of the native children. It is clear

from Table 2 that immigrant students were not distributed into schools in a manner

uncorrelated with the background characteristics of the native Israelis. The presence of

immigrant students in the 5th grade class is not a random event – native students in poorer and

lower achieving schools are more likely to attend schools with larger concentrations of

immigrant students. In general, the non-random assignment of children to schools, either

because of the choice of schools exercised by the families, or because of the endogenous

matching of pupils to schools done by education authorities, makes it difficult to identify the

effect of one group of peers on the outcomes of others. As such, the identification of a causal

link between peers has proven to be a difficult task in the literature. To overcome this

obstacle, our strategy is to exploit random variation in the number of immigrants in 5th grade

conditional on the school absorbing a given range of immigrant students in grades 4 to 6.



Methodology

      Formally, we define the treatment variable t as the percentage of immigrant students in

grade 5 in a given school:

                                          Number of immigrants in grade 5
                              t = 100 ×                                   .
                                           Number of children in grade 5



                                                  11
           We have a random sample of units, indexed by i=1,2,…,N. For each unit, we postulate

the existence of a potential outcome, Yi(t), for t ∈ [0,100] . We observe for each unit the actual

treatment Ti and a set of covariates Xi. The observed outcome for unit i is

           = ∑1(Ti = t )Yi (t ).
     obs
yi
             t∈T


Assumption 1 (Conditional random assignment):

                                       Y(t) independent of T | X,      for all t ∈ [0,100].

Assumption 2 (Constant linear treatment effect):

                                                     Yi (t ) = Yi (0) + β t .

           The first assumption is at the heart of our identification strategy: in our case, the critical

conditioning covariates are the number of immigrant children in grades 4 to 6, and the total

number of children in grade 5. We know that schools that absorbed large numbers of

immigrants are different in terms of student and school characteristics relative to schools that

absorbed fewer immigrants. However, holding constant the number of immigrant children in

grades 4 to 6, the number of immigrants in grade 5 (the numerator in the treatment variable) is

determined solely by random variation in birth years among the pool of immigrant children in

a school district. Since the treatment variable is the immigrant ratio, we must also condition

on the total number of children in grade 5. Once again, our argument is based on the

assumption that among schools of the same size that absorbed the same number of immigrant

children, variation in the percentage of immigrants in grade 5 is determined primarily by

random variation in the size of each immigrant cohort.

           We now consider the expectation of the observed outcome, conditional on the actual

treatment received and on the covariates:

                                                                                            
                                   (                   )
                               E y obs | T = t , X = x = E ∑1(T = t )Y (t ) | T = t , X = x 
                                                              t∈T                           
                               = ∑1(T = t )E [Y (t ) | T = t , X = x ]
                                   t∈T

                               = E [Y (0) + βt | T = t , X = x ] = E [Y (0) | X = x ] + β t ,

                                                           12
where the last equality follows from the conditional random assignment assumption. The

above formulation illustrates that, conditional on any particular value of the covariates, we can

obtain a consistent estimate of the treatment effect β by running a regression of the observed

outcome on a constant and the treatment variable.

       In practice, this approach is not feasible, because the two key conditioning covariates are

essentially continuous, so that there are not enough observations for any given value of X. For

example, there are few native students who attended schools with a particular number of total

students in grade 5 and a particular number of total immigrants in grades 4 to 6. Therefore, we

divide the sample into eight different intervals defined by the number of immigrants in grades

4 to 6 in a given school: the first interval includes schools with 1 to 5 immigrants in grades 4

to 6, the second interval includes schools with 6 to 10 immigrants in grades 4 to 6, and so on.

Then, within each interval, we regress the outcome variable on the treatment and on a flexible

function of the key conditioning variables. This control function, as it is known in the

literature, is meant to capture the term E [Y (0 ) | X = x ] in equation (1). In practice, the control

function will include the number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, the total number of children

in grade 5, the squares of these two variables, the interaction between the two, and, in some

specifications, additional individual and school characteristics entered linearly. Note that since

the exact functional form of E [Y (0 ) | X = x ] is unknown, estimating equation (1) on the full

sample imposes the specific functional form assumption globally, and may be misleading.

Instead, by dividing the sample into narrow intervals on the basis of the number of immigrants

in grades 4 to 6, we are less likely to induce bias in our estimates by our local approximation

to E [Y (0 ) | X = x ] .

       Summing up, within each interval we run the following regression to explain the high

school outcome of native Israeli student i who attended elementary school j:




                                                 13
      (High School Outcome)ij = λ0 + α (Percent Immigrants in 5th Grade) j
                             + λ1 (Family Background )i
                             + f (# of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, # of children in grade 5) j + u ij ,


where the treatment parameter, β, is identified by the conditional random assignment

assumption described above. Since the percent of immigrants in 5th grade does not vary at the

individual level, the standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the elementary school level.

The average treatment effect can be calculated by simply taking the weighted average of the

coefficients within each interval. Alternatively, one can pool all intervals together, and then

regress the outcome variable on the treatment effect, a dummy variable for each one of the

intervals, and the interactions of this dummy with each one of the conditioning variables. This

specification is equivalent to running separate regressions within each sub-sample, but

constraining the coefficient on the treatment variable to be the same across sub-samples. It is

potentially more efficient, as data from the whole sample is pooled together to obtain one

single estimate of the treatment effect. In the tables that follow, we refer to this model as the

“fully interacted” model.



Balancing Tests

     To determine whether the data supports our identification strategy, we now test whether

there is a significant relationship between the percent of immigrants in grade 5 and the

observable characteristics of native Israeli children in the various sub-samples of schools

defined by the total number of immigrant children in grades 4 to 6. This is done by regressing

various measures of the native student’s background or elementary school environment on the

percent of immigrant students in the school's 5th grade for the eight sub-samples. If the

assignment of immigrant students across the 4th, 5th and 6th grades within the same school is

indeed random once we condition on the narrow range of total immigrants in the school and

on the control function, then we should find no such significant relationship.

                                                14
     The balancing tests described above do not necessarily provide a proof of random

assignment, as the assumption requires there to be no correlation between the percentage

immigrants in 5th grade and both observable and unobservable background characteristics.

However, the lack of a significant relationship between the presence of percentage immigrants

in 5th grade and observable characteristics suggests that it is unlikely that such a relationship

exists between percentage immigrants in 5th grade and unobservable characteristics. The

results of these tests are presented in Table 3.

     Each coefficient in Table 3 represents the estimate from a single regression for each of

the various measures of the native student's background and elementary school environment

on the percent of immigrants in 5th grade. Out of the 64 coefficients, only five of them are

significant at the ten percent significance level or lower. The other 59 coefficients point to no

systematic relationship between observable characteristics and the percent of immigrants in

5th grade. Furthermore, the remaining five coefficients which do turn out to be statistically

significant do not tell a consistent story about whether students are positively or negatively

selected into schools with larger percentages of immigrants in the 5th grade (holding constant

the range of immigrant students in grades 4 to 6). For example, the second column reveals

that higher proportions of immigrants in 5th grade are significantly associated with larger

families and lower class sizes, which leads to contradicting inferences about negative or

positive selection. A similar phenomenon is found in column three where a higher proportion

of immigrants is significantly related to smaller families and larger class sizes.        These

coefficients not only contradict the direction of the selection, but they also contradict the

direction of the same variable which was significant in column two but with the opposite sign.

That is, four of the five significant coefficients out of 64 are contradicted within their own

sample and across samples.

     Overall, there does not appear to be a consistent or significant relationship between the

observable characteristics of native students and the percentage of immigrants in 5th grade,


                                                   15
once the number of total immigrants in grades 4 to 6 is limited to a narrow range. As such,

the samples appear to be balanced on the observable characteristics of the students and

schools, and therefore, provide a unique opportunity to exploit variation in the concentration

of immigrants in 5th grade in order to identify the effect of new immigrants on their peers.



4. Basic Results

     Using the identification strategy and the regression specification described above, Table

4 presents the basic estimates of the long-run effects of immigrants on the high school

achievements of native Israeli students. Each entry in the table represents the coefficient

estimate from a separate regression on the treatment variable (the percentage of immigrant

children out of all 5th graders), for the three high school outcomes of interest: the quality of

high school attended (measured by the average matriculation rate in the school between 1996

and 1998), the probability of dropping out before completing 12th grade, and the probability of

receiving a matriculation diploma at the end of high school.

     The estimates reported in the first panel of the table are from regressions that include

only the treatment variable and the flexible control function (the number of immigrants in

grades 4 to 6 and its square, the number of children in grade 5 and its square, and the

interaction between these two variables). The eight first columns in the table correspond to the

eight samples used in Table 3 for the balancing tests. We should note that the sample size in

each of the columns includes only native Israeli pupils, and therefore, it is identical to the

sample size reported in each of the columns of Table 3, respectively. The average 5th grade

cohort size is about 60-70 students, with six to seven recent immigrants. The implied average

proportion of recent immigrants in the 5th grade varies from 5 to 20 percent in the eight

samples.

     Many of the reported point estimates in the first panel of Table 4 are small with large

estimated standard errors, indicating that they are not statistically different from zero.


                                               16
However, the pattern of signs consistently points in the direction of an adverse effect of

immigrants on natives’ high school outcomes. Almost all of the estimates obtained from the

16-20, 26-30 and 31-35 samples are significant at the 5 or 10 percent level. In the last two

columns of the table, we present two alternative estimates of the treatment effect, and their

associated t-statistics. Column 9 is simply the weighted average of the eight within-interval

treatment effects, whereas column 10 presents the treatment effect obtained from the fully

interacted model discussed in Section 3. The point estimates for the effect of immigrant

concentration on the high school quality and on the matriculation rate are remarkably similar

according to the two methods, while the effect on the dropout rate is larger in the fully

interacted model. The estimates indicate that immigrant concentration in elementary school

has a negative effect on the quality of high school attended and on high school matriculation

rates, and a positive effect on the dropout rate. However, all the coefficients are small and

statistical significance is marginal at most. The point estimates imply that a 10 point increase

in the percentage immigrants in grade 5 lowers the matriculation rate of the high school

attended by 1.1-1.3 percentage points, raises the dropout rate by 0.5-1.0 percentage points,

and lowers the individual matriculation rate by 1.8-1.9 percentage points.

     When background characteristics of the student (father's and mother's schooling, number

of siblings, ethnic origin) and of the elementary school (test scores and socio-economic index

in 1991, a dummy for religious elementary school, class size in 1994) are added as controls to

the regressions, in the lower panel of the table, almost all of the estimates of the treatment

remain statistically insignificant. However, six of the estimates of the effect of the percentage

of immigrants on the matriculation rate are negative and their weighted average is negative

and just marginally insignificant. The average estimated effect is relatively small: a 10 percent

increase in the proportion of immigrants in the class induces a 1.4-1.5 percentage point

decline in the school average matriculation rate. The fact that the estimated effect does not

change very much as a result of adding the background characteristics as controls may be


                                               17
interpreted as additional evidence that the treatment and control samples are relatively

balanced in these observable measures, once one conditions on grade size and number of

immigrants in grades 4 to 6. Overall, the evidence in Table 4 suggests that the effect of

immigrants in 5th grade on the high school achievements of natives is likely to be negative,

but not very significant statistically or in magnitude.



Heterogeneous Effects

     Up to now, we have only attempted to estimate the effect of immigrants on the overall

population of natives. However, the effect of immigrants on the outcomes of natives may

vary with the background characteristics of the native student. We now examine the effect of

immigrants on disadvantaged native students who are possibly more likely to be affected by

the presence of immigrants in the classroom.9 We use two measures to identify disadvantaged

native students. The first is based on parental schooling, while the second is based on ethnic

background. In the next section, we investigate whether there are differential effects on the

outcomes of natives when the treatment variable is defined as the percentage of disadvantaged

immigrants in the 5th grade.

     Table 5 presents the estimates when each of the basic eight samples was stratified by the

mother’s years of schooling, below or above 10. Panel A in the table presents the results for

natives with less educated mothers and panel B presents the results obtained for the natives

with more-educated mothers.        The point estimates for each sub-sample are generally

imprecise, but the weighted average estimates for the effect of immigrant concentration on the

dropout rate and the matriculation rate for natives with less-educated mothers are significantly

different from zero. Also, the estimated effect in panel A is relatively large: a 10 percent

increase in the proportion of immigrants leads to a 2 percentage points increase in the drop out

rate (versus a mean of 8 percent) and to a 4.5 percentage point reduction in the matriculation




                                                18
rate (relative to a mean of 58 percent in the sample). The proportion of immigrants in the

classroom has no effect on the drop-out rate of children with more-educated mothers and the

effect on matriculation rates is one-third the size of the coefficient found with the sample of

natives with less-educated mothers. The effect on the quality of high school attended is

negative and more statistically significant with the more advantaged sample, but the

magnitudes of the coefficients are very similar for both advantaged and disadvantaged natives.

Overall, the weighted-average results point to a stronger effect of the immigrants on the

disadvantaged natives, and similar results are found in the fully interacted model in the last

column.

      An alternative way to identify disadvantaged students is to stratify the sample by ethnic

origin. Israeli society is quite clearly divided along ethnic lines in terms of socio-economic

status. For example, Israeli children of Asia-Africa origin (defined by themselves or their

parents being born in an African or Asian country) have the lowest average background

characteristics (parental schooling, income and other social and family attributes). Table 6

presents estimates based on a sample that includes children whose ethnic origin is Asia-Africa

(panel A) and estimates from a sample of all other Israeli children (Panel B).10 The results

presented in the first panel show clearly that native Israeli students from Africa-Asia origin

experience significantly lower human capital outcomes as the proportion of immigrants in the

classroom increases. The most dramatic effect is on the matriculation rate: the estimated

coefficients across the row (the row for the matriculation rate in Panel A) are all negative,

three of them are individually significant and the weighted average of the eight estimates is -

0.0045 with a t-statistic of 3.5. This point estimate implies that a 10 percentage point increase

in the proportion of immigrants reduces the matriculation rate of the Africa-Asia ethnic group


9
  A number of papers have shown that the outcomes of disadvantaged students are more responsive to changes in
school resources (Angrist and Lavy, 1999; Krueger, 1999; Hoxby, 2000b; Jepsen and Rivkin, 2002).
10
   Children in our sample belong to the 1983-1984 cohort, meaning that their parents would typically have been
born between 1950 and 1965. Therefore, our ethnic origin indicator is likely to identify quite accurately children
of parents who immigrated from North African countries in the later 1950s and 1960s.

                                                       19
by 4.5 percent, an effect that amounts to around 15 percent of the respective mean. In contrast

to this relatively large effect for native students of Asia-Africa origin, there is no significant

effect using the sample of all the other Israeli students. This pattern of results is also seen in

the last column using the fully interacted model.

      In Table 7, we define students as disadvantaged if they have both a low-educated mother

and they are of Asia-Africa origin. Despite the fact that the number of students in this

intersection is relatively small, we still find large and significant effects of immigrant

concentration on high school achievements. For this very disadvantaged group, a ten percent

increase in immigrant concentration raises the dropout rate by 2.0-3.2 percentage points, and

lowers the matriculation rate by 4.0-5.6 percentage points, while there is essentially no effect

on high school quality. These effects are larger than those found in either of the previous two

tables.

      Table 8 performs the analysis separately for males and females. The results suggest that

female students are negatively affected by the presence of immigrants in terms of their drop-

out rate and matriculation rate, but no significant effect is detected for males using these

outcomes. However, the males seem to experience a large negative effect when it comes to

the quality of the high school attended relative to females.



Comparison with OLS

      It is now natural to ask how our results would have changed had we adopted a more

naïve methodology. We explore this issue in Table 9. The last two columns of the table

reproduce the estimates from Tables 4-6 in the fully interacted model and in the “weighted

average” model, for the full sample (Panel A), for students with low-educated mothers (Panel

B), and for students of Asia-Africa origin (Panel C). Column 1 presents the estimates and

associated t-statistics from a simple bivariate regression of the high school outcome variables

on percentage immigrants in grade 5. Not surprisingly, the point estimates in this specification


                                               20
are substantially larger than those obtained with the quasi-experimental approach, reflecting

the non-random selection of immigrants across schools. In columns 2 through 5, we

progressively add more control variables to assess how the estimates vary and how they

compare to the ones obtained in the quasi-experimental approach. In columns 2 and 3, we add

individual level and traditional school level control variables (a religious dummy, average

class size in 1994, school test scores and socioeconomic index in 1991). In column 4 we add

linearly the two key conditioning variables, whose inclusion stems directly from the structure

of the assignment mechanism discussed in Section 3 (i.e., the number of children in grade 5

and the number of immigrant children in grades 4 to 6). In column 5, the key conditioning

variables are included together with their squares and their interaction. This is the same

flexible polynomial control function used in the previous tables.

     The table reveals that inclusion of the basic individual and school-level control variables

takes care of a large fraction of the selection bias, lowering substantially all of the coefficients

and t-statistics. However, we also note that in a number of specifications and samples, there is

a marked difference between the naïve OLS estimates of columns 2 and 3, and the quasi-

experimental estimates that take into account the structure of the assignment mechanism. For

example, in both the full sample and the two sub-samples, the naïve OLS coefficient for the

quality of high school attended is small and insignificant, while it becomes substantially larger

and statistically significant in the quasi-experimental specifications. A similar pattern emerges

for the effect of the treatment on high school matriculation rates, but only in the

disadvantaged samples: a 10 percent increase in immigrant concentration lowers matriculation

rates by 1.3 percent (2.3 percent) in the low-education (Asia-Africa) sub-sample according to

the naïve estimates, but the effect increases to 2.5-4.5 percent (3.4-4.5 percent) when we

control for the number of immigrants in the school. It appears that carefully taking into

account the mechanism generating variation in immigrant concentration across schools




                                                21
generates somewhat larger estimates of the treatment effect, which we believe to be more

credible than those obtained in a more naïve specification.

     Overall, the results in this section show a clear pattern of stronger and more negative

effects of immigrants on the human capital outcomes of natives coming from a more

disadvantaged background. In the next section, we probe further into the above finding that

disadvantaged native students experience large and significant peer effects on their human

capital outcomes by exploiting the unique episode generated by the mass exodus of extremely

disadvantaged immigrants from Ethiopia in May 1991.



5. Peer Effects in Schools that Absorbed Immigrants from Ethiopia

     In May 1991, fifteen thousand Ethiopian Jews were brought to Israel in an overnight

airlift and sorted in a hurried and haphazard fashion to absorption centers across the country.

This operation, known as Operation Solomon, created variation in the quality of schools faced

by Ethiopian children, which was uncorrelated with the family background characteristics of

each immigrant child. This natural experiment was used by Gould, Lavy, and Paserman

(2004) to show that variation in elementary school quality had a significant impact on the

achievements of Ethiopian immigrant children in high school.          In contrast, this section

examines whether the presence of Ethiopian children in the classroom in 5th grade had an

impact the achievements of native Israeli students in high school. This empirical context

allows us to examine the presence and dimension of peer effects of immigrants on natives in a

situation where the newcomers are from a much poorer social and economic background

relative to the recipient group. This represents a sharp contrast to the experiment exploited in

the previous section in which the immigrants (mostly from the former Soviet Union) were

equally or even more educated than the average adult native Israelis, even though their

economic status was inferior.




                                              22
     We adopt the same identification strategy we used in the previous section when

analyzing peer effects for all immigrants. Namely, to identify the causal effect of Ethiopian

immigrants on their peers, we exploit random variation in the number of immigrants across

grades within the same school. The identifying assumption is again that the proportion of

Ethiopians in 5th grade, conditioned on a given number of Ethiopian students in 4th to 6th

grade, is determined exogenously by random factors such as variation in the dates of birth

among the pool of immigrant children in a school district.

     Table 10 presents balancing tests for four samples defined by narrow ranges for the total

number of May 1991 Ethiopian immigrants between grades 4 and 6. We restrict attention to

schools with no more than 20 Ethiopian immigrant children, as the data becomes extremely

sparse beyond this cut-off point. The treatment is now the percentage of these Ethiopian

students in the school’s 5th grade. The summary statistics at the bottom of the table indicate

that as the number of Ethiopian immigrants in grades 4 to 6 increases, so does the average

number and percentage of Ethiopians in grade 5. For example, schools with 1 to 5 Ethiopians

in grades 4 to 6 had on average 2.3 percent Ethiopians in grade 5, whereas in schools with 16

to 20 Ethiopians the percentage rises to 13.41.

     The first three columns of Table 10 show insignificant coefficients for the relationships

between parental education levels of native students and the percentage of May 1991

Ethiopian immigrants in their 5th grade class. Of the 24 coefficients presented in these three

columns only one, the coefficient on class size in the third column, is significant at the 5

percent level, while the second highest t-statistic is 1.52. All the point estimates in these three

columns are also very small, another indication that these samples are balanced, and do not

reveal any systematic differences related to the proportion of May 1991 Ethiopian immigrants.

However, some systematic differences according to the proportion of Ethiopian students are

evident in column 4 of Table 10. In particular, significant coefficients are found for mother’s

and father’s years of schooling and for the socioeconomic index in 1991. These results


                                                23
indicate that schools in this sample that absorbed more May 1991 Ethiopian students in 5th

grade tended to have native students from less-educated families and from a weaker socio-

economic background. However, it is unlikely that these differences reflect selection, because

this should also show up in differences in number of siblings and in average test scores of the

school as well. Since no such differences are observed (in fact, some of the signs reflect

positive selection) and since this sample is very small, including only 16 schools, we are

therefore inclined to relate to these minor differences as not representing systematic

differences due to variation in the proportion of May 1991 Ethiopian immigrants in 5th grade.

In any case, some caution should be exercised in interpreting the results in the last column.

         Table 11 presents the analysis of the native outcomes in high school using the treatment

defined as the percentage Ethiopians in the 5th grade. The first panel presents the results for

all native children. The first column reveals that when the proportion of Ethiopian students is

small, their presence does not affect the outcomes of native students. However, the

coefficients in the next three columns show an adverse effect on natives in schools where the

fraction of Ethiopian immigrants was relatively high.         For example, the coefficients in

columns 2-4 in Panel A are all large and statistically significant for the matriculation rate.

These results suggest that peer effects seem to exist only at higher intensity levels of

treatment. Taking the weighted average of the effects does not yield precise estimates, mostly

because the weighted average is dominated by the first sample where the intensity of the

treatment is weak and the estimated effect is minor. In fact, the weighted average of the effect

on matriculation rates in the last three columns is -0.011 (t-statistic of 5.29). Significant

negative results are also obtained using the fully interacted model in the last column of the

table.

         Panel B of Table 11 presents the results for the sample of native children with low

mother’s year of schooling (below 10 years) drawn for each of the four basic samples. These

results also show a significant negative peer effect on the matriculation rate, and the


                                                24
magnitudes of the coefficients are generally larger than the coefficients using the sample of all

native students. For example, in the second column, the effect for the low education sample is

more than twice as large as for the whole sample (-0.016 versus -0.007). This result is fully

consistent with the results presented in Tables 5-7 where we found the peer effect of

immigrants to be stronger and more precisely estimated among native students from low

educated families. It is also important to note that the “no adverse peer effect” result seen at

low levels of treatment intensity (low proportion of Ethiopian students in class) is evident also

in the second panel. In fact, in schools with 1 to 5 Ethiopian immigrants, the results appear to

be reversed: the proportion of Ethiopian immigrants lowers native Israelis’ drop out rates (the

effect is significant at the 10 percent level), and it raises matriculation rates. This suggests that

even the most disadvantaged students are not affected from the presence of immigrants in the

classroom as long as their proportion is small.

      Panel C in Table 11 restricts the analysis to only native students from Asia-Africa ethnic

origin. The basic results are again very much in line with those presented in panel B and

discussed above: relatively large and negative peer effect of Ethiopian immigrants on the

matriculation probability of disadvantaged native students. However, similar to Panel B, the

significant results are mainly found at higher levels of immigrant concentration (columns 2

and 3 versus column 1) and in the fully interacted model (the last column).



6. Conclusion

      In this paper we have estimated the impact of immigrant concentration in elementary

school on the high school outcomes of native Israelis, using a natural experiment generated by

random variation in the distribution of immigrants across grades within a given school.

Overall, we find that the percentage of immigrants in elementary school has essentially no

effect on dropout rates, while it has at most a mild effect on the quality of the high school

attended and on high school matriculation rates. However, splitting the sample by parents’


                                                  25
years of schooling and ethnic origin reveals a consistent pattern: disadvantaged children

appear more likely to have been adversely affected by a higher concentration of immigrants

among their peers. Interestingly, when we define the treatment as the percentage of

disadvantaged immigrants, the estimated treatment effects are even larger, particularly at high

levels of treatment intensity.

     Our paper represents one of the first attempts to study the consequences of natives and

immigrants interacting in the same social and learning environment, while paying particular

attention to issues of identification and causality. The finding that exposure to immigrants

during elementary school yields detrimental effects on disadvantaged children into their high

school years is a new result, given that most of the literature focuses on contemporaneous peer

effects, rather than long term outcomes.

     In many respects, our findings can be of general interest beyond the local Israeli context.

The empirical episode we study allows us to examine how immigrants from a relatively

educated and skilled background from the former Soviet republics affect the human capital

outcomes of natives. The lessons learned from this analysis are becoming increasingly

relevant to Western countries that are expected to absorb growing numbers of immigrants

from Central and Eastern Europe.

     Our findings lead to at least two policy implications. First, any negative effect that arises

from integrating immigrants with native students in regular schools is mitigated when their

proportion is relatively small, suggesting that it is beneficial to spread the immigrants in as

many schools as possible. Second, absorbing immigrants in schools may require additional

resources to offset the crowding out of resources or the negative peer effects. These policy

lessons are equally relevant in an environment of highly educated immigrants since their

economic and language inferiority may put them at a disadvantage relative to native students.

     Our finding may also have implications for income inequality. The most important

dividing line in schooling in the US is high school completion. In Israel and in many


                                               26
European countries, the crucial threshold is passing the matriculation exams, which opens the

door to a college education. Angrist and Lavy (2004) estimated the returns to a year of

schooling in Israel at about 8.3 percent, while holders of the Israeli matriculation certificate

earn a further 24 percent. The returns to the matriculation certificate partly reflect the

increased likelihood of higher education. But even in a sample limited to those with exactly

12 years of schooling, holders of the matriculation certificate earn 13 percent more. The effect

of immigrants on the matriculation outcomes of natives may therefore have severe

implications for the income of disadvantaged natives as well as for income inequality.




                                              27
References

Altonji, Joseph G., and Card, David. “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market
      Outcomes of Less-Skilled Natives.” In Immigration, Trade and Labor, edited by John
      M. Abowd, and Richard B. Freeman. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Lang, Kevin. “How Important are Classroom Peer Effects? Evidence
      from Boston’s Metco Program.” NBER Working paper no. 9263, October 2002.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Lavy, Victor. “Using Maimonides' Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class
      Size on Scholastic Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), May 1999,
      pages 533-75.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Lavy, Victor "The Effect of High Stakes High School
      Achievement Awards Evidence from a Group Randomized Trial", Draft, September,
      2004.
Betts, Julian R. “Educational Crowding Out: Do Immigrants Affect the Educational
      Attainment of American Minorities?”, in Daniel S. Hamermesh and Frank D. Bean
      (Eds.), Help or Hindrance? The Economic Implications of Immigration for African-
      Americans, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1998.
Betts, Julian R. and Fairlie, Robert W. “Does Immigration Induce ‘Native Flight’ from Public
      Schools into Private Schools.” Journal of Public Economics, 87(5-6), May 2003, pp.
      987-1012.
Borjas, George J. "Do Foreign Students Crowd Out Native Students from Graduate
      Programs?" NBER Working Paper 10349, 2004.
Borjas, George J., Freeman, Richard B, and Katz, Lawrence. “Searching for the Effect of
      Immigration on the Labor Market”, American Economic Review, 86(2), May 1996, pp.
      246-251.
Borjas, George J. “The Labor Demand Curve Is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact
      of Immigration on the Labor Market.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November
      2003.
Card, David. “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market.” Industrial and
      Labor Relations Review, 43(1), January 1990, pp. 245-257.
Card, David. “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
      Higher Immigration.” Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), January 2001, pp. 22-64.
Cohen-Goldner, Sarit and Paserman, M. Daniele. “Mass Migration to Israel and Natives’
      Transitions from Employment.” Mimeo., Hebrew University, 2004a.
Cohen-Goldner, Sarit and Paserman, M. Daniele. “The Dynamic Impact of Immigration on
      Natives’ Labor Market Outcomes: Evidence from Israel.” Mimeo., Hebrew University,
      2004b.
Edin, Per-Anders, Peter Fredriksson, and Olof Åslund, “Ethnic Enclaves and the Economic
      Success of Immigrants – Evidence from a Natural Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, CXVIII (2003), 329-357.
Friedberg, Rachel M. “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 116(4), November 2001, pp. 1373-1408.
Gould, Eric D.; Lavy Victor and Paserman, M. Daniele. “Immigrating to Opportunity:
      Estimating the Effects of School Quality Using a Natural Experiment on Ethiopians in
      Israel.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2004.
Hanushek, Eric, John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin, “New Evidence About Brown V. Board
      of Education: The Complex Effects of School Racial Composition on Achievement,”
      NBER Working Paper No. 8741, 2002.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Do Immigrants Crowd Disadvantaged American Natives Out of Higher
      Education?” in Daniel S. Hamermesh and Frank D. Bean (Eds.), Help or Hindrance?



                                            28
     The Economic Implications of Immigration for African Americans. New York: Russell
     Sage Foundation, 1998.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race
     Variation.” NBER Working Paper No. 7867, August 2000a.
Hoxby, Caroline M. “The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New Evidence from
     Population Variation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics; 115(4), November 2000b,
     pages 1239-85.
Jacob, Brian A., “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers and Student Achievement: Evidence
     from Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago,” NBER Working Paper No. 9652, 2003.
Jepsen, Christopher, and Steven Rivkin. “What is the Tradeoff between Smaller Classes and
     Teacher Quality?” NBER Working Paper No. 9205, September 2002.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, “Moving to Opportunity in
     Boston: Early Results from a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
     Economics CXVI (2001), 607-654.
Krueger, Alan B. “Experimental Estimates of Education Production Functions”, Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, CXIV (1999), 497-532.
LaLonde, Robert and Topel, Robert. “Labor Market Adjustments to Increased Immigration.”
     In Immigration, Trade and Labor, edited by John M. Abowd, and Richard B. Freeman.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Oreopoulos, Philip, “The Long-Run Consequences of Living in a Poor Neighborhood,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (2003), forthcoming.
Sacerdote, Bruce, “Peer Effects with Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
     Roommates,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 681-704.
Weinberg, Bruce A., Patricia B. Reagan, and Jeffrey J. Yankow, “Do Neighborhoods Affect
     Hours Worked: Evidence from Longitudinal Data,” Journal of Labor Economics, XXII
     (2004), forthcoming.
Zimmerman, David J., “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural
     Experiment,” Review of Economics and Statistics, LXXXV (2003), 9-23.




                                           29
               Table 1: Background Characteristics of Immigrants and Natives

A: Ministry of Education data:
                                                        Immigrants from:
                         All
                                        Former Soviet                                           Native Israelis
                      Immigrants                             Ethiopia             Other
                                           Union
Father’s years of        11.45              13.04               1.80             14.21              12.03
   schooling             (5.49)             (3.62)             (3.30)            (4.46)             (3.56)
 Mother’s years          11.58              13.25               1.39             13.72              12.05
  of schooling           (5.31)             (3.26)             (2.90)            (3.70)             (3.41)
   Number of              1.54               1.10               4.28              1.98               2.41
    siblings             (1.73)             (1.16)             (2.61)            (1.35)             (1.57)
   Number of
                          7,159             5,477               945                737              54,700
    children



B: Census 1995 data
                                                        Immigrants from:
                         All
                                        Former Soviet                                           Native Israelis
                      Immigrants                             Ethiopia             Other
                                           Union
Father’s years of        12.69              13.51               2.57             13.50              11.67
   schooling             (4.50)             (3.20)             (4.61)            (4.32)             (3.83)
 Mother’s years          12.53              13.45               1.92             13.40              11.59
  of schooling           (4.52)             (3.09)             (4.20)            (3.95)             (3.98)
 Female headed            0.176             0.179              0.248              0.093              0.085
   household             (0.381)           (0.383)            (0.432)            (0.290)            (0.278)
     Home                 0.533             0.561              0.482              0.338              0.693
   ownership             (0.499)           (0.496)            (0.500)            (0.473)            (0.461)
Household head            0.071             0.067              0.096              0.086              0.037
 unemployed              (0.256)           (0.252)            (0.295)            (0.281)            (0.189)
  Household             3895.85            4258.76            751.01            3497.91            5899.36
monthly income         (3911.46)          (3738.91)          (1184.43)         (5371.44)          (6963.88)
   Number of
                          8,910             7,321               737                852              68,725
   households
Notes: The Ministry of Education sample includes the universe of children enrolled in 5th grade during the 1993-
1994 school year. The Census data includes all households with at least one child between the ages of 8 and 12
in 1995.




                                                      30
                                     Table 2: Summary Statistics

                                               Number of immigrants in grades 4 through 6
                                       1-10             11-20            21-30            31-40
    Number of schools                  271                144             164              124
Total number of children in
                                      13,014              13,707         9,943           7,329
         grade 5
Average number of children
                                      66.23               76.00          83.47           87.24
        in grade 5
   Average percentage
                                       4.04                8.00          11.51           15.47
  immigrants in grade 5

Peer characteristics
(non-immigrants)
                                      12.58                12.19         11.93            11.86
Father’s years of schooling
                                      (3.65)               (3.52)        (3.30)           (3.32)
                                      12.62                12.18         12.00            11.79
Mother’s years of schooling
                                      (3.46)               (3.36)        (3.12)           (3.27)
                                       2.43                 2.46          2.38             2.33
    Number of siblings
                                      (1.69)               (1.54)        (1.54)           (1.43)
                                      0.243                0.293         0.318            0.314
    Fraction Asia-Africa
                                     (0.429)              (0.455)       (0.466)          (0.464)
                                      30.06                31.05         32.47            32.96
         Class Size
                                      (6.04)               (5.74)        (5.17)           (5.45)

School characteristics
     Standardized Math                0.342                0.155         0.109            0.087
        Score in 1991                (0.775)              (0.842)       (0.806)          (0.820)
    Standardized Verbal               0.401                0.131         0.014           -0.009
        Score in 1991                (0.773)              (0.806)       (0.743)          (0.819)
    Socioeconomic Index               0.388                0.181         0.149            0.109
           in 1991                   (0.759)              (0.824)       (0.812)          (0.831)
Income per capita in school
                                      978.50              892.69         891.53          897.24
       locality in 1991
   Unemployment rate in
                                       2.94                1.63           1.44            1.45
   school locality in 1991
 Welfare recipiency rate in
                                      23.06               29.19          30.77           29.19
   school locality in 1991
 High school matriculation
  rate in school locality in          47.96               46.63          46.49           46.69
             1991

Outcome Variables
  Quality of high school              0.660                0.638         0.623            0.617
         attended                    (0.214)              (0.223)       (0.230)          (0.229)
  Fraction dropping out
                                      0.078                0.092         0.094            0.099
  before completing 12th
                                     (0.268)              (0.289)       (0.292)          (0.299)
           grade
 Fraction eligible for high           0.621                0.587         0.582            0.558
   school matriculation              (0.485)              (0.492)       (0.493)          (0.497)
Notes: Authors’ calculations based on Ministry of Education data.




                                                     31
                                                                       Table 3: Balancing Tests

                                                               Number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                  1-5               6-10           11-15         16-20            21-25                       26-30             31-35              36-40
Mother’s years of                0.0629            0.0012             0.0117             0.0069            0.0298            -0.0271            -0.0331           -0.0336
schooling                       [1.3489]          [0.0361]           [0.4163]           [0.2231]          [1.1584]          [-1.1779]          [-1.0622]         [-1.0103]
Father’s years of                0.0656            0.0040             0.0187             0.0007            0.0288            -0.0382            -0.0283           -0.0556
schooling                       [1.3065]          [0.1083]           [0.6837]           [0.0233]          [1.1206]          [-1.5967]          [-0.7903]         [-1.5909]
Number of                       -0.0039            0.0380             -0.0318            0.0195            -0.0117            0.0217            0.0123             0.0049
Siblings                       [-0.1256]          [2.2346]           [-2.1248]          [1.2789]          [-0.6016]          [1.4417]          [0.5703]           [0.2733]
Fraction                        -0.0013            -0.0003            -0.0027            0.0037            -0.0001            0.0021            -0.0000           -0.0077
Asia-Africa                    [-0.3034]          [-0.1093]          [-0.8887]          [1.1824]          [-0.0167]          [0.7134]          [-0.0075]         [-2.1873]
Standardized math score          0.0095            -0.0155            -0.0219           -0.0161            0.0121            -0.0035            -0.0201            0.0071
in 1991                         [0.4521]          [-0.8047]          [-1.1500]         [-1.1771]          [0.6949]          [-0.1869]          [-1.1266]          [0.3676]
Standardized verbal              0.0140            -0.0101            0.0046            -0.0226            0.0035            -0.0043            -0.0162            0.0137
score in 1991                   [0.6283]          [-0.5539]          [0.2258]          [-1.6172]          [0.2069]          [-0.2651]          [-0.9549]          [0.7370]
Socioeconomic index in           0.0022            -0.0202            0.0157            -0.0222            -0.0192           -0.0199            -0.0023            0.0170
1991                            [0.0939]          [-1.0747]          [0.8789]          [-1.6124]          [-1.0303]         [-1.0432]          [-0.1392]          [0.8795]
Class size in                    -0.1516           -0.2140            0.2724             0.0209            0.0909             0.0808            0.0222             0.0719
1994                            [-1.1409]         [-2.4166]          [2.7043]           [0.2145]          [0.8973]           [0.7738]          [0.2931]           [0.7631]
Number of schools                 123                148               153                 91                99                 65                72                 52
Number of children               5,031              7,983              8,346             5,361              5,857             4,086              4,159             3,170
Average number of
                                  42.20               57.38             59.46              66.34            67.85              73.17            69.50               74.13
children in 5th grade
Average number of
                                   1.04               3.06              4.39                6.56             7.59               9.65            11.14               12.40
immigrants in 5th grade
Average Percentage
                                   3.48               6.97              9.05               12.19            13.35              14.93            19.04               20.09
Immigrants in 5th grade
Standard deviation of %
                                   4.73               5.84              5.98                9.70             7.89               7.75             9.88               11.18
Immigrants in 5th grade
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5th grade. All regressions control
for number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, number of children in grade 5, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for clustering at the
school level, in brackets.



                                                                                         32
                                                                    Table 4: Outcomes for Native Israelis

                                                                              Treatment: Percentage immigrants in grade 5
                                                                                Number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                                                                                                                          Weighted       Interacted
                                 1-5            6-10           11-15          16-20            21-25         26-30           31-35           36-40
                                                                                                                                                          Average          Model

A: No Individual
    Controls
Quality of high school        -0.0004         -0.0000         -0.0013        -0.0008         -0.0003        -0.0041         -0.0044         0.0013         -0.0011         -0.0013
       attended              [-0.1206]       [-0.0043]       [-0.5597]      [-0.3881]       [-0.1546]      [-1.7649]       [-1.8814]       [0.5054]       [-1.1502]       [-1.4827]
 Dropped out before           -0.0025          0.0014         -0.0005         0.0042           0.0001        0.0023          0.0027         -0.0030         0.0005         0.0010
completing 12th grade        [-1.1875]        [0.9102]       [-0.2974]       [3.0127]         [0.0682]      [1.7280]        [1.5803]       [-1.4617]       [0.8429]       [1.6345]
      Passed HS                0.0033         -0.0017         -0.0022        -0.0033           0.0006       -0.0038         -0.0062         0.0026         -0.0018         -0.0019
  matriculation exam          [0.6875]       [-0.4865]       [-0.7251]      [-1.1538]         [0.2581]     [-1.8040]       [-1.9465]       [0.7880]       [-1.2924]       [-1.6471]

B: With Individual
    Controls
Quality of high school         0.0001         -0.0004         -0.0025         0.0004         -0.0008        -0.0046         -0.0029         0.0003         -0.0013         -0.0012
       attended               [0.0340]       [-0.1643]       [-1.6935]       [0.3317]       [-0.6251]      [-1.5800]       [-2.2075]       [0.2029]        [1.8585]       [-2.1779]
 Dropped out before           -0.0023          0.0014         0.0006          0.0028           0.0003        0.0011          0.0006         -0.0015         0.0005         0.0007
completing 12th grade        [-1.2629]        [0.9386]       [0.4276]        [2.6960]         [0.2878]      [1.1133]        [0.4480]       [-0.9381]       [0.8492]       [1.3827]
      Passed HS                0.0002         -0.0014         -0.0038        -0.0011         -0.0012        -0.0021         -0.0027         0.0017         -0.0015         -0.0014
  matriculation exam          [0.0438]       [-0.5359]       [-1.5762]      [-0.5927]       [-0.7159]      [-0.8740]       [-1.5703]       [0.8737]       [-1.6033]       [-1.8450]
  Number of schools              123            148             153            91               99             65             72              52             803            803
  Number of children            5,031          7,983           8,346          5,361            5,857          4,086          4,159           3,170          43,993         43,993
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5th grade. All regressions control
for grade size, the number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Individual controls are mother’s years of schooling, father’s years of
schooling, dummy indicators for whether parents’ schooling is missing, number of siblings, a dummy for whether the number of siblings is missing, age in 1994, a gender
dummy, a dummy for whether the elementary school is religious, class size in 1994, math scores in 1991, verbal scores in 1991, and school socioeconomic index in 1991. Robust
t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.




                                                                                         33
                                                     Table 5: Outcomes for Native Israelis – By Mother’s Education

                                                                              Treatment: Percentage immigrants in grade 5
                                                                                Number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                                                                                                                          Weighted       Interacted
                                 1-5            6-10           11-15          16-20            21-25         26-30           31-35           36-40
                                                                                                                                                          Average          Model

A: Mother’s years of
    schooling < 10
Quality of high school        -0.0038         -0.0004         -0.0018         0.0003         -0.0007        -0.0031          0.0010         0.0008         -0.0012         -0.0006
       attended               [-1.1750]      [-0.1572]       [-0.7511]       [0.1883]       [-0.3679]      [-1.0549]        [0.4122]       [0.3424]       [-1.2763]       [-0.7194]
 Dropped out before            0.0018          0.0033         0.0049          0.0018           0.0002        0.0019         -0.0004         -0.0035         0.0020         0.0011
completing 12th grade         [0.3931]        [1.1056]       [1.6481]        [0.8646]         [0.0715]      [0.8681]       [-0.1299]       [-1.6005]       [1.6995]       [1.1925]
      Passed HS               -0.0097         -0.0051         -0.0084         0.0015           -0.0020       -0.0053        -0.0008         0.0016         -0.0045         -0.0025
  matriculation exam         [-1.3098]       [-1.1874]       [-2.3503]       [0.4571]         [-0.6962]     [-0.9792]      [-0.2871]       [0.3848]       [-2.6166]       [-1.7764]
  Number of children             957           1,361           1,675          1,060            1,222           725            902             774           12,549         12,549

B: Mother’s years of
    schooling ≥ 10
Quality of high school         0.0004         -0.0006         -0.0031        -0.0000           -0.0011      -0.0039         -0.0036         -0.0003        -0.0016         -0.0016
       attended               [0.1903]       [-0.2771]       [-2.0564]      [-0.0288]         [-0.6851]    [-1.5894]       [-2.6941]       [-0.2006]      [-2.1654]       [-2.5608]
 Dropped out before           -0.0029          0.0006         -0.0004         0.0026           0.0008        0.0009          0.0002         -0.0008         0.0000         0.0004
completing 12th grade        [-1.5794]        [0.4283]       [-0.2890]       [2.6116]         [0.7575]      [0.7176]        [0.2279]       [-0.4600]       [0.0580]       [0.8639]
      Passed HS                -0.0010        -0.0011         -0.0027        -0.0022           -0.0011      -0.0008         -0.0026         0.0020         -0.0010         -0.0011
  matriculation exam         [-0.9639]       [-0.4546]       [-1.0486]      [-1.0834]         [-0.5209]    [-0.3274]       [-1.5209]       [0.9164]       [-0.9639]       [-1.3311]
  Number of children            4,074          6,622           6,671          4,301            4,635          3,361          3,257           2,396          35,317         35,317
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5th grade. All regressions control
for grade size, number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, their squares and the interaction between the two. Additional controls: mother’s years of schooling, father’s years of
schooling, dummy indicators for whether parents’ schooling is missing, number of siblings, a dummy for whether the number of siblings is missing, age in 1994, a gender
dummy, a dummy for whether the elementary school is religious, class size in 1994, math scores in 1991, verbal scores in 1991, and school socioeconomic index in 1991. Robust
t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.



                                                                                         34
                                                         Table 6: Outcomes for Native Israelis – By Ethnic Origin

                                                                             Treatment: Percentage immigrants in grade 5
                                                                               Number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                                                                                                                          Weighted     Interacted
                                1-5            6-10           11-15          16-20            21-25         26-30           31-35          36-40
                                                                                                                                                          Average        Model

A: Ethnic origin: Asia-
    Africa
Quality of high school        -0.0030         -0.0011        -0.0039        -0.0018           0.0012       -0.0021         -0.0021        -0.0009          -0.0020       -0.0015
       attended              [-1.0638]       [-0.3772]      [-2.2850]      [-1.1918]         [0.9524]     [-1.1569]       [-1.3993]      [-0.5655]        [-2.3154]     [-2.3924]
 Dropped out before           -0.0028         0.0009         0.0015          0.0035           0.0010        0.0025         -0.0002        -0.0028          0.0006        0.0009
completing 12th grade        [-0.9217]       [0.3974]       [0.8113]        [2.2359]         [0.5733]      [1.4362]       [-0.0937]      [-1.3035]        [0.7643]      [1.3071]
      Passed HS               -0.0113         -0.0021        -0.0059        -0.0012         -0.0043        -0.0038         -0.0039         0.0003          -0.0045       -0.0034
  matriculation exam         [-2.3956]       [-0.5877]      [-1.8613]      [-0.4309]       [-1.8176]      [-1.0619]       [-1.5840]       [0.1022]        [-3.5120]     [-3.0047]
 Number of children            1,228           1,929          2,387          1,625            1,924         1,240           1,341           959            12,633        12,633

B: Ethnic origin: other
Quality of high school         0.0014         -0.0002        -0.0014         0.0013         -0.0023        -0.0046         -0.0032         0.0004          -0.0010       -0.0011
       attended               [0.6780]       [-0.0804]      [-0.8047]       [0.9585]       [-1.4139]      [-1.7453]       [-2.2525]       [0.2739]        [-1.3510]     [-1.6570]
 Dropped out before           -0.0021         0.0016         0.0001          0.0022         -0.0004         0.0006         0.0012         -0.0011          0.0003        0.0005
completing 12th grade        [-1.0790]       [1.1242]       [0.0716]        [2.0573]       [-0.3439]       [0.5716]       [0.7682]       [-0.5980]        [0.5227]      [0.9576]
      Passed HS                0.0039         -0.0012        -0.0026        -0.0009           0.0013       -0.0007         -0.0019         0.0019          -0.0002       -0.0003
  matriculation exam          [0.9313]       [-0.3822]      [-0.9416]      [-0.5002]         [0.5658]     [-0.2633]       [-0.9768]       [0.8989]        [-0.1435]     [-0.3861]
 Number of children            3,803           6,054          5,959          3,736            3,933         2,846           2,818          2,211           31,360        31,360
                                                                                                                                                     th
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5 grade. All regressions control
for grade size, number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Additional controls: mother’s years of schooling, father’s years of
schooling, dummy indicators for whether parents’ schooling is missing, number of siblings, a dummy for whether the number of siblings is missing, age in 1994, a gender
dummy, a dummy for whether the elementary school is religious, class size in 1994, math scores in 1991, verbal scores in 1991, and school socioeconomic index in 1991. Robust
t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.




                                                                                        35
                                          Table 7: Outcomes for Native Israelis – By Mother’s Education and Ethnic Origin

                                                                              Treatment: Percentage immigrants in grade 5
                                                                                Number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                                                                                                                          Weighted       Interacted
                                 1-5            6-10           11-15          16-20            21-25         26-30           31-35           36-40
                                                                                                                                                          Average          Model

A: Mother’s years of schooling < 10 AND
   Ethnic Origin: Asia-Africa
Quality of high school        -0.0111          0.0019         -0.0045        -0.0026           0.0029        0.0007          0.0020         0.0006         -0.0018         -0.0001
       attended              [-1.6259]        [0.5391]       [-1.4600]      [-1.2787]         [1.4538]      [0.1937]        [0.5659]       [0.1627]       [-1.2143]       [-0.1029]
 Dropped out before            0.0059          0.0021         0.0073          0.0048           0.0035        0.0049         -0.0036         -0.0107         0.0032         0.0020
completing 12th grade         [0.8572]        [0.5700]       [2.4263]        [1.5807]         [1.2407]      [1.4442]       [-1.0156]       [-4.1609]       [2.0727]       [1.5012]
      Passed HS               -0.0140         -0.0016         -0.0101        -0.0019         -0.0044        -0.0020         -0.0020         -0.0030        -0.0056         -0.0040
  matriculation exam         [-1.5604]       [-0.2591]       [-2.5427]      [-0.5075]       [-1.4686]      [-0.3016]       [-0.4750]       [-0.6893]      [-2.6438]       [-2.3935]
  Number of children             334            498             652            416              557            298            366             289            3410           3410

B: Mother’s years of schooling ≥10 OR
   Ethnic Origin: Other
Quality of high school         0.0004         -0.0007         -0.0024         0.0005         -0.0015        -0.0047         -0.0032         0.0003         -0.0015         -0.0014
       attended               [0.1898]       [-0.3225]       [-1.5817]       [0.3948]       [-1.0061]      [-2.0323]       [-2.3973]       [0.2546]       [-2.0775]       [-2.4069]
 Dropped out before           -0.0025          0.0012         -0.0003         0.0021         -0.0002         0.0006          0.0010         -0.0005         0.0001         0.0004
completing 12th grade        [-1.3963]        [0.7882]       [-0.1933]       [2.1599]       [-0.2233]       [0.5507]        [0.7357]       [-0.3107]       [0.2052]       [0.8887]
      Passed HS                0.0010         -0.0016         -0.0028        -0.0012         -0.0007        -0.0021         -0.0028         0.0026         -0.0011         -0.0011
  matriculation exam          [0.2586]       [-0.5953]       [-1.1549]      [-0.5934]       [-0.3568]      [-0.8832]       [-1.5471]       [1.2923]       [-1.1666]       [-1.3728]
  Number of children            4697            7485           7694            4945            5300           3788           3793            2881           40559           40559
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5th grade. All regressions control
for grade size, number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Additional controls: mother’s years of schooling, father’s years of
schooling, dummy indicators for whether parents’ schooling is missing, number of siblings, a dummy for whether the number of siblings is missing, age in 1994, a gender
dummy, a dummy for whether the elementary school is religious, class size in 1994, math scores in 1991, verbal scores in 1991, and school socioeconomic index in 1991. Robust
t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.



                                                                                         36
                                                            Table 8: Outcomes for Native Israelis – By Gender

                                                                             Treatment: Percentage immigrants in grade 5
                                                                               Number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                                                                                                                          Weighted     Interacted
                                1-5            6-10           11-15          16-20            21-25         26-30           31-35          36-40
                                                                                                                                                          Average        Model

A: Males
Quality of high school        -0.0037         -0.0004        -0.0033        -0.0001         -0.0018        -0.0033         -0.0025         0.0006          -0.0021       -0.0017
       attended              [-1.6721]       [-0.1773]      [-1.7888]      [-0.0323]       [-1.4939]      [-1.6831]       [-1.5833]       [0.3268]        [-2.8394]     [-2.6655]
 Dropped out before           -0.0042         0.0007         -0.0011         0.0029         -0.0005         0.0007         0.0009         -0.0033          -0.0005       -0.0001
completing 12th grade        [-1.6777]       [0.2796]       [-0.5258]       [1.8646]       [-0.2894]       [0.5212]       [0.4608]       [-1.4359]        [-0.6117]     [-0.1281]
      Passed HS               -0.0012         0.0003         -0.0047         0.0004         -0.0013         0.0019         -0.0034         0.0022          -0.0012       -0.0008
  matriculation exam         [-0.2485]       [0.0925]       [-1.5904]       [0.1729]       [-0.5154]       [0.7541]       [-1.6483]       [0.9270]        [-0.9884]     [-0.7941]
 Number of children            2,626           3,966          4,339          2,652            2,977         2,046           2,163          1,590           22,359        22,359

B: Females
Quality of high school         0.0034         -0.0008        -0.0022         0.0010           0.0001       -0.0040         -0.0031        -0.0002          -0.0007       -0.0009
       attended               [1.3556]       [-0.3161]      [-1.3844]       [0.7077]         [0.0754]     [-1.4941]       [-1.8608]      [-0.1388]        [-0.8143]     [-1.3288]
 Dropped out before            0.0006         0.0021         0.0021          0.0024           0.0014        0.0006         0.0006          0.0000          0.0015        0.0014
completing 12th grade         [0.3540]       [1.6090]       [1.1706]        [1.9453]         [1.2467]      [0.5934]       [0.4193]        [0.0138]        [2.5538]      [2.6416]
      Passed HS                0.0008         -0.0038        -0.0031        -0.0020         -0.0013        -0.0062         -0.0018         0.0015          -0.0021       -0.0021
  matriculation exam          [0.1620]       [-1.1421]      [-1.0074]      [-0.8821]       [-0.6761]      [-2.2807]       [-0.8210]       [0.4653]        [-1.7013]     [-2.1477]
 Number of children            2,402           4,012          4,001          2,705            2,876         2,040           1,995          1,579           21,610        21,610
                                                                                                                                                     th
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5 grade. All regressions control
for grade size, number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Additional controls: mother’s years of schooling, father’s years of
schooling, dummy indicators for whether parents’ schooling is missing, number of siblings, a dummy for whether the number of siblings is missing, age in 1994, a gender
dummy, a dummy for whether the elementary school is religious, class size in 1994, math scores in 1991, verbal scores in 1991, and school socioeconomic index in 1991. Robust
t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.




                                                                                        37
                                                                                       Table 9: Comparison of Methods

                                                (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)                        (5)                      (6)                      (7)
                                                                                                                                                                              Fully interacted             Weighted
                                              OLS                        OLS                        OLS                        OLS                        OLS
                                                                                                                                                                                   model                 Average Model
A: Full Sample
Quality of high school                       -0.0041                    -0.0030                    -0.0005                   -0.0003                     -0.0012                   -0.0012                    -0.0013
attended                                    [-7.5179]                  [-6.0698]                  [-1.1508]                 [-0.5240]                   [-2.0865]                 [-2.1779]                  [-1.8585]
Dropped out before                           0.0025                     0.0015                     0.0006                    0.0008                      0.0005                    0.0007                     0.0005
completing 12th grade                       [6.9866]                   [4.6704]                   [1.9942]                  [1.6883]                    [0.9160]                  [1.3827]                   [0.8492]
Passed HS matriculation                      -0.0061                    -0.0033                    -0.0013                   -0.0015                     -0.0015                   -0.0014                    -0.0015
exam                                        [-9.2099]                  [-6.1093]                  [-2.5999]                 [-2.0916]                   [-1.9777]                 [-1.8450]                  [-1.6033]
B: Mother’s years of
     schooling <10
Quality of high school                       -0.0039                    -0.0031                    -0.0002                    0.0001                     -0.0005                   -0.0006                    -0.0012
attended                                    [-5.3894]                  [-4.8960]                  [-0.3610]                  [0.1274]                   [-0.5007]                 [-0.7194]                  [-1.2763]
Dropped out before                           0.0030                     0.0019                     0.0007                     0.0016                     0.0009                    0.0011                     0.0020
completing 12th grade                       [3.6436]                   [2.5723]                   [0.9812]                  [1.5872]                    [0.7936]                  [1.1925]                   [1.6995]
Passed HS matriculation                      -0.0046                    -0.0034                    -0.0013                   -0.0029                     -0.0028                   -0.0025                    -0.0045
exam                                        [-4.7928]                  [-3.8583]                  [-1.4304]                 [-2.4341]                   [-2.0409]                 [-1.7764]                  [-2.6166]
C: Ethnic Group: Asia-
     Africa
Quality of high school                       -0.0033                    -0.0025                    -0.0007                   -0.0008                      -0.0016                  -0.0015                    -0.0020
attended                                    [-5.9450]                  [-4.8518]                  [-1.4656]                 [-1.3133]                    [-2.3576]                [-2.3924]                  [-2.3154]
Dropped out before                           0.0027                     0.0017                     0.0012                    0.0012                       0.0008                   0.0009                     0.0006
completing 12th grade                       [5.3665]                   [3.6639]                   [2.4051]                  [1.7794]                     [1.0415]                 [1.3071]                   [0.7643]
Passed HS matriculation                      -0.0052                    -0.0032                    -0.0023                   -0.0032                      -0.0035                  -0.0034                    -0.0045
exam                                        [-6.8231]                  [-4.4805]                  [-3.1966]                 [-3.3338]                    [-3.3669]                [-3.0047]                  [-3.5120]
Individual controls                            No                         Yes                        Yes                       Yes                          Yes                      Yes                        Yes
School controls                                No                         No                         Yes                       Yes                          Yes                      Yes                        Yes
                                                                                                                                                          Flexible                 Flexible                   Flexible
Control function                              None                       None                       None                      Linear
                                                                                                                                                        polynomial               polynomial                 polynomial
Interval dummies and
interactions
                                                No                         No                        No                         No                         No                         Yes                         --
                                                                                                                                                   th
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5 grade. Individual controls: mother’s and father’s years of schooling,
dummy indicators for whether parents’ schooling is missing, number of siblings, a dummy for missing number of siblings, age in 1994, gender. School controls: religious school dummy, class size in 1994, math scores in
1991, verbal scores in 1991, and school socioeconomic index in 1991. Linear control function: number of children in grade 5 and number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6. Flexible polynomial control function: number of
children in grade 5, number of immigrants in grades 4 to 6, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Robust t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.




                                                                                                              38
                                            Table 10: The Impact of May 1991 Ethiopian Immigrants -- Balancing Tests

                                                                              Number of Ethiopian immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                    1-5                            6-10                          11-15                                         16-20
                                                  -0.0741                             -0.0194                             -0.0438                              -0.0462
Mother’s years of schooling
                                                 [-1.0498]                           [-0.4335]                           [-0.4837]                            [-3.3963]
                                                  -0.0759                             -0.0204                             -0.0841                              -0.0469
Father’s years of schooling
                                                 [-0.9641]                           [-0.4876]                           [-1.0610]                            [-2.7201]
Number of                                         -0.0330                             -0.0538                             -0.0399                              -0.0088
Siblings                                         [-0.7081]                           [-1.5223]                           [-0.9015]                            [-0.5053]
Fraction                                          -0.0081                             -0.0010                              0.0091                              0.0064
Asia-Africa                                      [-0.9349]                           [-0.2577]                            [1.0298]                            [1.7347]
                                                  -0.0066                              0.0372                              0.0046                              0.0126
Standardized math score in 1991
                                                 [-0.1514]                            [1.5055]                            [0.1477]                            [0.8993]
                                                  -0.0244                              0.0051                              0.0131                              -0.0039
Standardized verbal score in 1991
                                                 [-0.5807]                            [0.2021]                            [0.6484]                            [-0.4435]
                                                  0.0155                               0.0049                             -0.0360                              -0.0325
Socioeconomic index in 1991
                                                 [0.2959]                             [0.1663]                           [-0.9839]                            [-2.6015]
Class size in                                     0.3424                               0.1359                              0.4289                              0.3289
1994                                             [1.3459]                             [0.7982]                            [2.0185]                            [3.6307]
Number of schools                                    95                                  48                                  20                                  16
Number of children                                 4,411                               3,600                                858                                 606
                                th
Average number of children in 5
                                                     57.17                                45.54                              52.40                               52.43
grade
Average number of Ethiopian
                                                      0.89                                 2.58                               4.50                                6.13
immigrants in 5th grade
Average Percentage Ethiopian
                                                      2.30                                 6.83                               9.48                               13.41
Immigrants in 5th grade
Standard deviation of % Ethiopian
                                                      3.33                                28.57                               5.88                               12.69
Immigrants in 5th grade
                                                                                                                                                     th
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage immigrants in 5 grade. All regressions control
for number of May 1991 Ethiopians in grades 4 to 6, the number of children in grade 5, their squares, and the interaction between the two. Robust t-statistics, adjusted for
clustering at the school level, in brackets.


                                                                                        39
                                                 Table 11: The Impact of May 1991 Ethiopian Immigrants – Outcomes

                                                                           Treatment: Percentage Ethiopian immigrants in grade 5
                                                                             Number of Ethiopian immigrants in grades 4 to 6:
                                                                                                                                                                     Interacted
                                              1-5                      6-10                    11-15                   16-20            Weighted Average
                                                                                                                                                                       Model

A: All native children
                                            -0.0020                  0.0030                    -0.0081                 -0.0047                  -0.0016                 -0.0021
Quality of high school attended                                                                                                                                        [-1.5436]
                                           [-0.5104]                [1.2597]                  [-3.1083]               [-2.9496]                [-0.7186]
Dropped out before completing               -0.0039                  0.0011                    0.0026                  0.0020                   -0.0013                 0.0009
         12th grade                        [-0.8552]                [0.5625]                  [1.0307]                [1.6791]                 [-0.5184]               [0.7127]
                                             0.0045                  -0.0071                   -0.0189                 -0.0033                  -0.0019                 -0.0056
 Passed HS matriculation exam                                                                                                                                          [-3.2138]
                                            [0.7862]                [-2.8673]                 [-3.5520]               [-2.4028]                [-0.6020]
                N                             4,411                   1,683                      858                     606                     7,558                   7,552
B: Mother’s years of schooling
    < 10
                                            -0.0033                  0.0005                    -0.0199                 0.0018                   -0.0037                 -0.0018
Quality of high school attended
                                           [-0.5433]                [0.1328]                  [-2.8450]               [0.9497]                 [-1.0634]               [-0.8369]
Dropped out before completing               -0.0147                  0.0031                    0.0030                  0.0033                   -0.0063                 0.0006
         12th grade                        [-1.7961]                [0.6682]                  [0.6004]                [1.8792]                 [-1.3874]               [0.2438]
                                             0.0212                  -0.0162                   -0.0396                 -0.0013                  0.0023                  -0.0072
 Passed HS matriculation exam
                                            [2.7300]                [-3.1356]                 [-8.5441]               [-0.4330]                [0.5350]                [-2.1084]
                N                             1,414                    700                       313                     232                     2,659                   2,659
C: Ethnic Origin: Asia-Africa
                                              -0.0005                    0.0023                   -0.0104             -0.0038                  -0.0011                -0.0016
Quality of high school attended
                                             [-0.1375]                  [0.8136]                 [-2.5757]           [-1.8149]                [-0.5565]             [-1.0644]
 Dropped out before completing                -0.0053                    0.0005                   0.0034              0.0068                   -0.0017                0.0024
            12th grade                       [-1.1079]                  [0.1762]                 [1.1944]            [4.5562]                 [-0.6286]              [1.4196]
                                               0.0019                    -0.0100                  -0.0199             -0.0016                  -0.0040                -0.0063
 Passed HS matriculation exam
                                              [0.2463]                  [-2.9127]                [-2.6894]           [-0.8336]                [-0.9244]             [-2.8536]
                 N                              1,553                      735                      320                 249                     2,857                  2,857
Notes: Entries in the table represent the coefficients from separate regressions of the relevant dependent variable on the percentage Ethiopian children who immigrated in May
1991. All regressions control for grade size, the number of May 1991 Ethiopians in grades 4 to 6, their squares, and the interaction between the two. See Table 4 for the full list of
additional controls. Robust t-statistics (adjusted for clustering at the school level) in brackets.


                                                                                         40
