NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOLLAR SHORTAGES AND CRISES
Raghuram G. Rajan
Working Paper 10845
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10845

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

This paper reflects our opinions and is not meant to represent the views of the International
Monetary Fund or its member countries. We thank Douglas Diamond, Olivier Jeanne, Se-Jik
Kim, and Ashok Mody for helpful comments. The paper is based on talks Rajan gave at the
Central Bank of Argentina and the Central Bank of Chile. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peerreviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.
© 2004 by Raghuram G. Rajan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Dollar Shortages and Crises
Raghuram G. Rajan
NBER Working Paper No. 10845
October 2004, Revised June 2020
JEL No. G15,G28,F21,F32,F34
ABSTRACT
Emerging markets do not handle adverse shocks well. In this paper, we lay out an argument about
why emerging markets are so fragile, and why they may adopt contractual mechanisms -such as a
dollarized banking system- that increase their fragility. We draw on this analysis to explain why
dollarized economies may be prone to dollar shortages and twin crises. The model of crises
described here differs in some important aspects from what is now termed the first, second, and
third generation models of crises. We then examine how domestic policies, especially monetary
policy, can mitigate the adverse effects of these crises. Finally, we consider the role, potentially
constructive, that international financial institutions may undertake both in helping to prevent the
crises and in helping to resolve them.

Raghuram G. Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

There is a strong correlation between the stoppages of capital flows to a country, the extent
of dollarization of the country’s banking system, and the prevalence of banking crises. Between
1974 and 2003, 56 percent of all episodes where capital flows underwent a “sudden stop” ended in
a banking crisis; the same proportion rises to 75 percent in those episodes where the country also
had a high level of dollarization, and to no less than 100 percent, if, in addition to a high level of
dollarization, the country had in place a fixed exchange rate (see IADB (2004)). What accounts for
these correlations? Are there domestic policies that can mitigate such risks? How can international
financial institutions (IFIs) help their member countries avoid, or diminish the consequences of
such a predicament? We address these questions in this paper.
We review, first, why emerging markets may adopt contractual mechanisms -such as a
dollarized banking system- that accentuate rather than lessen their vulnerabilities. We argue that
weak institutions in emerging markets tend to make it harder for them to cope properly with
economic adversity. The burden of downturns, instead of being shared in predictable ways, is
spread in a haphazard manner, through, for example, selective defaults and high inflation. In such
an environment, and with limited contract enforcement, the best protection for investors against
risks may well be a domestic deposit denominated in foreign currency (following the convention in
this literature, we will call the foreign currency “dollars”).
Enough dollars at all times is critical to the functioning of a dollarized banking system. We
argue that an incipient dollar shortage, brought about by excessive government borrowing, or an
external “liquidity” shock, or an overvalued exchange rate, can be magnified by a dollarized
banking system, into a total collapse of the financial system, the exchange rate, and other asset
prices. Our explanation of crisis differs in some important aspects from what is now termed the
first, second, and third generation models of crises.
The links between the government and the banking system can come about simply because
both dip into a common pool of dollars. Difficulties for one may create difficulties for the other
even if the banking system does not hold significant amounts of government debt, or the

1

government does not bear the contingent liabilities of the banking system. Similarly, the collapse in
the exchange rate and the collapse in the banking system can occur close together, not just because
the corporate or banking system’s liabilities explode in value after depreciation, but also, because
the depreciation is a result of the banking system’s desperation for dollars. While dollar shortages
can cause banking system crises, the reverse is also possible. By no means do we imply that any of
the other channels already identified in the literature are unimportant (see Burnside, Eichenbaum,
and Rebello (2001) or Aghion, Bachetta, and Banerjee (2001) for models that emphasize these
other channels). Rather, we focus on one particular channel, the banking system’s need for dollar
liquidity, which can tie many of these effects together.
Then, we explore various possible policy interventions to mitigate the effects of dollar
shortages, including whether the multilateral financial institutions have a role to play. If
dollarization arises primarily from institutional infirmities rather than a distorted incentive to take
on risk, it may be costly to legislate it away. Countries may have to learn to live with dollarization
for a while. At the same time, if poor institutions rather than poor incentives are to blame,
interventions to mitigate the effects of dollarization need not exacerbate typical sources of moral
hazard.
In the rest of the paper, we lay out first the basic argument, and provide evidence for some
of its assumptions. We then examine various interventions domestic authorities could undertake,
and end with a discussion of possible interventions by the multilateral institutions.
I. A Framework
1.1. Why are emerging markets different?
A growing number of economists identify the quality of institutions as producing important
differences between emerging markets and developed economies. Broadly speaking, economic
institutions may be basic or narrow. By basic, we understand fundamental institutions, such as
those that ensure the security of property including through the prevention of arbitrary taxation, or
those that help enforce contracts. Basic institutions create the broad enabling environment for

2

transactions between private agents and the state, and between private agents themselves. By
narrow, we understand more detailed features of the institutional environment, such as whether the
central bank is de-facto independent or whether there is a functioning bankruptcy code. Although
not without exceptions, a country with weak basic institutions also finds it difficult to build
effective narrow institutions.
One important role played by basic institutions is to mediate the process and outcome of
social conflicts, particularly so in times of adversity. Typically, in a growing economy differences
between social actors may be papered over. A downturn, though, usually brings out, or sharpens
latent social tensions.
Why growth seems to be easier to share than adversity is no trivial question. If
consumption is shaped by habit, an income loss is much harder to swallow, while satisfaction from
additional gains less important to fight for. Individual aversion to losses in wealth is welldocumented in behavioral science. On the other hand, conflict may dissipate growth opportunities
more easily than it may worsen an already stagnant situation. For example, squabbling between
workers and management may drive investors away, chasing away the chance to start new projects;
but if there are no new investment opportunities on the horizon, squabbling is less costly as the
existing plant and machinery is already sunk investment.
Regardless of why conflicts are greater in times of economic adversity, how a society deals
with them depends on the kind of institutions of conflict management it has. In a comprehensive
study of failed states, Collier et al. (2003) find that years of poor economic growth precede civil
war. Even after concluding a peace, the probability of these states lapsing anew into war is high.
Not surprisingly, these states typically have weak institutions of conflict management such as
patchy enforcement of the law, limited adherence to democratic principles, and few meaningful
checks and balances on the government. Similarly, Rodrik (1999) finds that the countries that
experienced the sharpest drops in growth after 1975 were those with divided societies and weak

3

institutions of conflict management (as proxied for by indicators of the quality of government
institutions, rule of law, democratic rights, and social safety nets).
Acemogulu, Johnson, et al. (2003) find that countries with poor institutions have the
highest volatility of growth and higher levels of inflation. Satyanath and Subramanian (2004) show
that over and above the effect of policies, the quality of political institutions affects the extent of
nominal macroeconomic instability in a country.
Societies with well functioning institutions allocate burden sharing in times of distress in
predictable ways. For example, those who suffer the most adversity can fall back on an explicit
social safety net – a minimum level of unemployment insurance. Debtors and creditors can appeal
to bankruptcy proceedings to determine their relative shares. With an explicit and contingent
institutional sharing mechanism dictating the division of pain in place, there is no need to take to
the streets, the backrooms, or to the money printing press to settle outcomes.
By contrast, when institutions are too weak to offer predictable and acceptable settlements,
or protect existing shares, everyone has an incentive to jockey for a greater share of the pie.
Outcomes will be mediated more by the relative bargaining power of actors than by pre-existing
implicit or explicit contracts.
Often, bargaining will break down. Then, a government without the institutional capacity
to allocate the burdens of adversity among its citizenry fairly will be tempted to spread it through
the easiest means available, inflation. Nominal instability will accompany real instability in
countries with weak institutions, lending support to the view that while the proximate cause for
inflation may be monetary expansion, inflation is always and everywhere a political phenomenon!
1.2. Evidence for the link between inflation and poor growth.
We want to establish two facts here, which are a little different from the work cited so far.
First, we want to test whether the inflation “tax” is higher in downturns, and second, whether this
phenomenon is particularly acute for countries with poor institutions. To check this, we have data
on the value of the inflation tax, which is measured as ∆CPI /(1+ ∆CPI) where ∆CPI is the change

4

in the Consumer Price Index in the country over the year. This is computed every year from 1965
to 2002 for 165 countries. In Table 1, we present summary statistics and cross-correlations for the
inflation tax, the standard deviation of the inflation tax computed over the preceding five years, the
growth rate in GDP, and the quality of institutions measured by four different indices: government
efficiency, rule of law, quality of regulation, and control of corruption. These indices are from the
Governance Matters III database (Kaufman, et al. (2003)). We also report an index of institutional
quality constructed using the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) indicators; this second
institutional index approximates the one used by Knack and Keefer (1995).
In Figure 1, we plot the real growth of a country’s GDP, averaged over 1980 to 1995
against average inflation tax over the same period, separately for countries with below median
levels of government effectiveness and countries above median. The negative slope is steeper in the
former, suggesting that slower growth is correlated with more inflation in countries with weak
institutions.
Rather than average correlations, we are interested in the time series patterns across
countries. In Table 2 we use a panel of yearly observations between 1965 and 2002 where the
dependent variable is the inflation tax in a year in a country. In column (1), we estimate a random
effects GLS model where the explanatory variables are a constant and the growth rate in GDP. The
coefficient of the GDP growth rate is negative and highly significant suggesting that the inflation
tax is highest in periods of low GDP growth. A standard deviation increase in the growth rate is
associated with a reduction in the inflation tax by .0241, which is 20 percent of its sample standard
deviation. In column (2), we include the index of government efficiency (the results with the other
“Governance Matters” institutional variables are qualitatively similar) and the interaction of GDP
growth with the index. As the prior literature has found, countries with a better institutional
environment tend to experience lower inflation tax. Particularly interesting is that the positive
significant coefficient of the interaction term suggests, as predicted, that the inflation tax in

5

countries with better institutions is less sensitive to growth. In column (3), we estimate the model
including country fixed effects, and find no qualitative change in the coefficients of interest. 2
One problem with the estimated model is that we cannot tell the direction of causality.
High inflation may, in fact, cause low growth, though why this should be more pronounced in
countries with poor institutions is harder to say. Nevertheless, it is important to examine the effect
of the exogenous component of growth on the inflation tax. Typically, a country will be affected by
similar exogenous shocks as its neighbors, if not directly, then via trade. So one plausible
instrument for a country’s i’s growth is EXTGROWTH, which is the weighted average growth of
all other countries j, with each country j’s growth weighted by that country’s log GDP and divided
by the square of the distance between i and j. In column (4), we re-estimate the fixed effects model,
using EXTGROWTH to instrument for growth. The coefficient of the interaction is now larger in
magnitude and stronger in significance.
Large countries may affect the growth of their neighbors, so there is a case for arguing the
instrument is purer for small countries. One should ask if the coefficient estimate for the interaction
differs for small countries. In column 5, we re-estimate the fixed effect instrumented regression
with an additional term, the interaction multiplied by an indicator for countries whose GDP is
below the 90th percentile GDP. The coefficient estimate for the indicator is statistically insignificant
and small, suggesting that small countries do not have a different estimated interaction coefficient
than large countries. This lends confidence to the instrument for growth.
There could, however, be some concern about our measure for institutional quality. It may
be that the proxy for institutions is simply a proxy for per capita GDP. In column (6), we also
include the interaction between initial GDP for the country (in 1965 or the first year for which we
have GDP) and the country’s growth rate. The coefficient of the interaction between institutions
and growth is now slightly higher in magnitude, and still strongly significant.

2

We also cluster by country and include year indicators with no qualitative change in the interaction
coefficient.

6

We have assumed that institutions are slow moving, and have thus taken the index of
government efficiency from Kaufman et al. (2003), averaged over the years 1996, 1998, and 2000
as the measure of institutional quality in a country for the period 1965-2002. One concern is that
this measure is not pre-determined and exogenous. There is some controversy about what
instruments are appropriate for institutions. Following Acemogulu et al. (2002), we use the log of a
country’s population density in 1500 (countries that had less of a native population were less likely
to have an exploitative colonial structure imposed on them and have better institutions today) as an
instrument for institutional quality in column (7). While we lose a number of countries, the
coefficient of the interaction is still positive, large, and statistically significant. 3
The opposite concern would be that the measure of institutional quality is too static, that it
does not reflect changes that take place in a country over time. The problem is that detailed
measures of institutional quality going back to 1965 are simply not available. However, the index
we have constructed from ICRG data is one measure of institutional quality that does go back till
1985. 4 In column 8, we use the data from 1985, with the time-varying index as our measure of
institutional quality and find that the interaction variable is positive and significant as predicted.
The bottom line is that the inflation tax is higher when countries experience poor growth
(as also in Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2004)), and it is particularly high when those
countries have poor institutions. Poor societies with weak institutions do not share the burden of
distress well. 5
1.3. Contractual Adaptation

3

Of course, while the instrument for institutional quality is exogenous and pre-determined, whether it
satisfies exclusion restrictions depends on what else we think might explain the institutions growth
interaction. Since we have put forward no such alternative explanation, we do not pursue this issue.
4
We try and approximate the index created by Knack and Keefer (1995). The ICRG measures for quality of
bureaucracy, rule of law, corruption, and investment protection (including risk of expropriation, contract
repudiation, and repatriation of profits) are all normalized to be between 0 and 1. The index is the weighted
sum of these four measures, with the first three having a weight of 0.2, and the last having a weight of 0.4.
5
This contrasts with the view in Tornell and Lane (1999) where developing countries do not share windfalls
well and overspend them.

7

If the country’s underlying basic and narrow institutions do not permit a contingent,
speedy, and predictable sharing of adverse economic circumstances, and the tendency of the
government is to spread the burden along the path of least resistance, economic agents will take
steps to protect themselves. But without a reliable and effective legal system, what can they do?
Clearly the answer has to be to use instruments that depend in a very limited way on the legal
system for enforcement.
One approach is to use inflexible, non-contingent contracts, whose violation is easily
detected. For example, labor contracts in many developing countries effectively do not permit
employees to be fired. This is seen as inefficient because it does not allow firms to react quickly to
business conditions. Often, these prohibitions are ascribed to overly strong unions that hold the
economy to ransom. But if courts are slow and corrupt, so that a worker who is wrongfully fired
has no redress, perhaps the prohibition of firing—because violations are so easily and publicly
observable and can be responded to through mass protests—is the only way to protect workers
from arbitrary decisions by employers (also see Glaeser and Shleifer (2001)). Job tenure may also
act as a form of social security because the government does a miserable job providing a safety net,
and private insurance markets do not exist. Thus an inflexible contract can protect workers when
the preponderance of bargaining power is with firms.
This is not to argue that such contractual arrangements should never be reformed – they
may outlive their initial usefulness if the legal system improves, but may continue to be supported
by vested interests. The arguments we have made may be trotted out as a defense long after they
are valid.
1.3.1. Demandable debt
Another form of a rigid contract, but one with special features, is a bank demand deposit.
Essentially, a demand deposit has two features that make it virtually self-enforcing. First, the bank
is required to honor the claim when it is presented at the teller window. If it is slow in doing so, or
attempts in any way to renege, the news spreads quickly since the refusal to honor a demand

8

deposit is such a clear and incontrovertible event. Second, the bank honors withdrawals in the order
they are presented until no more depositors want to withdraw or the bank fails. “Sequential
service” implies that when depositors sense even the slightest hint of potential distress, they have a
strong incentive to withdraw their money – if they do, at worst they have the trouble of redepositing if the bank later turns out to be safe, if they don’t, they may end up penniless as the bank
fails.
The two features ensure that the ordinary depositor has a fairly secure claim, supported by
other depositors – the threat of a bank run plays the same role as the threat of a labor strike – if
bank management reneges on the commitment to repay the deposit contract it will face a depositor
run which will close it down. So except in the case where it absolutely cannot pay, bank
management will honor deposit contracts (see Calomiris and Kahn (1991), and Diamond and Rajan
(2001)). This may be one reason why banks are such an important component of the financial
sector in emerging markets.
The broader point is that anticipating little power over outcomes in downturns, weaker
agents might demand contractual options that will protect them in those states. For labor, it is the
option to keep a job, for depositors, it is the option to get their money. For the economy as a whole,
however, the exercise of these options add to the difficulty of adjustment in downturns,
exacerbating the problems created by institutional weakness.
In the rest of the paper, we will examine these problems further, specifically focusing on
how demandable debt raises the risks of financing industry in emerging markets. But before we
explore that, let us add two more ingredients.
1.3.2 Domestic Liability Dollarization
Inflation is a greater systematic risk, in the financial sense, in emerging markets. When it
is likely to explode in downturns there, depositors will demand an extraordinarily high risk
premium for holding inflation risk. Issuers who want to minimize expected debt service -perhaps
because of short horizons, or because they are liquidity constrained- will opt to issue real

9

instruments (see Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001) for a related explanation, and Ize and Levy
Yeyati (2003) and Jeanne (2002) on other theories why inflation risk could lead to dollarization).
If there is high volatility in inflation (which usually accompanies a high inflation rate) in
addition to weak institutions, inflation indexed instruments may not be attractive to the public.
Uncertainty about the measurement of inflation, delays in producing an accurate estimate, and fears
that the measurement will be manipulated, can increase their risks. The natural alternative to
issuing inflation indexed bonds is to denominate them in a foreign currency. This way, suspicion
about the official actions in a downturn may lead quite naturally to domestic liability dollarization.
1.3.3 Evidence on Liability Dollarization
What evidence do we have for this conjecture? Nicolo, Honohan, and Ize (2003) find that
in a cross-section of countries, the extent of dollarization (dollar deposits to total deposits) is
positively and significantly correlated with the log of inflation. However, when a proxy for
institutional quality is included, inflation no longer enters significantly. The evidence is consistent
with weak institutions driving inflation, which in turn leads to greater dollarization.
Again, however, we want to test a more nuanced version. We also want to see if there is a
relationship between the sensitivity of inflation tax to growth (which we have seen, appears to
reflect the ability of a country to allocate the costs of economic adversity) and the level of
dollarization. We also want to see if the extent of dollarization is related to the volatility of
inflation, over and above its correlation with the level of inflation. In Table 3, we present summary
statistics and cross correlations. The extent of liability dollarization is measured by the ratio of
foreign currency deposits to total deposits (FCDTD) in a country’s banking system averaged over
the 1990s, using the Nicolo, Honohan, and Ize (2003) data. The sensitivity of inflation tax to
growth for a country (henceforth “SENSITIVITY”) is the coefficient estimate on GDP growth in a
regression of the inflation tax on GDP growth for that country for the period 1965-2002. The
standard deviation of inflation tax is measured for every period t by its standard deviation during

10

the five years from t-4 to t; then for the cross-section we take the average of standard deviation
over 1965 to 2002.
In Table 4, the dependent variable is liability dollarization in a country in the 1990s. In
column (1) we include the sensitivity of inflation to GDP growth and a constant as explanatory
variables. The coefficient estimate for the sensitivity is negative and significant. Since the
sensitivity is typically negative (lower growth, more inflation tax), countries with a higher
magnitude of the sensitivity have greater deposit dollarization as expected. In Figure 2, we plot the
extent of dollarization against SENSITIVITY. As the graph suggests, the relationship is likely to
be non-linear. So in column (2), we allow for a non-linear specification of sensitivity by including
the square of sensitivity. The coefficient of the squared term is positive and strongly significant.
Greater sensitivity again is correlated with greater dollarization. If sensitivity changes from 0 to its
lower 1 percentile threshold (-0.029), dollarization increases by 33 percent, which is 140 percent of
its standard deviation.
We check that this relationship persists even when we include the “usual suspects”. In
column (3), we include the average inflation tax in the country, and in column (4) we add the
standard deviation of the inflation tax. While the coefficients for the non-linear specification for
sensitivity are positive and statistically significant in both columns, the coefficient for inflation tax
is positive and significant only when included alone, but becomes insignificant when the standard
deviation of inflation tax is included. The estimates for sensitivity are qualitatively similar if we
include squared terms for inflation tax and the standard deviation of inflation tax (estimates not
reported). Finally, in column (5), we include both the log of per capita GDP and the index of legal
restrictions on dollarization compiled by Nicolo, Honohan, and Ize (2003), which is available for
only 83 of the countries, and find qualitatively similar results.
One should not read too much into these last few “kitchen sink” regressions since
sensitivity, inflation tax, and the standard deviation of the inflation tax measure various aspects of
the same thing. All we want to show the reader is that both sensitivity and the standard deviation of

11

inflation tax seem to be correlated with the extent of dollarization as predicted by the earlier
discussion, and seem to capture something more than just the level of the inflation tax, which the
prior literature has identified.
The evidence thus far is consistent with the following conclusions: Countries with weak
institutions have greater sensitivity of inflation to growth. In countries with higher sensitivity,
investors have a higher demand for real deposits. Because inflation is also very volatile, they may
prefer deposits denominated in foreign exchange rather than deposits that are indexed. 6
1.4. Aggregate Dollar Constraints/Sudden stops
Let us now add the final ingredient to the “model”. Since emerging markets with the
weakest institutions for conflict management (and the most divided societies) have the hardest time
spreading the burdens of distress, they are also likely to have the most difficulty raising resources
to continue to service external debt. The tendency of some countries to default repeatedly
(Reinhart, Rogoff, Savastano (2003)) may reflect the weakness of their capacity to manage
economic adversity than any inherent lack of honesty on the part of their governments. But this
means that these countries are likely to face aggregate constraints on external borrowing sooner
than other countries. Since in periods of adversity creditors will reduce their expectations of what
the country will be able to repay, they will also reduce what they are willing to lend. Such a
“vertical” constraint on dollars the country can borrow (Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2000,2001))
or sudden stop (Calvo and Reinhart (2002)), will interact with liability dollarization to produce
unfortunate consequences we now document.
II. Consequences: Overshooting, Liquidation, and Contagion
Now that we have the ingredients, dollarized bank deposits and the possibility of aggregate
constraints on borrowing, let us sketch the consequences.

6

There is a sense in which this argument runs counter to the “Original Sin” thesis (for example, see
Hausman, Eichengreen, and Panizza (2002)) because we attribute financial fragilities to weak institutions
rather than to other factors like country size. But Hausman et al. (2002) focus on the currency denomination
of public debt rather than on the currency denomination of bank debt.

12

2.1. The Sources of Dollar Shortage
In the normal course, dollar depositors will want to withdraw some of their deposits. The
reasons for this can range from normal liquidity needs (such as importing foreign goods) to good
dollar investment opportunities outside the country. Clearly, if their bank has fewer dollar reserves
than the amount of withdrawals, it will buy dollars on the market. Summing across banks, there
will be an aggregate demand for dollars, which will have to be met out of the country’s reserves,
dollar repatriation by exporters, and, if necessary, additional external borrowing. It does not really
matter which domestic entity (government or banks) does the external borrowing since the
aggregate available pool of dollar resources will determine whether the aggregate domestic demand
can be satisfied.
Problems arise when the aggregate demand exceeds the aggregate supply (not including
external borrowing) and the country has difficulty borrowing the shortfall. One such situation is
one where the economy is booming but the (fixed) exchange rate is overvalued. Exporters may not
earn enough and, far from bringing foreign exchange into the country to repay loans, they may seek
to draw down their deposits to continue operations. Importers may have a huge demand for dollars
because foreign goods appear cheap. When added to the normal liquidity needs of depositors, the
demand may be so high that it even exceeds the willingness of foreign investors to lend the
shortfall. Another situation arises when the excess demand is relatively small but the economy is in
a bad way, or the government has over-borrowed, so foreign investors are unwilling even to lend
meager amounts of extra dollars needed. In fact, the government can contribute to the private sector
dollar shortage by adding its own external financing needs.
Regardless of how the dollar shortage emerges (and we will shortly see some examples),
the dollarized banking system can exacerbate it (see Diamond and Rajan (2005) for a detailed
model). Since the banks have issued a non-renegotiable promise to pay dollars, they either have to
convince their own depositors not to withdraw, by hiking the interest rates paid on dollar deposits,
or they have to attract dollars away from other banks in the spot market. Higher rates may quell

13

some depositor demand; but a core liquidity demand that cannot be deterred with higher rates will
remain. If this still exceeds the available dollars, the banks will compete with each other for scarce
dollars. Given that a bank fails if it does not come up with the needed dollars, it will be willing to
pay what it takes for additional dollars. With an overall shortage in place, however, banks can
competitively drive each other into failure.
Short banks will sell non-dollar spot assets and long term assets for dollars. Thus the
exchange rate (dollars per domestic currency) will tend to fall and interest rates (both for long term
dollar assets and for long term domestic currency assets) will rise. In principle, because the
quantity of dollar demand and supply cannot adjust readily, these prices can move very far from
any notion of fundamental value. Both the exchange rate and the interest rate can overshoot during
the scramble for dollar liquidity.
Real decisions will be affected during this scramble, with lasting consequences. Let us go
systematically through them.
2.2. Real Consequences
The first place banks will look for additional dollars is amongst those who generate them
and those who use them. Exporters will be squeezed, in an attempt to get them to speed up their
own dollar receipts and hasten repayment of dollar borrowings to banks (on average, across
emerging markets approximately 30 percent of domestic loans made by banks are denominated in
foreign currency (see IMF (2004)). To raise these amounts quickly, exporters will sell finished
goods inventories at steep discounts, and reduce near-term sales prices. They will shelve exports
that are highly import intensive, and abandon long-term projects, especially those that require
capital goods imports.
Clearly, all these actions will impair the economy’s medium run ability to export and thus
its ability to generate dollars in the future. The weaker a country’s institutions, the greater will be
the discount banks place on a future dollar generated by an exporter relative to a current dollar

14

(foreign investors will be willing to lend less against the future), and the greater the long-run
destructive consequences of a scramble for dollars.
We will see these effects not only in the tradable sector, but also in the non-tradable sector.
As domestic interest rates rise (because long run domestic assets are being sold for dollars), more
and more domestic projects will be shelved as they have to meet an impossible hurdle rate.
As bank assets fall in value, some banks, typically the ones with the greatest asset liability
currency mismatch (though see later), will become insolvent. This will trigger a generalized run on
the banks’ assets, causing even those who had no desire to withdraw to add to dollar demand. 7 The
horizon of failing banks will be even shorter, causing them to be even more indiscriminate in the
squeeze they put on borrowers. Even projects that could produce substantial dollar revenues in the
near term may be sacrificed for the immediate need – for example, banks may stop offering
working capital loans and export credit even if these are essential for the exporter to generate
revenues. As a result, the aggregate pool of dollars available over the near term could fall as banks
fail, and the aggregate excess demand for dollars could increase, putting pressure on other banks. 8
This form of contagion could imperil the entire banking system.
To summarize, when bank depositors demand repayment in dollars but the economy
cannot generate enough dollars to satisfy them, the consequences can be very serious. Domestic
dollar interest rates will rise to draw in dollars and choke off depositor demands. If, however, there
is a core group of depositors who absolutely want to withdraw dollars, and a limit to which
outsiders are willing to lend to the country, the country’s banking system can face an excess
demand for dollars that it cannot meet. If so, other asset prices will fall precipitously as banks
scramble to capture enough dollars from the common pool to save themselves. Domestic currency
7

Note that if the exchange rate is fixed but there are no capital controls, domestic currency depositors have
an even greater incentive to withdraw (and convert) than dollar depositors because they will fear a
devaluation.
8
Clearly a bank that fails will refuse to honor some of its dollar depositors. The unsatisfied demand of these
depositors will reduce aggregate demand. Therefore the effect of bank failure on the excess demand for
dollars depends on whether supply falls faster or slower than demand. See Diamond and Rajan (2005) for
conditions under which each is true.

15

interest rates will spike up, while the exchange rate will plummet. Banks will squeeze borrowers,
and aggregate activity will fall. Some banks may become insolvent and such failures could be
contagious.
Of course, in any such model, we could get multiple equilibria, where outside lenders
impose a sudden stop, which leads to the dollar shortage, which leads to bank actions that reduce
future dollar receipts, which justify the stop. We do not need, however, to appeal to multiple
equilibria to explain the crisis – a spike upwards in dollar demand, or downwards in dollar supply,
coupled with a “normal” demand for liquidity are sufficient to produce the effects.
Consider now how this “model” differs from earlier work. In a comprehensive survey,
Frankel and Wei (2004) attempt to distinguish between the three “generations” of crisis models on
the basis on their explanation of why the crisis occurs:
“ Whose fault is the crisis? Generation I says domestic macroeconomic policy,
Generation II says volatile financial markets, and Generation III says financial structure.
In neutral language, the explanations are, respectively, excessive macroeconomic
expansion, “multiple equilibria,” and moral hazard. In finger-pointing language, the
respective culprits are undisciplined domestic policymakers, crazy international investors,
and crony capitalists.”

The “model” in this paper is related to the third generation models in that it focuses on structural
problems associated with lending to emerging markets. However, in our paper crises are not
necessarily caused by willful misbehavior. Instead, they stem from adverse liquidity shocks that
jolt a system that is necessarily rigid, given the institutional inadequacies of the economy. Put
another way, better regulation and supervision may not necessarily eliminate the possibility of a
crisis. What is really needed is deep-rooted institutional reform: susceptibility to crises in our
framework ultimately rests not in an incentive problem but a collective action problem.
A closely related paper is Calvo, Izquierdo, and Mejia (2004), who also focus on a link
between sudden stops, dollarization, and banking crises. In their paper, sudden stops lead to a
devaluation, -in order to maintain external balance- which then causes problems in the dollarized
banking system through liability mismatches. In other words, macro-causes have micro-

16

consequences. In our model, the channel is not the need to maintain external balance but bank
liquidity. The sudden stop creates a dollar shortage, which leads banks to dump assets, causing the
exchange rate (and interest rates) to overshoot fundamentals, which then create balance sheet
problems for the banking system. Micro-causes aggregate up to have macro-consequences.
While we think both explanations have merit, there are differences. For instance, to the
extent that a devaluation gives exporters the ability to earn more (expansionary devaluation), there
is no reason for it to hurt the solvency of a dollarized banking system – since banks typically make
dollar loans to the exporters (see Nicola et al. (2003)). But to the extent that the capacity to earn
future dollars does not translate into current dollars, a liquidity mismatch could persist, and banks
could still go under in our framework.
2.2. Some Examples
Consider some examples.
Argentina (2001) 9
By the end of 2000, the Argentinean banking system had approximately $72 billion in
foreign currency denominated assets and about the same amount in liabilities. By most standards, it
seemed to have matched exposures. However, $25 billion of its assets were government securities,
issued by a government that was increasingly strapped for financing. Another $41 billion were
foreign currency denominated loans and securities issued by Argentinean corporations, which
clearly did not have the ability to repay quickly as exports amounted to only $ 31 billion. Of the
liabilities, $ 48.5 billion were foreign currency deposits.
In this fragile situation depositor runs could start for two related reasons. First, if the
government could not draw in more external resources to meet its own external debt service needs,
or its new borrowing requirements, the anticipated available dollar pool would be severely
constrained. The banking system’s liquidity needs would compete with the government’s needs,

9

This section relies heavily on IMF (2004)

17

pushing up interest rates and leading, perhaps, to a devaluation. 10 Second, given the extensive bank
holdings of government assets, a government default could render banks insolvent (though see
below).
Depositor runs started in 2001. Bank liabilities fell by $24 billion (approximately 9 percent
of GDP). In fact, Argentina lost more as a result of the bank run than as a result of the inability of
the government to access external markets to meet financing needs. Interestingly, the fall in
domestic currency denominated deposits was far greater than the fall in foreign currency deposits,
suggesting that depositors feared a devaluation, perhaps from the liquidity shortage, more than a
bank default. Since bank holdings of government debt could not be reduced, -in fact, they
increased-, the run was financed by curtailing private lending ($ 12 billion), running down bank
liquid assets ($ 5 billion), and borrowing from the central bank ($ 9 billion).
Ultimately, the entire banking system was affected, deposits were frozen, then loans and
deposits were “pesified” at different rates. The consequences are still being dealt with. The point to
take away is that a government may affect the dollarized domestic banking system simply by
crowding out access to dollars .
Uruguay (2002)
Uruguay experienced an almost reverse sequence of events: liquidity problems in the
banking sector triggered a crisis, a devaluation, and problems for the government, which then, had
to restructure debt. Let us examine how this happened.
Uruguay also had a highly dollarized banking system. Bank deposits were about 90 percent
of GDP by the end of 2001; 90 percent of these deposits were denominated in US dollars. About
half these deposits were held by non-residents, mostly Argentineans.
As the Argentineans saw their deposits in Argentina frozen, they started withdrawing from
Uruguayan banks. Their liquidity need could have been met by Uruguay’s domestic holdings of
10

Though not necessarily a default by dollar borrowers. For instance, Bleakley and Cowan (2002) find that
the negative balance sheet effects of devaluation are outweighed by the competitiveness gains for a sample of
Latin American firms.

18

liquid foreign currency assets. However, anticipating a shortage, Uruguayan residents also began
withdrawing deposits. With over 45 percent of the foreign currency deposits withdrawn, the
currency depreciated precipitously, prompting further concerns about bank solvency. The
government declared a bank holiday to stop the run; eventually, it reopened successfully the
banking system with the help of a Stand-By Arrangement from the IMF and a rescheduling of
deposits.
As a result of the depreciation, public debt, which was largely denominated in foreign
currency, ballooned from about 45 percent of GDP, by the end of 2001, to 100 percent of GDP, by
the end of 2002. Eventually, it had to be restructured. In this case, liquidity problems in the banking
sector created problems for the government in servicing its public debt.
South Korea (1997-98)
It is generally accepted that the trigger for the Korean financial crisis was a decline in
export growth, especially in key areas like semi-conductors. The weakening demand in importing
partners and the appreciation of the real exchange rate, as the dollar -to which many Asian
currencies were implicitly pegged- strengthened against the yen, were behind the pressure on the
real external sector. In the case of Korea, such initial pressure, emanating in the real external
sector, was compounded by a banking system that had issued a significant amount of short term
external debt and thus was vulnerable to a liquidity shock. Contrast this with the liquidity shock
that resulted from the government’s losing access to external borrowing, in the case of Argentina,
or the liquidity shock set in motion by Argentineans withdrawing their deposits abroad, in the case
of Uruguay.
We will not describe the details of the crisis, which resembled in many ways what we have
described above (see IMF (2002, 210) and IMF (1999, 188) for details). Korean banks initially
started facing difficulties in mid 1997. The government announced a guarantee of foreign
borrowings by Korean banks and the central bank attempted to help foreign branches and
subsidiaries of Korean banks roll over their foreign currency borrowings. But this depleted

19

reserves, leaving the central bank with little to fight domestic bank runs. The government simply
did not have the necessary dollars to back the guarantee it had announced. The won fell sharply.
In early December, the IMF announced a Stand-By Arrangement with Korea equivalent to
$ 21 billion, with additional financing from others of $ 37 billion. Yet this massive package was
insufficient, and the won continued falling. It was only when foreign private banks agreed to
maintain their exposure to Korean banks by exchanging their inter-bank loans for short term
government guaranteed bonds, and when the IMF accelerated disbursement of the loan, that
pressure on the won abated. In terms of our framework, the shortage was eliminated by reducing
dollar demand and increasing dollar supply and thus alleviating pressure on both the exchange rate
and the interest rate.
Interestingly, in the case of Korea, a liquidity crisis was averted because the government
had spare borrowing capacity and could draw in dollars (with some help from the IFIs and
developed country governments), which it then lent out to the banks. With a few examples behind
us, we can now discuss policy interventions in general terms.
III. Interventions
Let us recapitulate what happens if no intervention takes place. Obviously, the only way to
eliminate a dollar shortage is to increase supply or reduce demand for dollars. If dollar depositors
who seek to withdraw are not tempted to stay in the bank by higher dollar interest rates (for the
same reason, perhaps, that higher interest rates do not draw fresh foreign investors in), then banks
will start competing for scarce dollars. Since a bank has to satisfy every one of its withdrawing
dollar depositors in order to stay in business, it will be willing to pay any feasible price for dollars
if it is falling short. This is why prices of non-dollar assets can deviate so far from fundamentals –
the bank essentially faces a classic short squeeze where it has to deliver a specific asset in short
supply, so it is willing to sell all other assets, almost regardless of price.
The dollar shortage is a form of liquidity shortage for the banking system. However, it can
affect the solvency of firms, banks, and even the government, so it is extremely difficult to tell it

20

apart from a solvency problem. There are many ways solvency and liquidity can interact. Consider
two. First, the dollar shortage may stem from an insolvent government, not being able to roll over
dollar liabilities (a sudden stop). Too few dollars relative to demand can cause banks to dump
domestic assets, pushing up interest rates and depressing the exchange rate, rendering, thus, firms
with dollar liabilities insolvent. Second, some banks may be insolvent because of bad loans. A run
on them may cause a squeeze on credit to exporters, a shortage of dollars, and contagion in the
banking system, rendering the government insolvent through its contingent liabilities to the
banking system. And so on...
Put another way, the practical challenge in the midst of a crisis is to make a judgment call
on whether the crisis is one of illiquidity. If the judgment is in the affirmative, the proper
intervention is to lend freely to the healthiest banks the commodity that is in short supply, in this
case dollars (or alternatively, convince dollar demanders to hold off pressing their claims). For, if
the crisis is truly one of illiquidity, prevailing market rates will fall, and weaker institutions will
regain market access rapidly. If the crisis is one of insolvency, market rates will stay high, and the
banking system will continue to be fragile. Thus, except when failures are isolated or when asset
values collapse for other reasons than high interest rates or low exchange rates, it is typically only
after intervening in a crisis and seeing the consequences that one can tell whether the crisis was one
of illiquidity or insolvency.
Given the difficulty of telling illiquidity from insolvency, and given the cost of a banking
system meltdown, if the government has dollar reserves, spare external borrowing capacity, or
support from international financial institutions, it would sell dollars into the banking system
hoping to alleviate pressure. However, we have defined a dollar shortage as one where the
government itself has too few resources to contribute. So let us turn to other interventions.
3.1. Ex Post Intervention by Country Authorities
3.1.1. Recapitalization

21

The authorities can recapitalize specific banks by offering them additional domestic assets
or guarantees (backed by domestic assets). Often, what is termed “liquidity support” are simply
loans by the central bank to distressed banks without adequate collateral backing the loans – in
short, they are partial recapitalizations.
While targeted recapitalizations can prevent specific banks from failing, they leave, on the
aggregate, a dollar gap that has to be closed somehow. Unless other banks are allowed to fail, the
aggregate dollar demand cannot be satisfied. This implies that a bank recapitalization without any
attempt to bridge the dollar gap only forces other, potentially healthier, banks to fail. A blanket
recapitalization or guarantee of all banks simply allows all banks to bid more for dollars (that is, it
increases the interest or exchange overshooting) without reducing the eventual extent of bank
failures. This is why it is best to close down some banks and thus resolve the dollar shortage before
offering indiscriminate guarantees.
3.1.2. Monetary Policy
The monetary authorities could be accommodative and buy long-term domestic assets in
exchange for domestic reserves (or do the opposite). Monetary accommodation will reduce the
extent to which the burden of adjustment falls on the interest rate, and increase the downward
pressure on the exchange rate. If not reversed later, it will increase inflationary pressures.
However, the proximate effect will be to shift the burden amongst banks – the survival
chances of banks with relatively more holdings of long-term domestic assets will improve, while
the chances of those with more net dollar liabilities will weaken. Whether the new pattern of failure
reduces the overall dollar shortage depends on whether the newly failing banks subtract more
dollar liquidity in failing than the banks that would fail absent the intervention.
An exchange rate defense (keeping the exchange rate high by tightening monetary
policy), or an interest rate defense (keeping the interest rate low by being accommodative), are
different in this simple framework only in that they select different sets of banks for failure. The
choice between them rests on which one allows the banking system to come through the dollar

22

shortage creating the minimum long-term damage to the real economy – through the damage the
failing banks and their clients sustain. We are, of course, abstracting from any issues of credibility
here, though it would be hard to unambiguously relate monetary authority credibility gains to a
particular form of defense.
Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2004) also examine monetary policy in a situation of a
dollar shortage. However, while our focus is on the effects of monetary policy on the extent of
failure and economic damage (an ex-post analysis), their focus is on the ex-ante effects on the
incentive to hold dollars. An accommodative monetary policy is unambiguously preferred in their
analysis because it increases agent incentives to hold dollars before the crisis. Since the main
friction in their model is that the price of dollars is too low ex post (agents who need them do not
have the collateral to buy them), any policy that enhances the price of dollars during the crisis
enhances ex ante incentives.
If, however, such a policy did considerable damage to the banking system (because, for
example, moderately illiquid banks had many dollar liabilities), an effect they abstract from, our
analysis suggests the policy would be dominated. In fact, such a pre-announced policy might have
limited credibility ex ante and thus limited incentive effects. On the other hand, unlike their paper,
we assume no frictions in trading dollars ex post so we abstract from the effects they focus on. The
two papers should therefore be seen as complementary.
Before proceeding to other interventions, we should note that the monetary authority also
has the ability to select banks that will fail by allocating its limited foreign exchange reserves only
to some banks (i.e., at a subsidized price) and not to others. While such an intervention is fraught
with political difficulties (who will be chosen and will the process be transparent), ultimately, it is
an optimization problem where regulators allocate scarce resources to minimize the overall cost of
bank failures. Thus it is similar in consequence to the interventions just discussed.
3.1.3. Forced conversion/suspension of convertibility/capital controls.

23

Finally, consider even stronger interventions that violate the rights of the depositors. These
include forced conversion into domestic currency at a pre-determined (typically below market)
rate, the freezing of foreign currency deposits, and the imposition of capital controls. Clearly, such
interventions can be implemented only by the country authorities and not by the banks alone.
While these interventions do solve, to differing extents, the problem of dollar shortage,
they do so at the expense of a substantial loss in future credibility. Moreover, it is not clear that
they can be implemented effectively and for the long term. For instance, capital controls tend to
leak, and the longer they are in place, the more they leak. Therefore, the authorities had better be
confident that the liquidity shortage is temporary, else the breathing space these measures give
them will insufficient to rectify the problem; the problem will return with a vengeance with the
added difficulty that the authorities then have no credibility.
3.2. Ex ante intervention by country authorities.
Thus far we have discussed measures that could be taken in the midst of a crisis. Consider
now measures that could be taken upfront by the economy.
3.2.1. Reserves
One way to bullet-proof an economy against dollar shortages is for the authorities to build
foreign reserves. Of course, there are costs to holding reserves and to building them, including the
fiscal costs and possible distortions in the exchange rate. Furthermore, it is possible that the level of
dollarization in the economy increases as reserves, and confidence, grow. As a result, the
authorities may lose all control over monetary policy and the transmission mechanism. Building a
moderate amount of reserves is clearly warranted, but the welfare effects of building a hoard large
enough to buffer against most crises are ambiguous.
A second question that arises with reserves is whether the country should use them to
prepay debt. In other words, is spare debt capacity not the same as holding reserves, and less costly
to boot? For the riskiest countries though, prepaying debt may be dominated by holding reserves:
spare debt capacity is less fungible than reserves, and may also disappear in a crisis. Also, by

24

prepaying debt, the country loses the option to force a restructuring, which may be valuable in
times of stress.
3.2.2. De-dollarization and shifting dollarization
Given the risks associated with dollar shortages, some countries, including Mexico and
Bolivia in 1982 and Peru in 1985, have opted to ban dollarization. But if the proximate cause,
monetary instability, is not eliminated, investors will demand significantly higher interest rates to
hold domestic currency deposits, and some may simply take the money out of the country.
Consistent with this, countries that today have significant restrictions on dollarization, such as
Brazil, Colombia, and Venezuela, have particularly high loan spreads (see IADB (2004)).
Also, domestic currency depositors are not passive. With less-than-effective monetary
authorities, banks could be subject to stress even if they only issue domestic deposits. For instance,
suppose the authorities maintain an overvalued but fixed exchange rate. Fearing an eventual return
to equilibrium, depositors have an incentive to withdraw and convert into foreign currency. This
puts enormous stress on the banking system, forcing it to pay high interest rates to keep depositors
in, with the level of interest rates being determined by the degree of overvaluation rather than more
typical determinants like the return on investment and expected inflation. As described earlier,
domestic currency depositors were prominent in the Argentinean bank runs in 2001.
The point is that dollarization is not necessarily an aberration in the environment which
gives birth to it. Instead, it may be a reasonable adaptation. As Savastano (1996) and Balino et al.
(1999) document, the consequence of banning dollarization in Mexico, Bolivia, and Peru was
typically a severe contraction of intermediation which was reversed in Bolivia and Peru only when
dollar deposits were allowed again. Similarly, Nicolo, Honohan, and Ize (2003) show that
economies with high inflation tend to have more monetary depth with dollarization than without.
Rather than banning liability dollarization altogether, authorities may want to focus on
removing the distortions that lead it to its excessive practice, such as the dollar-liability issuers not

25

internalizing all the risks. More useful, of course, is to focus on changing the underlying conditions
that lead to dollarization, in the first place, a point we will touch on shortly.
Before concluding this section, note two points. First, the transition from an economy with
liability dollarization to one where dollarization is banned implies either violating existing dollar
contracts and prohibiting new ones, or shifting dollar liabilities to another domestic entity. The
Brazilian government essentially took the latter route by taking on the dollar liabilities of its
banking system – through the issuance of dollar denominated bonds to banks in 1998. As a result,
even though the real depreciated substantially in 1998-99, the banks were relatively immunized. Of
course, government debt ballooned as a result.
From a theoretical perspective, the government could improve welfare by taking on the
dollar liabilities of the banking sector. When individual banks fail during a dollar shortage, we have
seen they can worsen the aggregate shortage. When the government takes over the liabilities of the
banking sector, these individual failures are eliminated, so the dollar shortage need not be as
severe. Against this, one should weigh the increased moral hazard if the government is expected to
step in every time banks anticipate trouble.
Second, as argued above, with a fixed exchange rate and full convertibility, even domestic
currency denominated liabilities may become a source of vulnerability. This suggests that the
choice of exchange regime is not without consequence (also see, for example, Burnside,
Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2001b) or Edwards (2004)). But unfortunately, the very institutional
requirements needed to maintain a monetary anchor with a floating exchange rate regime may be
missing in countries where fixed exchange regimes create vulnerabilities. Therefore, there are
trade-offs involved in the choice of exchange regime, and as suggested by Calvo and Mishkin
(2003), it may be more useful to focus on changing the underlying institutions rather than on
choosing a specific regime.
3.2.4. Institutional reform

26

The root cause of deposit dollarization, we have argued, is weak basic institutions for
conflict management. The more proximate causes are inadequate fiscal and monetary institutions.
Of course, it is easier, -though not easy-, to reform the narrow institutions rather than the basic
ones. But without reforming the deeper basic institutions, which typically requires deep-rooted
political change, how successful can reform of narrow institutions be? We do not know much about
the process of institutional reform; countries like Chile, Mexico, and South Korea that have
improved their basic institutions over a relatively short time, aided by good policies and rapid
economic growth, offer a only a few successful examples. Understanding what ingredients in this
mix are essential, and what simply are coincidental, is a topic of ongoing research on which,
hopefully, researchers will have more to say in the near future. For now, let us turn to the role the
international financial institutions can play.
3.3. What can IFIs do?
Clearly, the international financial institutions (IFIs) can provide the technical support that
will help countries adopt good policies and improve their narrow institutions (such as their fiscal
framework or their inflation targeting framework). They can also provide the bilateral and
multilateral economic surveillance that can alert countries to possible sources of shocks. The
International Monetary Fund does all this. The million dollar question, of course, is whether IFIs
should lend in such situations.
3.3.1. “Liquidity” Loans
A dollar shortage seems precisely the kind of temporary need that certain IFIs like the
International Monetary Fund were set up to meet. By creating a common reserve pool of dollars,
the IFIs can substitute for costly reserve hoarding by countries.
The most persuasive case for lending is when the IFI alleviates what is essentially a
market-driven short squeeze on the country. It tides the country over its temporary exchange
shortage, preventing more destructive domestic sector real adjustment, and gets repaid once the
reasons for the temporary need vanish (e.g., exports recover).

27

The difficulty, of course, even with this simple scenario is that the ultimate cause for a
dollar shortage has to be that the country loses access to international markets. Thus the IFI has to
make the judgment call of whether the loss of access is due to irrational/ rational uncoordinated
behavior by market participants, or whether it stems from genuine fears. If the former is the case,
most would agree that the IFI should act as a lender of last resort. The only remaining concern
would be whether this role creates bad incentives for market participants, for the government, and
for banks – the issue of moral hazard, to which we will come in a moment-.
If however the adverse shock precipitating the dollar shortage reflects a genuine
institutional infirmity in the country – for instance that the government has no fiscal discipline, it
has reached borrowing limits, and thus it is shut off from international capital markets – matters
become more difficult. It may well be that the country could undertake reforms that would help it
regain access. In this case the country is illiquid but solvent contingent on undertaking reforms.
Solvency, however, will not be restored until the markets gain confidence that the reforms are
irreversible. This implies that the lending may well not be temporary.
If the alternative is a banking system crisis coupled with a burden to restructure public
debt, both of which will set back the country’s economy considerably, it may well make sense to
lend even when reforms are highly probable but not fully assured. The IFI bears some risk here that
it will not be repaid, but it does so in the larger interest of the member country facing distress (and
it should impose conditionality as well as charge an adequate premium for the risk).
The problem critics have is with the assumption that the IFI has a better ability to gauge
willingness to reform than market participants. Two arguments have been put forward to justify
this. First, the IFI may have better information about the country. This may have been true in the
past, but given the development of financial markets, we see little reason to believe it to be true
today. Second, the IFI may have a better sense of its own ability (and willingness) to coax the
reform process forward, and may in fact have to show some success (or put its money at stake)
before the market is persuaded. The IFI may also be able to put in place incentives for the country

28

to reform. We find the second argument more persuasive but one should not rule out the possibility
that the IFI has an incentive to find a role for itself where none exists (see below).
A final situation where IFI lending may be warranted is when the country’s public debt is
too high given its underlying fundamentals, so it cannot borrow, but, as a result, it also faces an
immediate dollar shortage that threatens its banking system. Rather than stand back and watch the
banking system implode, the IFI may want to offer a bridge loan targeted at the banking system, to
be repaid when the country regains market access after restructuring its external public debt. Again,
this is a form of liquidity lending but one compounded by the problem that the excessive public
debt will prolong the eventual resolution.
All this, however, raises two questions. First, does IFI intervention distort incentives
among participants? Second, are there better ways to provide assurance of liquidity support to
member countries?
3.3.2. Incentive Distortion and Tough Love
At least three types of incentive distortions are possible: (i) An unwillingness on the part of
countries to take adequate precautions or to avoid excessively risky situations (ii) an unwillingness
on the part of investors to take all risks into account, knowing they will be “bailed out” (iii) an
unwillingness on the part of domestic corporations and banks to insure themselves adequately.
Reams and reams have been written on the issue of moral hazard and we have little to add.
Some argue that country moral hazard is not an issue because finance ministers and central bank
governors lose their jobs in a financial crisis. Others argue that investor moral hazard is not a
problem because investors lose their shirts in a crisis. These arguments are reasonable but miss the
point. No finance minister will take an action that he thinks will create a crisis for sure. At the
margin, however, concerned about budget deficits, he may prefer to borrow cheaply in dollars than
borrow more expensively and for a longer term in domestic currency. He will be more likely to do
so if he knows the IFI will help if things go wrong. At the margin, interventions do distort
incentives to take risk.

29

The question is how much. Unfortunately, the empirical evidence does not offer a
reasonable assessment of magnitudes (see Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2004) for an excellent
exposition of the issues). Our reading of the current consensus is that country and investor moral
hazard is small in most situations; in a few cases, though, it could be really big. We need more
research identifying the circumstances where moral hazard is really a problem.
What seems clearer is that domestic corporations and banks may have too little incentive to
prepare themselves for possible shocks, knowing that there are ways they can force the system to
share it with them. This, however, is a case for better domestic regulation and supervision rather
than limiting IFI intervention.
In sum, then, the moral hazard rationale against IFI intervention may well exist in some
cases but we need to be able to identify those cases better. If these cases are indeed few in number,
as a reasonable judgment would suggest, then it may well make sense to accept the risks of
inducing moral hazard through intervention while trying harder to identify when it is a mistake.
If, however, the reasons for dollarization lie primarily in poor institutions rather than in
gaming - a collective action problem rather than an incentive problem - the greater concern should
not be about distorting individual incentives but about altering collective actions. Sometimes
external discipline forces a country to reform in ways, and at a speed, that the domestic
constellation of political forces will simply not allow, if left to its own devices. Put another way,
bailouts may help governments shift the burden of a crisis off the shoulders of the domestic
business elite on to domestic taxpayers (see Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2001)). To the extent that the
latter do not have an adequate voice, they bear the brunt of excessive intervention, and everyone
else who has a voice is willing to go along. The knowledge that bailouts may be hard to come by -a
policy of “tough love”- could pressure domestic forces to compromise and effect much needed
reform.
We simply do not understand the political economy of deep institutional reform, or of
crisis, well enough to offer a categorical answer on whether external financial support is a good

30

thing or a bad thing on net. Clearly, if there was an assurance that the pain would be short and
borne by those best able to absorb it, that the country would undertake genuine reforms, and that
the future would be much brighter, “tough love” is certainly an argument worth considering. But
what if the pain is prolonged, the economy degenerates into warring factions, and much of the pain
is borne by weaker sections of society? Again, further research is needed here. What seems
unquestionable is that if this route is chosen, there is a need to apply steady external pressure long
before a crisis, even conditioning the extent of crisis assistance on past willingness to reform or
maintain good policies.
3.3.3. A better way to intervene?
IFIs like the IMF typically agree to lend large amounts only when the member country is
experiencing conditions of distress. Since intervention, let alone adequate assistance, is not
assured, and the political considerations of large shareholders as well as the economic situation of
the member country can affect these decisions, countries face uncertainty – which reduces the
effectiveness of intervention in warding off the crisis. Moreover, countries fear that they will be
forced to accept unwarranted conditionality even if assistance is forthcoming, because they really
have no alternatives in a moment of crisis. These are understandable concerns: countries with a
strong policy regime seem to want insurance, not uncertain loans laden with further uncertainty
about conditions.
There is a second problem with leaving assistance to the complete discretion of the IFI. As
we have argued, it is hard to tell, even in the midst of a crisis, whether the underlying factors are
temporary or more structural, i.e., liquidity or solvency. The facts that emerge are unlikely to help
decision-making. In such a case, discretion can be harmful as it exposes the IFI to internal and
external political pressures to intervene. Not only will the decision be biased as a result of
discretion, it will also be noisy as it will not be based on underlying fundamentals.
One way to change this is through rules. For instance, access to IFI lending could be tied to
a country’s policies and reforms in normal times, as suggested by Jeanne and Zettelmeyer (2001).

31

If a country follows sound policies and undertakes needed reforms there should be a presumption
that if and when it faces a crisis, it is likely to be a liquidity crisis, or a solvency problem (such as a
permanent terms of trade shock) that is not of its own making. The IFI should intervene in the
former, and will be providing insurance in the latter case (with the country then making needed
adjustments on its own accord), not an entirely bad use of IFI resources.
These access limits could be set in the regular annual consultations between the IFI and a
member country, where they would be based on an in-depth analysis of the country’s policies. To
the extent that a country’s policy environment changes significantly, interim assessments could
also be undertaken. The assessments will be a clear signal to the market about the IFI’s view of a
country’s policies, putting steady pressure outside normal IFI programs on the country to stay the
course of reforms (a “non-borrowing” program), and putting more pressure on IFI staff to do a
good analysis because inadequate assessments will be contested.
Two immediate concerns arise. First, if the IFI is to intervene successfully in a liquidity
crisis, it usually makes sense to pump in enough funds to stop the panic. Smaller amounts may not
do the job and access limits, if set too low, may inhibit successful intervention. While no one may
be able to determine whether a crisis is one of liquidity or solvency, IFI staff can certainly judge
how much is needed from the facts of the crisis. So would not the rules on access be overly
constraining?
The answer, of course, is yes, but that is the point. To the extent that the access limit is
deemed insufficient for the crisis at hand, the IFI will have to convince bilateral or private parties
to join, which will limit excessive intervention. Otherwise, it will have to stay out. Thus the access
limit will effectively translate into a probability of intervention.
An alternative, though, is to link the probability of intervention but not the quantum of
assistance, to the country’s policies and reforms in normal times. For instance, for countries in
good standing, a decision to help might need approval by only a minority of the Board, while for
countries in poor standing, it might need approval by a supermajority. A politically independent

32

minority of the members could then block loans to countries that have not shown much ownership
of reform policies in the past.
This then leads us to the second concern. Ex ante conditionality, which is effectively what
rules amount to, is more intrusive than anything the IFIs currently do – even members not under
programs will be subject to greater scrutiny. Members will be rightly concerned about the kind of
polices the IFI’s staff will encourage and the possibility of political interference in setting access
limits (or voting requirements). This implies that reforms to the governance of the IFIs, ensuring
that they are seen as legitimate by all the members, will be critical to any such change in lending
policies.
Conclusion
We examine liquidity or dollar shortages in dollarized economies in this paper and explore
how they precipitate and exacerbate crisis. Unfortunately, the obvious solution – ban liability
dollarization – may not be appropriate. Liability dollarization is a response to institutional
infirmities. It will not diminish unless those infirmities are fixed. In the meantime, we have to, as
Guillermo Calvo suggested, learn to “live with dollarization”.
In particular, this means stepped up regulation and supervision up front to ensure that
dollarization does not become excessive. It also implies the government has the responsibility to
maintain a reasonable fiscal position so it does not crowd out liquidity, and to maintain adequate
reserves. It means developing tools for crisis resolution that recognize the nature of the problem; a
banking crisis driven by a dollar shortage has to be dealt with in a different way from a banking
crisis driven by bad loans. IFIs can play a role in all this, but the precise way to circumscribe that
role has to be worked out.
Finally, we have to pay more attention to deep-rooted institutional reform. Giving central
banks more independence and adopting inflation targeting frameworks are good steps, but if not

33

accompanied by serious fiscal reform are unlikely to persuade the public to forego dollarization. 11
It may not be surprising that the level of dollarization has increased over the 1990s despite a fall in
inflation, perhaps because monetary reforms still lack credibility. Fiscal reform itself may be
difficult unless political reform creates better basic institutions for allocating burden sharing in the
economy. This suggests much work needs to be done.

11

We agree in many ways with the analysis in Goldstein and Turner (2003), who also focus on institutional
reform as a way of dealing with dollarization. However, we think it will be more difficult than they seem to
suggest.

34

References

Acemogulu D., S. Johnson and J. Robinson (2002), “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and
Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income Distribution” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, November, 1231-1294
Acemogulu D., S. Johnson, J. Robinson, and Y. Thaicharoen (2003), Institutional Causes,
Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50,
49-123.
Aghion, P., P. Bachetta, and A. Banerjee (2001), “Currency Crises and Monetary Policy in an
Economy with Credit Constraints”, European Economic Review, 45, 1121-1150.
Balino, T., A. Bennet, and E. Borensztein (1999), “Monetary Policy in Dollarized Economies”,
IMF Occasional Paper 171.
Bleakely, H. and K. Cowan (2002), “Corporate Dollar Debt and Devaluations: Much Ado about
Nothing”, mimeo MIT.
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2001), “Prospective Deficits and the Asian Currency
Crisis, Journal of Political Economy, 109(6), 1155-1197
Burnside, C., M. Eichenbaum, and S. Rebelo (2001b), “Hedging and Financial Fragility in Fixed
Exchange Rate Regimes”, European Economic Review , 1151-1193.
Caballero, R, and A. Krishnamurthy (2000), “International Liquidity Management: Sterilization
Policy in Illiquid Financial Markets”, mimeo, MIT.
Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2001), “Excessive Dollar Debt: Financial Development and
Underinsurance”, mimeo, MIT.
Caballero, R. and A. Krishnamurthy (2004), “Exchange Rate Volatility and the Credit Channel in
Emerging Markets: A Vertical Perspective”, mimeo, MIT.
Calomiris, C. W. and C. M. Kahn (1991), “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal
Banking Arrangements” The American Economic Review, Vol. 81, No. 3., (Jun., 1991), pp. 497513.
Calvo, G., A.Izquierdo, and L.F. Mejia (2004), “On the Empirics of Sudden Stops: The Relevance
of Balance-Sheet Effects”, NBER working paper 10520.
Calvo, G. and R. Mishkin (2003), “The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for Emerging Market
Economies”, NBER Working paper 9808.
Calvo, G., and C. Reinhart (2002), “Fear of Floating”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (2),
379-408.
Collier, Paul et al. (2003), Breaking the Conflict Trap: Civil War and Development Policy, World
Bank Policy Research Report.

35

Diamond, D. W., and R. Rajan (2001) “Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial fragility: A
theory of banking,” Journal of Political Economy 109 (April 2001).
Diamond, D. W. and R. Rajan, (2005), “Liquidity Shortages and Banking Crises,” forthcoming,
Journal of Finance.
Edwards, S., (2004), “Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals,
and Sudden Stops”, IMF Staff Papers, 1-49.
Frankel J., and S-J. Wei,, (2004), “Managing Macroeconomic Crises: Policy Lessons”, mimeo,
International Monetary Fund.
Glaeser, E. and A. Shleifer, (2001), “A case for quantity regulation”, NBER working paper 8184
Goldstein, M. and P. Turner, (2004), Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging Economies,
Institute for International Economics, Washington DC.
Hausmann R., B. Eichengreen and U. Panizza (2002) “Original Sin: The Pain, the Mystery, and the
Road to Redemption” , mimeo, November 2002.
Inter-American Development Bank (2004), Unlocking Credit: The Quest for Deep and Stable Bank
Lending, Annual Report
IMF (1999), Financial Sector Crisis and Restructuring: Lessons from Asia, Lindgren, CJ, Balino,
T., Enoch, C., Gulde, A., Quintyn, M., and Tao, L., Occasional Paper 188.
IMF (2002): IMF-Supported Programs in Capital Account Crise, Ghosh, A., Lane, T., SchulzeGhattas, M., Bulir, A., Hamann, J., and Mourmouras, A., Occasional Paper 210.
IMF (2004): “Debt Related Vulnerabilities and Financial Crises – An Application of the Balance
Sheet Approach to Emerging Market Countries”, Mimeo.
Ize, A., and E. Levy Yeyati (2003), “Financial Dollarization”, Journal of International Economics,
vol 59, 323-347.
Jeanne, O., (2002), “Why Emerging Market Countries Borrow in Foreign Currency”,IMF
WP/03/177, forthcoming in B.Eichengreen and R. Hausmann editors, 2005, Other People’s Money,
University of Chicago Press.
Jeanne, O. and J. Zettelmeyer, (2004), “The Mussa Theorem”, mimeo, IMF.
Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart, (1999), “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-ofPayment Problems”, American Economic Review, vol. 89(3), 473-500.

Kaminsky, G., C. Reinhart, and C.Vegh (2004),“When It Rains, It Pours: Procyclical Capital
Flows and Macroeconomic Policies”, forthcoming in M. Gertler and K. Rogoff editors, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2004.
Kaufmann D., A. Kraay and M. Mastruzzi (2003), “Governance Matters III: Governance Indicators
for 1996-2002” World Bank working paper.

36

Knack S., and P. Keefer, (1995), “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country Tests
Using Alternative Institutional Measures”, Economics and Politics, vol. 7, no. 3, (Nov. 95), pp.
207-227.
Lane, P. and A. Tornell, 1998, “Why are Latin American Savings Rates Procyclical?” Journal of
Development Economics, vol 57, pp185-200.
Mody, A. (2004), “What is an emerging market”, working paper, International Monetary Fund.
Nicolo, G., Honohan, P., and A. Ize (2003), “Dollarization of the Banking System: Good or Bad?”,
IMF Working Paper 03/146.
Reinhart, C., Rogoff, K., and M. Savastano (2003), “Debt Intolerance”, Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity
Satyanath S. and A. Subramanian(2004) “What Determines Long-run Macroeconomic Stability?
Democratic Institutions” mimeo.
Savastano, M. (1996),”Dollarization in Latin America – Recent Evidence and Some Policy Issues”,
in P.Mizen and E. Pentecost (ed.), The Macroeconomics of International Currencies, Edward Elgar
Publishing.

37

Table 1. Institutions, Growth and Inflation in a panel of 165 countries, 1965-2002
1a. Summary Statistics
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

CV

Inflation Tax
St. Dev. of Inf.tax
Inflation
St. Dev. of Inflation
Real GDP growth

4902
4859
4902
4859
6428

0.098
0.042
14.871
8.289
3.521

0.120
0.044
34.683
19.453
5.896

-0.323
0.00015
-24.430
0.018
-84.380

0.846
0.365
547.534
206.265
59.860

1.226
1.050
2.332
2.347
1.675

165
165
165
165

0.062
0.075
0.110
0.057

0.907
0.939
0.809
0.946

-1.827
-1.830
-2.593
-1.610

2.370
2.210
1.957
2.390

14.612
12.493
7.372
16.559

ICRG Institutional Indicators
Index

2486

0.551

0.190

0.025

1

0.344

with components:
Quality of Bureaucracy
Law and Order
Corruption
Investment Protection

2486
2486
2486
2487

0.534
0.606
0.540
0.538

0.304
0.259
0.231
0.187

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

0.570
0.427
0.428
0.347

Governance Matters III Institutional Indicators
Government Efficiency
Rule of Law
Quality of Regulation
Control of Corruption

Notes: Inflation tax is π/(1+π), with π the annual CPI inflation.
The standard deviation of inflation and the inflation tax at year t is calculated over the 5 year period from t-4 to t.
Growth is the annual growth rate of real GDP.
The Governance Matters III indicators of the institutional environment are measured by their respective averages over the years 1996, 1998 and 2000.
The ICRG Index is the normalized 0-1 sum of the following components: quality of bureaucracy, law and order, corruptions, 2* investment protection similar to
Knack and Keefer (1995). Investment protection includes expropriation, contract repudiation and repatriation of profits. It is weighted by 2, so that the Index can
approximate the one used in Knack and Keefer(1995)
The ICRG individual components have been annualized and normalized 0-1 from available monthly observations for the period 1984 to 2002.
Sources: Inflation and GDP figures are from the IMF's World Economic Outlook 2004 database.
Governance Matters - Institutional indicators are from the Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi's 2003 Governance Matters III database.
ICRG Institutional Indicators are from the International Country Risk Guide Database, www.icrgonline.com

Table 1b. Institutions, Growth and Inflation in a panel of 165 countries, 1965-2002
1b. Pairwise Correlation Coefficients
(All correlation coefficients in the table are significant at 1% or less)
Gov.Eff.

Rul
Law

Qlt
Reg

Ctrl
Corr

0.049
0.038
0.042
0.032

1.000
0.940
0.866
0.949

1.000
0.848
0.946

1.000
0.800

1.000

-0.292

0.133

0.808

0.815

0.685

0.813

1.000

-0.258
-0.239
-0.126
-0.282

0.074
0.112
0.041
0.173

0.759
0.705
0.705
0.493

0.766
0.740
0.692
0.487

0.620
0.569
0.583
0.466

0.764
0.715
0.745
0.468

0.879
0.839
0.759
0.773

Inf.Tax

Sd(I.Tax)

Inflat.

Sd(Infla.)

growth

1.000
0.453
0.876
0.547
-0.236

1.000
0.386
0.802
-0.088

1.000
0.595
-0.233

1.000
-0.115

1.000

Governance Matters III Institutional Indicators
Govern. Efficiency
-0.205
-0.324 -0.156
Rule of Law
-0.227
-0.350 -0.173
Quality of Regulation
-0.160
-0.286 -0.133
Control of Corruption
-0.210
-0.338 -0.159

-0.193
-0.215
-0.169
-0.204

ICRG Institutional Indicators
Index
-0.409

-0.423

-0.288

with components:
Quality of Bureaucracy
Law and Order
Corruption
Investment Protection

-0.401
-0.338
-0.236
-0.357

-0.205
-0.255
-0.101
-0.320

Inflation Tax
St. Dev. of Inf.tax
Inflation
St. Dev. of Inflation
Real GDP growth

-0.314
-0.351
-0.165
-0.429

Index

Qu.
Bur.

LawOrd

Corrup

Inv
Prot

1.000
0.684
0.678
0.525

1.000
0.634
0.489

1.000
0.317

1.000

Notes: Inflation tax is π/(1+π), with π the annual CPI inflation.
The standard deviation of inflation and the inflation tax at year t is calculated over the 5 year period from t-4 to t.
Growth is measured as the annual growth rate of real GDP.
The Governance Matters III indicators of the institutional environment are measured by their respective averages over the years 1996, 1998 and 2000.
The ICRG Index is the normalized 0-1 sum of the following components: quality of bureaucracy, law and order, corruptions, 2* investment protection similar to Knack and Keefer
(1995). Investment protection includes expropriation, contract repudiation and repatriation of profits. It is weighted by 2, so that the Index can approximate the one used in Knack
and Keefer(1995)
The ICRG individual components have been annualized and normalized 0-1 from available monthly observations for the period 1984 to 2002.
Sources: Inflation and GDP figures are from the IMF's World Economic Outlook 2004 database.
Governance Matters - Institutional indicators are from the Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi's 2003 Governance Matters III database.
ICRG Institutional Indicators are from the International Country Risk Guide Database, www.icrgonline.com

1

Table 2. Determinants of Inflation Tax in a panel of 165 countries, 1965-2002
Dependent Variable: Inflation Tax
RE/GLS

RE/GLS

1

Explanatory Variables:
Constant
Real GDP Growth Rate

0.1191
(0.0064)
-0.0041
(0.00025)

Government Efficiency
Growth*Institutions (Gov. Eff.)

FE

2
***
***

0.1209
(0.0062)
-0.0048
(0.00035)
-0.0323
(0.0067)
0.0015
(0.0005)

***
***

FE/IV

FE/IV

FE/IV

FE/IV2

Alternative

Instrument

Small

Interaction
of

Fixed

for

Country

Initial GDP

and

Institutional

Effects

Growth

Effect

and Growth

Growth

Indicator

3

4

5

6

7

8

0.1114
(0.0015)
-0.0047
(0.00035)

***

0.0014
(0.0005)

***

***

0.1388
(0.0048)
-0.0224
(0.0020)

***

0.019
(0.0031)

***

***

0.1399
(0.0049)
-0.0233
(0.0021)

***

0.0216
(0.0046)
-0.0016
(0.0043)

***

***

0.1362
(0.0054)
-0.0079
(0.0068)

***

0.0246
(0.0031)

***

-.0019
(0.0007)

***

0.1351
(0.0072)
-0.0185
(0.0055)

***

0.0232
(0.0104)

**

***

Initial GDP * Growth
Institutions=ICRG Index
Growth*ICRG Index
4895

4895

***

0.2876
(0.0177)
-0.0264
(0.0070)

***

-0.2864
(0.0397)
0.0345
(0.0116)
2178

***

***

***

Small*Growth*Institutions

Number of Observations

FE/IV

Instrument
for Gov.
Eff.

4895

4753

4388

4387

2916

***

Notes: Standard deviations in parentheses below the estimated coefficients. Three stars indicate significance at 1% or less, two stars at 5% or less.
Columns 1 and 2 report the estimates of random effects GLS regressions; columns 3 to 8 those of fixed effects.
In columns 4 to 8 we instrument the growth rate and the interaction of growth with institutions, by the "external" growth rate
and its interaction with institutions. For every country i, and every year, the "external" growth rate is calculated as the average
of every other country's j ≠i growth rate weighted by the ratio of log GDP to the square of the distance between country j and country i.
In column 5, we interact (Growth*Institutions) with the dummy Small, which equals 1, if the country's GDP in that year is below the 90th percentile of the sample in that year.
In column 6, we interact Growth with the log of the initial level of real GDP; for most countries the initial level is that of 1965;
when this is not available, as in the transition economies, for example, we take the first year for which we have an observations for real GDP.
In column 7, we instrument the growth rate, institutions and the interaction of growth and institutions, by the "external" growth rate,
the log of population density in 1500 (see Acemoglou, Johnson and Robinson(2002)), and the interaction of "external" growth with the log of population density respectively.

2

In column 8, institutions are proxied by the ICRG Index, which is the normalized 0-1 sum of the following components: quality of bureaucracy, law and order, corruptions, 2* investment
protection similar to Knack and Keefer (1995). Investment protection includes expropriation, contract repudiation and repatriation of profits. It is weighted by 2, so that the Index can
approximate the one used in Knack and Keefer(1995)

Sources: Inflation tax and GDP growth series based on annual CPI and real GDP series from IMF's World Economic Outlook 2004 database.
Government Efficiency indicator: Kaufmann, et all (2003) Governace Indicators Database. Log of Population Density in 1500: Acemoglou, Johnson and Robinson (2002)
ICRG institutional indicators: International Country Risk Guide, www.icrgonline.org

3

Table 3. Growth, Inflation and Dollarization
3a. Summary Statistics

Foreign Currency Deposits
as % of Total Deposits
Sensitivity of I.Tax on Growth
Inflation Tax
St. Dev. of Inflation Tax
Log of Per Capita GDP
Legal Restrictions on Dollarization

Obs

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Min

Max

CV

91
91
91
91
91
83

0.2801
-0.0070
0.1350
0.0574
7.2451
0.5542

0.2352
0.0106
0.1008
0.0409
1.2306
1.1609

0.0014
-0.0453
0.0263
0.0106
4.2402
0

0.9156
0.0167
0.5666
0.1706
9.6286
5

0.840
-1.524
0.746
0.712
0.170
2.095

FCD/TD

Sensitivity

Inf. tax

SD(Inf.tax)

LnPcapGDP

Leg.Rest.

1
-0.4713*
-0.5859*

1
0.7604*

1

0.0649
0.2172*

-0.2345*
-0.2493*

-0.2784*
-0.1658

1
-0.2274*

1

3b. Pairwise Correlations
(a star indicates signficance at 5% or less)

Foreign Currency Deposits
as % of Total Deposits
Sensitivity of I.Tax on Growth
Inflation Tax
St. Dev. of Inflation Tax
Log of Per Capita GDP
Legal Restrictions on Dollarization

1
0.3718*
0.5581*
0.6807*
0.3011*
-0.2097

Notes: Foreign Currency Deposits to Total Deposits (0-1) for each country is the average of available observations over 1990 to 2001.
Inflation tax and its standard deviation for each country is the average for the period 1965 to 2002.
The sensitivity of inflation tax on growth is the estimated coefficient of growth as a regressor on inflation tax as the dependent variable.
The regressions were estimated by country for the period 1965 to 2002.
The measure of legal restrictions on dollarization (0-5, 0 meaning no legal impediments) is based on IMF's Exchange Arrangements and Restrictions for 2001.
Sources: For Foreign Currency Deposits/Total Deposits and Legal Restrictions on Dollarization, Nicolo, Honohan and Ize(2003)
Inflation tax and GDP growth calculations were based on annual CPI and real GDP series in IMF's World Economic Outlook 2004 database.

4

Table 4. Determinants of Liability Dollarization
Dependent variable: 1990-2001 Average of Foreign Currency Deposits to Total Deposits, (0-1)

1
Explanatory Variables:
Constant
Sensitivity of Inflation Tax to Growth
Square of Sensitivity

0.2227
(0.0275)
-8.2546
(2.1845)

2

***
***

0.2184
(0.0262)
0.7657
(3.4375)
420.6529
(127.874)

Inflation Tax

3

***

***

0.1038
(0.0324)
5.0396
(3.1545)
388.5883
(113.2333)
1.1070
(0.2188)

4

***
*
***
***

Standard Deviation of Inflation Tax

0.0546
(0.0318)
6.4243
(2.9051)
283.8134
(106.5391)
0.3170
(0.2738)
3.1707
(0.7495)

5

*
**
***

***

Log of Per Capita GDP
Legal Restrictions on Dollarization

0.3652
(0.1366)
5.6295
(2.9516)
254.0754
(105.2839)
0.2584
(0.2926)
2.7209
(0.7769)
-0.0356
(0.0163)
-0.0311
(0.0169)

***
**
***

***
**
*

Notes: Estimates based on a cross section of 91 countries except for column 5, where availability of legal restrictions limits the sample to 83.
The standard deviations are in parentheses under the estimated coefficients. Three stars indicate significance at 1%, two stars at 5%, and one star at 10%.
The sensitivity of inflation tax to growth is for each country the estimated coefficient of the growth rate of real gdp as regressor
on the inflation tax as dependent variable; the regressions for the estimation of sensitivity have been estimated for each country separately for the period 1965 to 2002.
Square of Sensitivity is the square of the above variable.
Inflation tax and its standard deviation are measured here by their averages over 1965-2002.
The measure of legal restrictions on dollarization (0-5, 0 meaning no legal impediments) is based on IMF's Exchange Arrangements and Restrictions for 2001.
Sources: Inflation tax, sensitivity of inflation tax to growth, standard deviation of inflation tax: calculations based on CPI and real GDP
series in IMF's World Economic Outlook, 2004 database. Log of per capita GDP, World Bank World DeveIopment Indicators, 2004.
Foreign currency deposits as % of total deposits, and index of legal restrictions on dollarization: Nicolo, Honohan and Ize(2003).

5

Figure 1. Real Growth and Inflation Tax when Institutional Quality is Below and Above its Median

Above Median Government Effectiveness

Below Median Government Effectiveness

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0

0

-0.1

-0.1
-10

-5

0

5

10

-5

0

5

10

15

Note: Real growth, on the horizontal axis, is measured for each country as the average over 1980 to 1995 of the annual growth rate of
real GDP. Inflation tax, (π/(1+π)), with π the annual CPI inflation, on the vertical axis, is each country's average inflation tax over
1980 to 1995. In the left (right) panel I group those of the 165 countries in the sample for which government effectiveness (average
value for 1996,1998 and 2000 as in Kaufmann et all (2003)) is below (above) the sample median.

6

Figure 2. Dollarization as a Function of the Sensitivity of Inflation Tax to Real Growth

90

Liability Dollarization

70

50

30

10

Sensitivity of Inflation Tax to Growth
-10
-0.05

-0.04

-0.03

-0.02

-0.01

0

0.01

0.02

Note: T he sensitivity of inflation tax to growth is the estimated coefficient of the real gdp growth rate as regressor on inflation tax as dependent variable; regressions by
country were based on 1965-2002 samples. Liability Dollarization is measured as the ratio of foreign currency deposits to total deposits in percent; for each country we take
the average for the period 1990-2001.

7

