                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     EXTERNAL ADJUSTMENT

                                            Maurice Obstfeld

                                         Working Paper 10843
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10843


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




This is a revised version of the Bernhard Harms Lecture delivered at the Kiel Institute for World Economics
on August 27, 2004, on the occasion of being awarded the Bernhard Harms Prize. I thank Miguel Angel
Fuentes and Gabriel Chodorow-Reich for expert research assistance. Philip Lane, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti,
and Cedric Tille generously shared unpublished data and charts. The Class of 1958 Chair and the Committee
on Research at Berkeley provided essential research support. The views expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Maurice Obstfeld. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
External Adjustment
Maurice Obstfeld
NBER Working Paper No. 10843
October 2004
JEL No. F21, F32, F36, F41

                                           ABSTRACT

Gross stocks of foreign assets have increased rapidly relative to national outputs since 1990, and the
short-run capital gains and losses on those assets can amount to significant fractions of GDP. These
fluctuations in asset values render the national income and product account measure of the current
account balance increasingly inadequate as a summary of the change in a country's net foreign assets.
Nonetheless, unusually large current account imbalances, especially deficits, should remain high on
policymakers' list of concerns, even for the richer and less credit-constrained countries. Extreme
imbalances signal the need for large and perhaps abrupt real exchange rate changes in the future,
changes that might have undesired political and financial consequences given the incompleteness
of domestic and international asset markets. Furthermore, of the two sources of the change in net
foreign assets -- the current account and the capital gain on the net foreign asset position -- the
former is better understood and more amenable to policy influence. Systematic government attempts
to manipulate international asset values in order to change the net foreign asset position could have
a destabilizing effect on market expectations.

Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu
Since the days of David Hume and before, the causes and effects of national trade

imbalances have fascinated economists. Paramount in their analyses have been the

questions:

•   What is the definition of an "imbalance"?

•   What shocks initiate imbalances?

•   Is an imbalance ultimately self-correcting and if so, in what time frame?

•   What is the nature of the dynamic adjustment process, and in particular, what are the

    implications for international and intra-national relative prices?

•   Should government intervene to limit international imbalances?

•   Which official interventions, if any, are likely to be beneficially effective?

These concerns remain highly topical today as analysts debate the implications of the

unprecedented series of high current account deficits that the United States has run since

the late 1990s. In this lecture I explore the extent to which recent vast changes in the

functioning of international capital markets require a new view of external adjustment.

       A quick historical review sets the stage for the discussion of recent developments.

Hume's own description of a stable, self-correcting system, focusing on the net export

balance, international gold flows, and the resulting changes in international terms of

trade, was intended to refute claims of the need for and effectiveness of restraints on

international trade. Later empirical research, for example, by Taussig and students of his

such as Viner and White, broadened the Humean framework to consider capital

movements and their effects on gold flows. Of course, even in Hume's eighteenth-century

milieu, the omission of international flows of capital and the attendant policy

complexities was anachronistic. During the fourteenth century, for example, Italian



                                              2
bankers moved capital within Europe, sometimes experiencing default and systemic

repercussions.

        Even under the classical gold standard, the credibility of currencies' gold parities

became a factor determining the speed and stability of the gold-flow adjustment process.

A notable pre-1914 episode was the early-1890s U.S. dollar crisis sparked by the

domestic agitation for silver. But by the interwar period, with the onset of the Great

Depression and widespread banking instability, the situation became extreme. Countries

losing gold (or gold-backed exchange) might be viewed by speculators as devaluation

risks. The resulting capital flight and the associated gold hemorrhage often led to a much

more rapid and possibly bigger depreciation than would have occurred absent

speculation. Sometimes, instead or in addition, capital controls were part of the policy

response.

        The interwar experience heavily conditioned the arrangements that emerged after

the 1944 Bretton Woods conference. The Bretton Woods system mandated fixed (albeit

adjustable) exchange rates against the U.S. dollar, but it also allowed official limitations

on private international capital flows. In a setting of restricted private credit, the net flow

of liquid international reserves -- principally dollars or gold -- was the measure of

international imbalance (with some debate over America's special role). Exchange rate

adjustments provided a safety valve leading to more rapid adjustment should the slower

Humean mechanism prove politically unworkable. (The dominant Mundell-Fleming

analytical model of the 1960s reflected the emphasis on reserve movement, treating

capital movements as relevant only insofar as they affected the stock of foreign reserves.)




                                               3
But even in that environment, speculative capital flows became unmanageable, and by

the early 1970s industrial-country dollar exchange rates were afloat.

        At the start of the twenty-first century, a veritable explosion in international asset

trade has occurred among a group of economies including the industrial countries as of

1970 and those once-poorer nations that have graduated, through euro zone membership

or otherwise, to reasonably low perceived levels of credit risk. This asset trade involves a

wide range of state-contingent instruments. For most of the poorer economies, there

remains a more rudimentary connection with the international capital market, as well as a

range of exchange-rate arrangements that typically fall short of conventional notions of

"freely floating." Even so, the subset of "emerging market" developing economies also

displays increasingly deeper integration into world finance, though not to the same

degree as the rich nations. These dramatic -- indeed unprecedented -- developments call

for rethinking the notions of "external balance" and "external adjustment" that have

underpinned international economic policy analysis in the past.

        I will argue that for a given country with a given degree of integration into world

financial markets, appropriate concepts of external balance adjustment cannot be defined

without reference to the structure of national portfolios. In general, an appropriate

external balance concept nowadays relates to the evolution over time of a broadly defined

concept of net external wealth. Particularly for the poorer countries though, liquidity

considerations remain important and as argued prominently by Reinhart, Rogoff, and

Savastano (2003), debt carrying capacity is sharply lower than for rich economies (just as

is true for individuals).




                                               4
        I will also argue that the current account still "matters," even for the United

States. We are far from a world in which, in the memorable words of former United

States Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill, the current account balance is a "meaningless

concept"1 -- although it is certainly true that, increasingly, the standard NIPA definition is

inadequate because it omits valuation changes. This point has recently been emphasized

anew by a number of authors, including Gourinchas and Rey (2004), Lane and Milesi-

Ferretti (2001, 2004), and Tille (2003, 2004); for earlier discussions, see Obstfeld (1986)

and Stockman and Svensson (1987). Flawed as they may be, however, current account

figures contain useful information, just as do the flawed figures for government fiscal

deficits.

        There is no doubt that for the industrial countries, the proliferation of state-

contingent international borrowing and lending has now created a situation in which

external adjustment can occur much more rapidly through exchange-rate and other asset-

price movements than was ever the case in the past. It remains unclear, however, whether

actual private international portfolios guarantee that such price movements are in general

stabilizing. Nor is it clear whether, even in the case of creditworthy rich economies, the

resulting governmental incentives might not interact in undesired ways with market

forces, generating adverse financial side effects. On these matters much more research is

needed. In the case of the developing countries, there is little doubt that the nature of

their portfolio options is too often destabilizing. As a result, the susceptibility to financial

crises is much greater, and the gains reaped from international financial relationships

lower, than for the industrial countries.


1
 See, for example, Kenneth Rogoff, Press Conference on the World Economic Outlook, April 18, 2002,
http://www.imf.org/external/np/tr/2002/tr020418.htm.


                                                  5
External Adjustment in an Idealized World



An economic unit's profile of consumption possibilities is constrained by its specific

foreign assets and liabilities, the international price schedules it faces, and any quantity

limitations constraining its foreign trades. Conventional notions of external balance relate

to changes in an economy's marketable net foreign wealth -- its external assets less its

liabilities -- although obviously, changes in prices or in quantitative constraints can have

equally serious effects on the benefits that can be derived from international trade over

the future. Thus, while I will focus on marketable external wealth in this lecture, it is

important in practice to keep in mind the entire set of international constraints on an

economy. Price effects, in particular, have economic effects beyond their effects on

market asset values. A full welfare analysis for the national unit must consider the entire

shape of its intertemporal consumption possibility frontier, although marketable net

foreign wealth is one important determinant of the frontier.

       A useful clarifying, albeit highly unrealistic, benchmark for thinking about

national portfolios is the nature of external adjustment in a world of fully enforceable

state-contingent contracts covering all possible future random events. In that world,

current account imbalances would be much reduced or even eliminated altogether. The

reason can be grasped by contrasting the idealized case with that of a world in which

international asset trade is limited to noncontingent instruments, bonds or loans. In the




                                              6
noncontingent-assets world, a temporary output increase at home that does not affect

investment opportunities leads to a current account surplus as domestic residents smooth

their consumption over time through the accumulation of interest-bearing foreign bonds.

Under complete Arrow-Debreu contracts, however, the home country is already insured,

to the optimal extent, against the domestic income shock. It has sold to foreigners in

advance much of its domestic output risk in exchange for claims on stochastic foreign

outputs. Thus, when domestic output rises temporarily, domestic consumption rises

commensurately with the equity share that the home country has retained, the balance

flowing out as a dividend payment to foreigners and thereby reducing national income.

Domestic and foreign current accounts need not move. As Stockman (1988) has stressed,

the income effects of shocks differ radically as between complete and noncontingent

asset markets, although the price effects may be similar. Deterministic changes would

still give rise to changes in net external wealth as a result of intertemporal smoothing

behavior, as would differences in time preference, but the current-account components

due to such perfectly predictable trends are likely to be relatively small in practice.

       In reality, firms may choose to retain earnings rather than pay out foreign

dividends that would otherwise show up in the current account as service imports. But in

that case, firms' stock-market prices would rise, resulting in the same end effect on net

external wealth. An increasingly serious inadequacy of the standard current account

measure is that it does not incorporate such potentially large valuation effects.

       Consider next a shock that raises the profitability of domestic investment. Now

there will be a current account deficit to draw in resources to be embodied in new capital.

The balance-of-payment counterpart is the sale to foreigners of equity claims on the new




                                              7
home investment, a financial inflow necessary to maintain globally diversified portfolios

throughout the world. The home country in the end holds only its pro-rated share of the

new capital, financed by its pro-rated increase in world savings. As Rogoff and I

expressed it in our textbook (1996, p. 297), "in this case … the current account is merely

an accounting device for tracking the international distribution of new equity claims

foreigners must buy to maintain the efficient global pooling of national output risks."

         But these idealized special cases have limited applicability in practice. The

interesting question to ask is whether the world capital market is in any sense

approaching this perfect-markets ideal.



The Evolution of Gross International Claims



As I have noted, a major change in the evolution of world capital markets has been the

proliferation of two-way cross-border claims, primarily among the richer industrial

economies. Figure 1 illustrates this evolution. These numbers, based on the valuable

work of Lane and Milesi-Ferretti in constructing international position data adjusted for

valuation changes, go through 2003.2 The data and implications for international

adjustment are discussed in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2004). Ratios of global foreign

assets and liabilities to global GDP now far exceed the values they attained under the




2
  I thank Philip Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti for providing the underlying data, which update
through 2003 the 1970-98 data described in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001). The series graphed can
alternatively be viewed as the GDP-weighted average of nations' foreign assets (liabilities) divided by
national GDP, where the average for each year is taken over those countries for which foreign wealth data
are available in that year. The "assets" series is the sum of gross private assets plus non-gold reserves. For a
comparison with the available (and much more fragmentary) data from the gold standard era, see Obstfeld
and Taylor (2004, chapter 2).


                                                       8
classical gold standard. (While there may be some recent exaggeration in the extent of

true foreign ownership of capital, the trend is unmistakable.)

       Recent numbers for the United States, the world's largest economy, are fully

consistent with these trends. In 1982, U.S. owned foreign assets were about 30% of U.S.

GDP, U.S. liabilities a bit over 22%. For 2003, the corresponding foreign assets ratio is

72% and the liabilities ratio, 96% making the U.S. net foreign debt 24% of GDP. The

United States' very large foreign debt is growing at the moment thanks in part to the

largest current account deficit ever recorded, a circumstance to which I will return later.

       These substantial asset cross-holdings represent an upsurge in international

diversification -- through currencies with variable exchange rates, bonds of different

maturities, and equities -- with the potential for sharp changes in asset prices leading to

large international redistributions of wealth. For example, if the home economy holds

large net stocks of foreign-currency assets, a depreciation of the domestic currency will

raise net external assets relative to home GDP. Similarly, if foreigners hold our equities, a

stock-market decline at home, provided it is not matched abroad, will reduce our net

foreign debt. The early intertemporal models of the current account developed 25 years

ago stressed the dynamic roles of saving and investment in altering net foreign assets,

usefully focusing attention on the implications of borrowing for future consumption

possibilities. Yet they assumed, in general, perfect certainty and external imbalances

financed through trade in real bonds. If those models ever were reasonable

approximations to reality, they now look manifestly inadequate to describe the dynamics

of net foreign assets in the brave new world of huge two-way diversification flows.




                                              9
         Data for the U.S. external balance sheet again illustrate the point. Year-end data

through 2003 are shown in Figures 2 and 3.3 For U.S. gross foreign assets, shown in

Figure 2, the striking change since the early 1980s is the sharp growth in foreign portfolio

equity holdings (which has reduced, though far from eliminated, the equity home bias

phenomenon for the United States). Only 1.8% of America's gross foreign assets in 1982,

equities had increased to a full 25% by 2003. The implication is that a 10% decline in

foreign stock markets, all else the same, would inflict a capital loss on Americans

approaching 2% of their GDP.

         The other striking feature of Figure 2 since the late 1990s is the relationship

between the dollar's exchange rate and U.S. foreign assets.4 To the extent that dollar

exchange rates impact the dollar values of foreign equities, FDI, bonds, and loans

denominated in foreign currencies, we would expect a strengthening dollar to reduce the

dollar value of foreign assets and a weakening dollar to raise these dollar asset values.

Figure 2 clearly displays such an effect, though for FDI and equities it is reinforced by

stock-market declines in local currency terms. From end-1999 to end-2001, the dollar

appreciated by about 15% against major currencies. Then, through end-2003, it

depreciated by more than 25%.5

         Figure 3 shows the composition of gross U.S. foreign liabilities. The most

dramatic increase has been in the share of U.S. bonds held by foreigners. Foreign

holdings of portfolio equity have increased more modestly since 1982, from 10.5% to



3
  I am grateful to C-dric Tille for generously providing these data.
4
  See Tille (2003) for a discussion of U. S. experience.
5
  Tille (2004) reckons that the dollar's 2002-2003 depreciation gave the U.S. a capital gain on net foreign
assets amounting to nearly 4% of 2003 GDP. His paper also incorporates such international wealth
redistributions into a new open economy macroeconomic model.


                                                     10
14.6% of total U.S. foreign liabilities. Since U.S. liabilities tend to be dollar-

denominated, exchange rate effects are muted, but one can observe the effects of the

stock-market meltdown (reducing the values of foreign FDI and portfolio equity claims

after 2000). One also sees the effect of the concurrent bull market in long-term bonds as

dollar interest rates fell (a development that, in itself, raised the value of foreign claims

on the U.S.).

        Some summary figures constructed by C-dric Tille decompose the changes in the

U.S. international portfolio since 1982 into financial flows and valuation changes, with

the estimated breakdown between exchange-rate and asset-price developments available

starting in 1990. Clearly the magnitudes of valuation changes, even as a share of nominal

GDP, have increased sharply in the last decade, sometimes exceeding substantially the

flow components of gross asset changes (Figures 4 and 5). This is also true of the net

changes (Figure 6), despite the tendency of world equity markets to move somewhat in a

synchronized fashion.



Comparing Diversification and Development Flows



In the 19th and early 20th centuries, most capital flows were "development" flows--one-

way movements, sometimes of large fractions of GDP, from rich countries such as

England, France, and Germany to developing or peripheral nations such as Argentina,

Russia, and Turkey. Reverse flows for the purpose of mutual risk diversification were

small or nonexistent (Obstfeld and Taylor 2004). Now, in contrast, diversification swaps




                                               11
have become a dominant feature of international finance, at least in trade among the

richer nations. Can one devise a quantitative measure of this development?

        One idea along these lines is to pursue the analogy between inter-industry trade --

in which countries export products that they do not at the same time import -- and intra-

industry trade -- in which countries simultaneously import and export differentiated

varieties within a single industrial category. I conceive of one-way asset trade, or

"development" finance, as the export of currently available goods in return for the

promise of future goods (or the reverse), giving rise to a imbalance on the current-

account. I conceive of two-way asset trade, or "diversification" trade, as the mutual

exchange of differentiated claims to future output, that is, claims on future output

available in different states of nature. The analogy is not exact, but is, I believe,

suggestive and useful. While in principle some asset trade can be rationalized in terms of

comparative advantage, as Svensson (1988) has shown, models of endogenous asset

production and trade such as the one developed by Martin and Rey (2001) provide

settings in which international asset trade is quite analogous to intra-industry trade.

        Nearly thirty years ago, Grubel and Lloyd (1975) suggested an index of the extent

of intra-industry trade that, despite some shortcomings, has been widely used in the

empirical trade literature. I propose to adapt it to international asset trade.

        One way to do so is to define the following index of two-way asset trade for a

country with gross foreign assets A and liabilities L:




                                                   A− L
                                 GL = 1 −                      .
                                                   A+ L

                                              12
The index equals 1 for a country with no net foreign assets or debt, one that therefore on

balance, over time, has not engaged cumulatively in intertemporal trade. It takes the value

of 0 when, for example, all liabilities are net liabilities (pure development finance).

Clearly the index is imperfect. For example, if net foreign assets are 0, it would not

capture a rise in leverage, as represented by equal increases in A and L. Thus, I will also

report below measures of total asset trade, defined as (A + L)/2Y, where Y is nominal

GDP. The Grubel-Lloyd measure also is very nonlinear, de-emphasizing possibly large

increases in leverage when already close to 1. Nonetheless, the numbers, which I derive

from the unpublished Lane and Milesi-Ferretti underlying Figure 1, are, I think,

suggestive.6

        Table 1 shows that for the emerging markets in general, diversification finance

remains much less prominent than development finance. This is especially true if one

computes a "non-reserve" Grubel-Lloyd index that (for most countries) is based primarily

on private asset holdings; see the table's second column. Thus Korea's overall G-L index

is close to 1. Leaving aside Korea's substantial official holdings of foreign (mostly U.S.

dollar) reserves, however, its index drops to 0.59 because the private sector is indebted to

foreigners. There are some exceptions among the emerging markets, notably Chile,

which has shown remarkably good economic performance in several respects, and whose

success at diversification has allowed it to move toward a truly floating exchange rate.




6
 The Grubel-Lloyd index does not capture whether a country is an international debtor or creditor. Thus, in
1913, when diversification finance was very limited but development finance was extensive, both the
creditor United Kingdom and the debtor Canada would have shown low values of the index.



                                                    13
Chile also has (for an emerging market) a relatively high volume of international asset

trade (see the table's third column). As a rule both the G-L index and my measure of asset

trade tend to be well below 1 for the emerging markets.

       This is not the case for High Income countries, though the overall G-L index is

comparatively lower for those with high stocks of net foreign claims (Japan, Kuwait,

Singapore) and for some lower-income European countries members (Iceland, Greece),

as well as for Australia and New Zealand with their chronic deficits. For the United

States, with a relatively high net foreign debt, the index is still 0.85, and for the United

Kingdom it is 0.99. On average the volume of asset trade is much higher for the High

Income group. Leaving aside Luxembourg (an obvious but small outlier), the simple

average of the third column for the High Income countries is 2.32 for the High Income

group, as against 0.64 for the Emerging group.

       How can we assess the size of these numbers? Let us take the U.S. as an example

for an exceedingly crude back of the envelope calculation. Imagine a homogenous world

economy in which the U.S., while still representing a quarter of world GDP, also contains

a quarter of the world's capital stock. Assume (as a lower bound) a global capital-output

ratio of 2. Then the United States, if holding a fully diversified portfolio of global capital

assets, would hold only a quarter of its own capital -- equivalent to 50% of GDP -- and

hold an amount of foreign capital equal to 150% of GDP. Smaller countries would have

higher ratios (as indeed is generally true in the High Income group). So the numbers

suggest that, since the early 1990s, we have come considerably closer to full global

financial integration, but are by no means there yet.




                                              14
       An important question is why, for the industrial countries and perhaps for some

well-positioned emerging markets such as Chile, increasing international leverage has

become possible. Obviously, the globalization process has involved a massive easing in

financial constraints, which I suspect is in part driven by technological developments, but

is mostly driven by the relaxation of the richer countries' administrative barriers to inter-

and intra-national financial transactions. With this development, however, comes a need

for more sophisticated risk management (as indeed we see being conducted), as well as

the possibility of greater individual, national, and systemic risks.




The Economic Role of Valuation Changes



A key open question for economic research is whether valuation effects can be relied

upon systematically to aid in the process of external adjustment. A broader but related

question is to ask if international diversification has been beneficial, and if so, to what

degree across different country groupings. The data we have seen already suggest that

most emerging markets (leaving aside special cases such as Chile and Uruguay) are quite

different from the established ones with respect to their use of international financial

markets. Thus, one would definitely expect the answers to the preceding questions to be

specific to the stage of development.

       First, it is worthwhile saying something about the process of external adjustment,

which I will view as the attainment of a current account balance consistent with a

stationary ratio of net foreign assets to GDP. I will take it as axiomatic that at any point in




                                              15
time, there is some long-run unconditional mean current-account balance determined by

the intersection of a country's long-run supply of net foreign assets (a function of

demographics, productivity growth, etc.) and world demand (based on global portfolio

preferences, assessments of country risk, etc.). Obviously, it is a matter of great difficulty

to put empirical meat on these theoretical bones, though in a given analytical model the

concepts can be made quite clear.

       There is strong evidence, developed by Taylor (2002) among others, that over the

long run the current account-to-GDP ratio is statistically stationary. Thus, a current

account deficit that is large relative to its long-run mean may be expected to decline,

while one that is small may be expected to grow. In this process of adjustment, relative

prices will change, bringing inter- and intra-national distributive effects that depend, in

part, on the structures of different actors', and national, portfolios. If asset markets were

complete, large expected price changes would not be a problem. But they are not, and the

expected changes could play out abruptly and with the proverbial long and variable lags.

This type of adjustment process raises the possibility of financial and political distress as

the current account returns to a sustainable position.

       A related question is whether, given national portfolios, current account

imbalances can be expected to produce valuation changes that ease the extent of

economic dislocations. For example, in the case of a high deficit country, do valuation

changes shorten the expected period of consumption cutback before the economy reaches

its stationary net foreign asset position?

       An important new paper by Gourinchas and Rey (2004) suggests that for the

United States, valuation changes on gross foreign assets and liabilities indeed speed the




                                              16
external adjustment process. The starting point of their analysis is a country's

intertemporal budget constraint, but in a context where the total rates of return on foreign

assets and liabilities (inclusive of capital gains and losses) are variable and stochastic.

        The budget constraint, in this context, has two predictions, one familiar and one

less so. If rates of return are constant, then an expected stream of future net export

surpluses must balance any net foreign debt. With variable asset returns, however, the

need for future surpluses might be mitigated by sufficiently high returns on external

assets relative to those on external liabilities. Gourinchas and Rey reason that a fall in the

current ratio of net exports to net external assets must predict, as a matter of the budget

constraint, either future increases in net exports, or future increases in the returns on

foreign assets relative to foreign liabilities. In particular, the latter could occur through

expected depreciation of the domestic currency, raising the relative return on foreign

assets denominated in foreign currency. So on this theory, one would expect the ratio of

net exports to net foreign assets to have predictive power for the exchange rate, with

declines in the ratio signaling future home currency depreciation.

        This prediction is borne out for quarterly U.S. data, both in within- and out-of-

sample tests. Gourinchas and Rey find that net foreign asset portfolio returns are

predictable up to two years out. Furthermore, at short and medium horizons, most

adjustment appears to be through asset returns, whereas at longer horizons it occurs

through changes in net exports.

        These results, derived from a framework based entirely on an intertemporal

budget constraint, are consistent with more than one economic mechanism. One is the

phenomenon of home consumption bias, which suggests that current account adjustments




                                               17
will be accompanied by adjustments in the real exchange rate and the terms of trade, with

supply and demand elasticities lower, and therefore relative price effects greater, in the

short run than in the long run. The undoubted frictions in domestic and world output

markets certainly suggest a reason why extreme current accounts "matter." They must

eventually be reduced, with potentially large relative price effects in the short run. In a

recent study, Rogoff and I (2004) have estimated real dollar exchange rate depreciation as

high as 30% or more as a result of a U.S. return to a zero current account. The

Gourinchas-Rey results suggest that portfolio-valuation effects would ease this process

somewhat, though quantitatively the mitigating effect on required dollar depreciation

appears to be rather small.

       The findings are also consistent with models of home currency portfolio bias, as

embodied in the portfolio-balance models of the 1970s developed by Branson,

Henderson, Kouri and others -- all inspired by Tobin's seminal 1969 general-equilibrium

model of monetary policy. According to the portfolio-balance model, a country's

residents have a preference, relative to foreigner investors, for bonds denominated in the

home currency -- there is a local-currency home bias. Suppose that a country's net exports

suddenly fall, widening the current account deficit and resulting in a wealth transfer to

foreigners. Because foreigners have a relative preference for bonds denominated in their

currency, there will be a transfer effect in the asset-markets: foreign currency will

appreciate against home currency. As in the Gourinchas-Rey findings, the home current-

account deficit will therefore predict home currency depreciation, and that depreciation

will give the home country a capital gain on its gross foreign assets (if they are positive),

mitigating the flow wealth loss through the current account deficit. The foreign country,




                                              18
if it holds positive stocks of domestic-currency bonds, will experience a capital loss

measured in local currency.

           Economists devoted considerable effort to the microfoundations of the portfolio-

balance model, but they moved on to other more tractable issues after the mid-1980s,

with the 1985 Handbook survey of Branson and Henderson (1985) a high-water mark

(and to a large extent a terminus) of that earlier research effort. Perhaps the negative

econometric results on the effectiveness of sterilized foreign exchange intervention, along

with the difficulty in empirically relating excess foreign-currency returns to observable

measures of outside asset stocks, led to a belief that the size of portfolio effects was in

any case small and of little policy relevance. I now believe, however, that the increasing

leverage in international financial markets and the potentially huge international wealth

transfers associated with alternative portfolio allocations make it is imperative to revisit

the portfolio model, perhaps synthesizing it with the models of home equity bias that

have received more recent theoretical attention. My hunch is that home currency

preference is for real, and that it, as well as home equity bias, will turn out to be closely

related to the trade costs that help to generate home consumption bias.7 At the moment,

we have no integrative general-equilibrium monetary model of international portfolio

choice, although we need one.

           Such theory as had evolved by the mid-1980s indeed supported home currency

bias, at least for reasonably risk-averse investors, through the following argument.

Suppose that price levels are quite predictable -- unlike exchange rates! -- and that there

is a home preference for home-produced goods in every country. To be concrete, let's say



7
    Rogoff and I (2000) made the trade-cost argument for home equity bias some years ago.


                                                     19
each country's consumers place an 80% weight on goods produced locally. Suppose the

home individual holds 80 per cent of his or her wealth in home-currency bonds and 20

percent in foreign-currency bonds, corresponding to the consumption weights. Then there

will be no domestic consumption risk associated with the portfolios. That is, we have

constructed a perfect consumption hedge. In fact, a sufficiently risk averse consumer will

hold such a hedge portfolio, with weight (1 - 1/R), R being the coefficient of relative risk

aversion, so that as R < , the weight on the hedge portfolio goes to unity. The balance of

wealth is held in a speculative portfolio, with weight 1/R, dependent on relative expected

returns. In this setup -- which I again emphasize is based on partial equilibrium reasoning

-- there is a wealth transfer effect on the exchange rate.8

        The empirical size of this effect is unknown, especially at high levels of exposure

to currency risk, but there is an obvious link to the question of current account

sustainability. Take the U.S. case. To the extent that foreigners become increasingly

unwilling to absorb dollar assets, either the dollar must depreciate or the U.S. must start

to denominate liabilities in foreign currencies, thereby losing some of the stabilizing

potential of dollar exchange-rate movements with respect to current account adjustment.

Indeed, as I discuss below, the emerging markets are exactly in this position -- they suffer

from the "original sin" of being unable to borrow abroad in domestic currency, as

Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) have called it -- and this makes current account

adjustment more difficult. At high levels of net external debt country risk could also

become an issue, though this possibility still seems remote for the United States.




8
 For further discussion of this result, see Adler and Dumas (1983), Branson and Henderson (1985), Kouri
and de Macedo (1978), and Krugman (1981).


                                                   20
           The Gourinchas-Rey finding, as I have noted, leaves open the precise mechanisms

generating exchange rate predictability by net exports, and clearly an important goal for

research is to investigate countries other then the U.S. and try to clarify the causal

mechanism at work. My suspicion is that all the known financial- and goods-market

biases will be at work, including the old portfolio-balance effect, driven by home

currency bias. Portfolio balance effects are likely to be especially relevant for the

emerging markets, but as I discuss now, are also likely to be destabilizing in that context,

providing one rationale for the "fear of floating" phenomenon shown by some of these

countries.9



The Portfolio Balance Adjustment Process



Concerns about "original sin" have centered on its implications for the macroeconomic

repercussions of a given exchange-rate movement. It is less appreciated, however, that

original sin will also affect the nature of foreign-exchange equilibrium, generally

complicating current-account adjustment and magnifying exchange-rate volatility. These

implications can be derived from the classic portfolio-balance model of exchange-rate

determination.

           In the industrial-country version of that model, domestic residents hold a fraction

of their wealth in foreign-currency bonds whereas foreign residents hold a fraction of

their wealth in domestic-currency bonds---there is no original sin. Domestic residents do,

however, have a home-currency habitat preference compared to foreign investors. That is,


9
    See Calvo and Reinhart (2002).



                                                21
domestic investors have a greater marginal propensity to allocate wealth to domestic-

currency bonds than do foreign investors.

       The best way to see the predicament of developing countries is to contrast their

adjustment processes with that of a country like the United States, for which the home-

currency transfer effect eases the process of external adjustment.

       In the setting of the United States economy, consider the mechanisms of portfolio

adjustment following a shock that opens up a home current-account deficit. Because the

foreigners whose wealth is growing are less keen on U.S. dollar assets than are the U.S.

residents whose wealth is correspondingly shrinking, a wealth transfer to foreigners

causes a fall in the relative demand for dollar-denominated assets. The dollar therefore

depreciates, restoring general portfolio equilibrium in three distinct ways, the first two of

which depend on valuation effects:

       1. Foreign investors suffer a capital loss, in foreign-currency terms, on their dollar

bond holdings. As a result, their dollar asset holdings, measured in terms of foreign

currency, shrink relative to their total wealth. To maintain a given desired portfolio share

of dollar assets, they must add to their dollar-denominated bond holdings.

       2. American investors enjoy a capital gain on their foreign assets and allocate

part of the resulting increase in wealth to dollar-denominated bonds.

       3. The last equilibration mechanism is the most subtle and the most dependent on

investors' having an accurate long-run view of the exchange rate's trajectory. As the

wealth transfer from Americans to foreigners continues, the exchange rate depreciates

further. But if the current-account adjustment process is stable, by which I mean that the

world economy is converging toward a new steady-state wealth distribution, the expected




                                             22
rate of dollar depreciation will decline over time. This trend of decline in expected dollar

depreciation raises the desired portfolio shares of dollar securities over time, helping to

stabilize the foreign exchange market.

           In this transition process to a stable foreign asset position, capital gains and losses

on asset positions partially offset the effect on the United States' net foreign debt of the

wealth transfer through the current account. These valuation effects reduce the real value

(in terms of U. S. goods) of the long-run external adjustment. But consider next how the

process works in a setting of original sin, with a foreign debt (rather than foreign assets)

denominated in foreign currency.

           As a concrete example, consider a sharp reduction in foreign demand for an

emerging country's (foreign-currency) liabilities.10 The short-term adjustment to the

shock involves a current account surplus -- the country must adjust to the lower stock of

claims on it foreigners wish to hold -- and an appreciating currency (partially reversing an

initial overshooting depreciation that both generates the required current account surplus

and creates a equilibrating expectations). In the original sin setting, the appreciation of

the home currency over time reinforces rather than offsets the domestic-wealth effect of

the increasing stock of net foreign assets. The extent of the real external adjustment that

must be made, in terms of domestic output, is therefore greater than otherwise, the

opposite of the Gourinchas-Rey effect found for the United States. From the standpoint of

the domestic asset markets, the exchange-rate movement's valuation effect increases

rather than mutes the excess supply of domestic-currency securities that domestic

residents must absorb. The only factor equilibrating the markets is a sharply declining


10
     For a more detailed rendition of the underlying model, see Obstfeld (2004).



                                                       23
expected rate of currency depreciation along the stable path. Because expectations must

do all of the work, indeed, more work, as they must counteract as well "perverse"

valuation effects, the stable dynamic adjustment path to a new long-run equilibrium (the

saddle-path) must be steeper than in the rich-country case, implying significantly higher

exchange volatility. Furthermore, market stability in general depends even more fully

than usual on rational long-run expectations -- stability truly is a knife-edge affair in this

case. Is it any wonder many emerging markets have been leery of uncontrolled floating?

Or that for them, international reserves as a source of liquidity are much more important

than for rich countries, making their external-balance issues closer to those that were

relevant everywhere during the Bretton Woods years.



World Capital Markets and Economic Stability



       A key question that I have postponed until now, although one clearly related to

the role of exchange rates and other asset prices in external adjustment, is the stabilizing

properties of current-account imbalances in general, and of the increasing international

asset diversification that we observe among many countries.

       Regarding the role of the current account, we might ask whether consumption

would have been more volatile in the absence of the opportunity for intertemporal trade.

It is difficult to know the counterfactual, but the studies we have do suggest modest gains

for the wealthy countries. Looking more broadly, one very striking fact is that many

poorer countries have much more volatile current accounts than rich ones. Figure 7

follows Husain, Mody, and Rogoff (2004) in distinguishing among low-income "insular"




                                              24
countries largely cut off from the private world capital market, emerging markets, and

high-income countries.11 The differences in current-account volatility (defined as the

standard deviation of CA/Y) are striking -- the most volatile cases being several countries

in Africa as well as Nicaragua and Laos. It is true that GDP volatility declines with GDP

per capita, but in view of the fact that the ratio of consumption to income volatility does

as well, it is hard to believe that for the poorest countries, external imbalances play a

stabilizing role. Edwards (2004) finds, consistent with this suspicion, that the poorer

countries suffer sharp current-account reversals more frequently. Further study of both

the cross-country evidence and individual country experiences is needed. Data quality is

part of the problem, but surely not all. (These data are for 1991-2000 but 1975-2000 data

look similar.)

           Direct evidence is slim, and we badly need more. Lane (2001) examines the GNP

vs. GDP distinction and finds that GNP is not smoother than GDP for OECD countries,

in contrast to the prediction of the simplest risk-sharing models. Figure 8 looks more

broadly, comparing the standard deviations of GDP and GNP per capita growth rates

(using 1975-2002 data). The figure suggests that a result similar to Lane's still holds true

for a larger country sample, although for poorer countries, data are of lower quality, as

already noted, and workers' remittances can be very important. What these analyses fail

to do is to incorporate the impacts of capital gains and losses on net foreign assets --

which would be essential for evaluating in full the stabilizing (or destabilizing) effects of

returns on international investments. In principle, we have data with which to begin

examining that question.


11
     Those authors refer to my "insular" economies as "developing," though.



                                                      25
        There are also some more indirect empirical approaches. One of the most

sophisticated and careful examples is the pooled time-series, cross-section study by

Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2004). They examine two country samples over 1980-

2000. The first is a larger sample (95 countries) incorporating emerging markets that

opened their equity markets to foreign participation strictly within the sample period, plus

high-income countries that, by and large, entered the sample period having already

liberalized. Some OECD countries, such as Japan and New Zealand, were relatively late

liberalizers and are included along with the emerging markets in Bekaert et al.'s second

(40-country) sample of economies that liberalized during the sample period. The authors

ask whether, once one controls for other relevant determinants, countries experience a

decline in macro volatility (of consumption per capita, of GDP per capita, and of their

ratio, C/Y ) after financial liberalization (either of the equity market, overall capital flows,

or both).

        The main pattern they find is quite consistent throughout their paper: significantly

negative coefficients on the liberalization indicator for the large sample, much smaller (in

absolute value) and statistically insignificant coefficients for the smaller sample.

        The smaller sample's implication is that it is hard to detect positive liberalization

effects on volatility (though the crises at the end of the '90s appear to have a large

influence here). The larger sample could be taken to imply that richer countries have been

beneficiaries of liberalization. But that conclusion is quite dependent on the authors'

having included all the relevant determinants of volatility that might bias the coefficient

on liberalization. The rich countries generally have much lower macro volatility than the

poorer countries, so the cross-sectional identification of the liberalization effect might




                                               26
easily lead us to overestimate its impact. Obvious measures of income are included in the

table and are correctly signed and significant, reinforcing the idea that industrial countries

have benefited, but one still remains suspicious that "deeper" determinants have led the

industrial countries both to liberalize and enjoy relatively stable growth. Bekeart et al.

indeed present results that attempt to control for these deep factors, as well as results

consistent with the idea that countries benefit most from liberalization when they have

low political conflict, high judicial efficiency, and the like. A tentative conclusion is the

one familiar from second-best theory: liberalization will work when it does not

exacerbate pre-existing distortions in the economy. However, the Bekaert et al. study

does not really tell us the channels through which liberalization works (or for that matter,

can backfire).



Concluding Thoughts



In conclusion, I return to the central question of the definition of external balance, and its

bearing on the relevance of the current account. I have suggested that the current account

is increasingly outmoded as a measure of the evolution of net external wealth. National

portfolios are increasingly leveraged through the trade of claims on the home country for

claims on foreigners, trades that need not entail any change in national wealth at the point

securities change hands. This remains less true for the developing world, where the

current account retains obvious significance (as also do international reserve holdings),

and where credit constraints are likely to bind much more quickly.




                                              27
       Even for the industrial countries, however, the current account remains important.

True, capital gains and losses on existing portfolios may be of the same magnitude as net

exports, but for policy purposes, existing economic knowledge gives us a much better

handle on the determinants of the current account than on those of asset prices. In

general, the change in net foreign wealth equals the capital gain or loss on the national

net foreign portfolio, plus the current account. The first component is large for richer

countries, and on present trends, likely to grow further. But the second component is the

one that policy can best target -- and together, the net foreign asset position and current

account determine the required real exchange rate adjustment we should expect in order

to reach external sustainability.

       There is some evidence for the U.S. that net exports predict changes in net foreign

assets in a manner that aids current account adjustment. We cannot depend on this

statistical relationship, even if it is found to hold for more countries. It would be

exceedingly rash to take it as a "menu for policy choice," because attempts to exploit it by

running ever larger deficits might well lead to a breakdown of whatever statistical

regularity has prevailed in the past -- once again, the Goodhart-Lucas principle. This

breakdown could come about through a change in foreign portfolio behavior that would

erode the United States dollar's singular status as the international currency par

excellence. The same point applies to active exchange-rate management, where there will

be increasing temptations and political pressures in future pushing for policies that

benefit national holders of foreign assets and debts. These pressures would put the

stability of the floating exchange rate system at risk, and make it all the more urgent that

independent central banks be seen to be sovereign over exchange-rate policies and




                                              28
subject to transparent inflation (or better, price-level) targeting rules. It would be a grave

error to posit an "external balance theory of the exchange rate" analogous to the "fiscal

theory of the price level," under which the external value of the currency accommodates

exogenously given export deficits. Policies based on such a theory would surely

destabilize financial markets and lead to destructive policy competition if countries select

mutually inconsistent goals.

        The sign and size of the current account balance points to the expected long run

real exchange rate adjustment, but portfolio positions determine the vulnerability to sharp

exchange-rate fluctuations. We know little about the stabilizing properties of

international diversification swaps, and even less about the internal incidence of

international asset price changes across national debtors and creditors, all the more reason

to be wary of visible macro imbalances that could mandate large price swings. Other

things equal, one would think this uncertainty would induce countries to wish to hold

larger cushioning stocks of net foreign assets, some in liquid form, for precautionary

purposes, as we indeed see now rather dramatically in East Asia. Obviously, the reason

behind current account movements is also relevant in assessing the policy response.12

Inflows to the United States that purchased bubble equity are now history, with pain only

to the foreign investors (Ventura 2002). Inflows that ultimately finance tax cuts for the

rich will not become bygones so quickly.

        I do not mean by this to reassert the Lawson Doctrine, which holds that current

account deficits are of no policy concern unless driven by government deficits. The

12
  It is sometimes argued that suboptimally high investment or low saving are sufficient reasons to reduce
the current account deficit. From the perspective of basic welfare economics, however, the national
advantage that would accrue from reducing the deficit depends on how it is reduced, and by how much. For




                                                   29
doctrine has been discredited, and rightly so. In our second-best world, almost any

foreign borrowing can trigger government budgetary intervention and public-sector

liability in some states of the world, so the distinction between purely private and public

foreign borrowing is not a sharp one in practice. We saw this most dramatically in

various developing-country crises, but the point applies more broadly. However, large

and persistent current account deficits driven by government borrowing are likely to be

troublesome down the road if not matched by productivity gains or productive investment

in tradable sectors.

         All the more reason for economists and policymakers to monitor closely the net

foreign wealth position and its allocation among various asset and liability classes. We

need to be very concerned, even in rich countries, with national "value at risk," as

Dornbusch (2002) has called it. We also need to care about the most predictable

component of the increase or decrease in net foreign wealth, the current account balance.



References



Adler, F. Michael and Bernard Dumas. "International Portfolio Choice and Corporate

Finance: A Survey." Journal of Finance 38 (1983), pp. 925-84.



Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. "Growth Volatility and

Financial Liberalization." Working Paper 10560, National Bureau of Economic Research,

June 2004.


example, if investment distortions lead to over-investment, there is no guarantee that additional taxation of
current consumption will raise national welfare.


                                                     30
Branson, William H. and Dale W. Henderson. "The Specification and Influence of Asset

Markets." In Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International

Economics, vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1985.



Calvo, Guillermo A. and Carmen M. Reinhart. "Fear of Floating.'' Quarterly Journal of

Economics 117 (May 2002), pp. 379-408.



Dornbusch, Rudi. "A Primer on Emerging-Market Crises." In Sebastian Edwards and

Jeffrey A. Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 2002, pp. 743-54.



Edwards, Sebastian. "Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account

Reversals, and Sudden Stops." IMF Staff Papers 51 (Special Issue 2004), pp. 1-49.



Eichengreen, Barry and Hausmann, Ricardo. "Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility.''

In New Challenges for Monetary Policy. Kansas City, MO: Federal Reserve Bank of

Kansas City, 1999, pp. 329-68.



Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and H-l3ne Rey. "International Financial Adjustment."

Photocopy, Berkeley and Princeton, July 2004.




                                          31
Grubel, Harry G. and Peter J. Lloyd. Intra-Industry Trade: The Theory and Measurement

of International Trade in Differentiated Products. London: Macmillan, 1975.



Husain, Aasim, Ashok Mody, and Kenneth Rogoff. "Exchange Rate Regime Durability

and Performance in Developing Countries versus Advanced Economies.'' Working Paper

10673, National Bureau of Economic Research, August 2004.



Kouri, Pentti J. K. and Jorge Braga de Macedo. "Exchange Rates and the International

Adjustment Process." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1:1978), pp. 111-50.



Krugman, Paul R. "Consumption Preferences, Asset Demands, and Distribution Effects

in International Financial Markets." Working Paper 651, National Bureau of Economic

Research, 1981.



Lane, Philip R. "Do International Investment Income Flows Smooth Income?"

Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv 137 (No. 4, 2001), pp. 714-36.



Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. "The External Wealth of Nations:

Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Nations."

Journal of International Economics 55 (December 2001), pp. 263-94.



Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. "Financial Globalization and Exchange

Rates." Photocopy, Trinity College Dublin and IMF, June 2004.




                                           32
Martin, Philippe, and H-l3ne Rey. "Financial Super-Markets: Size Matters for Asset

Trade." Working Paper 8476, National Bureau of Economic Research, September 2001.



Obstfeld, Maurice. "Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and Measurement."

Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series in Public Policy 24 (Spring 1986), pp. 55-104.



Obstfeld, Maurice. "Globalization, Macroeconomic Performance, and the Exchange

Rates of Emerging Economies." Monetary and Economic Studies (Bank of Japan) 22

(December 2004).



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. Foundations of International Macroeconomics.

Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. "The Six Major Puzzles in International

Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?" In Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff,

eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff. "The Unsustainable U.S. Current Account

Position Revisited." Photocopy, Berkeley and Harvard, July 2004.



Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor. Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and

Growth. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004.




                                          33
Reinhart, Carmen M., Kenneth S. Rogoff, and Miguel Savastano. "Debt Intolerance."

Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (1:2003), pp. 1-74.



Stockman, Alan C. "Fiscal Policies and International Financial Markets." In Jacob A.

Frenkel, ed., International Aspects of Fiscal Policies. Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1987, pp. 197-217.



Stockman, Alan C. and Lars E. O. Svensson. "Capital Flows, Investment, and Exchange

Rates." Journal of Monetary Economics 19 (March 1987), pp. 171-201.



Svensson, Lars E. O. "Trade in Risky Assets." American Economic Review 78 (June

1988), pp. 375-94.



Taylor, Alan M. "A Century of Current Account Dynamics." Journal of International

Money and Finance 21 (November 2002), pp. 725-48.



Tille, C-dric. "The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign Debt." Federal

Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics and Finance 9 (January 2003),

pp. 1-7.



Tille, C-dric. "Financial Integration and the Wealth Effect of Exchange Rate

Fluctuations." Photocopy, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2004.




                                            34
Tobin, James, "A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,'' Journal of

Money, Credit and Banking 1 (February 1969): 15-29.



Ventura, Jaume. "Bubbles and Capital Flows." Working Paper 9304, National Bureau of

Economic Research, November 2002.




                                         35
Table 1: Indexes of International Asset Trade

Country                          G-L index      Nonreserve G-L index   Asset trade/GDP

 Emerging
Argentina                          0.70                 0.64                1.15
Bolivia                            0.34                 0.26                0.84
Brazil                             0.45                 0.31                0.59
Chile                              0.84                 0.71                1.14
China, P.R.                        0.98                 0.51                0.46
Colombia                           0.68                 0.51                0.58
Czech Republic                     0.83                 0.55                0.83
Ecuador                            0.19                 0.14                0.60
Egypt, Arab Rep.                   0.85                 0.64                0.55
Guatemala                          0.77                 0.53                0.36
Hungary                            0.50                 0.33                0.76
India                              0.75                 0.17                0.27
Indonesia                          0.54                 0.27                0.53
Korea, Rep.                        0.97                 0.59                0.47
Malaysia                           0.92                 0.63                1.03
Mexico                             0.38                 0.15                0.38
Morocco                            0.62                 0.17                0.57
Pakistan                           0.58                 0.25                0.40
Peru                               0.49                 0.24                0.59
Philippines                        0.57                 0.38                0.71
Poland                             0.58                 0.30                0.48
South Africa                       0.88                 0.85                0.59
Thailand                           0.73                 0.34                0.64
Uruguay                            0.90                 0.86                0.93
Simple Average                     0.67                 0.43                0.64

 High Income
Australia                          0.66                 0.62                 1.02
Austria                            0.93                 0.92                 1.63
Belgium                            0.95                 0.96                 3.35
Canada                             0.99                 0.99                 0.94
Denmark                            0.96                 0.91                 1.95
Finland                            0.92                 0.90                 1.75
France                             0.98                 0.98                 1.68
Germany                            0.97                 0.98                 1.44
Greece                             0.64                 0.62                 0.81
Hong Kong, China                   0.77                 0.82                 5.90
Iceland                            0.58                 0.54                 1.02
Ireland                            0.93                 0.93                 8.49
Italy                              0.96                 0.95                 1.06
Japan                              0.71                 0.81                 0.65
Kuwait                             0.23                 0.25                 1.64
Luxembourg                         0.99                 0.99                78.39
Netherlands                        0.99                 0.98                 3.79
New Zealand                        0.51                 0.45                 0.84
Norway                       0.85   0.88   1.50
Portugal                     0.85   0.83   1.99
Singapore                    0.89   0.98   4.08
Spain                        0.84   0.83   1.40
Sweden                       0.95   0.93   1.82
Switzerland                  0.85   0.87   4.89
United Kingdom               0.99   0.99   3.55
United States                0.85   0.84   0.83
Simple Average               0.84   0.84   5.25
Average without Luxembourg   0.83   0.83   2.32
        Figure 1: World Foreign Assets and Liabilities, 1970-2003
                          (% of World GDP)

 150




 100




   50




    0
        1970       1974        1978        1982         1986           1990    1994     1998   2002


                                               Assets                     Liabilities
Source: Philip Lane and Gian Maria Milesi−Ferretti, unpublished data
                                                            Figure 2: Composition of U.S. Gross Foreign Assets


            9,000.000


            8,000.000


            7,000.000


            6,000.000

                                                                                                                                                      Other
            5,000.000                                                                                                                                 Bank Loans
Billion $




                                                                                                                                                      Bonds
                                                                                                                                                      Equity
            4,000.000                                                                                                                                 Private FDI
                                                                                                                                                      Public

            3,000.000


            2,000.000


            1,000.000


               0.000
                  82

                         83

                               84

                                     85

                                           86

                                                 87

                                                       88

                                                             89

                                                                   90

                                                                         91

                                                                               92

                                                                                     93

                                                                                           94

                                                                                                 95

                                                                                                       96

                                                                                                             97

                                                                                                                   98

                                                                                                                         99

                                                                                                                               00

                                                                                                                                     01

                                                                                                                                           02

                                                                                                                                                 03
                19

                        19

                              19

                                    19

                                          19

                                                19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                  19

                                                                        19

                                                                              19

                                                                                    19

                                                                                          19

                                                                                                19

                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                            19

                                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                          20

                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                 Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis
                                                 Figure 3: Composition of U.S. Gross Foreign Liabilities

            12,000.000




            10,000.000




             8,000.000
                                                                                                                                                        Other
                                                                                                                                                        Treasuries
                                                                                                                                                        Bank Loans
Billion $




             6,000.000                                                                                                                                  Bonds
                                                                                                                                                        Equity
                                                                                                                                                        Private FDI
                                                                                                                                                        Public
             4,000.000




             2,000.000




                0.000
                   82

                          83

                                84

                                      85

                                            86

                                                  87

                                                        88

                                                              89

                                                                    90

                                                                          91

                                                                                 92

                                                                                       93

                                                                                             94

                                                                                                   95

                                                                                                         96

                                                                                                               97

                                                                                                                     98

                                                                                                                           99

                                                                                                                                 00

                                                                                                                                       01

                                                                                                                                             02

                                                                                                                                                   03
                 19

                         19

                               19

                                     19

                                           19

                                                 19

                                                       19

                                                             19

                                                                   19

                                                                         19

                                                                               19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                20

                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                              Source: See Figure 2
                                                 Figure 4: Changes, Gross Assets

             1400
             1200
             1000
              800
              600
              400
$ billions




              200
                0
              -200
              -400
              -600
              -800
             -1000
                     1982
                            1983
                                   1984
                                          1985
                                                 1986
                                                        1987
                                                               1988
                                                                      1989
                                                                             1990
                                                                                    1991
                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                              1997
                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                             Source: Cedric Tille; BEA

                                                   Fin Flows                   Exch rate                   Asset prices                      Total



                                           Figure 5: Changes, Gross Liabilities

             1400
             1200
             1000
              800
              600
              400
$ billions




              200
                0
              -200
              -400
              -600
              -800
             -1000
                     1982
                            1983
                                   1984
                                          1985
                                                 1986
                                                        1987
                                                               1988
                                                                      1989
                                                                             1990
                                                                                    1991
                                                                                           1992
                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                       1996
                                                                                                                              1997
                                                                                                                                     1998
                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                                                          2001
                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                        2003




                                                                                Source: See Figure 4

                                                   Fin Flows                   Exch rate                   Asset prices                      Total
                                         Figure 6: Changes, Net Foreign Assets

             600

             400

             200
$ billions




               0

             -200

             -400

             -600

             -800
                    1982
                           1983
                                  1984
                                         1985
                                                1986
                                                       1987
                                                              1988
                                                                     1989
                                                                            1990
                                                                                   1991
                                                                                          1992
                                                                                                 1993
                                                                                                        1994
                                                                                                               1995
                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                                                                             1997
                                                                                                                                    1998
                                                                                                                                           1999
                                                                                                                                                  2000
                                                                                                                                                         2001
                                                                                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                                                                                       2003
                                                                               Source: See Figure 4

                                                  Fin Flows                   Exch rate                   Asset prices                     Total
               Figure 7: Current Account Volatility versus Per Capita Output




                        0.15
Current Account/GDP
Standard Deviation of




                        0.10




                        0.05




                        0.00
                               0           20000              40000         60000
                                              GDP Per Capita in 2000

                                   High Income          Emerging       Insular
Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank
         Figure 8: Volatility of GNP Growth Compared with GDP Growth



                             0.15
Per Capita GNP Growth rate
   Standard Deviation of




                             0.10




                             0.05




                             0.00
                                    0.00            0.05              0.10            0.15
                                                      Standard Deviation of
                                                   Per Capita GDP Growth rate

                                           High Income         Emerging         Insular
Source: World Development Indicators, World Bank
