                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ECONOMIC GROWTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT:
                         A REVIEW OF THEORY AND EMPIRICS

                                           William A. Brock
                                           M. Scott Taylor

                                         Working Paper 10854
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10854


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by William A. Brock and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Economic Growth and the Environment: A Review of Theory and Empirics
William A. Brock and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 10854
October 2004
JEL No. F1, Q2

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper reviews both theory and empirical work on economic growth and the environment. We

develop four simple growth models to help us identify key features generating sustainable growth.

We show how some combination of technological progress in abatement, intensified abatement,

shifts in the composition of national output and induced innovation are necessary for sustainable

growth, and then demonstrate how growth models employing any one of these mechanisms generate

other potentially refutable predictions on abatement costs, pollution levels, or emission intensities.

William A. Brock
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53705
wbrock@ssc.wisc.edu

M. Scott Taylor
Department of Economics
University of Calgary
2500 University Drive, NW
Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 1N4
and NBER
mstaylor@ucalgary.ca
1       Introduction

The relationship between economic growth and the environment is, and may always remain,
controversial. Some see the emergence of new pollution problems, the lack of success in
dealing with global warming and the still rising population in the Third World as proof
positive that humans are a short-sighted and rapacious species. Others however see the
glass as half full. They note the tremendous progress made in providing urban sanitation,
improvements in air quality in major cities and marvel at the continuing improvements in
the human condition made possible by technological advance. The …rst group focuses on the
remaining and often serious environmental problems of the day; the second on the long, but
sometimes erratic, history of improvement in living standards.
    These views are not necessarily inconsistent and growth theory o¤ers us the tools needed
to explore the link between environmental problems of today and the likelihood of their
improvement tomorrow. It allows us to clarify these con‡icting views by use of theory,
and when di¤erences still remain, to create useful empirical tests that quantify relative
magnitudes.
    For many years, the limited natural resource base of the planet was viewed as the source
of limits to growth. This was, for example the focus of the original and subsequent “Limits
to Growth” monograph and the e¤orts by economists refuting its conclusions.1 Recently
however it has become clear that limits to growth may not only arise from nature’s …nite
source of raw materials, but instead from nature’s limited ability to act as a sink for human
wastes. It is perhaps natural to think …rst of the environment as a source of raw materials,
oil and valuable minerals. This interpretation of nature’s service to mankind led to a large
and still growing theoretical literature on the limits to growth created by natural resource
scarcity. Empirically it led to studies of the drag limited natural resources may have on
growth, and a related examination of long run trends in resource prices.2
    Nature’s other role - its role as a sink for unwanted by-products of economic activity
- has typically been given less attention. As a sink, nature dissipates harmful air, water
and solid pollutants, is the …nal resting place for millions of tons of garbage, and is the
unfortunate repository for many toxic chemicals. When the environment’s ability to dissipate
or absorb wastes is exceeded, environmental quality falls and the policy response to this
reduction in quality may in turn limit growth. Growth may be limited because reductions
in environmental quality call forth more intensive clean up or abatement e¤orts that lower
the return to investment, or more apocalyptically, growth may be limited when humans do
such damage to the ecosystem that it deteriorates beyond repair and settles on a new lower,
less productive steady state.3
    1
     See Nordhaus (1992) for the latest refutation.
    2
     For work on resource price trends see most importantly Barnett and Morse (1963) and Slade (1982).
   3
     This branch of the literature relies on case study evidence of irreversible damage created in the past and
argues that our now greater technological capabilities may portend even worse outcomes in the future. For a
primarily theoretical discussion of irreversibilities and hysteresis caused by nonlinearities see the symposium
edited by Dasgupta and Maler (2003). For related nonlinear theory see Dechert (2001). For case study


                                                      1
    This link between growth and the environment has of course received much more attention
recently because of the rapidly expanding empirical literature on the relationship between per
capita income and pollution. This literature, known as the Environmental Kuznets Curve
(EKC) literature, has been enormously in‡uential. So to a certain extent, the tables have
now turned: there is far less concern over the ultimate exhaustion of oil or magnesium, and
far more concern over air quality, global warming, and the emissions of industrial production.
    The economics literature examining the link between growth and the environment is
huge; it covers, in principle, much of the theory of natural resource extraction, a signi…cant
body of theory in the 1960s and 1970s on resource depletion and growth; a large literature in
the 1990s investigating the implications of endogenous growth theories; and a new and still
growing literature created in the last decade examining the relationship between pollution
and national income levels. Every review has to make di¢ cult choices about exclusion
and we make ours on the basis of novelty. There are excellent book length treatments on
the depletion of renewable and non-renewable resources, and several reviews of endogenous
growth theory’s contributions already exist.4 This leaves us to focus on the relatively new
theoretical literature linking environmental quality to income levels. For the most part, we
discuss the link between industrial pollution and growth, but also show how this most recent
work is related to earlier contributions on exhaustible resources and growth.
    While no review can settle the perennial debate over the limits to growth, this review
hopes to play a positive role in moving the literature forward by identifying important unre-
solved theoretical questions, reporting on the results of recent empirical work, and providing
an integrative assessment of where we stand today.5 To do so, we focus on three questions.
These are: (1) what is the relationship between economic growth and the environment?; (2)
how can we escape the limits to growth imposed by environmental constraints?; and (3),
where should future research focus its e¤orts?
    To answer these questions we start by introducing de…nitions and providing a preliminary
result linking the environment and growth. We de…ne the scale, composition and technique
e¤ects of growth on the environment, and then use these de…nitions to prove a useful but
negative result on the limits to growth. We show that changes in the composition of national
output –as occur when the economy specializes in relatively less pollution intensive services
or relatively less natural intensive industries- can at best delay the impact of binding envi-
ronmental constraints. In the long run, emission intensities must fall towards zero if growth
is to be sustainable.
    In many models this constraint is met through the substitution of clean inputs for dirty
ones, in others via increased abatement, and in still others through some combination of
technological progress and the other channels. This result is helpful to us because it allows
evidence from prehistory see Brander et al. (1998).
   4
     See the classic book length treatments of renewable and nonrenewable resources by Clark (1990), and
Dasgupta and Heal (1979). A good introduction to the relationship between endogenous growth theory and
the environment is contained in the review by Smulders (1999).
   5
     Whether there are serious limits to growth is an unending controversy that reached its peak with the
publication of the Limits to Growth by Meadows et al. in 1972. See the subsequent contributions by Solow
(1973) followed by Meadows et al. (1991) and then Nordhaus (1992).


                                                   2
us to distinguish between empirical regularities that are consistent with a short run growth
and environment relationship (along a transition path) from those consistent with the long
run relationship (along a balanced growth path). It also helps us sort through the literature
by focusing on how a given model can generate what we take as our de…nition of sustainable
growth: a balanced growth path with increasing environmental quality and ongoing growth
in income per capita.6
    With our de…nitions and result in hand we then turn to present some stylized facts on the
environment and growth. These facts concern the trend and level of various pollutants, and
measures of the cost of pollution control. In many cases, the data underlying the construction
of these facts is of limited quality; the time periods are sometimes insu¢ ciently long to draw
strong conclusions and the relevant magnitudes imprecise relative to their constructs in
theory. Nonetheless, they are the best data we have.
    Overall these data tell three stories. The …rst is that by many measures the environment
is improving at least in developed countries. The level of emissions for regulated pollutants
is falling, and the quality of air in cities is rising. The U.S. and other advanced industrial
countries have seen secular improvements in the quality of their environments over the last
30 years. To a large extent cities are cleaner than in the past, emissions of health-threatening
toxics are reduced, and in some cases the changes in environmental quality are quite dramatic.
    The second feature of the data is that pollution control measures have been both relatively
successful and relatively cheap. While there are severe di¢ culties in measuring the full cost
of environmental compliance most methods …nd costs of at most 1-2% of GDP for the U.S.
Comparable …gures from OECD countries support this …nding.7
    The last feature of the data is that there is a tendency for the environment to at …rst
worsen at low levels of income but then improve at higher incomes. This is the so-called
Environmental Kuznets Curve. We …rst present raw emission data drawn from the U.S.
and then brie‡y review the empirical literature on the Environmental Kuznets’s Curve that
relies on cross-country comparisons. The raw data from the US are unequivocal, while the
cross-country empirical results are far less clear but generally supportive of the …nding.
    Having reviewed the relevant data and set out de…nitions we turn to a review of the
theory. To do so, we develop a series of 4 simple growth and environment models. The
models serve as a vehicle to introduce related theoretical work. For the most part we focus
on balanced growth path predictions and eschew formal optimization taking as exogenous
savings or depletion rates and sometimes investments in abatement. We do so because in
   6
     This is di¤erent from other de…nitions. We wanted to avoid stagnation as a sustainable growth path
and hence require positive growth; but with positive income growth giving more marketable goods along the
balanced growth path it seems only appropriate to require an improving environment as well since this gives
us more non market goods.
   7
     Aggregate compliance costs were reported in a 1990 EPA study that has apparently never been updated.
(See EPA (1990) Environmental Investments: The cost of a clean environment) The earlier study predicted
year 2000 compliance costs of approximately 200 billion dollars (1990 dollars), but recent EPA publications
(EPA’s 2004 Strategic Plan) distances themselves from this estimate and reiterates just how di¢ cult it is to
estimate compliance costs. OECD evidence can be found in the publication Pollution Abatement & Control
Expenditures in OECD countries, Paris: OECD Secretariat.


                                                     3
many cases, these rates must be constant along any balanced growth path and hence we
identify a set of feasible conditions for sustainable growth. Moreover the resulting simplicity
of the models allows us to identify key features of fully developed research contributions
already present in the literature. In some cases, the choice of abatement or savings matters
critically to the point we are making and hence in those cases we provide optimal rules.
    The 4 models were developed to highlight the di¤erent ways we can meet environmental
constraints in the face of ongoing growth in per capita incomes. In the …rst, which we dub
the Green Solow Model, emission reductions arise from exogenous technological progress in
the abatement process. Although this model is very simple it provides three useful results.
First, we show that even with the economy’s abatement intensity …xed, the dynamics of
the Solow model together with those of a standard regeneration function are su¢ cient to
produce the Environmental Kuznet’s Curve. The transition towards any sustainable growth
path has environmental quality at …rst worsening with economic growth and then improving
as we approach the balanced growth path. This is a surprising result. While numerous
explanations for the EKC relationship have been put forward, this explanation is simple,
novel, and quite general as it relies only on basic properties of growth functions.
    Second, the Green Solow model provides a useful benchmark since this model predicts
that a more strict pollution policy has no long run e¤ect on growth. In true Solow tradition,
di¤erent abatement intensities create level di¤erences in income but have no e¤ect on the
economy’s growth rate along the balanced growth path. This result provides partial justi…ca-
tion for the current practice of measuring the costs of pollution control as the sum of current
private and public expenditures with no correction for the reduction in growth created. It
also points out the stringent conditions needed for a stricter policy policy to cause no drag
whatsoever on economic growth.
    Third, the model clearly shows how technological progress in goods production has a very
di¤erent environmental impact than does technological progress in abatement. Technolog-
ical progress in goods production creates a scale e¤ect that raises emissions, technological
progress in abatement creates a pure technique e¤ect driving emissions downwards. In the
Green Solow model both rates are exogenous, and as such they provide especially clean ex-
amples of scale and technique e¤ects for us to refer to later. And as we show throughout
the review, the presence or absence of technological progress in abatement is key to whether
we can lower emissions, support ongoing growth, and provide reasonable predictions for the
costs of pollution control.
    The second model, which we dub the Stokey Alternative, was inspired by Nancy Stokey’s
(1998) in‡uential paper on the limits to growth. Here we present a simpli…ed version to
highlight the role abatement can play in improving the environment over time. The model
we present focuses on balanced growth paths and not the transition paths as emphasized
by Stokey, but nevertheless it contains two results worthy of note. The …rst is simply the
observation that once we model abatement as an economic activity that uses scarce resources,
increases in the intensity of abatement that are needed to keep pollution in check will have a
drag on economic growth. Rising abatement creates a technique e¤ect by lowering emissions
per unit output, but also lowers pollution by lowering the growth rate of output.


                                              4
     By rewriting the model along the lines of Copeland and Taylor (1994) so that pollution
emissions appear as if they are a factor of production, it is now relatively simple to conduct
growth drag exercises for the cost of pollution control in much the same way that others have
examined the growth drag of natural resource depletion.8 By doing so, the model makes clear
the limits to growth brought about by environmental policy.
     The second feature we focus on is the model’s prediction concerning the intensity of
abatement. In models with falling pollution levels, neoclassical assumptions on abatement,
and no abatement speci…c technological progress, the intensity of abatement must rise con-
tinuously through time. For example, in Stokey’s analysis the share of "potential output"
allocated to abatement approaches one in the limit. Since this share represents pollution
abatement costs relative to the value of aggregate economic activity, models that rely on
abatement alone tend to generate counterfactual predictions for abatement costs. This is
true even though ongoing economic growth is fueled by technological progress, and hence
this result reinforces our earlier remarks about the importance of technological progress in
abatement.
     Our third model links the source and sink roles of nature by assuming energy use both
draws down exhaustible resource stocks and creates pollution emissions that lower environ-
mental quality. This “source and sink” formulation allows us to examine how changes in
the energy intensity of production help meet environmental constraints. In this model, the
intensity of abatement is taken as constant and there is no technological progress in abate-
ment. Instead the economy lowers its emissions to output ratio over time by adopting an ever
cleaner mix of production methods. As such the model focuses on the role of composition
e¤ects in meeting environmental constraints. We show that the economy is able to grow
while reducing pollution because of continuous changes in the composition of its inputs, but
this form of “abatement”has costs. Growth is slowed as less and less of the natural resource
can be used in production.
     This “source and sink”formulation is important in linking the earlier 1970s and 1980s lit-
erature focusing on growth and resource exhaustion with the newer 1990s literature focusing
on the link between economic growth and environmental quality. We show that the …niteness
of natural resources implies a constraint on per capita income growth that is worsened with
higher population growth rates. This constraint is relaxed if the rate of natural resource use
is slower as this implies reproducible factors have less of a burden in keeping growth positive.
But sustainability also requires falling emissions, and this constraint is most easily met if
the economy makes a rapid transition away from natural resource inputs as this reduces the
energy and pollution intensity of output.
     Putting the constraints from the source and sink side together, we show there exist
parameter values for which the twin goals of positive ongoing growth and falling emission
levels are no longer compatible. This is not a doomsday prediction. Together with our
previous analysis it suggests that abatement or composition shifts alone are unlikely to
be responsible for the stylized facts. Technological progress directly targeted to lowering
abatement costs (i.e. induced innovation) must be playing a key role in determining growth
  8
      See for example Nordhaus (1992).


                                               5
and environment outcomes. Therefore, in the remainder of the paper we turn to a model
where technological progress in abatement is set in motion by the onset of active regulation
and works to generate sustainable growth paths.
    To highlight the importance of technological progress in abatement our …nal model draws
on the analysis of Brock and Taylor (2003) by adopting their Kindergarten Rule model. While
the previous models were useful vehicles to discuss the literature and describe possibilities,
they were necessarily incomplete because they eschew formal optimization. Optimizing be-
havior is however important in discussions of the magnitude of drag created by pollution
policy, and also important in discussions concerning the timing or onset of active regulation.
The Kindergarten model provides two contributions to our discussion.
    First, it shows how technological progress in abatement can hold compliance costs down
in the face of ongoing growth. In contrast to the Green Solow model, there are ongoing
growth drag costs from regulation, but as long as abatement is productive it is possible
to generate sustainable growth without skyrocketing compliance costs. By highlighting the
important role for progress in abatement, the model points out the need to make endogenous
the direction of technological progress as well as its rate.
    Second, the model generates a …rst worsening and then improving environment much like
that in Stokey (1998). In contrast however to the methods employed in the empirical EKC
literature, we show that the path for income and pollution will di¤er systematically across
countries. This systematic di¤erence leads to the model’s Environmental Catch-up Hypoth-
esis relating income and pollution paths to countries initial income levels. Poor countries
experience the greatest environmental degradation at their peak, but once regulation begins
environmental quality across both Rich and Poor converges. Despite this, at any given in-
come level an initially Poor country has worse environmental quality than an initially Rich
country. Moreover, since both Rich and Poor economies start with pristine environments,
the qualities of their environments at …rst diverge and then converge over time. In addition
to this cross-country prediction, the model also links speci…c features of the income and
pollution pro…le to characteristics of individual pollutants such as their permanence in the
environment, their toxicity, and their instantaneous disutility. Together these predictions
suggest a di¤erent empirical methodology than that currently employed, and expand the
scope for empirical work in this area considerably.
    The …nal section of our review is a summary of the main lessons we have drawn from
the literature, o¤ers suggestions for future research and brie‡y discusses some of the most
important topics that we did not discuss elsewhere in the review.


2     Preliminaries
2.1    Scale, Composition and Technique
We start with some algebra linking emissions of a given pollutant to a measure of economic
activity, its composition and the cleanliness of production techniques. By doing so we illus-
trate that any growth model that predicts both rising incomes and falling pollution levels has

                                              6
to work on lowering pollution emissions via one of three channels. Consider a given pollutant
and let E denote the sum total of this pollutant’s emissions arising from production across
the economy’s n industries.9 Let ai denote the pounds of emissions per dollar of output
produced in industry i, si denote the value share of industry i in national output, and Y
national output. Then by de…nition total emissions E are given by:
                                            X
                                            n                     X
                                                                  n
                                  E=              ai si Y where         si = 1                          (1)
                                            i=1                   i=1

       Since this is a de…nition we can di¤erentiate both sides with respect to time to …nd:
                                      X
                                      n
                                                                                   Ei
                               E^ =          i    ai + s^i ] + Y^ where
                                                 [^                        i   =                        (2)
                                      i=1
                                                                                   E

where a ^ over x indicates [dx=dt]=x. Changes in aggregate emissions can arise from three
sources that we de…ne to be the Scale, Composition and Technique e¤ects.10
    To start, note that holding constant the cleanliness of production techniques and the
composition of …nal output (i.e. holding both a    ^i = 0 and s^i = 0 for all i) emissions rise or
fall in proportion to the scale of economic activity as measured by real GDP or Y . This is
the scale e¤ect of growth and unless it is o¤set by other changes, emissions rise lock step
with increases in real output.
    Alternatively, we can hold both the scale of real output and the techniques of production
constant to examine the impact of changes in the composition of output. To do so, in (2)
we set Y^ = 0 and a ^i = 0 for all i as this isolates the pure composition e¤ect on pollution
emissions.
                                               X n
                                          ^
                                         E=           is
                                                       ^i                                      (3)
                                                           i=1

    Emissions fall via the pure composition e¤ect if an economy moves towards producing a
set of goods that are cleaner on average than the set they produced before. To see why this
is
Ptrue,    note that the change in value shares across all n industries must sum to zero; i.e.
   n
   i=1 dsi = 0 . Now using this result in (3) we obtain the change in emissions arising from
a pure composition e¤ect as:
                                           Xn
                                      ^
                                     E=       s^i [ i si ]                                (4)
                                                     i=1

   Given our de…nitions i si > 0 if and only if Ei =pi yi > E=Y . In words, the element
 i   si is positive if and only if industry i’s emissions per dollar of output is greater than
the national average. De…ne a dirty industry as one whose emissions per dollar of output
   9
     The pollutant could instead be produced via consumption. In that case we adopt weights re‡ecting
industry i’s share in …nal demand. This has little impact on our results here, but would have some relevance
in an open economy setting.
  10
     See Copeland and Taylor (1994) for model based de…nitions of these e¤ects in a static setting. This
terminology was popularized by Grossman and Krueger’s (1993) NAFTA study.

                                                           7
exceed the economy wide average E=Y ; de…ne a clean industry as one where emissions per
dollar of output are less than the economy average. Then equation (4) holds that aggregate
emissions fall from the pure composition e¤ect whenever the composition of output changes
toward a more heavy reliance on clean industries and rises otherwise.
    Finally, emissions can fall when the techniques of production become cleaner even though
output and its composition remain constant. To isolate this technique e¤ect, we set Y^ = 0
and s^i = 0 for all i to …nd that emissions fall if emissions per unit output fall for all activities.
In this case we …nd:
                                                 X n
                                           ^
                                           E=          ia
                                                        ^i                                        (5)
                                                   i=1

and hence if techniques are getting cleaner, emissions per unit of output fall, and overall
emissions fall from this pure technique e¤ect.
    When the environment is modeled as a sink for human wastes it is often assumed that
emissions together with natural regeneration determine environmental quality. When the
environment adjusts relatively slowly to changes in the pollution level, natural regeneration
can play an important role in determining environmental quality. A typical and very useful
speci…cation assumes the environment dissipates pollutants at an exponential rate. Let X
denote the pollution stock (an inverse measure of environmental quality) and let the pristine
level be given by X = 0. Then since the ‡ow of emissions per unit time is E, the evolution
of the pollution stock is given by:

                                     X_ = E       X where      >0                                     (6)

    This formulation is convenient because it is generally assumed that X must be bounded
for human life to exist and hence (6) yields a simple negative linear relationship between the
steady state ‡ow of pollution E, and the pollution stock X. A bound on X then implies a
similar bound on steady state emissions, E.11 Moreover, given the linear relationship any
scale, composition or technique e¤ect on emissions is translated directly into impacts on X.
    One cost of (6) is that the percentage rate of natural regeneration is independent of
the state of the environment. A common modi…cation is to assume the rate of natural
regeneration rises as X gets further and further from its pristine level. Letting = (X),
we can introduce this possibility by writing the evolution of X as:

                                X_ = E        (X) X where      0
                                                                   (x) > 0                            (7)

  (X) is often assumed to be linear:
    An alternative and equally valid interpretation of (2) is that E is the instantaneous ‡ow
of natural resources used in production. Under this interpretation, equation (1) gives us an
economy wide factor demand for this natural resource evaluated at the equilibrium level of
use given by E. For example, the demand for oil equals the sum of demand arising from all
  11
     Along a balanced growth path the time rate of change of X must equal that of E. To see this divide
both sides of (6) by X and note that a constant rate of change in X requires the ratio E=X to be constant.


                                                    8
sectors of the economy. In this interpretation ai are barrels of oil used per unit of output
in industry i, si is the value share of industry i in national output, and Y is again national
output.
    For example, if the ‡ow of resources extracted is falling at some constant rate over
time while real output is rising, then we know that some combination of changes in energy
e¢ ciency per unit of output (a technique e¤ect) and changes in the output mix to less energy
intensive goods (a composition e¤ect) must be carrying the burden of adjustment. Changes
in resource use over time can then be linked to the relative strength of scale, composition
and technique e¤ects. To complete the translation let the current stock of natural resources
S be given by our initial endowment K less the sum over time of extraction by humans, E.
If this resource has a zero regeneration rate we obtain the standard equation governing stock
depletion in exhaustible resources:
                                            S_ = E                                         (8)
    Alternatively, we can leave open the possibility of regeneration. Making the needed
changes to (8) gives us the standard accumulation equation for a renewable resource such as
a forest or …shery when growth is stock dependent.

                                              S_ = (S) S       E                                            (9)

And again if (S) is linear we obtain the familiar logistic growth for a naturally regenerating
resource.12
    Although (1) is a de…nition it implicitly contains an assumption on how economic growth
and the environment interact. Note that the value shares sum to 1 and ai (t) 0 for all i
and t. Assume that ai (t) > 0 for all i and t. This assumption turns out to be an important,
because if some activities are perfectly clean, or approach perfectly clean activities in the
limit, then it is possible for composition e¤ects alone to hold pollution in check despite
ongoing growth. Conversely, if all economic activities must pollute even a small amount,
then environmental quality can only rise in the long run via continuous changes in the
techniques of production and these may run into diminishing returns.
    It is not helpful here to enter into philosophical discussions over the de…nition of pollution
or the likelihood of today’s unwanted outputs becoming tomorrow’s valuable inputs. Instead
we just note that all production involves the transformation of one set of materials into
another and that this transformation requires work. All work requires energy and energy
is always wasted in work e¤ort. Therefore some unintentional by products of production
  12
     It should be noted however that di¤erent assumptions on (S) can lead to drastically di¤erent conclusions
when they lead to growth functions with what biologists call critical depensation [See Clark (1990) for a formal
de…nition and discussion]. Critical depensation refers to a property of the natural growth function such that
at some minimum S, natural growth becomes negative. Natural growth can turn negative because of predator
prey interactions across species, or because the species has a minimum viable population. Introducing
thresholds and critical depensation into either (9) or (7) can alter results considerably. Unfortunately little
is known about the extent of non-convexities of this type empirically. For theoretical work examining their
impact see the symposium edited by Dasgupta and Maler (2003). Sche¤er and Carpenter (2003) document
some examples of catastrophic regime shifts in ecosystems.


                                                       9
are always produced and we most often call these by products pollution. Since this is a
statement of belief and not a rigorous proof, we note this as an assumption.
    Assumption 1. Pollution is a by-product of all production:

                                f or all i; t      0; lim inf fai (t)g > 0                             (10)

this implies that there exists for each i, a strictly positive " > 0 such that ai (t) > ". With
Assumption 1 in hand, it is now possible to show that composition e¤ects are at best a
transitory method to lower pollution emissions. Let us explain in detail why this conclusion
holds. Suppose there is a bound, B > 0 such that if E(t) exceeds B, human life cannot exist.
Then if Y (t) goes to in…nity as t goes to in…nity, (10) implies:
                                        X
                                        n
                                                                 B
                        E (t)     B)            ai (t) si (t)         f or all t   0                   (11)
                                         i=1
                                                                Y (t)

Thus we must have
                                                              B
                            ai (t) := min fai (t)g                 ! 0 as t ! 1                        (12)
                                                             Y (t)

     But (12) contradicts Assumption 1. Hence if we are to have bounded emissions with
growing Y (t), we must have the cleanest industry emission rate ai (t) going to zero. Therefore,
falling pollution levels and rising incomes are only possible if there are continual reductions
in emissions per unit output and zero emission technologies are possible, at least in the limit.


3      Stylized Facts on Sources and Sinks
We present three stylized facts drawn from post WW II historical record. We present data on
pollution emissions and environmental control costs and leave the discussion of energy prices
to later sections. Since data is typically only available for pollutants that are presently under
active regulation we discuss the US record with regard to its six so-called criteria air pollu-
tants, but amend these with international sources where possible. These are: sulfur dioxide,
nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, lead, large particulates and volatile organic compounds.13
With the exception of lead, these air pollutants all typically classi…ed as irritants and so we
also brie‡y discuss the US history of regulation of long-lived and potentially harmful chem-
ical products. For the most part we present data on emissions rather than concentrations
because data on emissions covers a much longer time period and is una¤ected by industry
location and zoning regulation. On the other hand, the longest time spans of data (from
1940 onwards) re‡ect some changes in collection and estimation methods.14 Nevertheless,
  13
     The long series of historical data presented in the …gures is taken from the EPA’s 1998 report National
Pollution Emission Trends, available at http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/trends/trends98.
  14
     As methods of estimation improve new categories of emissions are included and some revision occurs
as well. For example, prior to 1985 the PM10 data excluded fugitive dust sources and other miscellaneous

                                                        10
this data is the best we have available and where possible we direct the reader to concen-
tration data and related empirical work. In addition we present data on industry pollution
abatement costs from Vogan (1996), although these are only available for the 1972-1994
period.
     We start by presenting in Figure 1 emissions per dollar of GDP for all pollutants except
lead. Lead is excluded since data is only available over a much shorter period. As shown,
emissions per unit of output for sulfur, nitrogen oxides, particulates, volatile organic com-
pounds, and carbon monoxide all fall over the 1940-1998 period. For ease of comparison
emission intensities were normalized to 100 in 1940 and the …gure adopts a log scale. PM10
fell by approximately 98%, sulfur, volatile organic compounds and carbon monoxide fell by
perhaps 88%, and nitrogen oxides fell by perhaps 60%. Somewhat surprisingly, it is also
apparent that if we exclude the years of WWII at the start of the data, the rate of reduction
for each pollutant appears to be roughly constant over time.
     Although there is a tendency to see good news in falling emission intensities, there are
good reasons for not doing so. One reason is simply that real economic activity increased
by a factor of 8.6 over this period and this masks the fact that emissions of many of these
pollutants rose during this period. The second is that this measure –like that for aggregate
emissions –has very little if any welfare signi…cance. Since our measure is physical tons of
emissions added up over all sources, it necessarily ignores the fact that some tons of emissions
create greater marginal damage than others.15
     Our second stylized fact is presented in Figure 2. In it we plot business expenditures
on pollution abatement costs per dollar of GDP over the period 1972-1994. These twenty-
two years are the only signi…cant time period where data is available.16 As shown, pollution
abatement costs as a fraction of GDP rise quite rapidly until 1980 and then remain relatively
constant. As a fraction of overall output, these costs are relatively small. Alternatively, if
we consider pollution abatement costs speci…cally directed to the six criteria air pollutants
and scale this by real US output, the ratio is then incredibly small –approximately one half
of one percent of GDP - and has remained so for over twenty years (See Vogan (1996)).17
     Data from other countries supports the general conclusion that pollution abatement costs
emissions, so these are eliminated from the time series graphed in Figure 7. As well revision occurs. A close
look at the 2001 Trends report shows that emissions reported for our pollutants during the 1970s and 1980s
does not exactly match the …gures given in the 1998 report. We use the 1998 …gures rather than those from
2001 since the 2001 report only contains estimates to 1970, and we import the EPA’s graphics directly into
our …gures because we cannot match them precisely from the raw data.
   15
      In contrast, a quality-adjusted measure of emissions would add up the various components weighing
them by their marginal damage; or a quality-adjusted measure of aggregate concentrations in a metropolitan
area would weigh concentrations in each location by the marginal damage of concentrations at point (urban,
industrial, suburban, etc.).
   16
      In 1999 the PACE survey was run again this time as a pilot project. Using the 1999 survey we …nd the
ratio of PACE to GDP of approximately 1.9% which is very much in line with Figure 2. This 1999 survey
is di¤erent in some respects from earlier ones. For details see the Survey of Pollution Abatement Costs and
Expenditures, U.S. Census Bureau 1999 available at www.census.gov/econ/overview/mu1100.html
   17
      These …gures are also similar to those presented in the review of pollution abatement costs in Ja¤e et
al. (1995).


                                                     11
are a small fraction of GDP and show perhaps a slight upward trend. For example, total
expenditures by both government and business in France rose from 1.2% of GDP in 1990 to
1.6% in 2000. Over the 1991-1999 period, these same expenditures in Germany rose from
1.4% of GDP to 1.6%. Austria and the Netherlands show somewhat higher expenditures
on the order of 2.1% and 1.6% in 1990 rising to 2.6% and 2.0% in 1998. While this data
is clearly fragmentary, expenditures in the order of 1-2% of GDP seem to be the norm in
OECD countries, with perhaps half of this being spent by private establishments and the
remainder by governments.18
    These …gures however re‡ect to a certain degree the changing composition of output
over time and therefore understate the impact higher pollution abatement costs have had on
some industries. Levinson and Taylor (2003) for example argue that since the composition of
U.S. manufacturing has been shifting towards less pollution intensive industries, aggregate
measures understate the true costs of pollution regulations. They construct estimates of pol-
lution abatement costs holding the composition of industry output …xed at the 2 and 3 digit
industry levels and then compare these estimates with estimates allowing the composition of
output to change. In all cases, holding the composition of US output …xed in earlier periods
leads to a higher estimate of industry wide abatement cost increases. As a result, the small
increases in pollution abatement costs shown in the aggregate data are at least partially due
to the U.S. shedding some of its dirtiest industries over time.
    Our third and …nal fact is presented in Figures 3 to 8. These …gures show a general
tendency for emissions to at …rst rise and then fall over time. Note that the falling emis-
sions/intensities reported in Figure 1 are necessary but not su¢ cient for this result. This
pattern in the data is visible for all pollutants except nitrogen oxides that may at present be
approaching a peak in emissions. Conversely, particulate pollution peaked much earlier than
the other pollutants, while lead has a dramatic drop in the mid-1970s. These raw U.S. data
support the contention that environmental quality at …rst deteriorates and then improves
with increases in income per capita.
    Another interesting aspect of these …gures is the breakdown of emissions by end-use
category. Apart from some exceptions arising from the miscellaneous category the within-
pollutant source of the emissions remains roughly constant in many of the …gures. For
example, consider SO2. Aggregate emissions follow an EKC pattern, but the components of
fuel combustion and industrial processes do as well. A similar pattern is found in volatile
organic compounds, but less so in the case of carbon monoxide which presumably is due to
the change in automobile use over the period. In total the rough constancy in the within-
pollutant sources of emissions suggests that the overall EKC pattern is not driven by strong
compositional shifts.
    Our …nding of an EKC in the raw emission data is consistent with the recent ‡urry
of formal empirical work linking per capita income and pollution levels. This empirical
literature was fueled primarily by the work of Grossman and Krueger (1993, 1995) who
found that, after controlling for other non-economic determinants of pollution, measures of
  18
    These data are drawn from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 2003, “Pollu-
tion Abatement and Control Expenditures in OECD Countries”, Paris: OECD Secretariat.


                                                 12
some (but not all) pollution concentrations at …rst rose and then fell with increases in per
capita income.19 Their work is important in several respects: it brought the empirical study
of aggregate pollution levels into the realm of economic analysis; it debunked the commonly
held view that environmental quality must necessarily decrease with economic growth; and it
provided highly suggestive evidence of a strong policy response to pollution at higher income
levels.
    Unfortunately, empirical research has progressed very little from this promising start.
Subsequent empirical research has focused on either con…rming or denying existence of similar
relationships across di¤erent pollutants.20 Subsequent research has shown that the inverse-U
relationship does not hold for all pollution, and there are indications the relation may not
be stable for any one type of pollution.21 Since the empirical work on the EKC typically
employs cross-country variation in income and pollution to identify parameters, it is perhaps
not surprising that there are signs of parameter instability. This instability could arise from
country speci…c di¤erences in the mechanism driving the two processes, but very little, if any,
work has gone into evaluating the various hypotheses o¤ered for the EKC. This interpretation
of the econometric problems is of course consistent with our …nding that the raw US data
o¤ers a dramatic con…rmation of Grossman and Krueger’s cross-country results. Cross-
country di¤erences leading to parameter instability are of course irrelevant in a one-country
context.
    In its original application, the EKC was interpreted as re‡ecting the relative strength
of scale versus technique e¤ects. However, it is di¢ cult to support this interpretation. To
isolate either the scale or technique e¤ect we need to hold constant the composition of output,
but this is not typically done in this literature. Therefore, the shape of the EKC may re‡ect
some mixture of scale, composition and technique e¤ects.
    Despite these criticisms, the major and lasting contribution of this literature is to suggest
a strong environmental policy response to income growth. The EKC studies are generally
supportive of the hypothesis that income gains created by ongoing growth lead to policy
changes that in turn drive pollution downwards. However, as our discussion in later sections
will show, an EKC is compatible with many di¤erent underlying mechanisms and is entirely
compatible with pollution policy remaining unchanged in the face of ongoing growth.
    While most studies do not present evidence that allows us to distinguish between the
underlying mechanisms responsible for the EKC, two recent studies o¤er additional insights.
Hilton and Levinson (1998) examine the link between lead emissions and income per capita
using a panel of 48 countries over the twenty-year period 1972-1992. This study is important
because it …nds strong evidence of an inverted U-shaped relationship between lead emissions
and per capita income, and then factors the changes in pollution into two di¤erent compo-
   19
      In addition to Grossman and Krueger (1993,1995), other early contributions are Sha…k and Bandyopad-
hyay (1994), Selden and Song (1994), Hilton and Levinson (1998), Gale and Mendez (1996).
   20
      See, for example, Selden and Song (1994), El-Ashry (1993), Harbaugh et al (forthcoming), Stern and
Common (2001) and the surveys mentioned previously.
   21
      Hilton and Levinson (1998) contains some of the most convincing evidence of an EKC. Harbaugh, et
al. (forthcoming) examines the sensitivity of the original Grossman and Krueger …nding to new data and
alternative functional forms.


                                                   13
nents. The …rst is a technique e¤ect that produces an almost monotonic relationship between
lead content per gallon of gasoline and income per capita. The second is a scale e¤ect linking
greater gasoline use to greater income.22 This study is the …rst to provide direct evidence
on two distinct processes (scale and technique e¤ects) that together result in an EKC.
     To interpret the empirical evidence as re‡ecting scale and technique e¤ects one needs to
rule out other possibilities. Although the authors do not couch their analysis in this context,
their analysis implicitly presents the necessary evidence. First, they document a signi…cant
negative relationship between the lead content of gasoline and income per capita (post 1983).
This relationship shows up quite strongly in just a simple cross-country scatter plot of lead
content against income per capita. Since lead content is arguably pollution per unit output,
it is di¢ cult to attribute the negative relationship to much other than income driven policy
di¤erences.23
     Second, the authors …nd a hump-shaped EKC using data from the post-1983 period,
but in earlier periods they …nd a monotonically rising relationship between lead emissions
and income. The declining portion of the EKC only appears in the data once the negative
health e¤ects of lead had become well known. The emergence of the declining portion in
the income pollution relationship is very suggestive of a strong policy response to the new
information about lead. The fact this only appears late in the sample makes it di¢ cult to
attribute the decline in lead to other factors that could be shifting the demand for pollution.
For example if the declining portion of the EKC was due to increasing returns to scale
in abatement, then it should appear in both the pre and post-1983 data and vary across
countries being correlated with an appropriate measure of economic scale. If it was due to
shifts in the composition of output arising naturally along the development path, why would
it only appear in the post-1983 data? While it is possible to think of examples where these
other factors are at play, the scope for mistaking a strong policy response for something else
is drastically reduced in this study. The natural inference to draw is that the decline only
occurs late in the sample because with greater information about lead’s health e¤ects, policy
tightened and emissions fell.
     A second important study is Gale and Mendez (1998). They re-examine one year of
sulfur dioxide data drawn from Grossman and Krueger’s (1993) study. The study does
not o¤er a theory of pollution determination, but is original in investigating the role factor
endowments may play in predicting cross-country di¤erences in pollution levels. They regress
pollution concentrations on factor endowment data from a cross-section of countries together
with income-based measures designed to capture scale and technique e¤ects. Their results
suggest a strong link between capital abundance and pollution concentrations even after
controlling for incomes per capita. Their purely cross-sectional analysis cannot, however,
  22
     Lurking in the background of this study is a composition e¤ect operating through changes in the ‡eet of
cars. This composition e¤ect is not investigated in the paper, although it may be responsible for the jump
in lead per gallon of gasoline use at low income levels shown in Figure 4 of the paper.
  23
     To be precise we should note that since lead content per gallon is an average, and cars di¤er in their use
of leaded versus unleaded gas, the composition of the car ‡eet is likely to be changing as well. Therefore,
the fall in average lead content may re‡ect an income-induced change in the average age of the ‡eet (which
would lower average lead content) plus a pure technique e¤ect.


                                                      14
di¤erentiate between location-speci…c attributes and scale e¤ects. Nevertheless, their work
is important because the strong link they …nd between factor endowments and pollution
suggests a role for factor composition in determining pollution levels. That is, even after
accounting for cross-country di¤erences in income per capita, other national characteristics
matter to pollution outcomes.
     Combining our three stylized facts on pollution emissions presents us with an important
question. How did aggregate emissions and emissions per unit output fall so dramatically in
the U.S. without raising pollution abatement costs precipitously?
     There are several possible explanations. One possibility is that ongoing changes in the
composition of US output have led to a cleaner mix of production that has lowered both
aggregate measures of costs and emissions. The downward trend in emissions per unit output
shown in Figure 1 prior to the advent of the Clean Air Act suggests some role for composition
e¤ects. While changes in the composition of US output are surely part of the story, there are
reasons to believe that they cannot be the most important part. Over the 1971-2001 period
of active regulation by the EPA, total emissions of the 6 criteria air pollutants (Nitrogen
Dioxide, Ozone, Sulfur Dioxide, Particulate matter, Carbon Monoxide, and Lead) decreased
on average by 25%. Over this same period, gross domestic product rose 161% and pollution
abatement costs have risen only slightly.24 The magnitude of these emission reductions is
too large for it to re‡ect composition changes alone.
     To get a feel for the magnitudes involved note that if changes in the composition of output
over the 1971-2001 period are to carry all the burden of adjustment, then we would set the
changes in ai to zero in (2). Then using the EPA’s estimate of an average 25% reduction for
E and the 161% increase for Y , we …nd that the weighted average of industry level changes
must add up to - 186% change. This is just too large a realignment in the composition of
industry to be credible.
     It is also apparent from the …gures that emissions for most pollutants have been falling
since the early 1970s and as we saw earlier there are limits to how far aggregate emissions can
fall via composition e¤ects. Our earlier discussion of the static nature of the within-pollutant
sources of emissions also argues against strong composition e¤ects. Finally, there is little
evidence that international trade is playing a major role in shifting dirty goods industries to
other countries but stronger composition e¤ects after the advent of federal policy in early
1970s would be necessary to explain the fall in emissions seen in the …gures.25 For this set
of reasons it seems clear that composition e¤ects alone cannot be responsible for the result.
     Another possible explanation is that ongoing growth in incomes has generated a strong
demand for environmental improvement. In this account, income gains over the post WWII
period produce a change in policy in the early 1970s and usher in the EPA and the start of
emission reductions. While this explanation …ts with the decline in emission to output ratios
and the lowered emissions since the early 1970s, it too cannot be the entire story. As we
discuss in Section 4, if rising incomes are to be wholly responsible for the change in pollution
  24
     These …gures are from the EPA’s Latest Findings on National Air Quality, 2001 Status and Trends,
available at http://www.epa.gov/air/aqtrnd01/ published September 2002.
  25
     See for example Antweiler et al. (2001) and Grossman and Krueger (1993).


                                                 15
policy, agents must being willing to make larger and larger sacri…ces in consumption for
improving environmental quality. For example, the theory models of Stokey (1998), Aghion
and Howitt (1998), Smulders (2001), Lopez (1994), etc. all require a rapidly declining
marginal utility of consumption to generate rising environmental quality and ongoing growth.
But as Aghion and Howitt note:
          “Thus it appears that unlimited growth can indeed be sustained, but it is not
       guaranteed by the usual sorts of assumptions that are made in endogenous growth
       theory. The assumption that the elasticity of marginal utility of consumption be
       greater than unity seems particularly strong, in as much as it is known to imply
       odd behavior in the context of various macroeconomics models. . . ”(p. 162.)
    A rapidly declining marginal utility of consumption is required in earlier work because
increasingly large investments in abatement are required to hold pollution in check.26 This
implies the share of pollution abatement costs in the value of output approaches one in the
limit, which is inconsistent with available evidence.27
    A …nal possibility is technological advance. Ongoing technological progress in production
and abatement could simultaneous drive long run growth and hold pollution abatement costs
in check. Technological progress in goods production could be the driving force for growth in
…nal output, while technological progress in abatement allows emissions per unit of output to
fall precipitously without raising environmental control costs skyward. In this explanation,
income gains from ongoing growth are responsible for the onset of serious regulation in the
1970s, but the advent of regulation then brought forth improvements in abatement methods.
As a consequence agents have not been required to make increasingly large sacri…ces in
consumption for improving environmental quality. As we show in section 4, this explanation
is consistent with the predictions of both our Green Solow and Kindergarten models.
    Before we proceed we should note that the stylized facts given thus far exclude a discus-
sion of many other pollutants. By selecting only pollutants for which data is available we
may have erred on the side of optimism since the measurement of pollutants is often a pre-
cursor to their active regulation. One important omission from the above is any discussion
of air toxics such as benzene (in gasoline), perchloroethylene (used by dry cleaners), and
methyl chloride (a common solvent). These are chemicals are believed to cause severe health
e¤ects such as cancer, damage to the immune system, etc. At present the EPA does not
maintain an extensive national monitoring system for air toxics, and only limited information
is available.28
    Another omission is any discussion of the set of long-lived chemicals and chemical by-
products that have found their way into waterways, soils and the air. These products have
  26
     This restriction also implies a large income elasticity of marginal damage and many question whether
the demand for a clean environment can be so income elastic. For example, McConnell (1997) argues that
current empirical estimates from contingent valuation and hedonic studies do not support the very strong
income e¤ects needed.
  27
     See the discussion in Aghion and Howitt (1998, page 160-161) and our discussion of abatement in Section
5 of Brock and Taylor (2003).
  28
     See U.S. EPA, Toxic Air Pollutants, at www.epa.gov/airtrends/toxic.html.

                                                    16
very long half-lives and produce serious health and environmental e¤ects. Prominent among
these in US history are DDT, PCBs, Lead, and most recently CFCs. O¢ cial estimates on
emissions of these pollutants is di¢ cult to …nd, but historical accounts and partial data
indicate their emissions follow a pattern roughly similar to that of lead shown in Figure
8. As shown by the …gure the history of lead is one of strong initial growth in emissions,
followed by a rapid phase-out and virtual elimination. In fact, lead continues to be emitted
in small amounts, whereas PCB emissions rose from very low production levels in the 1930s
to millions of pounds per year of production in the 1970s, to end with a complete ban in
1979. Similarly, DDT was used extensively after WWII but banned in 1972. CFC production
in the US rose quickly with the advent of refrigeration and air conditioning, but this set of
chemicals now faces a detailed phase-out with CFC-11 and CFC-12 already facing a complete
production ban. The salient feature of these accounts is strong early growth followed by quite
rapid elimination.
    A …nal failing of these data is that they are on emissions and not concentrations.29
Concentration data is available for most of these data at least over the last 20 to 30 years, but
the data is well known to be noisy and su¤ers from other problems related to comparability
over time. Nevertheless most aggregate measures of air quality in cities have been improving
over time. For example, data on the number of US residents living in counties that were
designated non-attainment because of their failure to achieve federal air quality standards
shows that over the 1986 to 1998 period these numbers have been falling quite dramatically
for sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxide, carbon monoxide, lead and PM10. The number of people
living in counties who failed the federally mandated ozone air quality has however risen from
75 million in 1986 to 131 million in 1998.30


4      Some Illustrative Theory
4.1     The Green Solow Benchmark31
Every model relating economic growth to emissions or environmental quality has by construc-
tion made implicit assumptions regarding the strength of scale, composition and technique
e¤ects. These assumptions are often hidden in choices made over functional form, over the
number of goods, the inclusion of …nite resources, or in assumptions concerning abatement.
Since we have data on the composition of output, its scale, and emissions per unit of output,
it is often useful to divide models into categories according to their reliance on scale, tech-
nique and composition e¤ects rather than model speci…cs like the number of goods, types
of factors or assumptions over abatement. By dividing up the literature along these lines,
  29
     Note however that much of the empirical EKC work employs pollution concentration data as does
Antweiler et al. (2001).
  30
     For these data see U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, O¢ ce of Air Quality Planning and Standards,
National Air Quality and Emissions Trend Report, 1998 (EPA, Research Triangle Park, NC 2000) and earlier
trend reports.
  31
     For a detailed exposition see Brock and Taylor (2004).


                                                   17
we can weigh the relative merits of model’s that rely exclusively on composition e¤ects by
looking at their strength in the data rather than by asking ourselves far less obvious ques-
tions such as are capital and resources good or poor substitutes or does abatement exhibit
increasing returns.
    The literature linking growth and pollution levels is immense starting with very early
work in the 1970s by Forster (1973), Solow (1973), Stiglitz (1974), Brock (1977) and others,
and culminating in the more recent work investigating the Environmental Kuznet’s curve
such as Stokey (1998), Aghion and Howitt (1998), or Jones and Manuelli (2001). Although
the earlier and late literatures di¤er greatly in their assumptions regarding the driving force
behind growth, all models of economic growth must produce changes in scale, composition, or
techniques that satisfy (1). Models that produce similar aggregate relationships between in-
come and pollution often rely on di¤erent mechanisms to drive pollution downward. Because
of these di¤erences, they have other observable implications that we can use for evaluation.
    To start our enquiry into the various mechanisms authors have employed to generate
sustainable growth or an EKC prediction, we develop an augmented Solow model where
exogenous technological progress in both goods production and abatement leads to contin-
ual growth with rising environmental quality. This is the simplest model to explore the
importance of technological progress in driving down emissions per unit of output.32
    Consider the standard one sector Solow model with a …xed savings rate s. Output is
produced via a CRS and strictly concave production function taking e¤ective labor and
capital to produce output, Y . Capital accumulates via savings and depreciates at rate . We
assume the rate of labor augmenting technological progress is given by g. All this implies:

                                         Y     =   F (K; BL)                                    (13)
                                         K_    =   sY    K
                                          L_   =   nL
                                         B_    =   gB

    To model the impact of pollution we follow Copeland and Taylor (1994) by assuming
every unit of economic activity, F , generates    units of pollution as a joint product of
output. The amount of pollution released into the atmosphere may di¤er from the amount
produced if there is abatement. We assume abatement is a CRS activity and write the
amount of pollution abated as an increasing function of the total scale of economic activity,
F , and the economy’s e¤orts at abatement, F A . If abatement at level A, removes the A
  32
    A full description of the model together with supporting empirical work can be found in Brock and
Taylor (2004), NBER working paper No. 10557.




                                                   18
units of pollution from the total created, we have:
                    E = pollution created             pollution abated                                 (14)
                      =  F      A F; F A
                                             FA
                        =      F 1      A 1;
                                             F
                                                                                   FA
                        = F e ( ) where e ( )            [1   A (1; )] and
                                                                                   F
where the third line follows from the linear homogeneity of A, and the fourth by the de…nition
of as the fraction of economic activity dedicated to abatement.
    The relationship in (14) requires several comments. The …rst is simply that (14) is a
single output analog of (1) showing that emissions are determined by the scale of economic
activity F , and the techniques of production as captured by e( ). The second is that the
production of output per se and not input use is the determinant of pollution. Since there
is only one output, this means the composition e¤ect must be zero. In a subsequent section
we alter our formulation to consider pollution created by input use, but note in passing here
that making pollution proportional to the employment of capital has no e¤ect on our results.
Finally, since F A is included in F , even the activity of abatement pollutes.
    To combine the assumptions on pollution in (14) with our Solow model, it is useful to
assume the economy employs a …xed fraction of its inputs –both capital and e¤ective labor
– in abatement. This means the fraction of total output allocated to abatement is a
…xed much like the familiar …xed saving rate assumption.33 As a result, output available for
consumption or investment Y , becomes [1 ]F . In addition we must adopt some assumption
concerning natural regeneration. To do so we assume the quality of the environment evolves
over time according to (6). Therefore, the evolution of the pollution stock is given by:

                                           X_ = F e ( )       X                                        (15)
   Finally, since the Solow model assumes exogenous technological progress, we assume
emissions per unit of output fall at the exogenous rate g A . Putting these assumptions
together and transforming our measures of output and capital into intensive units, our Green
Solow model becomes:
                                  y = f (k) [1   ];                                                    (16)
                                  k_ = sf (k) [1  ] [ + n + g] k
                                 E = BLf (k) e ( ) ;
                                 X_ = E      X;
                                  _ =    g A

  33
     We treat as endogenous when examining transition paths in section 5. It is possible that no abatement
is optimal in some limited circumstances, but in models generating balanced growth this would imply every
increasing pollution levels. In models without growth, such as Keeler et al. (1972), a Murky Age or Polluted
Age equilibrium result is possible with set to zero.

                                                    19
where k is K=BL and y is Y =BL; i.e. capital and output measured in intensive units. The
top line of (16) repeats the basic Solow model where net output is a fraction of total output.
Taking as given, and assuming the Inada conditions, there is a k such that output, capital,
and consumption per person all grow at rate g.
    Using standard notation, direct calculation reveals that along the balanced growth path
we must have gy = gk = gc = g > 0. A potentially worsening environment however threatens
this happy existence. From (16) it is easy to see that constant growth in environmental
quality requires gx = gE . Since k is constant along the balanced growth path, the growth
rate of emissions is simply:
                                       gE = g + n g A                                     (17)
which may be positive, negative, or zero. The …rst two terms in (17) represent the scale e¤ect
on pollution since output grows at rate g + n. The second term is a technique e¤ect created
not by greater abatement e¤orts, but because emissions per unit output fall via exogenous
technological progress at rate g A .
   Therefore our requirements for sustainable growth are very simple in this model.

                                         g > 0                                           (18)
                                        gA > g + n

Technological progress in abatement must exceed that in goods production because of popu-
lation growth; and some technological progress in goods production is necessary to generate
per capita income growth.
    The Green Solow model, although very simple, demonstrates several important points.
The …rst is that investments to improve the environment may cause only level and not
growth e¤ects. This is obviously true here since the growth rate of per capita magnitudes
is explicitly linked to the rate of technological progress, but not to . By setting the time
derivative of capital per e¤ective worker to zero in (16) it is straightforward to show that a
tighter environmental policy (higher ) lowers output, capital and consumption per worker,
but has no e¤ect on their long run growth rates.
    The implied income and consumption loss from a tighter policy is however quite small.
Adopting a Cobb-Douglas formulation for …nal output with the share of capital equal to
   shows that the ratio of consumption per person along the balanced growth paths of the
economy adopting weak versus strong abatement is just:
                                                          1
                                     cw   1       W
                                                      1
                                        =                                                (19)
                                     cs   1       s

since both economies grow at rate g + n. If weak abatement means adopting a share of
pollution abatement costs in national output of :5%, and strong abatement means 10%,
then consumption per person will di¤er by 16% along the balanced growth path (assuming
capital’s share in output is 0:35). Therefore, a twenty-fold di¤erence in the intensity of
abatement creates only a 16% di¤erence in consumption per person!


                                             20
    The calculation however seems to imply that environmental policy cannot be much of a
limit on economic growth. Recall though that for any given choice of abatement intensity, if
we are to have ongoing growth, an improving environment, and a constant (relative) cost of
environmental policy, then technological progress in abatement must be su¢ ciently strong.
If technological progress is slower than that given in (18) then one of two things must happen.
Either additional investments in abatement must be undertaken to maintain environmental
quality, or environmental quality must decline. At this point however we should note that the
strict concavity of A implies there are diminishing returns to greater and greater abatement
e¤orts. From (14) we …nd that e0 ( ) = A2 < 0, but e00 ( ) = A22 > 0. Therefore, in the
absence of strong technological progress in abatement, growth in income per capita is only
consistent with lower pollution levels if abatement grows over time.34
    One …nal observation concerns the transition path of the model. Despite the fact that
the intensity of abatement is …xed and there are no composition e¤ects in our one good
framework, simulations of the Green Solow model produce a path for income and environ-
mental quality tracing out an Environmental Kuznets Curve. This surprising result is shown
graphically in Figure 9 below. In Figure 9 we present the trajectories for two economies that
are identical in all respects except for their abatement intensity. Each starts from an initially
pristine environment and a small initial capital level. Strong abatement refers to a 10% share
of output spent on abatement; weak abatement to a 0:5% share. The other parameters were
chosen for the purposes of illustration. Per capita income grows at 1% along the balanced
growth path, the population grows at 2% and the abatement technology improves at 5%.
Note that these parameters ensure that growth is sustainable according to (18). Capital’s
share is set at 0:35, the savings rate is 10% and depreciation is 2%. Regeneration is set with
   = 0:1 implying a 10% rate for any X > 0.
    As shown, the environment at …rst worsens and then improves as the economy converges
on its balanced growth path. Note that along the balanced growth path emissions fall and
the environment improves at 2% per unit time, which is close to what the simulation delivers
in its last periods.
    This result follows for three reasons. First, the convergence properties of the Solow model
imply that output growth is at …rst rapid but then slows as k approaches k . With a …xed
intensity of abatement, pollution emissions grow quickly at …rst but slower later. Therefore,
part of the dynamics is governed by the convergence properties of the neoclassical model.
    Second, when we start at a pristine environment the e¤ective rate of natural regeneration
is zero. This is true because “nature” is at a biological equilibrium with X = 0. When
production begins the environment deteriorates. At X = 0, the introduction of any emissions
overwhelms the rate of regeneration and lowers environmental quality. As X rises, natural
regeneration rises. This must be a feature of the regeneration function in order for X = 0
to be a stable biological equilibrium.
    Third, we have assumed emissions fall along the balanced growth path.
    Together the …rst two facts imply that at the outset of economic growth the rapid pace
  34
    A rising intensity of abatement will lower growth rates introducing other problems in meeting the
sustainability criteria. We leave this issue for the next section.


                                                 21
of growth swamps nature’s slow or zero regeneration; but the economic growth rate slows
and regeneration rebounds. As we approach the balanced growth path natural regeneration
must overwhelm the now less rapid in‡ows of pollution. The environment improves.
    It is important to recognize that this result is more general than our Cobb-Douglas
technology and instead relies on quite general properties of production and growth functions.
To verify write the dynamic system governing k and X as:

                              k_ = sf (k) [1    ] [ + n + g] k                              (20)
                             X_ = co exp [ c1 t] f (k) X

where c0 > 0 and c1 = g A (g +n) > 0 are positive constants. To show the environment must
at …rst worsen evaluate the accumulation equation for X at t = 0. Since the environment is
initially pristine, X(0) = 0, and the initial capital stock cannot be zero so k(0) > 0. Sub-
stituting these values into (20) and evaluating shows the environment must at …rst worsen.
X has to be growing at least initially. To examine the rest of the transition path recall that
k(t) is increasing in time until it reaches k because this is, after all, a Solow model. Using
this fact, we can bound the path for X by noting:

                  X_ = co exp [ c1 t] f (k)   X < co exp [ c1 t] f (k )    X                (21)

Therefore for any t > 0, X(t) must be below the solution to the ordinary di¤erential equation:
X_ = co exp [c1 t] f (k ) X, X (0) = 0. This ordinary di¤erential equation has a closed form
solution showing X(t) tends to zero as t goes to in…nity. Using the inequality in (21) we can
conclude that pollution must fall along its trajectory.35
    This explanation for the EKC is entirely distinct from those o¤ered in the literature.
There are no composition e¤ects, no increasing intensity of pollution abatement, no increas-
ing returns to abatement, no evolution of the political process, and no international trade.
The result follows primarily from the mechanics of convergence coupled with the dynamics
predicted by a standard natural regeneration function. Moreover from (14) it is easy to see
that emissions per unit of GDP falls both during the transition and along the balanced growth
path at the constant rate gA (recall Figure 1 at this point). This is quite surprising because
both output and emissions growth varies over time, with the level of emissions tracing out an
EKC. Since is …xed throughout, the share of pollution abatement costs in value-added is
constant. Therefore, although very simple, the Green Solow model matches three important
features of the data: declining emissions to GDP ratios, the EKC, and pollution abatement
costs that are roughly constant over time.
    The Green Solow Model bears a family resemblance to several papers examining the
growth and pollution link within a neoclassical framework. Forster (1973) examines a neo-
classical model with zero population growth and no technological progress in either abate-
ment or production. His main result is that steady state consumption per person and capital
 35
   With a further assumption on technology we can ensure the EKC must be single humped. Our Cobb-
Douglas formulation adopted in the …gure is covered by our assumption.



                                               22
per person are lower when society invests in pollution control since these controls lower the
net return to capital.
    Although Forster’s assumptions on abatement and pollution creation are di¤erent from
ours, we can reproduce his main results in our …xed savings rate setting by adopting his
assumptions of gA = g = n = 0. When we do so we …nd steady state capital per person and
consumption per person both fall with increases in while pollution is lowered. Forster’s
work is important because it was perhaps the …rst examination of optimal pollution control
in a neoclassical setting.
    The Green Solow model is also similar to the neoclassical model adopted in Stokey
(1998), but di¤ers in that Stokey gives no role to technological progress in abatement. As
a result increasing abatement intensity must carry the day in reducing pollution. Stokey
also generates the EKC prediction but her result follows from a change in pollution policy
along the transition path. Her simulations of the model must however to some extent re‡ect
the same dynamic forces we have identi…ed since the model is neoclassical and the evolution
equation for the environment is identical.
    More closely related work is Bovenberg and Smulders (1995). In their endogenous growth
formulation “pollution augmenting technological progress” holds pollution in check and
drives long run growth. In their two-sector model, ongoing investments in the knowledge
sector raise the productivity of pollution leading to a balanced growth path with a constant
level of environmental quality. Again our Green Solow model reproduces the ‡avor of their
results. Setting n = 0 to mimic their zero population growth assumption, and assuming
g = gA to mimic the identical rates of technological progress found in both sectors, we …nd
from (22) that emissions are constant along the balanced growth path and output per person
grows at rate g.
    This similarity should not be all that surprising because Bovenberg and Smulders’“pol-
lution augmenting technological progress” is very similar to our technological progress in
abatement. To see why divide both sides of our emissions function in (14) by , and then
employ the monotonicity of A in to invert the intensive abatement function and solve for
[1    ]. Use this to write net output Y = F [1      ] available for consumption or investment
as:
                                   Y = G (F (K; BL) ; AE)                                 (22)
where A = 1= , and G is both CRS and concave. Hence “pollution augmenting technological
progress”is equivalent to our technological progress in abatement.

4.2    Intensifying Abatement: The Stokey Alternative
We now amend our Green Solow model to incorporate a role for intensi…ed abatement to
lower pollution levels. In the model above reductions in pollution came about solely because
of changes in the emission technology and not because society allocated a greater share of
its resources to pollution prevention. In an important paper Nancy Stokey [Stokey (1998)]
presented a series of simple growth and pollution models to investigate the links between the


                                             23
limits to growth and industrial pollution. She examined the ability of these models to repro-
duce the results of empirical work …nding an Environmental Kuznets Curve and investigated
how an active environmental policy may place limits on growth. An important feature of
Stokey’s analysis was its dependence on increased abatement and tightening regulations to
drive pollution downward.
    Her analysis contains two contributions. The …rst is a simple explanation for the empirical
…nding of an Environmental Kuznets curve. Like Lopez (1994) before her, and Copeland and
Taylor (2003) after, Stokey shows how an income elastic demand for environmental protection
can usher in tighter regulations and eventually falling pollution levels. This assumption
on tastes, together with certain assumptions on abatement, succeeds in generating a …rst
worsening and then improving environment as growth proceeds.
    Stokey’s second contribution was to investigate whether there are limits to growth im-
posed by regulating industrial pollution. In section 5 we discuss her analysis within an AK
framework; here we focus on her work within the neoclassical model that formed the bulk of
her paper. To do so we make the smallest departures possible from the Green Solow model.
We again take the savings rate as …xed, but allow the intensity of abatement to vary over
time. Since we are primarily interested in feasibility rather than optimality, our …xed savings
rate assumption will simplify the analysis at little or no cost. Stokey assumed zero population
growth, exogenous technological progress in goods production, a Cobb-Douglas aggregator
over capital and labor in …nal goods production, and adopted an abatement function drawn
from Copeland and Taylor (1994). In Stokey’s analysis an optimizing representative agent
determine savings and abatement decisions.
    Although it is not obvious from Stokey (1998), a process of pollution abatement is implicit
in her analysis. In Stokey’s formulation the planner chooses a consumption path and the
techniques of production as indexed by “z”. The choice of techniques determines the link
between potential output, F , and …nal output Y available for consumption or investment.
The two are related by Y = F z; while aggregate emissions are given by E = F z for some
   > 1. To see how this choice of “techniques” is really one over abatement intensity make
the change of variables (1     ) = z, and then let e( ) = (1       ) for > 1. It is now easy to
see that the “techniques” chosen by the planner correspond to choices over the abatement
intensity . The resulting e ( ) is just a speci…c form of an emissions function coming from
the assumptions of constant returns to abatement and pollution being a joint product of
output. Since is in principle observable, we conduct our analysis in this unit.
    Our amended model assumes zero technological progress in abatement, and to follow
Stokey adopts the speci…c emissions function given above and a Cobb-Douglas aggregator




                                              24
over factors. The model is described by:

                                       Y     = F [1    ]
                                       F       K (BL)1
                                       K_    = sY     K
                                        L_   = nL                                             (23)
                                       B_    = gB
                                       E     = F e ( ) F [1                  ]

To examine the feasibility of balanced growth with a non-deteriorating environment we start
with the last equation in (23) giving emissions and log di¤erentiate to …nd:

                                 GE = Gk + (1                    ) (g + n) + Ge(      )       (24)

recall GE must be zero or negative or else the environment deteriorates. In the absence of
technological progress in the emissions function, this implies the growth rate of emissions
per unit of output Ge( ) must be negative. To identify what this may imply for growth, we
eliminate GK . To do so, note balanced growth requires Y =K constant. Divide both sides of
the …nal goods production function by Y . Rearrange and log di¤erentiate with respect to
time to …nd:
                                                       Ge( )
                               GY = GK = g + n +                                        (25)
                                                    (1     )
where GY is the growth rate of …nal output. At this point it is worthwhile to note that …nal
output growth is reduced by active abatement since Ge( ) must be negative.
    To determine the evolution of emissions along the balanced growth path substitute (25)
into (24) and rearrange slightly to obtain:
                                                     Ge(     )         (         1) Ge(   )
                               GE = g + n +                        +                          (26)
                                                (1           )
The …rst two terms of this expression, (n + g), represent the scale e¤ect of growth. They
represent the growth rate of emissions that would arise along the balanced growth path if
was held constant. This is clear from (23) since if is constant Ge( ) = 0.
   The …nal two terms in (26) represent the technique e¤ect created by lowering emissions
per unit output along the balanced growth path. This technique e¤ect is itself composed of
two parts. The …rst component is the reduction in the growth rate of …nal output caused
by the diversion of resources to abatement. Since is increasing along the balanced growth
path, the growth rate of F exceeds that of …nal output by this amount.36 Therefore, this
component of the technique e¤ect lowers pollution by slowing down the growth rate of …nal
output (recall (25)).
   The second component of the technique e¤ect is the reduction in emissions per unit of
…nal output created by abating more intensively. This is the standard component identi…ed
 36
      The growth rate of   and e( ) are related by Ge(   )   =       [ =(1        )]G .

                                                      25
in static models. This component of the technique e¤ect need not be as large as previously
to lower pollution. To see this solve (26) for the rate at which emissions per unit of output
must fall to drive emissions downward. Algebra yields:

                                                        g+n
                                       Ge( ) >                                              (27)
                                                  1 + [ = [(1            ) ]]

which is smaller than the minimum rate of (g + n) needed in (17). Not surprisingly because
abatement has a negative e¤ect on growth rates, it has less of a role to play in lowering
emissions per unit of output. Therefore in set-ups where abatement is responsible for pollu-
tion reduction, the burden is shared across two margins: abatement lowers growth rates and
abatement also lowers emissions per unit output.
    These two roles for abatement now introduce the possibility that a sustainable growth
path may not exist. To see why, note that the reduction in growth created by an ever
tightening environmental policy is very similar to the growth drag found in models with
either …xed land or exhaustible natural resources.37 In the case with …xed or declining
resources the ratio of resource use to e¤ective labor falls along the balanced growth path and
this lowers growth rates. The same is true here once we make the right translations. To see
this parallel, use the …nal goods production function and the emissions function to write net
output as if pollution were an input into production. Doing so we …nd:
                                                             1       1
                                               Y = F1            E                          (28)

Along the balanced growth path E must fall while F grows; therefore the reduction in E
works very much like the exhaustion of a resource that lowers growth. It is now apparent
that while (27) tells us that the decline in emission intensity must be su¢ ciently fast to lower
emissions; equation (25) tells us this same magnitude cannot be too large if we are to have
positive growth in income per capita. Solving (25) for the implied restriction and combining
with (27) yields, after some manipulation:
                                                              g+n
                                       g>     Ge( ) >                                       (29)
                                                             + (1 )

The range given by this inequality de…nes the set of emission intensity reductions that are
consistent with declining emissions and positive per capita output growth: i.e. sustainable
growth. If we recall that > 1, then it is straightforward to see that the feasible region is
not empty when there is zero population growth. When n > 0 the region may not exist. By
equating the two sides of (29) we can solve for the relationship between population growth
and parameters that must be true for a sustainable growth path to exist. Algebra gives us:

                                                                          1
                                      g [(1      ) (1    1= )] > n                          (30)

 37
      An excellent review of growth drag is contained in Jones (2002; chapter 9).


                                                        26
The left hand side of (30) is exactly labor’s share in …nal goods production (use (28)and the
de…nition of F ) times the rate of labor augmenting technological progress, g. The right hand
side is exactly emissions share in …nal output, 1= , times the rate of population growth, n.
The intuition for this condition is straightforward, and is identical to that we give later in a
model where exhaustible energy resources create drag.
    The left hand side of the expression represents the Solow forces of technological progress
raising growth to the extent determined by labor’s share and the rate of progress. The right
hand side could be called the Malthusian forces since they capture the impact of diminishing
returns caused by a falling ratio of emissions to e¤ective labor along the balanced growth
path. These forces are stronger the more important are emissions in the production of …nal
output, and stronger the faster is population growth.
    If the inequality in (30) goes the other way then we have two choices. Either per capita
income growth is negative, or per capita income growth is positive but emissions rise. In
either case we do not have sustainable growth according to our de…nition.
    This observation of course suggests we follow the path of earlier authors and calculate the
growth drag due to pollution policy. For example, Nordhaus (1992) adopts a model similar
to (28) with emissions E replaced by either land or an exhaustible natural resource and then
generates estimates for the drag caused by …nite land and natural resources. But without a
formal framework in which to estimate the long run growth impact of tighter environmental
policy, Nordhaus resorts to estimates of contemporaneous expenditures on abatement to
calculate future costs of pollution control.
    We can go further here, although our methods are far from ideal. To generate an estimate
for the growth drag caused by environmental policy we need estimates of , and Ge( ) .
We note using (23) that Ge( ) = GE=Y =[        1] where GE=Y is the observable growth rate of
emissions per unit of …nal output. For various measures of E it is shown in Figure 1. We take
capital’s share of production, to be 0:35. To eliminate the parameter write emissions
per unit of output, using (23) as E=Y = (1        ) 1 . Since we have data on emissions, …nal
output and pollution abatement costs we could in theory estimate . Using this estimate
we could then calculate the growth drag due to pollution policy. Since our purpose is not
to provide de…nitive answers but rather suggest a methodology, take the log of E=Y and
di¤erentiate with respect to time to …nd:
                                             GE=Y    1
                                      =1                                                   (31)
                                              G
where G is the growth rate of the pollution abatement cost share, and the average pollution
abatement cost share over the period in consideration. Now use (31) to eliminate and
rewrite (25) as:
                                                 G
                               GY = g + n                                              (32)
                                              (1    ) (1    )
   The drag due to environmental policy is now directly linked to observable measures:
the share of pollution abatement costs in the value of overall economic activity, and the
percentage growth rate of this measure. To investigate what a reasonable magnitude of

                                              27
                  PAC share percentage increase per year           2.5     5.0    7.5
                  Pollution abatement costs share 1970             1.0     1.0    1.0
                  Pollution abatement cost share 2000              2.1     4.3    8.8
                  Average = [1    ] across period                  1.57    2.72   5.15
                  Growth drag percentage                           0.06    0.2    0.5

                  Table 1: The drag pollution policy on growth (percentages)

growth drag maybe, we report in the table below a series of illustrative calculations. Recall
that the share of pollution abatement costs in either manufacturing value-added or GDP is
small –on the order of 1 or 2%. In certain industries it can of course be much higher. Take
1970 as the base year and set the pollution abatement costs share in that year at 1%. Then
applying growth rates of 2:5 to 7:5% per year in this cost share, we obtain with the help of
(32), the following results.
    The …rst column assumes the share of pollution abatement costs in the value of output
rises from 1% to a little over 2% in thirty years. The other columns report larger increases
for illustrative purposes, although they are far in excess of the historic increases as shown by
our data in Figure 2. A striking feature of the table is that the drag due to environmental
policy is very small except in extreme cases. When pollution abatement costs rise from 1%
to a little over 2% in 30 years, the drag on growth is only 6 hundredths of 1% point. When
pollution abatement costs grow by 5% per year, the policy reduces growth by 0:2%. If costs
grow by the extremely large 7:5% per year, drag is now 12 of 1% point which is signi…cant.
Note that growth in per capita income, GY n, over the last 50 years is approximately 2%
per year; therefore the last column would predict an ever strengthening environmental policy
that raises the share of pollution abatement costs in value-added by 7:5% year would reduce
per capita income growth by 25%.
    To a certain extent the relatively small e¤ects in Table 1 are not that surprising. If
pollution abatement costs as a fraction of value-added are in the order of 1%, it is di¢ -
cult to see how even relatively large percentage increases in their level would lower growth
tremendously. To go slightly further, note from (31) that if GE=Y and G are of the same
magnitude, then it is easy to see that is approximately 1= .38 This implies the share of
emissions in …nal production in (28), 1= is on the order of 0:01 or 0:02:And if pollution
emissions are such an unimportant input into the production of …nal output, then drag from
any reduction in emissions over time must also be small.
    Despite the optimistic results in Table 1 concerning growth rates, models that rely on
active abatement often contain the prediction that abatement becomes a larger and larger
component of economic activity. This is a direct consequence of two facts. The …rst is that
for emissions to fall, emissions per unit of output must shrink continuously with ongoing
growth. The second is that with constant returns to abatement, lowering emissions per unit
  38
    This may not be such a bad assumption. In Figure 1 it appears that the growth rate of emissions per
unit output for each pollutant may be roughly constant over the last 50 years. The important point is that
the two growth rates are of a similar magnitude and not necessarily equal.


                                                   28
output comes at increasing cost. As a consequence, an implication of an exclusive reliance
on abatement is that abatement costs rise along the growth path to eventually take up most
of national product. To verify this, return to our simple example and note Ge( ) is constant
along the balanced growth path. Using our speci…c emission function in (23), we know:
                                                 "     #
                                                     _
                                     Ge( ) =                                            (33)
                                                   1

       Solving this di¤erential equation for          yields:

                                  (t) = 1     (1       (1       (0))) e(Ge(   )=   )t                  (34)

starting from some (0) near the balanced growth path we see that as time goes to in…nity
goes to one because Ge( ) < 0. Abatement must take up a larger and larger share of national
product as time progresses. This is an uncomfortable conclusion in light of the data we have
already presented showing a relatively weak increase in abatement over time. In addition
the reader may wonder why it is that agents would willingly make such sacri…ces in …nal
consumption necessary for such a large abatement program.
    At this point it is useful to refer to Stokey (1998) explicitly for an answer since Stokey’s
analysis shows that consumer’s are indeed willing to make the sacri…ce needed in net output
to lower pollution albeit under certain conditions. Speci…cally, by adopting a CRRA utility
function Stokey shows emissions fall along the balanced growth path if and only if the
elasticity of marginal utility with respect to consumption exceeds one. Only if consumers
valuation of consumption falls quickly are they willing to take a smaller and smaller slice of
(an ever expanding) national income as growth proceeds.
    Stokey’s analysis also allows for a more theoretically based growth drag calculation. By
adopting speci…c functional forms, Stokey solves for the growth rate of …nal output and
emissions in terms of primitives. By rearranging slightly and recasting these results in terms
of our notation we …nd the growth rate of output per person and overall emissions are just:

                                                               +       1
                          Gy = g         g                                                             (35)
                                                  +         1 + (1      )(          1)
                                     1
                          GE =               Gy

where is the elasticity of marginal utility in the CRRA utility function,      1 is a measure
of the convexity of damages from pollution, is capital’s share, g is the exogenous rate of
labor augmenting technological progress. There is zero population growth so n = 0.39
    In comparison to our simple example the drag of environmental policy is now directly
linked to the primitives of tastes and technology although it re‡ects similar forces at work.
  39
    This is found by rearranging (3) page 14 of Stokey (1998). To rewrite the equation in our set up we need
to note the rate of labor augmenting technological progress would be g=(1       ) which we write as g in the
above.

                                                        29
For example, by rearranging we can isolate the percentage reduction in growth caused by
active pollution policy:

                                                       1 GE=Y
                              Gy = g 1                                                                     (36)
                                              1    GE=Y + (1  )(             1)

the greater is the rate of reduction in emissions per unit output, GE=Y , and the larger is
emissions share in …nal output 1= , the greater will be the drag. This is the same set of
forces we found using our simpler framework.
     We can of course estimate growth drag in this optimizing framework as well. In order
to replicate the Environmental Kuznet’s curve Stokey adopts a set of parameters for all the
primitives we need. In doing so, the model predicts the EKC found in empirical work, but
using these same values for capital’s share, the abatement technology, etc. we …nd that
growth drag is an unbelievable 60% of potential growth. Using the parameter speci…cation
chosen to mimic the EKC, growth in income per capita in the absence of pollution policy is
4% per year.40 But using (35) growth is actually approximately 1:6% per year with active
pollution policy; therefore, growth in income per person is slowed by 60% from what it would
be in the absence of environmental concerns. This is clearly far too high.
     If we lower the elasticity of marginal utility to approach the lowest limit consistent with
falling pollution ( approaching 1), and set = 1, then drag hits its minimum. But even
in this case, drag is almost 55% of potential growth. The problem with these calculations is
our assumption of = 3, which implies a share of pollution emissions in …nal output of 1=3
which is clearly far too high. Altering to values similar to those used in our growth drag
calculations suggests a much smaller drag.
     For example, from Figure 1 it is apparent that 3 of the US criteria pollutants had an
emissions per unit of output in 1998 that were just 1=10 of their value in 1940. This implies
a growth rate of approximately 4% per year from these pollutants. Assuming the share
of emissions in …nal output is 0:02, is 50, and with a capital share of 0:35 we …nd the
percentage reduction predicted by (36) to be just 0:03. Therefore a 2% growth rate would
be reduced to just 1:94% because of the drag of environmental policy.41
     We would hasten to add however that these calculations are purely for illustration. They
demonstrate how the growth drag due to environmental policy may be calculated from prim-
itives on technologies, abatement costs, knowledge of historic growth, and emission levels.
We leave it to future research to develop and re…ne these methods to generate estimates of
the growth drag due to environmental policy.42
  40
     This is just the e¤ective rate of labor augmenting technical change which is g=(1        ) = 0:024=0:6 in
Stokey’s notation.
  41
     The problem with this set of parameters is that the output elasticity of emissions in production is far too
high at 1=3. If the regulator used pollution taxes to implement the social optimum, this implies that at all
periods of time the share of pollution taxes in value-added would be 1/3. Setting much higher generates
numbers closer to those we reported in Table 1.
  42
     Other methods used to estimate the impact of tighter pollution policy on growth include the use of
quite detailed computable general equilibrium models of the U.S. economy, econometric studies, and more


                                                      30
    Many other papers rely on an active role for abatement in lowering pollution levels,
and therefore must contain predictions for both the drag of environmental policy and the
evolution of pollution abatement costs over time. In some work, abatement is speci…ed
di¤erently so that it escapes diminishing returns by assumption. For example, early work
by Keeler et al. (1972) examines no growth steady states and assumes foregone output is
the only input into abatement. As a result of this assumption, marginal abatement costs are
constant in their formulation. Even with constant marginal abatement costs they …nd that
when abatement is not very productive a “Murky Age”equilibrium arises: abatement is not
undertaken and emissions are high in the steady state. Alternatively, when abatement is
very productive in reducing emissions, the steady state is given by a Golden Age equilibrium
with active abatement and lower emissions.
    Other related work appears in Lopez (1994) and Copeland and Taylor (2003). In these
contributions an optimizing social planner chooses the optimal level of abatement but factor
supplies and technology are taken as parametric in their exclusively static analyses. Both
adopt formulations where abatement is a constant returns activity using conventional in-
puts and examine how once for all growth in either technology or factor endowments a¤ect
pollution levels.43 When growth is fueled by neutral technological progress, Copeland and
Taylor show that emissions fall with this source of growth if the elasticity of marginal damage
from pollution exceeds one. In a CRRA framework this corresponds to the condition Stokey
derived of > 1.
    In contrast when growth occurs by primary factor accumulation alone, then Lopez (1994)
shows that whether pollution rises or falls now depends on both the elasticity of substitution
between factor inputs and the income elasticity of marginal damage. If the elasticity of
substitution between primary factors and emissions is large, then emissions fall quite easily.
When production is Cobb-Douglas, Lopez’s condition is identical to that of Stokey and > 1
generates the result that emissions fall with growth.
    Together these contributions demonstrate that an improving environment and rising in-
comes are surely feasible in a standard neoclassical model where abatement is a constant
returns activity. This path is also optimal under certain conditions. But by relying exclu-
sively on changes in the intensity of abatement to lower pollution levels consumers must be
willing to make rather large sacri…ces for a cleaner environment over time. It is in fact this
rather large willingness to sacri…ce for a cleaner environment that leads to regulation in the
…rst place.
    In Stokey (1998), regulation is at …rst not present as the shadow value of capital is
too high and the shadow value of pollution too low when growth begins for the planner
to allocate any output to abatement. An important input into this decision is that the
aggregative data exercises like the one we just conducted. The results from these studies are quite di¤erent.
For example, Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1990) build a 35 industry model of the U.S. economy to estimate the
impact of pollution abatement costs and motor vehicle emission standards on overall output and growth.
They …nd that output growth in the U.S. was reduced by almost 0:2% over the 1973-1985 period by these
environmental policies, and in level terms U.S. real GDP is lower by a quite signi…cant 2:6%.
  43
     Lopez (1994) does not present an abatement function per se but it is implicit in his use of the revenue
function listing primary factors and emissions as productive factors.


                                                     31
marginal product of the …rst unit of abatement is bounded above even at zero abatement.44
As a result, no abatement is undertaken = 0 and pollution rises lock-step with output.
Once the environment has deteriorated su¢ ciently and the now larger capital stock has
depressed its shadow value, active abatement begins. There is then a transition period and
the economy approaches the balanced growth path described previously.
    This explanation for the EKC is quite persuasive. It links rising income levels with a
lower shadow cost of abatement and a higher opportunity cost of doing nothing. It captures
the idea that policy responds positively to real income growth and generates an EKC is a
straightforward way. We have already seen however that a further implication of the model
is an ever-rising pollution abatement cost share that may be inconsistent with the data.
In addition we should note that this explanation predicts a constant emissions to output
ratio prior to the regulation phase when emissions are rising. After regulation begins, the
emissions to output ratio falls and does so at a constant rate along the balanced growth
path (see (35)). Figure 1 however shows the emission to output ratio was falling long before
emissions peaked in Figures 3 through 8. Therefore, using this data as our guide the model
misses the long reduction in emissions per unit output that occurred in the US prior to peak
pollution levels being achieved.
    These observations suggest, at the very least, that other forces are simultaneously at
work and partially responsible for the falling emissions to output ratio and roughly constant
control costs in the U.S. historical record. One natural candidate is of course changes in
the composition of output towards less energy intensive, and hence less pollution intensive,
goods. Much has been made recently about the dematerialization of production and its
environmental consequences, and hence we now turn to examine a model relying on just
these e¤ects.

4.3       Composition shifts: The Source and Sink Model
There are several ways to escape a worsening environment as economic growth proceeds. One
possibility is for technological progress in abatement to lower pollution levels as shown in the
Green Solow model; another is intensi…ed abatement as shown by the Stokey Alternative. A
third method is to alter the composition of output or inputs towards less pollution intensive
activities. In this section we investigate the implication of changing energy use in production.
Much of current concern over pollution arises from energy use and hence if the economy as
a whole could conserve on energy this would have important implications for environmental
quality. But raising energy e¢ ciency per unit of output comes at some cost because energy
is a valuable input and constraining its use will lower overall productivity. These losses must
be compensated for by increases in capital, e¤ective labor or new technology if growth is
not to be slowed. Therefore, solving our pollution problems by altering an economy’s input
mix may introduce signi…cant drag. These growth concerns are of course one of the major
reasons why many countries have delayed rati…cation of the Kyoto protocol; and why many
developing countries refuse to sign the agreement.
 44
      We will show this in section 5.


                                              32
    While many models investigating the growth and pollution relationship rely on composi-
tional changes to lower pollution levels, few make the role of energy explicit in their analyses.
For example, Copeland and Taylor (2003) present a “Sources of Growth” explanation for
the Environmental Kuznets curve arguing that if the development process relies heavily on
capital accumulation in the earliest stages and human capital formation in later stages, these
changes will alter the pollution intensity of production so that the environment should at …rst
worsen and then improve over time. Related empirical work in Antweiler et al. (2001) …nds
growth fueled by capital accumulation is necessarily pollution increasing, while growth fueled
by neutral technological progress lowers pollution levels. Behind these results is presumably
a link between the di¤erent types of growth, energy use, and emissions.
    Similarly, in Aghion and Howitt (1998)’s analysis of long run growth and environmental
outcomes, their clean capital - knowledge - takes on a larger and larger role in growth in
the long run and this too creates an eventually improving economy. But since they adopt
the same assumptions on abatement as Stokey (1998), even with a changing composition of
output large increases in abatement must made to hold pollution down to acceptable levels.
    In most of these formulations the link to energy use is at best implicit with the reader
having to interpret capital or other productive factors in a broad way to include energy or
other natural resources. One of the major accomplishments of the early resource literature
was to identify how and when …nite resources impinge on the growth process. By ignoring
the role of exhaustible resources in generating pollution, we run the risk of making pollution
reductions look relatively painless because these analyses will miss the induced drag on
economic growth created by lower energy use. In this section we make the connection
between energy use, growth and environmental outcomes precise by combining earlier models
of growth and exhaustible resources with newer models examining the pollution and growth
link. By doing so we demonstrate how some of the results of the earlier 1960s and 1970s
literature on natural resources and growth have relevance today.
    One of the major research questions of the earlier ‘limits to growth” literature was the
extent to which exhaustible natural resources impinged on growth. Seminal contributions
by Solow (1974) and Stiglitz (1974) showed that growth with exhaustible resources was
indeed possible, although it required a joint restriction on the rate of population growth,
technological progress and the share of natural resources in output. There are two well-
known results from this literature.
    The …rst, due to Solow (1974), is that a program of constant consumption is feasible
even with limited exhaustible resources and a constant population if the share of capital in
output exceeds the share of resources in …nal output. This observation led to a consideration
of the optimal rate of savings to maximize the constant consumption pro…le. The answer
was provided by John Hartwick (1977) and embodied in the now-famous Hartwick’s rule:
invest all the rents from the exhaustible resource in capital and future generations will be as
well o¤ as the currently living despite the asymptotic elimination of natural resources.45
    The second result, due to Stiglitz (1974), is that growth in per capita consumption is
  45
   Adopting Hartwick’s rule in our source-and-sink model leads to increasing utility over time as the envi-
ronment improves with resource exhaustion. Proof available upon request.


                                                    33
possible with positive population growth if the rate of resource augmenting technological
progress exceeds the population growth rate. Our formulation will also yield a similar re-
striction on technological progress to generate positive per capita output growth, but in
addition we add the further restriction that environmental quality improves. Therefore,
even when growth with exhaustible resources is feasible in terms of generating positive out-
put growth (as required by Stiglitz (1974)), it may be unsustainable because this same plan
implies rising pollution levels.
    We remain as close as possible to our earlier formulation while introducing a role for
natural resources. We make two important changes. First, we introduce energy as an
intermediate good. The intermediate good “energy”is produced from an exhaustible natural
resource, R, capital, and labor via a CRS and strictly concave production technology. Final
output (used for investment or consumption) is then produced via capital, labor and the
energy intermediate. To keep things simple we assume both production functions are Cobb-
Douglas, and to remain consistent with our earlier formulations we assume technological
progress is labor augmenting.46
    Our second change is to assume pollution is produced via energy use, and not the overall
scale of …nal goods production. In doing we sever the strong link we had thus far between
pollution and …nal output by making pollution the product of input use. We retain our
earlier assumption that pollution can be abated, but take the fraction of resources devoted
to abatement as constant. We have already shown in the Stokey Alternative that increasing
abatement creates drag on economic growth; here we show that even with the abatement
intensity …xed, a move towards less energy intensive production lowers growth while it reduces
the growth rate of emissions.
    With these assumptions in hand, the production side of the economy becomes:
                                   Y    = Kyb1 (BLy )n1 I b2                                          (37)
                                    I = KIb3 (BL1 )n2 Rb4 [1             ]
where I is the energy intermediate, is the fraction of the energy industry’s activities devoted
to abating pollution, R denotes the ‡ow of resources used per unit time, and subscripts denote
quantities of capital and labor used in …nal good production, Y , and the intermediate good
energy, I.
    Capital and labor has to be allocated e¢ ciently across the two activities –intermediate
and …nal good production. It is straightforward to show that this implies a constant fraction
of the capital stock is employed in intermediate good production and the remainder in …nal
goods. The same is true for labor. This allows us to aggregate and rewrite the production
function for …nal good output as follows:
                                    Y = K a1 (LB)a2 Ra3 [1         ]b2                                (38)
which is necessarily CRS with a1 + a2 + a3 = 1.47
  46
     This implicitly assumes that energy is not an essential input into production; i.e. energy per unit of
output is not bounded below.
  47
     Algebra shows a1 = b1 + b2 b3 , a2 = n1 + b2 n2 , and a3 = b2 b4 .

                                                    34
    To complete the model we add equations governing the labor force and technology growth,
the relationship between extraction and the resource stock, S, plus our abatement assump-
tions linking emissions to energy use, I. These conditions are:

                                     K_    =   sY     K                                                   (39)
                                      L_   =   nL
                                     B_    =   gB
                                     E     =   I e ( ) = I [1         ]
                                      S_   =     R

where e ( ) measures the ‡ow of emissions released per unit of energy used. It is instructive
at this point to rewrite the emissions equation to focus on the role of a changing composition
of inputs in determining pollution levels. To do so de…ne the variable = I=Y which is the
ratio of energy use to …nal good production, or what is commonly called the energy intensity
of GDP. Then rewriting the emissions function we …nd:

                                               E = Y e( )                                                 (40)

A change in emissions can now come from any one of three sources: scale e¤ects via changes
in …nal good output Y ; composition e¤ects coming from changes in the energy intensity of
…nal good production ; and technique e¤ects that lower e ( ) directly.
    We examine balanced growth paths and impose two requirements on the set of paths we
investigate. First, as usual we require non-deteriorating environmental quality. Second, we
require positive growth in per capita income.48
    To solve for a balanced growth path note Y =K must be constant along any such path.
Using this requirement we can log di¤erentiate (38) with respect to time, impose the require-
ment that Y =K be constant, and …nd the growth rate of …nal output:49

                                                      a3
                               GY = (g + n)               [(g + n)         gR ]                           (41)
                                                     1 a1
The …rst term is the usual growth rate of output in the Solow model; the second is a negative
element capturing the growth drag caused by natural resources. To see why this term appears
suppose resources were in unlimited supply; then their services could grow over time at the
same rate as e¤ective labor and we would have gR = g + n. In this case, capital, output,
  48
      To this the reader may choose to add various e¢ ciency conditions. For example, Stiglitz (1974) imposes
the arbitrage condition requiring the return on capital equal that of the resource. This additional constraint
is the well-known Hotelling (1931) result that the rate of capital gain on the resource in situ must equal
the return on capital. This e¢ ciency condition fails here because energy use creates the disutility pollution.
We could impose a similar e¢ ciency condition but its form would depend on how pollution entered utility.
Alternatively, or in addition, the reader may add a condition requiring the marginal rate of substitution
between consumption and pollution equal its marginal product. We leave a discussion of optimality until
section 5.
   49
      It is helpful to recall is constant and (38) is CRS.

                                                      35
resources and e¤ective labor would grow at the rate g+n and there would be no resource
drag. In fact, however, the resource base S(0) > 0 is …nite and exhaustible, and this implies
that gR < 0.50 Any non-positive gR is feasible because we can always choose the level of
resource use such that the …nite stock is eliminated asymptotically. Therefore, the ratio
of resources to e¤ective labor in production falls over time and this reduces growth below
the Solow level. Indeed as (41) shows, growth in …nal output could be negative if resource
constraints loom too large.51
    >From our earlier equations it is straightforward to show that a3 = b2 b4 and hence the
existence of …nite resources lowers growth by an extent determined by the resource share in
…nal output. To see this note that if the share of …nal output going to resources approached
zero, then a3 approaches zero, and GY in (41) approaches g + n the Solow growth rate.
    It is now straightforward to write growth in per capita output as just:
                                                 a3
                                    gy = g           [g + n            gR ]                            (42)
                                                1 a1
which shows technological progress has to o¤set both population growth and the reduction
in resources over time in order for per capita income to rise. To make this clear and relate
our model here to the Stokey Alternative, suppose the resource in question o¤ered an inde-
structible ‡ow of services per unit time; i.e. suppose it was Ricardian land. Then gR = 0
and growth in per capita income is positive if and only if:
                                                a2 g > a3 n                                            (43)
    The left hand side of (43) represents the Solow forces of technological progress the strength
of which depends on the share of labor in overall production and the rate of labor augmenting
technological progress. Aligned against these are the Malthusian forces lowering output per
person by applying more and more labor to the …xed stock of land. The rate of population
growth and the share of land in production determine the strength of the Malthusian forces.
Note the similarity between (43) and our earlier (30). The condition in (43) arises when
gR = 0 and gy > 0; the condition in (30) has gE = 0, and gy > 0. Note the parallel between
emissions and resources.
    To generate falling pollution we will need a strong compositional shift and hence gR < 0
is our standard case. Our …rst condition for sustainability is that (42) is positive. Our second
condition is that pollution must fall over time. Log di¤erentiating our emissions function in
(40) yields:
                                   gE = gA + g + gY + ge( )                                  (44)
                                                         Zt
  50
       >From our stock equation we have S(t) = S (0)          R ( ) d where S (t) must be non-negative. This
                                                         o
implies that R( ) cannot rise over time along a balanced growth path.
  51
     Recall however the Solow result [See Solow (1974)] that with zero technological progress and zero pop-
ulation growth, a program of constant consumption can be maintained as long as the share of resources in
…nal output is less than the share of capital. We cannot derive this condition from (41) directly because we
have already imposed a constant Y =K, which is inconsistent with this program.

                                                    36
to eliminate the possibility of emissions falling because of technological progress in abatement
as in the Green Solow model, we set gA to zero. To eliminate the possibility of greater
abatement e¤orts holding pollution in check as in the Stokey Alternative, we set ge( ) = 0.
This leaves only changes in the composition of inputs to o¤set the rising scale e¤ect of
ongoing growth.
    Straightforward calculations then show that the growth rate of energy per unit of …nal
output is simply given by:

                                           b4              a3
                   g =     [1   b3 ]                             [g + n    gR ] < 0        (45)
                                       1        b3        1 a1

The sign of (45) is negative (see footnote 47). Not surprisingly, the energy intensity of …nal
output must fall over time.
    Putting the growth rate of output and energy intensity together we …nd emissions will
fall if and only if:

                                                 a3
                    gE = (g + n)       b3            + b4 [(g + n)        gR ] < 0         (46)
                                                1 a3

     Note the …rst element in (46), (g + n), is exactly the scale e¤ect of output growth in the
Green Solow model. And instead of technological progress in abatement appearing to o¤set
the scale e¤ect of growth, we now have emissions per unit of …nal output falling from the
composition e¤ect given by the second negative term. The growth rate of output is lowered
by the drag of natural resources and hence as the economy “abates” by altering its input
mix this creates drag much as in Stokey (1998).
     There is a tension therefore between the desirability of moving away from natural resource
use in order to lower pollution emissions and the cost of doing so in terms of growth. This of
course is a primary concern of many developing countries and has limited their participation
in the Kyoto Protocol to limit global warming. Because of our addition of a …xed natural
resource, in some cases, composition e¤ects alone cannot generate positive balanced growth
with a non-deteriorating environment.
     To investigate we graph Gy from (42) and GE from (46) in Figure 11 below. We have
graphed these growth rates against the rate of change in e¤ective labor per unit resource;
that is against, [(g + n) gR ] since this term plays a key role in both emissions growth and
per capita growth. There are several things to note about it. First, suppose resources were
in unlimited supply; then their services could “grow”over time at the same rate as e¤ective
labor: g + n and we would have gR = g + n. Such a wonderful existence corresponds to
points along the vertical axis in the …gure. In particular we see that with no resource drag,
per capita output growth equals g. With a …nite resource base the growth rate of resource
use must be negative and this means that per capita income growth must be lower as shown
by the negatively sloped line labeled Gy starting at g and intersecting the horizontal axis at
point B. Movements along this line correspond to changes in the growth rate of resource use
gR .


                                                     37
    Similarly, if there were unlimited resources the energy intensity of GDP would remain
constant and emissions would rise lock step with output. This unlimited resources scenario
corresponds to a point along the vertical axis with the rate of aggregate output growth and
emissions of (n + g). Again, since resource use must decline over time the true growth rate
of emissions must be lower as shown by the line labeled GE that intersects the horizontal
axis at A. The growth rate of emissions falls as we move to the right along this line because
…nal output grows more slowly, and …nal output uses less energy per unit output.
    >From these observations it is clear that at all points to the left of A, growth in emissions
is positive; points to the right of A, growth in emissions is negative. Similarly, all points
to the left of B have positive per capita output growth; points to the right have negative
growth. Putting these results together we see that ongoing growth in per capita incomes
and an improving environment may not be feasible in some cases. In particular, the bold
line segment AB represents the feasible region. Taking g and n as exogenous, this region
gives us a range of resource exploitation rates, gR , that are consistent with our twin goals.52
    To understand the determinants of the feasible region it proves useful to consider the
zero population growth case. If population growth is zero, then the two lines have the same
vertical intercept as shown by the dotted n = 0 line that is parallel to GE . Whether positive
growth and falling emissions is possible only depends on the relative slopes of GE versus
Gy . Algebra tells us a region such as AB will always exist with zero population growth.
The logic is simply that emissions growth falls with both reduced output growth and a
changing energy intensity of production. Both occur as we increase drag by moving right in
the …gure. Therefore, once resource drag has lowered per capita output growth to zero at a
point like B the scale e¤ect is zero, but emissions growth must be strictly negative because
the composition e¤ect is still driving energy intensity downwards. Consequently, a feasible
region like AB exists.
    When population growth is positive, this logic fails. As we raise the population growth
rate the GE curve shifts to the right and eventually intersects the horizontal axis at B. This
in e¤ect raises the scale e¤ect. At this point, positive growth with declining emissions is not
possible. The reason is simply that emissions growth is rising in n (a scale e¤ect), whereas
growth in output per capita falls with n because of resource drag. Once we choose n large
enough –as shown by the dashed line labeled n1 > n –the feasible region disappears.53
    These results have a decidedly negative ‡avor to them. An environmental policy that
lowers the growth rate of emissions and lowers the energy intensity of …nal output, also lowers
per capita growth to such an extent that an improving environment and real income gains
may be unattainable. There are several reasons why we should be cautious in interpreting
these negative results. The …rst is simply that we have ruled out a role for active abatement as
in the Stokey Alternative. And we have ruled out technological progress as in the Green Solow
model. While adding more avenues of adjustment is always good, active abatement lowers
  52
     You can derive the exact extraction level associated with any rate of exploitation by employing the
materials balance constraint for resources.
  53
     The issue of feasibility also arises in the Stokey Alternative although we didn’t focus on it there. Recall
Stokey (1998) assumed n = 0. Our analysis here suggests that this is not an innocuous assumption.


                                                      38
pollution emissions but creates drag just as reducing energy use does. Routine calculations
show that if we let all three avenues of adjustment operate, we can write our two balanced
growth path requirements as:

                    Gy =       g            RD [(g + n)        gR ] + P P D ge( ) > 0                   (47)
                              |{z}          |      {z            }    |    {z    }
                           Green Solow        natural resource drag   pollution policy drag

                     GE = g + n gA            EI [(g + n)         gR ] + T E ge( ) < 0
                          | {z }              |      {z             } | {z }
                              Green Solow        composition e¤ect        technique e¤ect


where RD is a positive constant representing resource drag, and PPD a positive constant
representing pollution policy drag. Note that in general with both resource exhaustion and
abatement rising, there are two sources of drag on per capita income growth. Corresponding
to each source of drag is of course a component of emission reduction. In the second equation
EI is a positive coe¢ cient representing energy intensity changes. This corresponds to a
composition e¤ect. In addition TE is a positive coe¢ cient representing changes coming from
increased abatement; this represents a technique e¤ect.
    Putting all this together in terms of our …gure, we …nd that allowing for technological
progress in abatement (gA > 0) shifts the growth of emissions line GE inward expanding
the feasible region. This should come as no surprise. Adding active abatement shifts both
lines down (the economy grows slower as do emissions), having an ambiguous e¤ect on the
feasible region. Raising population growth from zero however shrinks the region making it
more likely that both requirements cannot be met.
    What then are we to make of our stylized facts from the introduction? Emission levels
have been falling in many countries while growth in per capita income remained positive.
Pollution abatement costs have trended upwards but only slowly, and energy prices –while
rising – have not been rising at fast rates.54 We have already seen that these features are
roughly consistent with the Green Solow model and less so with the Stokey Alternative. Here
we …nd that relying on changes in energy intensity alone can work in lowering emissions but
it does so only with strong compositional shifts towards less energy intensive goods. In our
formulation these shifts are only consistent with a rising real price of energy over time. To
see this note that energy’s share in …nal output is …xed; take …nal output as the numeraire,
and conclude that the real price of energy must rise along the balanced growth path at the
rate      > 0.
    In Figure 10 we plot the real price of three energy sources: oil, natural gas, and coal.
For ease of reading all prices are set to 100 in 1957. It is very risky to draw any strong
conclusions from this data. The real price of oil has almost doubled since 1957; the price
of natural gas is rising quite quickly, while the price of coal has increased the least over the
period. Naturally these price increases have created some composition e¤ects as predicted
by our source and sink model, but only over certain periods of time. For example, Wing
  54
    Note from (37) that the relative price of energy to …nal good output must rise along the model’s balanced
growth path because we have already shown that the energy intensity of production, , falls over time (see
(45)).


                                                        39
and Ekhaus (2003) examine the history of energy intensity in US production and divide
its changes into those accruing from a changing mix of US industries and those accruing
from within industry improvements in energy e¢ ciency (which would correspond to a fall
in ). Their …ndings suggest that from the late 1950s until the mid 1970s changes in the
composition of US industries played a major role in reducing overall energy intensity. But
during the 1980s and 1990s the reduction in US aggregate energy intensity has come from
improvements in energy e¢ ciency at the industry level. Therefore changes in the composition
of output cannot carry the burden of explanation of our data.
    Instead these compositional changes must have been helped along by signi…cant techno-
logical progress in abatement or energy e¢ ciency ( ). The evidence for these changes is very
strong. For example in a detailed study of the energy e¢ ciency of consumer durables Newell
et al. (1999) …nd strong support for a signi…cant role for autonomous technological progress
(over 60% of the change in energy e¢ ciency), and supporting roles for induced innovation
created by higher energy prices. Similar evidence is presented by Popp (2002) who examines
the impact of higher energy prices on the rate of innovation in key energy technologies. Using
a database of US patenting activity over the 1970-1993 period, Popp explains variation in
the intensity of energy patenting across technology groups as a function of energy prices, the
existing “knowledge stock”in a technology area and other covariates such as federal funding
for R&D. There are two main results from the study. The …rst is that a rise in energy prices
shown in Figure 10 created induced innovation and a burst in patenting activity after the
oil price shocks.
    The second major result is that while prices are a signi…cant determinant of patenting
activity, other factors are also very important. For example, the existing stock of knowledge
(as measured by an index of previous patenting weighted for impact) in a technology area
has a large impact on subsequent patenting. For example, Popp reports that the average
change in knowledge stocks over the period raise patenting activity on average by 24%; while
the average change in energy prices over the period raise patenting on average by only 2%.
Knowledge accumulation and spillovers are very important in determining the pace of future
innovation.55
    Taking these considerations into account would likely expand our feasible region AB. For
example, if the emission intensity      fell when either energy prices rose (as in the source-
and-sink model) or abatement intensi…ed (as in the Stokey Alternative), then composition
changes and active abatement could play a smaller role in checking the growth of pollution.
This would of course make feasibility more likely.
    Adding complications to our existing models would however take us too far a…eld, and
as yet we know of no research that explicitly links energy prices, induced innovation and
  55
     Related empirical work by Kaufmann (2004) however is less sanguine about the ability of technical
change to lower energy intensity in the long run. Kaufman examines the 1929-1999 period and argues that
estimates of autonomous energy e¢ ciency increases have been drastically overstated because changes in the
composition of inputs and outputs have had led to a signi…cant lowering of energy intensity. Instead he
argues that inter fuel substitutions and reductions in household energy purchases are largely responsible for
the declining trend in the energy intensity of GDP.



                                                     40
pollution emissions within a growth framework. Instead we take a small step towards a
theory of induced innovation in the next section when we introduce a model with learning
by doing in abatement and reconsider our stylized facts. But before doing so, we should
note that we have, to a certain extent, stacked the decks against sustainable growth by
assuming environmental quality has no e¤ect on production possibilities. We have assumed
that reducing the ‡ow of emissions has only a cost in terms of drag and no bene…t in
terms of heightened productivity in goods production due to higher environmental quality.
Several authors have however postulated a direct and positive link between the productivity
of …nal goods output and environmental quality. This link casts doubt on the validity of
growth drag exercises like ours. A typical formulation would add to our models a shift
term on the …nal goods production function that is increasing in environmental quality. For
example, Bovenberg et al. (1995) and Tahovnen (1991) both postulate this type of additional
interaction. Once we allow for a direct productivity response to an improved environment it
is not clear that emission reductions lower growth. Bovenberg et al. and Tahovenen et al.
both give su¢ cient conditions under which this additional channel dominates.
    In general the less important are emissions in the direct production function, the more
responsive is natural growth to a reduction in emissions, and the greater is the marginal
productivity boost from a cleaner environment, the more likely it is that emission reduc-
tion could, in theory, boost growth. While it is certainly plausible that a deteriorating
environment will lower productivity, it is however unclear how important these impacts are
empirically. We suspect that for most of industrial production these environmental impacts
are small. Certain industries such as farming or …shing are certain to have larger productivity
e¤ects from an improved environment, but these industries are small contributors to GDP in
developed countries. It is likely that these induced productivity e¤ects are greatest in poor
developing economies and as yet have escaped the notice of serious empirical researchers.
    While it is certainly possible for these direct productivity e¤ects to exist, we feel the
biggest restriction imposed by our analysis thus far is its failure to link the rising costs of
pollution control to innovation targeted at raising the productivity of abatement. Induced
changes in technology of this sort are likely to lower energy intensity over time given the
price paths shown in Figure 10 and innovation in abatement technologies is likely to be
forthcoming as abatement costs rise. Both of these induced e¤ects would lower emissions
per unit …nal output by altering . There is of course a large body of empirical research
…nding just such e¤ects. But clearly these links are important although di¢ cult to model in
a growth framework, for as Popp notes

     “The most signi…cant result [sic of the study] is the strong, positive impact energy
     prices have on new innovations. This …nding suggests that environmental taxes
     and regulations not only reduce pollution by shifting behavior away from pollut-
     ing activities but also encourage the development of new technologies that make
     pollution control less costly in the long run. . . ..simply relying on technological
     change is not enough. There must be some mechanism in place that encourages
     new innovation”, p178.


                                              41
   With this quote in mind we now turn to consider the role of innovation induced by
regulation.


5      Induced Innovation and Learning by Doing
The series of models we have examined thus far explain the growth and environment data
by focusing on technological progress in goods production, increased abatement e¤orts or
changes in the composition of output over time.56 Missing from this list is a considera-
tion of induced innovation lowering abatement costs. Induced innovation or learning by
doing is prominent in both growth theory (since the writings of Arrow (1962)), and in en-
vironmental economics more generally. For example, Ja¤e, et al (1995) stresses the role of
induced technological advance in solving pollution problems and holding down abatement
costs. New growth theory often adopts formulations that are in essence learning by doing
models. In models where knowledge accumulates over time, innovators learn from this stock
of knowledge. In models of human capital acquisition the evolution of human capital re‡ects
the learning of past generations. And the simplest AK speci…cation can be thought of a
model where learning by doing in capital accumulation generates constant returns to capital
accumulation at the economy wide level.
    The introduction of learning by doing o¤ers several new features to the growth and
environment relationship. First, if abatement e¤orts are subject to learning by doing then
this feature alone may generate the prediction of a …rst worsening and then improving
environment. In a static setting, learning by doing is identical to increasing returns, and
Andreoni and Levinson (2001) show how increasing returns to abatement can generate an
EKC in a partial equilibrium endowment economy.57
    Secondly, learning by doing alters the costs of pollution control. If learning by doing
e¤ects are unbounded, then growth with falling pollution levels could conceivably come at
decreasing cost to society. In a world with bounded learning by doing the implications are
less clear, but it seems likely that the drag of pollution policy would be smaller if learning by
doing e¤ects are present. An important feature of the static analysis mentioned above is that
the authors generate falling pollution levels under quite weak assumptions on preferences.
Speci…cally they do not need to adopt formulations where the demand for environmental
protection is very income elastic. This suggests that a parallel dynamic analysis may escape
these restrictions as well, because the cost of environmental control is now lower.
    Third, if learning by doing arises from economy wide growth in the knowledge stock then
learning by doing models o¤er the possibility of linking technological progress in abatement
with that in goods production. Learning by doing models give us one way to make our
assumptions about knowledge spillovers and technological progress consistent across sectors.
And as our previous analysis makes clear, the relative rates of technological progress in goods
  56
     To this we could add the set of papers invoking political economy arguments. See for example Jones
and Manuelli (2001) and the related empirical work by Barrett (1998).
  57
     Copeland and Taylor (2003) extend their analysis to a two-sector general equilibrium model with industry
wide external economies in abatement and replicate their …nding for a production economy.

                                                     42
production and abatement are key to determining the sustainability of a balanced growth
path.
    Finally, although learning by doing is often modeled as a passive activity and not pur-
poseful investment, learning by doing can be a form of induced innovation. If a worsening
environment necessitates the imposition of pollution controls, and abatement is subject to
learning by doing, we have e¤ectively followed the advice of Popp in identifying a causal
factor behind subsequent improvements in abatement technology.

5.1     Induced Innovation and the Kindergarten Rule Model
To discuss these issues, we now introduce the Kindergarten Rule model of Brock and Taylor
(2003). This model, like those in the static literature, relies on learning by doing in the
abatement process to hold pollution in check. Importantly, though since learning by doing is
really an assumption about knowledge spillovers, the Kindergarten model adopts a consistent
set of assumptions regarding the bene…cial impact of knowledge spillovers. It assumes,
similar to contributions in the AK growth literature, that knowledge spillovers in capital
accumulation lead to constant returns at the aggregate level. Similarly, knowledge spillovers
in abatement eliminate diminishing returns to abatement. As a consequence, we obtain a
relatively simple model of growth with pollution controls where learning by doing reduces
abatement costs but does not eliminate the drag of environmental policy entirely.
    In order to focus on the implications of ongoing technological progress for the environment
and growth, Brock and Taylor (2003) adopt the very direct link between factor accumulation
and technological progress employed by Romer (1986), Lucas (1988) and others. By doing so
they generate a simple one-sector model of endogenous growth and environmental quality.58
    For simplicity they adopt a conventional in…nitely lived representative agent, and assume
all pollution is local. There is one aggregate good, labeled Y, which is either consumed or
used for investment or abatement. There are two factors of production: labor and capital.
There is zero population growth and hence L(t) = L; recall it is the rate of population growth
relative to the rate of technological progress that is key, so here one of these rates is set to
zero. In contrast to labor, the capital stock accumulates via investment and depreciates at
the constant rate .

5.1.1    Tastes
A representative consumer maximizes lifetime utility given by:
                                             Z1
                                                               t
                                       W =        U (C; X) e       dt                               (48)
                                              0

  58
     Extensions of their framework to allow for purposeful innovation and a distinction between these two
forms of capital, along the lines of Grossman and Helpman (1991) or Aghion and Howitt (1998), seem both
feasible and worthwhile.



                                                    43
where C indicates consumption, and X is the pollution stock. Utility is increasing and
quasi-concave in C and X and hence X = 0 corresponds to a pristine environment. When
we treat X as ‡ow, X = 0 occurs with zero ‡ow of pollution. When we allow pollution to
accumulate in the biosphere we assume the (damaging) service ‡ow is proportional to the
level of the stock. Taking this factor of proportionality to be one, then X is the damaging
service ‡ow from the stock of pollution given by X.
    A useful special case of U (C; X) is the constant elasticity formulation:

                                                C1 "      BX
                               U (C; X) =                        for " 6= 1                            (49)
                                                1 "
                                                         BX
                               U (C; X) = ln C                  for " = 1

where       0; "        0 and B measures the impact of local pollution on a representative
individual.

5.1.2    Technologies
The assumptions on production are standard. Each …rm has access to a strictly concave and
CRS production function linking labor and capital to output Y . The productivity of labor
is augmented by a technology parameter T taken as given by individual agents. Following
Romer (1986) and Lucas (1998) we assume the state of technology is proportional to an
economy wide measure of activity. In Romer (1986) this aggregate measure is aggregate
R&D, in Lucas (1988) it is average human capital levels; in AK speci…cations it is linked to
either the aggregate capital stock or (to eliminate scale e¤ects) average capital per worker.
We assume T is proportional to the aggregate capital to labor ratio in the economy, K=L,
and by choice of units take the proportionality constant to be one.59

5.1.3    From Individual to Aggregate Production
Although we adopt a social planning perspective, it is instructive to review how …rm level
magnitudes aggregate to economy wide measures since this makes clear the assumptions
made regarding the role of knowledge spillovers. We aggregate across …rms to obtain the
  59
     As is well known, one-sector models of endogenous growth blur the important distinction between phys-
ical capital and knowledge capital and force us to think of “capital” in very broad terms. Extensions of our
framework along the lines of Grossman and Helpman (1991) or Aghion and Howitt (1998) seem both possible
and worthwhile. These extensions would however add additional state variables making our examination of
transition paths di¢ cult.




                                                    44
AK aggregate production function as follows:60
                                       Yi = F (Ki ; T Li )
                                            X
                                       Y =     F (Ki ; T Li )                                          (50)
                                                  i
                                        Y   = T LF (K=T L; 1)
                                        Y   = KF (1; 1) = AK
where the …rst line gives …rm level production; the second line sums across …rms; the third
uses linear homogeneity and exploits the fact that e¢ ciency requires all …rms adopt the same
capital intensity. The last line follows from the de…nition of T .
    Summarizing: diminishing returns at the …rm level are undone by technological progress
linked to aggregate capital intensity leaving the social marginal product of capital constant.
    We now employ similar methods to generate the aggregate abatement technology. To
start we note pollution is a joint product of output and we take this relationship to be
proportional.61 By choice of units we take the factor of proportionality to be one. Pollution
emitted is equal to pollution created minus pollution abated. Abatement of pollution takes
as inputs the ‡ow of pollution, which is proportional to the gross ‡ow of output Y G , and
abatement inputs denoted by Y A . The abatement production function is standard: it is
strictly concave and CRS. Therefore denoting pollution emitted by P , we can write pollution
emitted by the ith …rm as:
                                     Pi = YiG a YiG ; YiA                                 (51)
    Now consider a Romeresque approach where individual abatement e¤orts provide knowl-
edge spillovers useful to others abating in the economy. To do so we again introduce a
technology shift parameter , and assume it raises the marginal product of abatement. To
be consistent with our earlier treatment of technological progress in production we assume
  is proportional to the average abatement intensity in the economy, Y A =Y G . Then much
as before we have the individual to aggregate abatement technology transformation as:
                                  Pi = YiG       a YiG ; YiA
                              Pi = YiG 1    a 1; YiA =YiG
                            X      X
                              Pi =    YiG 1    a 1; YiA =YiG                                           (52)
                              i             I
                                             G
                                  P = Y [1            a (1; 1)] ; a (1; 1) > 1
                                  P = Y G [1          a (1; 1)] ;      Y A =Y G
where the …rst line introduces the technology parameter ; the second exploits linear homo-
geneity of the abatement production function; the third aggregates across …rms; the fourth
  60
     Implementing our planning solution by way of pollution taxes and subsidies to investment and abatement
should be straightforward.
  61
     Nothing is lost if we assume pollution is produced in proportion to the services of capital inputs. The
service ‡ow of capital is proportional to the stock of capital, and the stock of capital is proportional to
output.

                                                      45
recognizes that e¢ ciency requires all …rms choose identical abatement intensities, uses the
de…nition of and notes that for abatement to be productive it must be able to clean up
after itself. The …fth line de…nes the intensity of abatement,        Y A =Y G . Since abatement
                                                                   62
can only reduce the pollution ‡ow we must have          1=a (1; 1).
    It is important to note that the aggregate relationship between pollution and abatement
given by the last line in (52) is consistent with empirical estimates …nding rising marginal
abatement costs at the …rm level. Each individual …rm has abatement costs given by fore-
gone output used in abatement, and hence partially di¤erentiating the …rst line of (52) and
rearranging we …nd:
                              @YiA           @a         @YiA2
                                   = 1=            < 0;        >0                           (53)
                              @Pi          @YiA          @Pi2
   Marginal abatement costs are rising at the …rm level.
   Marginal abatement costs at the society level, are however, constant. To see why totally
di¤erentiate (52) allowing and individual abatement to both vary. We …nd:

                              dYiA                                 @a=@YiG d
                                   =      1=   @a=@YiA                                                  (54)
                              dPi                                 [@a=@YiA ] dPi

  is the average abatement intensity in the economy, whichhgiven
                                                               i hidentical
                                                                       i    …rms, is just the
                                                     d      1     dYiA
abatement intensity for the typical ith …rm. Using dPi = Y G       dPi
                                                                         and rearranging we
                                                             i
obtain:
                              dYiA                              YiA
                                   =        hh          i         h    i    i                           (55)
                              dPi                 @a
                                                            YiA + @Y@aG YiG
                                                 @YiA               i

                                                 YiA                       1
                                      =                    =                     <0
                                            a (YiA ; YiG )              a (1; 1)

where the …rst line follows from rearrangement and the second by CRS in abatement. The
result given in (55) is identical to what we …nd by di¤erentiating the aggregate relationship
between pollution and abatement given in the last line of (52).
    Summarizing: diminishing returns at the …rm level, that lead to rising marginal abate-
ment costs, are undone by technological progress linked to aggregate abatement intensity
leaving the social marginal cost of abatement constant.
    The formulations of learning by doing that we have adopted are extreme. In general we
would expect the productivity in abatement (or production) to adjust gradually in response
to a slow moving measure of knowledge capital. In the cases developed here however the
productivity boost from an increased knowledge capital occurs instantaneously. So instead
  62
     Adding the possibility of investments in restoration would probably strengthen the case for sustainable
growth. Abatement of pollution and restoration are however distinct activities. We imagine that a restoration
production function would take as an input the current damage to the environment –our stock variable X
– and then apply inputs to restore it. This is quite di¤erent from abatement which operates to lower the
current ‡ow of pollution by use of variable inputs.


                                                        46
of being a complicated function of the abatement intensities adopted in the in…nite past
history of the economy weighed by their relevance to productivity today, it is simply pro-
portional to the current intensity. This is of course an abstraction, but a useful one since
it frees us from keeping track of the evolution of two additional state variables (knowledge
capital in abatement and knowledge capital in production), and allow us to capture the
main feature of learning by doing models by linking the productivity of abatement to the
intensity of this activity at the economy wide level. It also yields simple linear forms for
production and abatement that add greatly to the model’s tractability. This last feature is
especially important in a model where the stock of environmental quality has already raised
the number of state variables to two.
    Putting these pieces together our planner faces the aggregate production relations for
output and abatement given by the last lines of (50) and (52) together with the atemporal
resource constraint linking gross output, abatement and net production:
                                           Y =YG           YA                                     (56)
    The Kindergarten model is only one approach to modeling endogenous growth and envi-
ronment interactions. Closely related approaches in an AK framework are those of Stokey
(1998), Smulders (1993) and Smulders and Gradus (1996). These papers all adopt AK mod-
els, but end up with di¤erent conclusions. Early work in a one-sector framework by Smulders
(1993) and Smulders and Gradus (1996) demonstrated how continuing economic growth and
constant environmental quality are compatible in an AK model. In constrast, Stokey (1998)
demonstrated how continuing growth and constant environmental quality are not compatible
within a AK set up. The di¤erence in their results comes from their di¤erent assumptions
on abatement. To see why this is true, start with (51), ignore knowledge spillovers, and work
forward using now familiar steps to …nd:
                           Pi = YiG (1       );   ( )       [1   a (1; 1   )]                     (57)
   Stokey employs the speci…c functional form for given by (1                   ) for   > 1, and this
implies the CRS abatement production function given by:
                                            "             #
                                                        A
                                                     Yi
                         a YiG ; YiA = YiG 1     1                                                (58)
                                                     YiG

       Using (57) it is now easy to show abatement is subject to diminishing returns:
                              @Pi                      1        @Pi2
                                   =       (1     )        < 0;       >0
                              @YiA                              @YiA2
which implies marginal abatement costs are rising at the aggregate level. Setting Y A = 0
we …nd the …rst unit of abatement lowers pollution by the amount > 1, somewhat similar
to our formulation where a(1; 1) > 1.63 If we now combine (57) with (50), recall net output
  63
    Since the marginal product of abatement is bounded when abatement is zero, Stokey (1998) is able to
show that no regulation is undertaken initially and pollution rises lock-step with output.

                                                  47
is (1   ) times gross output, and introduce the variable z = 1          , we …nd the exact
speci…cation employed in Stokey (1998).

                                  Y = AKz; P = AKz                                      (59)

    Stokey’s (1998) result that growth is not possible follows from matching an AK aggre-
gate production function with strictly neoclassical assumptions on abatement adopted from
Copeland and Taylor (1994). That is, if we think of the AK model as one of knowledge
spillovers then Stokey has assumed these spillovers occur in production but not abatement.
By doing so, she eliminates “technological progress” in abatement and this eliminates the
possibility of sustainable growth.
    Comparing our approach to the work of Smulders is more di¢ cult because abatement
is not speci…cally modeled and he considers a variety of formulations. By specializing his
framework to the AK paradigm we …nd:
                                                       K
                                   Y = K; P =                                           (60)
                                                       A
   The …rst element is just a standard AK production function. The second relates what
Smulders refers to as net or emitted pollution to the capital stock, K, and abatement, A. If
we employ (60) and solve for emissions per unit of gross output we …nd:

                                      P   K
                                        =         = K                                   (61)
                                      Y   A

    If the economy allocates a …xed fraction of its output to abatement, K=A is constant,
and emissions per unit of gross output fall with the size of the economy. This re‡ects a
strong degree of increasing returns. Moreover, the reader may note from (60) that pollution
emitted goes to in…nity as abatement goes to zero, which is inconsistent with pollution being
a joint product of output. Therefore, Smulders and Gradus (1993, 1996) match AK aggregate
production with assumptions on abatement ensuring increasing returns; and, in contrast with
the Kindergarten speci…cation, assume pollution is not a joint product of output.

5.1.4   Endowments
We treat pollution as a ‡ow that either dissipates instantaneously –such as noise pollution –
or a stock that is only eliminated over time by natural regeneration –such as lead emissions
or radioactive waste. When X is a stock we have:

                                  X_ = AK [1      a]        X                           (62)

where represents the speed of natural regeneration, and where for economy of notation we
have denoted a(1; 1) by a. When X is a ‡ow we have:

                                     X = AK [1         a]

                                             48
5.1.5   The Kindergarten Rule
We focus …rst on the possibility of balanced and continual growth, leaving to the next
section a discussion of transition paths. Before we proceed with the formal analysis it proves
instructive to step back slightly to consider the feasibility and optimality of sustainable
growth. From our assumptions on abatement it is clear that if is set high enough all
pollution emissions will be eliminated and we will enter a zero emission world. Therefore as
long as a > 1 there will exist a < 1 that generates zero emission technologies. And if < 1
then some output will be left over for consumption and investment which can in turn drive
growth in output. It appears then that feasibility is guaranteed by knowledge spillovers in
abatement generating a constant marginal product.
    The assumption of a > 1 is innocuous. Recall that abatement, like all other economic
activities, pollutes. One unit of abatement creates one unit of pollution, but cleans up a > 1
units of pollution. It is only this surplus between costs and bene…ts, 1 1=a > 0 that makes
abatement useful at all. But even if growth is feasible, abatement is costly and this will
cause drag as in our earlier formulations. The remaining questions for sustainability are how
large is this drag, how much will it lower the return to capital, and what restrictions on
preferences will be needed to generate sustainable growth.
    To answer these questions consider the following problem:
                                                Z1
                                                                    t
                                   M aximize           U (C; X) e       dt
                                                   0
                         s.t. K (0) = K0; X (0) = X0 , and              1=a              (63)
                                 K_ = AK [1     ]  K C
                                 X_ = AK [1        a]      X

where we adopt U (C; X) from (49). Recall the fraction of gross output allocated to abatement
is and since the ‡ow of pollution into the environment cannot be negative this will never
exceed 1=a. We can write the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation as:
                         8                          1 "                           9
                         <                  H = C1 "       BX
                                                               +                  =
       W (K; X) = M ax                                                                   (64)
                         :                                                        ;
                             1 [AK [1    ]     K C] + 2 [AK [1          a]    X]

where W (K; X) is the maximized value of the program for the given initial conditions
fK0 ; X0 g, and H is the current value Hamiltonian for our problem. The controls for this
problem are consumption, C, and abatement intensity, .
   Observe the term involving our control variable, ,

                         M ax fAK [      1    a 2 ]g s.t. 0             1=a

where 1 is the positive shadow value of capital and 2 is the negative shadow cost of
pollution. Since the Hamiltonian is linear in , the value of the term S = [ 1 a 2 ]

                                              49
will largely determine the optimal level of abatement. When S > 0, the shadow cost of
pollution is high relative to that of capital. In this case abatement is relatively cheap and
maximal abatement will be undertaken. Conversely when S < 0 the shadow value of capital
is high relative to that of pollution. In this case abatement is relatively expensive and zero
abatement will occur. Finally, when S = 0, the shadow values are equated and active, but
not necessarily maximal, abatement will occur. Therefore, the value of S determines when
and if the economy switches from a zero-to-active-to-maximal abatement regime. We deal
with these possibilities in turn.
    Regardless of the value of S, the optimal level of consumption will always satisfy
                                        @H         "
                                           =C            1   =0                                    (65)
                                        @C
although the shadow value of capital and its dynamic path may di¤er across regimes.
    When S > 0, maximal abatement occurs and the dynamics are given by:
                     S > 0
                        = K ; K 1=a
                    _1 =   g 1; g A 1      K
                                                                                                   (66)
                                                                                   1="
                    K_ = [g + ] K C ( 1 ) ; K (0) = K0 ; C ( 1 )               1
                    _ 2 = 2 [ + ] + BX 1
                    X_ =     X, X (0) = X0
   By choosing the intensity of abatement = K there are no net emissions of pollution
and the environment improves at a rate given by natural regeneration. We dub K “the
Kindergarten rule”because when economies adopt the Kindergarten rule pollution is cleaned
up when it is created.64
   Alternatively, S may be exactly zero. In this case we have an interior solution for abate-
ment, with the following dynamics:
                 S = 0
                    2 0; K
                _1 =   g 1
                                                                                         1="
                K_ = [A [1  ]    ] K C ( 1 ) ; K (0) = K0 ; C ( 1 )                  1             (67)
                _ 2 = 2 [ + ] + BX 1
                X_ = AK [1 a ]      X; X (0) = X0
  In this situation pollution is not completely abated, and hence the evolution of environ-
mental quality re‡ects both the level of active abatement and natural regeneration. And
  64
    This is one of the most common rules taught in Kindergarten. For a list of common Kindergarten rules
see All I Really Need to Know I Learned in Kindergarten: Uncommon Thoughts on Common Things by
Robert Fulgham. Fulgham argues that the basic values we learned in grade school such as "clean up your
own mess" (in e¤ect our Kindergarten rule) and "play fair" are the bedrock of a meaningful life.

                                                  50
…nally, with no abatement at all we must have S < 0. Both pollution and output rise over
time yielding:
                   S <   0
                     2   0
                  _1 =        1   [A            ]     2A
                                                                                   1="
                  K_ =   [A    ] K C ( 1 ) ; K (0) = K0 ; C ( 1 )              1         (68)
                  _2 =    2 [ + ] + BX
                                          1

                  X_ =   AK      X; X (0) = X0
   Consider growth paths with active abatement. Then from (67) and (66) we …nd the
shadow value of capital falls over time at a constant exponential rate:
                                       _1
                                                             K
                              g             =       A 1                   <0             (69)
                                        1

provided the net marginal product of capital, at the Kindergarten rule level of abatement,
A[1- K ], can cover both depreciation and impatience. We leave for now a detailed discussion
of what this requires and assume it is true: g > 0. Then it is immediate that consumption
rises at the constant rate gC = g=" > 0.
    >From the capital accumulation equations in both (66) and (67) we can now deduce
that capital and output must grow at the same rate as consumption if is constant over
time. To determine whether the intensity of abatement is constant over time, consider the
accumulation equation for pollution:
                                        X_ = AK [1           a]       X                  (70)
    There are two ways (70) can be consistent with balanced growth. The …rst possibility
is that we have a maximal abatement regime where S > 0 holds everywhere along the
balanced growth path. In this situation, K grows exponentially over time and is set to the
Kindergarten rule level. Using (66), this balanced growth path must have:
                                        X_ =         X and        =   K
                                                                                         (71)
   In this scenario, the environment improves at the rate over time and abatement is a
constant fraction of output 1 > K > 0. As time goes to in…nity the economy approaches
a pristine level of environmental quality. Therefore the balanced growth path exhibits con-
stant growth in consumption, output, capital and environmental quality. Consumption is a
constant fraction of output and we have:
                             gc = gk = gy = g=" > 0; gx =                 <0             (72)
   A second possibility is that abatement is active but not maximal. De…ne the deviation of
abatement from the Kindergarten rule as D( ) = ( K        )= K . Using this de…nition rewrite
(70) to …nd:
                                    X_   AK [D ( )]
                                       =                                                 (73)
                                    X         X

                                                      51
    It is apparent that if the deviation of abatement from the Kindergarten rule fell exponen-
tially, then it may be possible for X to fall exponentially while K rises. That is, in obvious
notation, a possible balanced growth path would have:

                                        gk + gD = gx < 0                                      (74)

    In this situation abatement is at an interior solution at all times and becomes progressively
tighter over time approaching the Kindergarten rule asymptotically. The in‡ow of pollution
from production into the environment is always positive but environmental quality improves
nevertheless. This intuitive description suggests that the possibility of this outcome must
rely on both the pace of economic growth and the ability of the environment to regenerate.
This is indeed the case as Brock and Taylor (2003) show that a necessary condition for us
to remain in a S = 0 regime with active abatement is simply:

                                            (    1) > g                                       (75)

    This condition re‡ects two di¤erent requirements. The …rst is simply that cannot equal
one. If it did then the (instantaneous) marginal disutility of pollution is a constant and 2
is a constant as well. This would also imply that consumption be …xed as well. This is
inconsistent with growth of any sort.
    Assuming not equal to one is necessary for balanced growth with an interior solution
for abatement. But a second condition must also hold. Natural regeneration, , must be
su¢ ciently large relative to the growth rate g. If the rate of regeneration is high and growth
rates quite low, then the optimal plan is to use nature’s regenerative abilities to partially
o¤set the costs of abating because the shadow value of foregone output is high in slow growth
situations. Conversely, if regeneration is low and the growth rate g relatively high, then no
amount of abatement short of the Kindergarten rule will hold pollution to acceptable levels.
    This intuition suggests a natural corollary for the case of ‡ow pollutants. If pollution has
only a ‡ow cost it is “as if”the environment is regenerating itself in…nitely fast. This intuition
suggests that as we let get large, the results in the stock pollutant case should replicate those
for a ‡ow. This intuition is, in fact, correct. Brock and Taylor prove that when g > 0 and X
is a ‡ow pollutant, then sustainable economic growth with an ever improving environment
is possible and optimal. With a ‡ow pollutant, if > 1, then the intensity of abatement
approaches the Kindergarten rule level of abatement, K , asymptotically. Alternatively, if
  = 1, then = K everywhere along the balanced growth path.
    These results are important in showing how the Kindergarten rule generates sustainable
growth. Sustainable growth requires two conditions. The …rst is that g given in (69) is
positive. The assumption g > 0 requires the marginal product of capital, adjusted for the
                                                                                                K
ongoing costs of abatement, be su¢ ciently high. A necessary condition is that A[1                ]
be positive, but this is guaranteed as long as abatement is a productive activity. Given
abatement is productive, we still require the adjusted marginal product of capital, A[1 K ],
to o¤set both impatience and depreciation. If abatement is not very productive, then K =
1=a will be close to one and growth cannot occur. If capital is not very productive or if the

                                                52
level of impatience and depreciation are high then ongoing economic growth cannot occur.
These are however very standard requirements for growth under any circumstances.65
    The second is that h = g(1 1=") + > 0. This condition is the standard su¢ ciency
condition for the existence of an optimum path in an AK model with power utility.66 This
condition is of course weaker than that needed in earlier models generating declining pollution
levels. For example, " is just in the CRRA speci…cation we used earlier and we have
already seen that Stokey (1998), Lopez (1998) and others require > 1 to generate declining
emissions. Here the requirement is far weaker and this follows from the fact that consumer’s
are not required to make larger and larger sacri…ces in consumption to fund an every growing
abatement program.

5.2     Empirical Implications
The Kindergarten model relies heavily on the assumed role of technological progress in
staving o¤ diminishing returns to both capital formation and abatement. It is impossible
to know apriori whether technological progress can indeed be so successful and hence it is
important to distinguish between two types of predictions before proceeding. The …rst class
of predictions are those regarding behavior at or near the balanced growth path. This set has
received little attention in the empirical literature on the environment and growth, although
balanced growth path predictions and their testing are at the core of empirical research
in growth theory proper (see the review by Durlauf and Quah (1999)). The second set of
predictions concern the transition from inactive to active abatement and these are related
to the empirical work on the Environmental Kuznets Curve (See Grossman and Krueger
(1993,1995) and the review by Barbier (2000)).

5.3     Balanced Growth Path Predictions
Using our previous results it is straightforward to show that near the balanced growth path
we must have: convergence in the quality of the environment across all countries sharing
parameter values but di¤ering in initial conditions; the share of pollution abatement costs
in output approaching a positive constant less than one; overall emissions rates falling and
environmental quality rising; and emissions per unit output falling as production processes
adopt methods that approach zero emission technologies. The model also presents predictions
for the intensity of abatement that we discuss subsequently.
  65
     In Keeler, Spence and Zeckhauser (1972) a similar condition describes their Golden Age capital stock.
In their model with no endogenous growth the Golden Age capital stock is de…ned by (in our notation) the
equality f 0 (K)[1 1=a]     = simulations of the model assume a to be 12 (see p.22). Chimeli and Braden
(2002) assume a similar condition. Both studies assume abatement or clean up is a linear function of e¤ort
thereby ignoring the reality of diminishing returns and the necessity of ongoing technological progress.
  66
     Denote the growth rate in an AK model with power utility by g , then in terms of our parameters we
have g = g=" and the standard condition is + (" 1) g . This is equivalent to h > 0. See Aghion and
Howitt (1998, Equation (5.3)).




                                                   53
    Whether the cross-country predictions will be borne out by empirical work is as yet
unknown but an examination of US data shows the model’s strongest predictions – those
regarding falling emissions and improving environmental quality - are not grossly at odds
with available U.S. data. The most favorable evidence for the model is the slow movement in
pollution abatement costs in the face of dramatically declining pollution levels. The model
explains this feature of the data by recourse to speci…cs of the abatement function that hold
abatement costs down much as exogenous technological progress does in the Green Solow
model.
    The prediction of declining emission intensities along the balanced growth path is also
consistent with the data shown in Figure 1, but as in Stokey (1998) the model only predicts
declining emissions to output ratios after regulation begins.

5.4     The Environmental Catch-up Hypothesis
We have so far focused on balanced growth paths but the large EKC literature concerns
itself with what must be transition paths towards some BGP. To examine these predictions
we present several transition paths in Figure 5. One of these paths is that of a Poor country
having small initial capital K P but a pristine environment. The other is the path of a
Rich country starting again with a pristine environment but with a much larger initial
capital K R . These di¤erences in initial conditions could re‡ect variance across countries in
geography, resource endowments or institutions that impact on initial productivity levels.
Each economy starts with a pristine environment in stage I and grows. During this stage
there is no pollution regulation: the environment deteriorates, X rises, and the capital stock
grows until the trajectory hits the Switching Locus labeled SL. Once the economy hits the
Switching Locus active regulation begins and the economy enters stage II.67
    It is apparent from the …gure that the Poor country experiences the greatest environmen-
tal degradation at its peak, and at any given capital stock, (i.e. income level) the initially
Poor country has worse environmental quality than the Rich. Moreover, since both Rich and
Poor economies start with pristine environments, the qualities of their environments at …rst
diverge and then converge. This is the Environmental Catch-up Hypothesis.
    Divergence occurs because the opportunity cost of abatement (and consumption) is much
higher in capital poor countries. A high shadow price of capital leads to less consumption,
more investment and rapid industrialization in the Poor country. Nature’s ability to regen-
erate is overwhelmed. The quality of the environment falls precipitously. In capital rich
countries the opportunity cost of capital is lower: consumption is greater and investment
less. Industrialization is less rapid and natural regeneration has time to work. The peak level
of environmental degradation in the Rich country is therefore much smaller. But once we
  67
     Brock and Taylor (2003) show the exact position and shape of the locus depend on whether parameters
satisfy the fast growth or slow growth scenario. For the most part we will proceed under the assumption
that economic growth is fast relative to environmental regeneration; that is (75) fails strongly and we have
  (    1) < g. This implies (t) = K everywhere along the balanced growth path (Figure 12 implicitly
assumes this result). For illustrative purposes we will sometimes discuss the parallel ‡ow case (where we can
think of approaching in…nity but (75) failing because = 1).

                                                     54
enter Stage II abatement is undertaken and since abatement is an investment in improving
the environment, it is only undertaken when the rate of return on this investment equals (or
exceeds) the rate of return on capital. Since economies are identical, except for initial condi-
tions, rates of return are the same across all countries in Stage II. Equalized rates of return
require equal percentage reductions in the pollution stock. Therefore absolute di¤erences in
environmental quality present at the beginning of Stage II disappear over time.
    Note how similar this intuition for the ECH is to that given for the EKC prediction in
the Green Solow model. In the Green Solow model initial rapid growth overwhelms nature’s
ability to dissipate pollution starting from its initial position at a biological equilibrium.
Eventually growth slows and the environment’s regenerative powers restore its quality slowly
over time. Growth is initially rapid in the Solow model because of diminishing returns. In
the Kindergarten model, growth is initially rapid because there is no regulation and no drag
from pollution policy to lower the marginal product of capital. And once regulation is active,
growth slows because regulation lowers the net marginal product of capital. The environ-
ment’s regenerative powers then restore its quality slowly over time. Both explanations have
nature overwhelmed early on and both give prominent roles to a declining marginal product
of capital.
    The discussions above, and Figure 5, assume the fast-growth-slow-regeneration assump-
tions hold. We chose this case to discuss and illustrate because it illustrates the forces at
work very clearly. Since many of the same conclusions hold when growth is relatively slow
we only provide a sketch here of some di¤erences. There is again a Switching Locus which
divides Stage I from Stage II. The Switching Locus again de…nes a unique X that is declin-
ing in K . The most important di¤erence is that once a trajectory of the system hits this
new Switching Locus it remains within it forever. If the economy is below the locus then
abatement is inactive and K rises at a rapid rate: X increases rapidly until the Switching
Locus is reached in …nite time. If the initial (K; X) is above the locus, maximal abatement
is undertaken but this drives down the shadow cost of pollution very quickly and we again
hit the locus, this time, from above.
    Once on the locus, countries remain trapped within it thereafter and this implies the
economy’s choice of abatement remains interior; i.e. the trajectory follows along the Switch-
ing Locus maintaining M AC = M D(K; X) throughout. Over time abatement rises and
the intensity of abatement approaches the Kindergarten rule in the limit. Therefore, the
slow growth case is very similar except that the model now predicts an even stronger form
of convergence. All transition paths remain on the Switching Locus once active abatement
begins; therefore policy active countries share the same path for environmental quality and
income levels in Stage II.

5.5    The ECH and the EKC
Brock and Taylor prove that all economies capable of sustained growth must follow the stage
I –stage II life cycle producing an EKC like relationship between income and environmental



                                              55
quality.68 Their income and growth prediction is however somewhat di¤erent from a standard
EKC result. They predict that countries di¤erentiated only by initial conditions exhibit
initial divergence in environmental quality followed by eventual convergence.69 Moreover, as
Figure 5 makes clear countries make the transition to active abatement at di¤erent income
and peak pollution levels. This of course throws into question empirical methods seeking to
estimate a unique income-pollution path. More constructively it suggests that an important
feature of the data may well be a large variance in environmental quality at relatively low-
income levels with little variance at high incomes. Empirical work by Carson et al. (1997)
relating air toxics to U.S. state income levels is supportive of this conjecture:

       “Without exception, the high-income states have low per-capita emissions while
       emissions in the lower-income states are highly variable. We believe that this may
       be the most interesting feature of the data to explore in future work. It suggests
       that it may be di¢ cult to predict emission levels for countries just starting to
       enter the phase, where per capita emissions are decreasing with income”, p. 447-
       8.

   In some cases however, (initially) Rich and Poor will make the transition at the same in-
come level but still exhibit our Catch-up Hypothesis. To investigate, we report the switching
locus in the fast growth case. It takes on an especially simple form given by:
                                  1     B
                       M AC =       =               X        1
                                                                 [hK ]" = M D (K ; X )                 (76)
                                  a   [ +       ]

which is the downward sloping and convex relationship between pollution and capital de-
picted in Figure 5. The left hand side of (76) represents marginal abatement costs. The
right hand side is marginal damage evaluated at fK ; X g. Marginal damage is increasing
in the pollution stock provided exceeds one, and since the ‡ow of national (and per-capita)
income Y is always proportional to K, it is apparent that the income elasticity of marginal
damage with respect to ‡ow income is given by ". Large values of " correspond to the strong
income e¤ects referred to earlier
    Let approach one. Then the slope of the Switching Locus approaches in…nity and
all countries attain their peak pollution levels at the same K . But even with a common
turning point di¤erences in environmental quality remain. Moreover, these are not simple
level di¤erences because countries initially diverge and then converge after crossing K . To
eliminate our catch-up hypothesis we must assume regeneration is in…nitely fast: X is a
  68
     The addition of perfect capital markets can a¤ect the pollution and income path greatly. To a certain
extent a country is running down its environment initially to accumulate capital. With perfect capital
markets it is possible to eliminate stage I entirely in some cases. Given many less developed countries have
very limited and imperfect access to capital markets it is di¢ cult to know the empirical importance of this
result. It suggests however that access to capital markets may be an excluded country characteristic in EKC
style regressions.
  69
     It is possible to show X is rising throughout Stage I and this ensures points along the Switching Locus
do indeed represent peaks in pollution levels.


                                                        56
‡ow. In this case Brock and Taylor show the Switching Locus is again vertical at a given
K . More importantly, since pollution is proportional to production before K , and policies
are identical after K : initial conditions no longer matter.
    These results tell us that when pollution is strictly a ‡ow, all countries share the same
income pollution path. But when pollution does not dissipate instantaneously, initial con-
ditions matter. We have the Environmental Catch-up Hypothesis, and empirical methods
must now account for the persistent role of initial conditions.70

5.6     Pollution Characteristics
The ECH focuses on cross-country comparisons in pollution levels, but says little about
how predictions vary with pollutant characteristics. And while most authors have focused
on generating an EKC relationship there has been very little work examining how these
predictions vary with pollutant characteristics. This is unfortunate since there is good data
in the U.S. and elsewhere that could be fruitfully employed to test within country but across
pollutant predictions. This is especially important since many models can generate the EKC
result.
    To demonstrate the Kindergarten model’s across pollutant predictions consider regenera-
tion …rst and start from a position where = 0 (radioactive waste). Brock and Taylor (2003)
show that the Switching Locus in Figure 5 shifts outwards as we raise . The response is to
delay action and allow the environment to deteriorate further. Once we raise su¢ ciently
the economy eventually enters the fast regeneration regime and here we …nd abatement de-
layed in another manner –it is introduced slowly by the now gradual implementation of the
Kindergarten rule. Faster regeneration then implies that countries either begin abatement
at higher income levels or allow their environments to deteriorate more before taking action.
Surprisingly, fast regeneration will be associated with lower and not higher environmental
quality - at least over some periods of time or ranges of income.71
    A change in regeneration rates also a¤ects the pace of abatement. If a pollutant has a
long life in the environment, then once abatement begins it is clear that natural regeneration
can play only a small role. Consequently the optimal plan calls for an initial period of
inaction before starting a very aggressive abatement regime: the immediate adoption of the
Kindergarten rule. When is relatively large we are in the fast regeneration regime and
  70
     This result may explain why empirical research investigating the EKC has been far more successful with
air pollutants like SO2, than with water pollutants or other long lasting stocks (see the review by Barbier
(2000)).
  71
     An especially colorful example of delay in abatement caused by rapid natural regeneration is that of
the City of Victoria in British Columbia. Every day, the Victoria Capital Regional District (CRD) dumps
approximately 100,000 cubic meters of sewage into the Juan de Fuca Strait. Scienti…c studies have long
argued that since the sewage is pumped through long outfalls into cold, deep, fast moving water there is no
need for treatment. The CRD has always used these studies to delay building a treatment facility. Current
plans are for secondary treatment to begin in 2020, but until then over 40 square kilometers of shoreline
remains closed to shell …shing. Background information can be found at the Sierra Legal Defense fund site
http://www.sierralegal.org/m_archive/1998-9/bk99_02_04.htm



                                                    57
abatement is intensi…ed gradually and only approaches the Kindergarten rule level in the
limit.
    Putting the predictions for the timing and intensity of abatement together, Brock and
Taylor …nd that very long-lived pollutants should be addressed early with their complete
elimination compressed in time. It is optimal to delay action on short-lived pollutants and
adopt only a gradual program of abatement. This description of optimal behavior is of
course consonant with the historical record in several instances where long-lived chemical
discharges and gas emissions were eliminated very quickly by legislation, whereas short-lived
criteria pollutants have seen active regulation but not elimination over the last 30 years.
    Pollutants also di¤er in their toxicity. The marginal disutility of toxics could exceed
those classi…ed as irritants, and damages from toxics may rise more steeply with exposure.
The …rst feature of toxics implies their abatement should come early. This is clear from (76)
where increases in B shift the Switching locus inwards and hasten abatement. Surprisingly
very convex marginal damages (a high ) call for the gradual and not aggressive elimination
of pollution. The logic is that any reduction in the concentration of toxics has a large
impact on marginal damage. Therefore, only by lowering emissions slowly can we match a
steeply declining value of marginal reductions with a falling opportunity cost of abatement.
Therefore, although toxics may have large absolute negative impacts on welfare, this argues
for their early, but not necessarily aggressive, abatement.
    And …nally how does the income elasticity of the demand for environmental quality (")
a¤ects the onset and pace of regulation? We have already shown that the restriction of
" > 1 is not needed to generate sustainable growth. This parameter does however have
a role to play in determining the timing of regulation. To illustrate its role consider the
fast growth regime and let the gross marginal product of capital, A, rise. This necessarily
raises g and if " > 1, the Switching Locus shifts in. Abatement is hastened. When " < 1,
abatement is delayed and peak pollution levels shift right.72 A similar set of results holds for
increases in the productivity of abatement although there is an additional con‡icting force.
Therefore, in contrast to earlier work Brock and Taylor (2003) …nds that the income elasticity
of marginal damage has an important role to play in determining the income level at which
abatement occurs and the resulting pollution level, but virtually no role in determining if
the environment will improve nor its rate of improvement.


6     Conclusion and Suggestions for Future Research
The relationship between economic growth and the environment is not well understood: we
have only limited understanding of the basic science involved – be it physical or economic
– and we have very limited data. In this review we have tried to evaluate ongoing e¤orts,
both theoretical and empirical, to understand this relationship. We started by introducing
de…nitions for the scale, composition and technique e¤ects of growth on pollution, and then
  72
     Our use of the terms delayed or hastened does not refer to calendar time, but rather to whether actions
occur at a higher or lower income level.


                                                    58
constructed three simple theoretical models to highlight the role each can play in generating
sustainable growth. Throughout we have tried to link these models to the existing literature
and in a very rudimentary way evaluated their predictions using data on pollution emissions,
abatement costs and resource prices.
    This is a research topic on the periphery of growth theory proper. It placement re‡ects
the lack of a core model to work with and the paucity of data for empirical analyses. This
is unfortunate because an understanding of the relationship between economic growth and
the environment may be key to long run prosperity; it is certainly of interest to developing
country governments searching for a balance between material growth and environmental
protection, and it is also of great interest in the developed world given current debates over
global warming, its costs, and the costs of its amelioration.
    Our review has revealed much heterogeneity in terms of approach and methods used
in theoretical work. Some heterogeneity is to be expected, but too much dissipates e¤ort.
By examining the pollution creation and abatement process in some detail we hoped to
direct future e¤orts more productively. We showed that standard assumptions such as CRS
and concavity of the abatement production function lead to tractable formulations where
pollution emissions appear in much the same way as other factors. By doing so we were able
to show how we can evaluate the costs of environmental policy in a manner similar to that
used to evaluate the drag of natural resources on growth. By making this connection precise
we provided a bridge between the early resources and growth literature of the 1970s with
the recent literature on pollution and income. We also hope to instill in others the need to
provide micro foundations for assumptions over the amount of pollution emitted or abated
in production, since we have repeatedly shown the importance of these assumptions for a
model’s ability to generate sustainable growth.
    Our theoretical review contains three main messages. The …rst comes directly from our
Green Solow model where we showed how the typical convergence properties of the neoclas-
sical model together with a standard natural regeneration function yield an Environmental
Kuznets Curve. This suggests that e¤orts to explain the EKC via complicated processes of
political economy, IRS, freer trade, and di¤erential factor growth, etc. may be unnecessary.
At the very least it points out that the interplay of natural and Solow growth dynamics
certainly work towards this …nding.
    Our second message concerns drag. We have shown throughout that e¤orts to limit pollu-
tion and raise environmental quality create a drag on growth rates. This …nding was stronger
in some cases since rapid population growth could eliminate the possibility of sustainable
growth entirely. The drag calculations we provided are for illustration and not meant to
substitute for more serious enquiry that must include empirical estimation of key parame-
ters. Nevertheless these calculations are helpful in focusing our e¤orts on key parameters
(the share of emissions in …nal good production or the rate of change in pollution abatement
costs), and demonstrate how di¢ cult it is to generate sustainable growth in a country with
signi…cant population growth. The calculations also o¤er a quick litmus test; if a speci…ca-
tion suggests environmental policy reduces growth by 40%, something is surely amiss. It is
hoped that drag calculations of the type we have conducted become a more standard feature


                                             59
in the literature.
    Finally, we have shown how di¤erent assumptions on abatement can produce very dif-
ferent results for sustainability (recall the contradictory results of Smulders and Stokey in
the AK model). To a certain extent progress in this literature has been slowed because
researchers have too many degrees of freedom in choosing their speci…cation. Some restric-
tions are imposed by the requirement of a balanced growth path, but this still leaves much
leeway to the researcher. We have adopted a consistent speci…cation of pollution creation
and abatement based on the common, if not innocuous, assumptions of constant returns,
concavity and pollution being a joint product of output. Within these con…nes we have then
argued that technological progress in abatement, distinct from that in …nal goods, is key to
generating sustainable growth at reasonable costs. By identifying this as a key requirement
we hope to direct future research e¤orts towards a theory of induced innovation where both
relative prices and pollution regulations determine the pace and direction of improvements
in abatement technology.
    Our review of empirical work shows that the existing literature has made relatively few
contributions to our understanding. The Environmental Kuznet’s curve stands out as a key
empirical regularity, but continued progress in this area can only come with a more serious
consideration of other related data. One contribution of this review has been to show that
many of the theoretical models capable of generating an EKC also contain predictions in
other directions that are worthy of examination. The simple Green Solow model had strong
predictions for the emission intensity of GDP; the Stokey Alternative contained sharp predic-
tions about the time pro…le of abatement costs; the Source-and-Sink model contained links
between energy prices, energy use, and pollution levels; and …nally, the Kindergarten model
produced a cross-country catch-up hypothesis as well as yielding several within-country but
across-pollutant predictions. Further progress in our understanding can only come from a
tighter connection between theory and data.
    This review has been limited by its focus. It has been a review of work linking industrial
pollution and growth with only small asides to consider natural resource use. In many cases
the formal structure of the models resembled those in the renewable resource literature, but
we did not provide a review of …ndings there. As such we have sidestepped the rather thorny
issues of property rights protection and the e¢ ciency of environmental policies. We have
done so not because we believe that these issues do not merit attention, but rather because
adding a useful discussion of these topics would make this review unwieldy. It should be
emphasized however that a common feature of the resources we examined was their well-
de…ned property rights. This is true for air quality when the quality is determined by local
pollution; and it is true of oil and other energy resources.
    There are however an important class of resources where property rights enforcement is
lax or where no property rights exist at all. Property rights problems arise in three main
areas. These are: local and transnational …sheries; the global atmospheric commons; and
lastly, the forest stocks in many developing countries. It is somewhat ironic that these
renewable resources are under far more threat than the so-called exhaustible resources such
as oil, gas or minerals. The reason for this is inescapable: the di¤use nature of many of


                                             60
these resources has led to a lack of property rights and very little management. Therefore,
while our focus on industrial pollution is perhaps defensible in that it determines the air
quality and health prospects for hundreds of millions of people across the globe, we should
not forget other vexing problems arising from the lack of property rights. And while our
data and the existing empirical results suggest that many local pollution problems are well
in hand or respond well to increases in incomes brought about by growth, global pollution
problems, such as global warming, appear to be far more di¢ cult to solve.73 Therefore, it
may be that the real threat to continued growth arises not from the relatively small drag
introduced by existing environmental policies, but from the absence of new policies to stem
more serious global problems.




 73
      See Schmalensee, Stoker, and Judson (1998) and Holtz-Eakin and Selden (1995).


                                                   61
References
 [1] Aghion, P. and P. Howitt (1998), Endogenous Growth Theory, MIT Press, Cambridge
     MA.

 [2] Andreoni, J. and A.Levinson (2001), "The Simple Analytics of the Environmental
     Kuznets Curve," Journal of Public Economics, May , 80(2): 269-286.

 [3] Antweiler, A., B. Copeland and M. S. Taylor (2001), "Is Free Trade Good for the
     Environment," American Economic Review 94, 1, September: 877-908.

 [4] Arrow, K. (1962), "The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing" The Review of
     Economic Studies, Vol. 29, No. 3. June: 155-173.

 [5] Arrow, K., P. Dasgupta, L. Goulder, G. Daily, P. Ehrlich, G. Heal, S. Levin, K. Maler,
     S. Schneider, D. Starrett, B. Walker (2003), “Are we consuming too much?”, at P.
     Dasgupta’s website, Cambridge.

 [6] Barbier, E.(1997), “Environmental Kuznets Curve Special Issue: Introduction”, Envi-
     ronment and Development Economics 2: 369-381.

 [7] Barnett, H.J. and C. Morse (1963), Scarcity and Growth: The Economics of Natural
     Resource Availability, John Hopkins Press, Baltimore.

 [8] Barret, S. and K. Graddy (2000), "Freedom, Growth, and the Environment", Environ-
     ment and Development Economics. Vol. 5: 433-456

 [9] Berndt, E.R.(1990), “Energy Use, Technical Progress and Productivity Growth: A
     Survey of Economic Issues”, The Journal of Productivity Analysis, 2: 67-83 .

[10] Bovenberg, A.L., and S. Smulders (1995), “Environmental quality and pollution aug-
     menting technological change in a two sector endogenous growth model”, Journal of
     Public Economics, 57: 369-391.

[11] Brander, J.A., and M. S. Taylor (1997), “The Simple Economics of Easter Island: A
     Ricardo-Malthus model of renewable resource use”, American Economic Review 88, No.
     1: 119-138.

[12] Brock, W.A. (1977), “A Polluted Golden Age”, in V.L. Smith, ed. Economics of natural
     and environmental resources (Gordon and Breach Science Publishers, London).

[13] Brock, W.A. and D. Starrett (2003), “Managing systems with nonconvex positive feed-
     back,”, Environmental and Resource Economics, 26, Iss. 4, Dec.: 575-624

[14] Clark, C. (1990). Mathematical Bioeconomics, Wiley.



                                            62
[15] Brock, W.A. and M.S. Taylor (2004),. “The Green Solow model". NBER Working Paper
     No. w10557. June.

[16] Brock, W.A. and M.S. Taylor (2003), “The Kindergarten Rule for Sustainable Growth".
     NBER Working Paper No. w9597. April .

[17] Cole, M.A., A.J. Rayner and J.M. Bates (1997), “The environmental Kuznets curve:
     an empirical analysis”, Environmental and Development Economics, 2, 401-416.

[18] Copeland, B.R., and Taylor M.S. (1994), “North-South Trade and the Environment”,
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109: 755-787.

[19] Copeland, B.R., and Taylor M.S. (2003), Trade and the Environment: Theory and
     Evidence, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

[20] Copeland, B.R., and Taylor M.S. (2004), “Trade, Growth and the Environment”, Jour-
     nal of Economic Literature, forthcoming.

[21] Dasgupta, P, and G. Heal (1974), “The Optimal Depletion of Exhaustible Resources”,
     The Review of Economics Studies, Vol. 41, Symposium Issue on the Economics of
     Exhaustible Resources: 3-28.

[22] Dasgupta, P, and G. Heal (1979), “Economic Theory and Exhaustible Resources, Cam-
     bridge Economic Handbooks, Cambridge University Press.

[23] Dasgupta, P. and K. Maler (2003), “The economics of non-convex ecosystems: Intro-
     duction,”Environmental and Resource Economics, 26, Iss. 4, Dec.: 499-602 .

[24] Dechert, W.D. e.d. (2001), Growth Theory, nonlinear dynamics and Economic modeling,
     Edward Elgar: Cheltenham.

[25] Durlauf, S.N. and D.T. Quah (1999), “The New Empirics of Economic Growth”, in the
     Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, chapter 4, J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, Eds. Elsevier
     Science B.V.:235-308.

[26] EPA (2004), Strategic Plan, Bene…ts the Costs of EPA’s Activities available at
     http://www.epa.gov/ocfo/plan/plan.htm

[27] EPA (1990), Environmental Investments: The Cost of a Clean Environment.

[28] Forster, B.A. (1973), “Optimal Capital Accumulation in a Polluted Environment”
     Southern Economic Journal, 39: 544-547

[29] Gale L. and Mendez J.A. (1998), “A note on the relationship between, trade, growth,
     and the environment". International Review of Economics and Finance 7(1): 53-61



                                          63
[30] Goulder, L.H. and Schneider, S.H. (1999), “Induced Technological change and the At-
     tractiveness of CO2 abatement policy”, Resource and Energy Economics, August, 21
     (3-4): 211-253.

[31] Grossman G.M, and A. B. Krueger (1993), "Environmental Impacts of a North Amer-
     ican Free Trade Agreement," in The US-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber, ed.
     Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

[32] Grossman G.M, and A. B. Krueger (1995), "Economic Growth and the Environment,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics: 353-377.

[33] Grossman G.M. and Helpman E. (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
     MIT press.

[34] Harbaugh, W. Arik Levinson, and David Molloy Wilson (2002), “Reexamining the Em-
     pirical Evidence for an Environmental Kuznets Curve". The Review of Economics and
     Statistics.84(3) August: 541-551.

[35] Hartwick, J.M. (1977), “Intergenerational Equity and the Investing of Rents from Ex-
     haustible Resources, American Economic Review, 66, December.

[36] Hilton, H., and A. Levinson (1998), "Factoring the Environmental Kuznets Curve: Ev-
     idence from Automotive Lead Emissions," Journal of Environmental Economics and
     Management, 35: 126-141.

[37] Holtz-Eakin, D. and T. Selden (1995), "Stoking the …res? CO2 emissions and economic
     growth," Journal of Public Economics, 57: 85-101.

[38] Hotelling, H. (1931) “The Economics of Exhaustible Resources”, Journal of Political
     Economy, 39 April: 137-175.

[39] Ja¤e, A.B., K. Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A panel
     data study”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Nov.79(4): 610-619.

[40] Ja¤e, A.B., S.R. Peterson, and P.R. Portney (1995), “Environmental Regulation and
     the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What does the Evidence tell us?, Journal
     of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXIII, March: 132-163.

[41] Ja¤e, A. B. and R.G. Newell, and R.N. Stavins (forthcoming), “Technological change
     and the Environment”in the Handbook of Environmental Economics, Karl-Goran Maler
     and Je¤rey Vincent eds.. North-Holland/Elsevier Science, eds.

[42] John, A. and R. Pecchenino (1994), "An overlapping generations model of growth and
     the environment," The Economic Journal, 104: 1393-1410.

[43] Jones C.I. (2001), Introduction to Economic Growth. Second Edition. W.W. Norton &
     Company.

                                           64
[44] Jones, L.E. and R.E. Manuelli (2001), "Endogenous Policy Choice: The Case of Pollu-
     tion and Growth," , Review of Economic Dynamics, 4, Issue 2, April: 245-517.

[45] Jorgenson, D.W. and P.W. Wilcoxen (1990), “Environmental Regulation and U.S. eco-
     nomic growth”, Rand Journal of Economics, 21, summer: 314-340.

[46] Kaufman, Robert F.(2004), “The Mechanisms for Autonomous Energy E¢ ciency In-
     creases: A Cointegration Analysis of US Energy/GDP Ratio”, The Energy Journal, 25,
     No. 1.

[47] Keeler, E., M. Spence, and R. Zeckhauser (1972), “The Optimal Control of Pollution”,
     Journal of Economic Theory, 4: 19-34.

[48] Levinson, A., Taylor M. S. (2003), “Unmasking the Pollution Haven E¤ect”, paper
     presented at the NBER Environmental Economics Meetings, Boston, Summer. Available
     at http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~staylor/

[49] Lopez, R. (1994), “The environment as a factor of production: the e¤ects of economic
     growth and trade liberalization”, Journal of Enviornmental Economics and Management
     27: 163-184.

[50] Lucas, R.E. Jr. (1998), "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Mon-
     etary Economics, 22: 3-42.

[51] Meadows, D.H., Meadows, D.L., Randers, J., Behrens, W.W. (1972), The limits to
     Growth, Universe Books, New York.

[52] Meadows, d.H., Meadows, D.L., Randers, J. (1991), Beyond the Limits, Earthscan
     Publications, London.

[53] McConnell, K.E. (1997), “Income and the demand for environmental quality”, Environ-
     ment and Development Economics 2: 383-399.

[54] Newell, R.G., A.B. Ja¤e, and R.N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation hypothesis
     and energy saving technological change”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, August: 941-
     975.

[55] Nordhaus, W. (1992), “Lethal Model 2: The Limits to Growth Revisited” Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, Volume , No. 2: 1-59.

[56] Pezzey, J.C.V., and Withagen, C. (1998), “The Rise, Fall and Sustainability of Capital-
     Resource Economies”, Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 100, (2): 513-527.

[57] Popp, D. (2002), “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices”, American Economic Review,
     Vol. 92, No. 1, March: 160-180.



                                            65
[58] Rodriguez, F., and J.D. Sachs (1999), “Why Do Resource Abundant Economies Grow
     more slowly”, Journal of Economic Growth, 4, September: 277-303.

[59] Robinson, J.A. and T.N. Srinivasan (1997), “Long-term consequences of population
     growth: technological change, natural resources, and the environment”, Handbook of
     Population and Family Economics, eds. M.R. Rosenzweig and O. Stark, Elsevier Science.

[60] Romer, P. (1986), “Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth”, Journal of Political
     Economy, 94, October: 1002-37.

[61] Rose, A. and C.Y. Chen (1991), “Sources of change in energy use in the U.S. economy,
     1972-1982: a structural decomposition analysis”, Resources and Energy 13: 1-21.

[62] Schmalensee, R., Stoker T.M. and Judson R.A. (1998), “World Carbon Dioxide Emis-
     sions: 1950 - 2050", The Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, Issue 1, February:
     15-27

[63] Sche¤er, M., S.R.Carpenter (2003), “Catastrophic regime shifts in ecosystems: linking
     theory to observation”, Trends in Ecology and Evolution, Vol. 18, No. 12, December:
     648-656.

[64] Scholz, C.M. and G. Ziemes (1999), “Exhaustible Resources, Monopolistic Competition,
     and Endogenous Growth”, Environmental and Resource Economics, 13: 169-185.

[65] Selden T. and D. Song (1994), "Environmental quality and development: Is there a
     Kuznets curve for air pollution emissions?" Journal of Environmental Economics and
     Management 27: 147-162.

[66] Sha…k N. and S. Bandyopadhyay (1994), "Economic Growth and Environmental Qual-
     ity: time series and cross country evidence," Washington D.C: The World Bank.

[67] Slade, M.E. (1987), “Trends in Natural Resource commodity prices: an analysis in the
     time domain”, Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 9: 122-137.

[68] Smulders, J. (1994), Growth, Market Structure, and the Environment: Essays on the
     Theory of Endogenous Economic Growth. Tilburg University.

[69] Smulders, S. (1999), “Endogenous Growth Theory and the Environment”, in J.C.J.M.
     van den Berg (eds.) Handbook of Enviornmental and Resource Economics, Cheltenham:
     Edward Elgar: 610-621.

[70] Smulders, S. and R. Gradus.(1996), “Pollution abatement and long-term growth”, Eu-
     ropean Journal of Political Economy, 12: 505-532.

[71] Solow, R.M. (1974), “Intergenerational Equity and Exhaustible Resources”, Review of
     Economic Studies (Symposium): 29-46.


                                           66
[72] Solow, R. (1973),“Is the end of the world at hand”, Challenge, March-April: 39-50.

[73] Solow, R.M., (1993), “An almost practical step toward sustainability”, Resources Policy
     19(3); 162-172.

[74] Stiglitz, J. (1974), "Growth with Exhaustible Natural Resources: E¢ cient and Optimal
     Growth Paths" The Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 41, Symposium on the Economics
     of Exhaustible Resources: 123-137.

[75] Stern, David, I. (2003), “The rise and fall of the environmental kuznets
     curve,” Department      of   Economics, Rensselaer Polytechnic  Institute,
     http:www.rpi.edu/dept/economics/.

[76] Stokey, N.(1998), "Are there limits to Growth," International Economic Review, 39(1):
     1-31

[77] Sue Wing, Ian, and R.S. Eckhaus (2003), “The Energy Intensity of US Production:
     Sources of Long-Run Change, paper presented at the 5th USAEE/IAEE session of the
     Allied Social Science Association meeting, Washington, D.C. Jan. 4.

[78] Tahvonen, O., and J. Kuuluvainen (1991), “Optimal Growth with renewable resources
     and pollution”, European Economic Review, 35: 650-661.

[79] Valente, S. (2002), “Renewable Resources and Sustainable Development”, mimeo, Uni-
     versita di roma.

[80] Vincent, J.R. (1997), “Testing for environmental Kuznets curves within a developing
     country”, Special Issue on Environmental Kuznets Curves, Environment and Develop-
     ment Economics 2 (4): 417-431.

[81] Weitzman, M. L.(1999), “Pricing the Limits to Growth from Mineral Depletion”, Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, May: 691-706.




                                            67
                                                             FIGURES
                1000                                                                                                  1000
Tons of Emissioins/GDP




                    100                                                                                               100
       1940=100




                                                                                                                      38.2




                         10                                                                                           10




                                                                                                                      2.3


                         1                                                                                            1
                         1940    1945   1950   1955   1960    1965        1970   1975    1980    1985   1990   1995

                                                                     Year
                                                 SO      NOx          VOCs          CO          PM10



                                Figure 1: Emission intensities, 1940-1998. Tons of emissions/real GDP.




                                                                     50
                       2.0%

                       1.8%

                       1.6%
Real expenditure/GDP




                       1.4%

                       1.2%

                       1.0%                                                                                                                                                                     ratio
                       0.8%

                       0.6%

                       0.4%

                       0.2%

                       0.0%
                              1972

                                     1973

                                            1974

                                                   1975

                                                          1976

                                                                 1977

                                                                        1978

                                                                               1979

                                                                                      1980

                                                                                             1981

                                                                                                    1982

                                                                                                            1983

                                                                                                                   1984

                                                                                                                          1985

                                                                                                                                 1986

                                                                                                                                        1987

                                                                                                                                               1988

                                                                                                                                                      1989

                                                                                                                                                             1990

                                                                                                                                                                    1991

                                                                                                                                                                           1992

                                                                                                                                                                                  1993

                                                                                                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                           Year




                                            Figure 2: Pollution abatement costs, 1972-1994. PACE/GDP.




                                                            Figure 3: Sulfur dioxide emissions, 1940-1998.


                                                                                                           51
 Figure 4: Nitrogen oxide emissions, 1940-1998.




Figure 5: Carbon monoxide emissions, 1940-1998.


                      52
Figure 6: Volatile organic compounds, 1940-1998




                      53
Figure 7: Particular matter PM10, 1940-1998.




                    54
Figure 8: Lead emissions 1970-1998.




                55
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
    1                    100                        199
                         Time

        Weak Abatement =         Strong Abatement


         Figure 9: The green solow benchmark.




                         56
                   325


                   300


                   275


                   250


                   225
Start Year = 100




                   200


                   175


                   150


                   125


                   100


                   75


                   50
                         1957 1960 1963 1966 1969 1972 1975 1978 1981 1984 1987 1990 1993 1996 1999

                              Crude Petroleum (dol./bbl)      Bituminous Coal (dol./short ton)   Natural Gas (dol./100 cu. Ft.)




                                                           Figure 10: Real energy prices.




                                                                             57
Figure 11: Feasibility: resource drag per capita growth.


                          58
Figure 12: Transition paths.


            59
