                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         MICROSTRUCTURE OF THE YEN/DOLLAR
                             FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET:
                      PATTERNS OF INTRA-DAY ACTIVITY REVEALED
                         IN THE ELECTRONIC BROKING SYSTEM

                                             Takatoshi Ito
                                            Yuko Hashimoto

                                          Working Paper 10856
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10856


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




The authors are grateful to EBS for their understanding the value of academic research and providing a
proprietary data set for the academic purpose with few restrictions and a modest fee. Also, we are grateful
to EBS analysts in New York for guidance on the nature of the data. A long-time encouragement from
Professor Charles Goodhart has been instrumental in moving forward this line of research. Helpful comments
from Bob Rankin (Reserve Bank of Australia) during the preparatory stage were appreciated. We are grateful
to Graham Elliott and Rich Lyons for their comments and suggestions on an earlier version of the paper.
Comments by Ryan Love on an earlier draft is also helpful. Discussions with foreign exchange dealers in
New York and London in the fall of 2003 were also helpful in understanding the structure of the market. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Takatoshi Ito and Yuko Hashimoto. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Microstructure of the Yen/Dollar Foreign Exchange Market: Patterns of Intra-day Activity
Revealed in the Electronic Broking System
Takatoshi Ito and Yuko Hashimoto
NBER Working Paper No. 10856
October 2004
JEL No. F31, F33, G15

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper establishes several intra-day patterns of the high-frequency exchange rate behavior, using

the firm bid-ask quote, transaction of the EBS data set. First, the activity of quote and transactions

is high in the beginning hours of the three major currency markets – Tokyo, London, and New York

and low during the Tokyo and London lunch hours and late afternoon in New York. Second, a new

observation is obtained in that activity does not increase toward the end of business hours in the three

major markets, even during the closing hours of New York on Friday. Third, an average bid-ask

spread is narrow (wide), when quote and deal frequencies are high (low, respectively), except the

beginning hour of Tokyo (GMT 0), when the bid-ask spread is wide despite high levels of activity.

Takatoshi Ito
Graduate School of Economics
University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033
JAPAN
and NBER
itointokyo@aol.com

Yuko Hashi
Department of Economics
Toyo University
5-28-20 Hakusan, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 112-8606 Japan
yhashi@toyonet.toyo.ac.jp
1. Introduction
This paper describes the intra-day patterns of market activities—frequencies of quote
revisions, transactions, and bid-ask spread—of the yen/dollar spot exchange rate using a
newly available data. The data, provided by the EBS, consist of global electronic broking
bid-ask quotes and transactions for three years starting January 01, 1999 at the frequency
of every one second.1 This data set has advantage over the frequently-used, indicative
quotes of a foreign exchange market tick-by-tick data set, such as FXFX of Reuters, in at
least in two important aspects. First, the quotes in the electronic broking are “firm” quotes,
in that the banks are committed to trade at those quoted prices.2 The firm quotes can be
hit, without recourse, for transactions by any counter-party in the system, provided that
the counterparty has a credit line with the bid/ask posting institution. In contrast, the
indicative quotes of FXFX screen are those input by dealers to give market information
without any commitment for trade. The reliability of indicative quotes as a market reality
is much less than firm quotes in the electronic broking system. Second, transactions data
that are available in the electronic broking system is simply not available in the FXFX
screen.

Major findings include the following: (1) Activity—measured by the number of quote
entries (price changes) and the number of deals—and bid-ask spreads have a distinct
intra-day pattern; (2) Activity is high in the beginning hours of the three major currency
markets—Tokyo, London, and New York; (3) There is little evidence that the activity
increases toward the end of business hours in the three major markets, even during the
closing hours of New York on Fridays, thus there is little evidence of U-shape
pattern—this is a new observation; (4) Activity is quite low during the lunch hours of
Tokyo and London, late afternoon hours of New York; (5) An average bid-ask spread is
narrow (wide), when quote and deal frequencies are high (low, respectively), except the
beginning hour of Tokyo (GMT 0), when the bid-ask spread is wide despite high levels of
activity.

The contribution of this paper to the literature is three-fold. First, the paper presents a
careful description of intra-day activities, using the newly-available data consisting of
“firm” quotes and deals, taking into account time zone and daylight saving time of major
markets, national holidays, day of the week effect, and other factors. Second, it is found

1
  The data set was provided for fee by the EBS Co., for the use at the University of Tokyo, Research
Center for the Advanced Science and Technology. The authors are grateful to EBS for such an
arrangement.
2
  See Goodhart and O’Hara (1997: p.78) for general discussions on the difference between the
indicative and firm quotes.
that in the foreign exchange market, unlike the stock market, there is no U-shape pattern
of activities. Third, a negative correlation between the number of deals and the width of
bid-ask spread is generally observed during the active time of the day, but the first
business hour of Tokyo has wider bid ask spread and higher activities than the following
hour.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 explains the basics of the
structure of the foreign exchange market, and the role of electronic broking system. The
importance of electronic broking system may be far beyond what is commonly believed.
Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 is a main part of this paper, establishing intra-day
patterns of activities. Various tests are conducted to establish the patterns revealed in the
data. Section 5 concludes the paper.



2. A rise of the electronic broking system
2.1. Global Survey
The state of the global foreign exchange market is available from a market survey by
central banks conducted under coordination of the Bank for International Settlements
(BIS(2002)), once every three years. The most recent survey was conducted in April
2001, and the BIS report was issued in 2002.

According to the survey, in April 2001, the average daily turnovers of the foreign
exchange were $1.2 trillion, down from $1.5 trillion in April 1998. Of these turnovers,
spot transactions accounted for $387 billion, outright forward $131 billion, and swaps
$656 billion. Decomposing into currency pairs, $/Euro accounts for $354 billion, $/Yen
$231 billion, $/GBP $125 billion. Foreign exchange transactions may be between
reporting dealers ($689 billion), between a dealer and other financial institutions ($329
billion), or between a dealer and non-financial customers ($156 billion). Trades could
be between local parties ($499 billion), or between cross-border parties ($674 billion)

Trends, revealed from the past surveys (up to 2001), are as follows. (1) Spot trades are on
the decline; (2) Swaps are on the rise. (3) trades among reporting dealers fell
substantially.

The decline in the spot turnovers (14% decline form the 1998 survey) is attributed to “the
introduction of the euro, the growing share of electronic broking in the spot interbank
market, consolidation in the banking industry and international concentration in the
corporate sector appear to have been the main factors driving the fall in turnover.” (BIS
(2002; p. 6) In different categorization, the trades between dealers who report to the BIS
surveys has declined substantially.3 “This can in part be explained by the growing role
of electronic brokers in the spot interbank market. The use of electronic brokers implies
that foreign exchange dealers generally need to trade less actively among themselves.”
(BIS (2002; p.7).) This trend means that “hot potatoes” (Lyons (1997)) are less important
now, and a cool supercomputer is increasingly important. In other words, dealers’ tactics
to transform order flows from the corporate sector into the interbank market may be less
important than before, and the dealers’ behavior in posting firm bids and asks through the
electronic broking system is more important then before.4 In order to understand the
high-frequency movements of the foreign exchange rate, analyzing the electronic broking
system is now essential as well as the influence of order flows. (See Lyons (1996, 1998)
for the view that order flows are important for dealer’s strategies.)

Although the importance of electronic broking is pointed out, the number of market
shares is not disclosed in the global tabulation. In the Tokyo market survey conducted
by the Bank of Japan as a part of the BIS study gives a detailed look at the rise in the
electronic trading in the Tokyo market.

Weights of different markets in global turnovers of foreign exchanges by time zone and
particular local markets are shown in Table 2-1 and, for the yen/dollar only, in Table 2-2.
The Asian region accounts for about 20% of worldwide all-currency trades and 40% of
worldwide yen/dollar trades, of which Tokyo accounts for about a half of all currencies
and three-quarters of yen/dollar trades. The UK and European markets account for about
50% of global turnovers and 30% of yen/dollar trades, of which London accounts for
two-thirds in all currency or yen/dollar trades. The North American accounts for just
short of 20% in all currency or yen/dollar trades, of which the U.S. has most of the share.
                                 Insert Table 1-1 and 1-2

If market shares of electronic spot trading are similar to those of total kinds of foreign
exchange turnovers, and if most of trades are done during the currency dealers’ business
hours (local time 9 to 5), then about 40 percent of global trades are conducted in Tokyo
business hours (GMT Hours 0 to 8); 30 percent of them are in conducted in London
business hours (GMT Hours 9 to 17, during the standard time; and one hour earlier during


                                                                          !"             #$
    $%%                %          %
4
  Our interviews (in November 2003) with banks with substantial foreign exchange trading in London
reveals that they have reduced in the last few years the degree of discretion of dealers and shifted
proprietary trading to the specialized section. Computer models have replaced dealers’ instincts.
the daylight saving time); about 20 % of them in the New York business hours (GMT
Hours 14 to 22, during the standard time; and one hour earlier during the daylight saving
time). This is just a rough estimate of market size, and has some implications to
intra-day patterns of the foreign exchange turnovers.

2.2. Central Bank Survey in Tokyo
The BIS report (2002) does not have a separate analysis of electronic broking, although it
suggests that transactions through electronic broking system have increased and the
larger share of electronic broking system contributed to the decline in the spot
transactions in the recent years.

The Bank of Japan survey on the Japanese market as a part of the global BIS survey gives
a more detailed picture on the importance of electronic broking system. The following
statistics are derived from the Bank of Japan (2001).

In the foreign exchange market in Tokyo in April 2001 had 146.8 billion yen of
transactions, of which 122.7 billion yen was in the interbank market, and 24.1 billion yen
was in the customer market. In the interbank market, transactions are spot trading (27.8
billion yen), forward trading (10.7 billion yen), or swap trading (84.2 billion). Of the
Spot transactions of 27.8 billion yen, about half (13.4 billion yen) was done via electronic
broker, another half (13.0 billion yen) is through direct dealing. The human broker is
now diminished to be a minor segment (1.4 billion yen) of the market.

In broker trades in Tokyo, more than 90 percent of broker trades are done through the
electronic broking system, as opposed to human brokers. The ratio of electronic trading
has grown rapidly in the last several years. The ratio of electronic broking transactions to
total spot has increased from 12.0% (1995) to 36.7% (1998), to 48.3% (2001). The ratio
of electronic broking transactions to total broking transactions increased from 32.1%
(1995) to 79.3% (1998) to 91.0% (2001). By now, the electronic broking system is a
dominant form of spot broker transactions, and as important as direct dealing in the
overall spot trades.

By currency decomposition, the Tokyo market is skewed toward the dollar/yen
transactions. The dollar/yen accounts for 69.2%, Euro/dollar 13.2%, and Euro/yen,
4.2%.

In summary, the electronic broking system is now dominating in the spot transaction. At
least for the yen-dollar market in Tokyo, the voice broker is very much of an endangered
species, and the electronic broking system is now replacing some of the direct dealings
between banks.



3. The EBS data
3.1. EBS electronic broking system
The EBS has a strong market share (in absolute terms and in comparison to Reuter
D-3000) in the yen/dollar rate and the Euro/dollar rate and covers more than 90% of the
yen/dollar trade.5 Therefore, it is safe to assume that almost all electronically brokered
yen/dollar spot deals are represented in the data set. The EBS is a provider of trading
technology, and the quotes and transactions are shown continuously, 24 hours a day. The
EBS screen shows the “firm bid” and “firm offer”, the bid and offer that are committed to
trade if someone on the other side is willing to trade at that price. (For the general
reference on the microstructure of the foreign exchange market, see Goodhart and O’Hara
(1997), Lyons (1995) and Lyons (2001).)

The EBS system facilitates, as part of the dealing rules, each institution to control
bilateral credit lines. Namely, each EBS-linked institution sets credit lines (including
zero) against all other potential counter-parties. Therefore, an institution faces a
restriction of bid, offer, or deal from other institutions. When bid and offer rates are
posted for the system, they are not necessarily available to all participants of the EBS
system. The EBS-registered trader’s screen shows the best bid and best offer of the
market and best bid and best offer for that particular institution. In normal times, the best
bid of the market is lower than the best offer of the market. Otherwise, some institution
that has positive credit lines with both institutions on the bid and ask sides will be able to
make profits by arbitrage.

As part of facilitating an orderly market, EBS requires any newly linked institution to
secure a sufficient number of other banks that are willing to open credit lines with the new
comer. A smaller or regional bank may have fewer trading relationships, thus not as many
credit relationships. Then the best bid and ask for that institution may be different from
the best bid and ask of the market. A smaller or regional bank may post more aggressive
prices (higher bids or lower asks) because they will have relatively fewer credit
relationships, implying that they will see fewer dealable prices generally.

3.2. The EBS Data Set
5
 Goodhart, Ito and Payne (1996) and Goodhart and Payne (1996) have used the data obtained from
Reuter D2000-2 that is predecessor of D3000.


                                               &
The EBS has made available a high-frequency (one-second slice) data set that contains
information of, among others, best bid, best ask, deals done on the bid side and deals done
on the ask side.6 Moreover, the EBS deal history shows whether the deal is done on the
bid side (the bid was taken) or the ask side. The EBS data set does not contain information
on the volume of transactions associated with bid, offer, or deal.

The Data prepared by EBS and purchased by the University of Tokyo contains the
following data.
        -Currencies: (a) the yen/dollar rate; (b) the dollar/euro rate.
        -Period: From 01 January 1999 to 31 December 2001.
        -Frequency: Originally, tick-by-tick, sliced to every second.7
        -Items: (a) Best bid of the market; (b) Best offer of the market; (c) Deal rate done
        on the bid side, or lowest selling price (“the lowest given”); (d) Deal rate done on
        the offer side, or highest buying price (“the highest paid”).8

The basic characteristics of the full sample of raw (original) as well as filtered data used
in this study are shown in Table 2. “The number of price changes” means the number of
quote changes on either side of the bid-ask quotes or both at the same time.9 Then, the
difference between “the number of price changes” and the sum of “the number of price
changes on the bid side” and “that on the ask side” is the number of quote changes on both
sides simultaneously.

                                            Insert Table 2

The best ask price (in the yen/dollar unit) is almost always higher than the best bid price.
But there are a small number of reversals (that is, the best bid being higher than the ask

6
  The data set is a proprietary data set of EBS. The usage is restricted to those who are affiliated in
the Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, the University of Tokyo.
7
  Data are of the 1-second time slice. The system records, at every second, bid, offer, deals that are
posted and carried out in the world-wide EBS system. Bid and offer rates are recorded at the end of
time slice. For example, bid and offer rate at xx hour, yy minute, zz second. Fluctuations of the bid and
offer rates within the second (in the time slice) are not recorded and cannot be inferred. It is
theoretically possible that bid and offer rates move up and down within the second, but not shown in
the data set. Deal rates are recorded on the basis of Highest Paid and Lowest Given in the 1-second
time slice.
8
  The deal (on either side) recorded at zz second includes those that took place between zz-1 second to
zz second. When there are multiple trades within one second, “lowest given price” and “highest paid
price” will be shown. A highest paid deal means the highest price hit (done) on the ask side within one
second and the lowest given deal means the lowest price hit (done) on the bid side within one second.
9
  Price changes could be generated by new entries of quotes, withdrawal of former quotes or
disappearance of the quote due to “hits”.


                                                   '
price)10. Among 8.5 million quote entries, 72,429 entries (less than 1% of the time) have
shown reversals---inverted bid-ask spread. We believe that such a reversal happens for
the following reason. It occurs due to the (lack of) credit lines. If a bank that posts the
bid and another bank that posts the ask do not have a credit line each other, and no other
bank has credit lines to both banks that post the quotes, then the inverted spread, but not
implying an arbitrage opportunity, may occur. We decided to remove the inverted spread
entries because it is infrequent, and difficult to interpret from financial economics,
although it is a normal situation from the system design.

Among the total number of deals done on each of bid and ask side, there were 24,119
reversal of deals—the deal on the ask side is lower than the deal on the bid side, on the
yen/dollar unit. This may happen for several reasons. Recorded deals are “lowest given”
and “highest paid” during the time slice (1 second). First, the firm ask and firm bid may
move around during the one second, having “hits” many times so that the reversal may
happen. Second, under the credit-screened market, different market participants may see
the different prices during the very short time intervals. Third, deals are published when they are
completed. Since communication between the terminal and server takes milliseconds a recorded
deal may have begun at a previous time-slice.


                                               Figure 1

Figure 1 shows illustration of price changes and transactions with negative spread. The
solid line and dashed line indicate the price changes with ask and bid quote, respectively,
and and shows the deals on ask and bid side, respectively.



4. A First Look at the Intra-day Patterns
4.1. Definition of Activity during the day
In the following, the market activity and bid-ask spread for a standardized time
aggregation (one hour) are examined. As market activity, we will take the number of price
changes and the number of deals (the sum of bid-side deals and ask-side deals) will be
counted for each time interval. 11 Also the average bid-ask spread for the period is

   In some situations, different third parties see the bid or ask. The price seen by a third party may
represent a very aggressive bid or ask, but not an arbitrage price. A single third party may see both
prices. In such situations, they may see an arbitrage opportunity, but there is no guarantee that they
can execute deals at both prices. It is a matter of timing and such prices are likely to be short lived.
   Note that the number of price changes and the number of deals in the data set may not be exactly
match the total number of price changes and deals in the EBS system, because the data set is in terms
of the one-second slice. If there are more price changes and deals within one second, the recorded


                                                   (
calculated.

The intraday patterns have been explored in many papers before. However, except for
Goodhart, Ito, and Payne (1996) and Goodhart and Payne (1996), all papers use
indicative prices. Moreover, the period is typically for several months. This paper
establishes the facts with firm quotes and deals, that are far better in describing the market
than indicative prices. Intraday patterns using indicative prices have been shown by, for
example, Andersen and Bollerslev (1997, 1998), Baillie and Bollerslev (1990),

A higher level of activity means a larger number of price changes, and a larger number of
deals. This is due to the fact that the number of price changes by dealers tends to increase
when more participants are in the market; when more news become available; when the
most competitive participant (who post best bid and ask) is reacting to news and market
develops quickly; and when the bids and asks are hit more often (so that the best bids or
asks are knocked out). The number of deals tends to increase when more participants with
heterogeneous expectations are present in the market; and when more news that can be
interpreted differently, become available.

As to the bid-ask spread, it tends to become narrower when more participants are in the
market (that is, market is deep) and when expectations are relatively homogeneous.

4.2. Standard Time and Daylight Saving Time
In this section, intra-day activity is described by the time-aggregation of one hour data.
Activity is represented as the number of seconds where price changes are recorded and
the number seconds where deals are recorded. The average bid-ask spread of the hour also
represents the market depth. These indicators of market activity are calculated for each
GMT Hour (Hour 0 to 23), and then averaged over a certain period (for one year, or a
particular day of the week).

Since daylight saving time is adopted in London (from the last Sunday of March to the
last Sunday of October) and New York (from the first Sunday of April to the last Sunday
of October), the GMT hour does not correspond to local business hour between the
summer and the winter. Thus, aggregation for the year is divided into the two periods:12


numbers are less than the true numbers.
12
   Daylight saving time in 1999 was from April 4 to October 31 in the United States; from March 28 to
October 31 in the United Kingdom; in 2000, from April 2 to October 29 in the United States, and from
March 26 to October 29 in the United Kingdom; and in 2001, from April 1 to October 28 in the United
States and from March 25 to October 28 in the United Kingdom.


                                                 )
   Daylight Saving (Summer) Time: First Sunday of April-last Sunday of October, and
   Standard (Winter) Time: January-last Sunday of March, the next working day of the
   last Sunday of October-December.

Note that we eliminate the one-week period when Europe is under the Summer Time but
the US is not. Figures 1-1 to 1-6 show the intraday (Hour 0 – 23) pattern of the activity
and the bid-ask spread, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and national holidays in the three
markets

                               Figure 2-1:    Summer 1999
                               Figure 2-2:    Summer 2000
                               Figure 2-3:    Summer 2001
                                Figure 2-4:    Winter 1999
                                Figure 2-5:    Winter 2000
                                Figure 2-6:    Winter 2001

Findings are summarized as follows:
(1) There is high correlation between the “number of price changes” and the “number of
    deals”.
(2) There are three peaks in a day for the number of price changes and the number of
    deals. In Summer, peaks of the activity are seen at Hour 0, Hour 6-7 and Hour 12-14;
    and in winter, Hour 0, Hour 8, Hour13-15.
(3) There are three troughs in a day. In Summer: Hour 3; Hour 10-11; and Hour 21: and in
    Winter, Hour3, Hour 11, and Hour 22.
(4) The three peaks and three troughs produce the U-shape patterns twice a day. The
    hours when the market activity is at its peak correspond to the Tokyo market opening,
    London market opening and New York market opening, respectively. On the other
    hand, the three troughs in a day correspond to the Tokyo lunch hour, London lunch
    hour, and the evening in New York, respectively. High activity in hour 6-8 may be
    those in ending hours of Tokyo or beginning hours in Europe; and surging activity in
    hour 12-14 may be those in ending hours of London or beginning hours in New York.
(5) In general, there is negative correlation between the bid-ask spread and the number of
    deals (or price changes): The three troughs of the number of deals (or price changes)
    corresponds to three peaks of the bid-ask spread. One deviation is the Hour 0, when
    the bid-ask spread is higher than other business hours in Tokyo (except lunch hour)
    but the number of deals (or price changes) is at the one of the peaks; that is, unlike
    other times, a positive correlation.


                                              *
4.3. Tokyo, London, and New York effects
The difference of intraday patterns between the winter and summer helps us to examine
the “shape” of each of the three major markets. Figures 1-1 to 1-6 suggest that intraday
patterns (in terms of GMT) shift with summer times of London (Europe) and New York.
There is no summer time in Tokyo. When London and New York are adopting daylight
saving (summer) time, the second and third peaks of the day shift forward by one hour.

But Tokyo closing is only slightly overlapped with London, and London afternoon is
overlapped with New York morning. U-shape of Tokyo and London is not quite directly
testable. However, whether the U-shape is to be believed, the shift of business hours (in
terms of GMT) in the summer in London gives a clue to a question whether the surge in
Hours 7-8 are due to Tokyo closing or London opening.

From figures above, it is immediately clear that the peak of activity shifts by one hour in GMT when
London is adopting the daylight saving (summer) time, from Hour 8 in winter to Hour 7 in
summer. Since activity in the afternoon and market-ending hours of Tokyo market does not change in
terms of GMT hours, the shift of peak at must be due to the shift between the summer and
winter time of London/Europe markets’ opening. This strongly indicates that the surge is
more due to London opening than Tokyo closing.

A trough at Hour 3 corresponds to the lunch break in Tokyo. Historically, the interbank
foreign exchange transactions had a lunch break (regulatory shutdown) during the lunch
hours. When the regulation was removed, the activities during the lunch hour increased at
the expense of those before and after, the net effect was higher.13 A trough at Hour 11 in
the winter and Hour 10-11 corresponds to lunch hours in Europe, although it seems a little
bit early for lunch in London. The activity declines sharply in the afternoon hours in New
York, showing no surge toward the end of NY business hours. There is an increase in the
activity from Hour 17 to Hour 18 in the summer, but the change is very small.

In order to identify statistically the “shape” of the intra-day pattern, we calculated
standard deviations for each of indicators of market activity—the number of price
changes, number of deals and spread—which are also plotted along with indicators in the
figures above. As is clear from the figures above, the standard deviations (dashed lines)
of each indicator of market activity is very small. We also conducted the T-test for
difference between two GMT hours for the number of price changes, number of deals and

13
     See Ito, Lyons, and Melvin (1998) for such a phenomenon.
the spread. The test was conducted for every pair of different GMT time so that to identify
the different levels of activity at various times of the day. In the table below, we show the
test results of two adjacent hours to save space. The time of the day effects is statistically
tested in section 6.

The number of price changes and the number of deals done is found to be statistically
different for every two-adjacent-hour pair except hours 7 and 8, hours 10 and 11, hours 13
and 14, and hours 21 and 22. These identical hours correspond to the London and
European markets’ opening (GMT 7-8), before and after the lunch time (GMT 10-11 and
13-14), and between the New York market’s closing and the Asia-Pacific market’s
opening. The test statistics show the distinct pattern of the beginning of Tokyo market at
Hour 0 and the Tokyo lunch time at Hour 3. On the whole, the number of price changes
and the number of deals have recognizable time-to-time patterns.

Although the intraday pattern of the bid-ask spread is less obvious than the number of
price changes and deals, we still find some patterns: the spread stays relatively narrow for
the first half of the day, then becomes wider as the market becomes relatively calm in the
New York afternoon, and becomes the highest during the several hours between the New
York market’s closing and the Asia-Pacific market’s opening.

                                          Insert Table 3

Table 3 shows the t-test for hour-to-hour differences of the price change frequencies,
deals frequency, and the width of bid-ask spreads. The test shows whether the
characteristics of activity or bid-ask spread of hour t is different from that of hour t+1.

From our study with firm bid-ask quote data, we derive two major findings of activity
patterns during the day. First, there is no evidence for a U-shape activity pattern for a
major market, contrary to the common belief in the literature.14 There is a surge of
activity in the opening hours of the three major markets, but no surge toward the end of
each market. This is the new insight in the literature.

Second, the activity is at its highest during the opening hours of New York (overlapped
with the afternoon of London) and lowest during the late afternoon hours of New York,
before the Tokyo market opens, with significant drops during the lunch hours of Tokyo

14
  For the empirical test and survey of the U-Shape pattern in financial markets, see, for example,
Harris (1986), Foster and Viswanathan, (1993), Ito, Lyons and Melvin (1998), Andersen and
Bollerslev (1998).
and London. These salient features have been well-known in the literature using
indicative quotes. Here they are confirmed with better data sets with deal counts as well
as firm quotes.

4.4. Adjusted GMT
If we used the GMT 24 hour clock (Hour 0-23) for the entire year, then the same GMT
hours mix different business hours in London and NY local hours depending on the
summer and winter. This is inappropriate when we investigate intraday pattern of
activities, in particular, the beginning hours and ending hours of major markets

With these observations, the summer/winter adjusted intraday pattern is created with the
following rule:15 For adjusted GMT clock, the hours during the summer will be pushed
back by one hour for London and US business hours, so that a GMT hour corresponds to
the same local business hour (say, London local time 9am), regardless of summer or
winter. Essentially, this amounts to matching the peak of the activities for the beginning
hours of London and New York. There are some technical difficulties to do this. First, the
beginning hours may not be clear cut. It could be 9am, or 8am, or even 7am, depending
on their business practices of the city.

Adjusted GMT is created with the following procedures:
(1) Adjusted GMT Hours 0-5 are the common to winter and summer, and they
    correspond to original GMT data. This is because there is no summer time in Japan.
(2) Adjusted GMT Hour 6 consists of original GMT Hour 6 of the winter time only. It
    contains no summer time observations. 16 This adjustment is made to allow
    business-hour local time of London and New York will be matched regardless of the
    season in the adjusted GMT clock.
(3) Adjusted GMT Hour 7 – 22 are constructed as follows. Adjusted GMT Hour 7 is
    original GMT Hour 7 of the winter time and Hour 8 of the summer time. Beginning
    GMT 7, the local time for London and New York will be the same regardless the
    season. This corresponds to an assumption that a surge of opening hours starts at 7 am

15
   One may think that all observations can be shifted by one hour during the summer time, but that is
not appropriate, since Tokyo does not have daylight saving time. The adjustment is to preserve the
Tokyo business hours as GMT hours, while London and NY business hours are adjusted by one hour
for their shift during the summer in terms of GMT hours. Shifting only London-based or NY-based
quotes and deals would be another solution, but it is not possible since bank names of quotes or deals
are not available.
16
   This adjustment is needed to bridge from the end of Tokyo time to the beginning of the European
time. Possibilities of another breaking point like Hour 7 or Hour 8 were tried. Not much difference is
detected, except alignment of the peak of activities seems to be best when the break is between Hours
6 and 7.
    in London and 8 am in the Continental markets. Then Adjusted-GMT Hour x is GMT
    Hour x of the winter time and GMT Hour x+1 in the summer time, for x=7 to 23.
(4) Adjusted GMT Hour 23 consists of original GMT Hour 22 of the summer time only.
    No winter observations.
(5) Adjusted GMT Hour 24 consists of original GMT Hour 23 of both the summer and
    winter time. This assumes that in Tokyo, activities in Hour 8 am is common for the
    summer and winter. This is a reasonable assumption because there is no summer time
    in Japan.

                                          Insert Table 4-2

The adjusted GMT time line is shown in Table 4-2. According to the adjusted GMT, the
peaks of activities during the day—that correspond to opening hours of Tokyo, London,
and New York—occur at the same hours.

                                Figure 3-1, Figure 3-2, Figure 3-3

With these understandings, the intraday pattern adjusted for the summer/winter time in 25
hour clock (adjusted GMT) is as follows. All figures are excluding observations on
Saturday, Sunday, National holidays in Tokyo, London, or New York. Not much
difference in the intra-day patterns are observed among the three years.



5. The Day of the Week Effects
With the adjusted GMT clock, the day-of-the-week effects can be analyzed with
parsimonious way (Monday pattern; instead of Monday in the summer and Monday in the
winter). There are two interesting questions that can be answered using the day of the
week: First, whether the opening hours in Tokyo on Mondays is significantly different
from other hours; and, second, whether the closing hours in New York on Friday is
significantly different from other hours.17

If orders accumulated during the weekend (about 35 hours) is much larger than those
accumulated during the overnight gap (2-3 hours) between New York close and Tokyo
open, then the first hour of Tokyo on Monday (Hour 0 in adjusted GMT) may be quite
different, most likely much higher activity, from that hour on any other day of the week.
Similarly, if weekend deprives investors from opportunities of rebalancing portfolio for

17
     The day of the week effects in stock markets is commonly observed and analyzed.
many hours, then investors may have to square positions before a weekend. Then the
activity in the closing hours in New York (Hours 17-18 in adjusted GMT) on Friday may
be much higher than those on any other days of the week. Followings provide the
intra-day pattern of the day of the week averaged over the year 2001. In order to save
space, figures for other years are omitted.

                       Figure 4-1: Monday, 2001,
                       Figure 4-2: Tuesday, 2001,
                       Figure 4-3: Wednesday, 2001,
                       Figure 4-4: Thursday, 2001,
                       Figure 4-5: Friday, 2001

  Overall, the pattern of the activities of each day does not show a large deviation from
the intra-day pattern of the year 2001. The number of price changes and deals at Hour 0
does not seem to have neither the Monday effect nor the Monday opening effect. The
intra-day pattern of spread of Monday morning does not seem to differ from other days of
the week.

Since the intra-day pattern of Hour 0 is not clearly found specific to Monday morning, we
explicitly focuses on the activities during Monday Hour 0. The figures from 4-1 to 4-3
show the yearly average number of price changes, deals, and bid-ask spread in 5 minutes
intervals during the Hour 0 on Mondays. Overall, the number of price changes and the
number of deals for the first 5 minutes are as high as that for the last 5 minutes, whereas
the bid-ask spread for the first 5 minutes is higher than the last 5 minute by 0.005. Both
of the number of quote (deal) entries and the spread continue to decrease for the first half
hour. The recovery to the “normal” activity pattern—the higher the price changes (deals),
the narrower the spread—emerges about 40 minutes after the Tokyo market opens.

                                   Figures 5-1, 5-2, 5-3

From the careful examination on intra-day pattern of activity across the week, following
findings became obvious.
(1) No special Monday opening effect—Hour 0 on Monday—in the market activity is
    observed.
(2) It is commonly seen on any day of the week that Hour 0 is special in that the numbers
    of quote and deal entries are high, whereas the bid-ask spread is not narrow. In other
    hours, the correlation is negative between the bid-ask spread and the number of deals
    (or quotes).
(3) There is no activity surge in the afternoon of New York, despite the weekend. If any,
    New Yorkers go home early on Fridays.
(4) The activity surge in Hour 23 and 24 on Monday-Thursday is due to Sydney markets
    and early Tokyo markets. There is no activity on Saturday morning in these markets.
    That is, there is virtually no activity in the market of Hour 23 and 24 on Friday.



6. Relationship between the number of price changes, deals, and spread
It is theoretically expected that the number of price changes and the number of deals are
positively correlated. This is because when the number of quote entries by market
participants is large, then the possibility of deals done must be large. A simple regression
shows that when the price changes are frequent, the deals are frequent. The relationship
between the number of deals and the number of price changes is shown in Table 5-1.

                                      Insert Table 5-1

It is also expected that the bid-ask spread is negatively correlated with either of the first
two measures. When the bid-ask spread is narrow, then the difference between the buy
side and sell side is small, so that even with a slight change in opinion results in a deal.
The reverse explanation is also possible. When the market is deep (more participants are
present and ready to trade at similar prices), then even with many frequent deals, the
bid-ask spread stays narrow. However, there may be an exception to this relationship.
When the Tokyo market opens after a long break, such as a weekend, the bid-ask spread
may be wider as market participants are unsure about the market conditions and other
participants’ positions, while the numbers of deals and quote revisions may be higher, as
some participants have to carry out some accumulated orders from customers quickly.

Let us test a hypothesis that the opening hour of the Tokyo market has special
characteristics, because it follows a few hours of extremely low activity. The bid-ask
spread and the number of price changes has a stable relationship throughout the day,
except for the first business hour of the Tokyo market. Then we run a regression model as
follows:

   spread = constant + ( + D1)*number of price changes (deals),

where is expected to be negative and D1 is a hour 0 dummy, taking the value 1 when the
quote is recorded in the period of Hour 0 (Tokyo 9am) and 0 otherwise.



                                              &
                                      Insert Table 5-2

Estimation results are shown in Table 5-2. Regressions are run for each of the three years,
and using the number of price changes (Panel A) or the number of deals (Panel B). As
shown in the tables, the statistically significant and negative , as expected, is found. The
estimated coefficient of Hour 0 dummy is either significantly negative or insignificant.
Therefore, the hypothesis of a special first hour effect, a positive correlation between the
spread and activities—namely, the Tokyo opening effect, is not supported by the
regressions.

Monday opening effects
Not only the Hour 0 effect is found to be statistically insignificant in the market activity,
but, from the figures from 3-1 to 3-5, the intra-day pattern of Monday opening does not
seem to be significantly different from that of opening hours of other days of the week.
Here, we statistically test the effect of Monday morning on the market using the Monday
Hour 0 dummy to be significant in the following regression model:

spread = constant + ( + Monday Hour 0 dummy)*number of price changes (deals),

where is expected to be negative and Monday Hour 0 dummy takes 1 when the price
changes (deals) is put in at Monday Hour 0 and 0 otherwise.

                                      Insert Table 5-3

Regression results are shown in Table 5-3. The estimation result on price changes, shown
in Panel A, does not support the hypothesis of Monday morning effect in the FX market.
The Monday H0 dummy is not significantly positive for the full sample, 1999 and 2000
regressions. In 2001, the coefficient is estimated positive (not significant). The results
suggest that there is no Monday opening effect on spread.

The result on the number of deals, in Panel B, is slightly different from the price change
result. The Monday Hour 0 dummy is estimated to be positive in the full sample (at 5%
significance level) and in 2000 (at 10%). The Monday morning effect is found in deal
activities, suggesting that the market participants carry out some accumulated orders over
the weekend in the first hour of the week, the Monday Tokyo morning at Hour 0, despite
the wider bid-ask spread.

London and New York effects


                                              '
Finally, three hypotheses will be examined, using the time aggregation of one hour. As
observed above, we find several features on intra-day patterns such as that the London
opening and New York market effects are seen from the shift between the winter time and
daytime saving time and that no Monday morning effects is found in the FX market from
the day-of-the-week examination. Tokyo opening effect (Hour 0) is (seemingly)
insignificant, which is partly because of the pattern of activity specific to Hour 0. In the
following, three hypotheses on the intraday pattern of activity will be statistically tested
using various dummy variables. The hypotheses to be examined are:
          (H1) The bid-ask spread is narrower (wider) when the activity is high (low,
          respectively);
          (H2) During opening hours of the major markets (Tokyo, London/Europe, New
          York), activity is higher;
          (H3) Toward the close of the major markets, activity is higher.
The combination of hypotheses (H2) and (H3) amount to the U-shape activities.18 We test
above hypotheses using one of the following two specifications:

                        number of price changes = *D1 + *D2 + ,
                    spread = *D1 + *D2 + ,

where D1 are dummy variables representing Hour 0 to Hour 22 to control time of the day
effects, and D2 consists of 3 types of dummy variables; London open, London lunch, and
NY open. In running regressions, opening hours of three major markets is considered
along with the London lunch time.

                  1 at Hour 7 in summer
     LDN open 1 =     1 at Hour 8 in winter
                  0 otherwise,

Since dy / dD2 = (y = number of price changes or spread) is independent from other
explanatory variables, it simply depicts the effect of London opening (London lunch, NY
opening) over and above k hours after the Tokyo opens regardless of the daylight saving
time.19 In case of London opening dummy above, k=7.

18
    The U-shape pattern was originally documented for the stock market. In the exchange market, see
Hsieh and Kleidon (1996), Ito, Lyons, and Melvin (1998).
19
   The test is conducted including three other sets of dummies: London opening(version 2) = 1 at Hour
6 in summer, 1 at Hour 7 in winter, and 0 otherwise; NY open (version 2)= 1 at Hour 14 in summer, 1
at Hour 15 in winter, and 0 otherwise; NY open (version 3)= 1 at Hour 13 in summer, 1 at Hour 14 in
winter, and 0 otherwise. The results is not reported save space, but it is found that each of the London
opening, London lunch, and NY opening has a significant effect on both price changes and spread, and


                                                   (
Since a large jump of quote entries between hour 5 and hour 6 in summer (which
corresponds to the London 5 and 6 hour in the morning) and between hour 6 and hour 7 in
winter is in some cases found in figures 2-1 to 4-5, we consider the case London market
opens at Hour 6 in summer and Hour 7 in winter.

               1 at Hour 6 in summer
  LDN open 2 =     1 at Hour 7 in winter
               0 otherwise,

The London lunch dummy is as follows:

              1 at Hour 10 in summer
  LDN lunch =    1 at Hour 11 in winter
              0 otherwise,

We consider three types of the New York opening dummies as follows:

              1 at Hour 14 in summer
  NY open 1 =    1 at Hour 15 in winter
              0 otherwise,

              1 at Hour 13 in summer
  NY open 2 =    1 at Hour 14 in winter
              0 otherwise,

              1 at Hour 12 in summer
  NY open 3 =    1 at Hour 13 in winter
              0 otherwise,

                                          Insert Table 5-4

Regression results are shown in Table 5-4. The regression result of Number of Price
Changes on Dummy is shown in Panel A. The results generally show that the dummy
variables are significant in most of the time. The Hour 3, Hour 19 and Hour 20 dummies
are not significant in some regressions, indicating that the number of quote entries in


that the opening (lunch) hours significantly shifts with the daylight saving time.


                                                    )
these 3 hours is not significantly different from average entries. Needless to say, these
three hours correspond to Tokyo lunch hour and two hours in the New York late afternoon.
The results imply that the quote entry does not significantly vary even during the most
inactive hours. The London open dummies, London lunch dummy, and New York open
dummies are all significant indicating that the market becomes active (shows many price
entities on the screen) exactly k hours after the Tokyo market opens—these are the
London opening and New York opening effects.

Panel B shows the regression result of the spread on dummy variables. Estimation results
show that the dummy variables are insignificant from Hour 10 to Hour 15 in most of the
regressions. These hours correspond to the dusk to late evening hours in the Tokyo time,
or from morning to early afternoon hours in the London time, and the early morning hours
in the New York time. The London open and New York open dummies are not significant
in some cases. London lunch hour is insignificant in the regression of 1999, indicating
that in 1999 the London lunch time effect was not clearly seen whereas it became clear in
2000 and 2001. As to the London open effect, both types of London open dummies are
insignificant in 2000 and 2001, indicating that the London open hour effect is not clearly
seen in the width of spread in 2000 and 2001. Finally, type 1 of New York open dummy
is insignificant in 2000 and all types of the New York open dummies are insignificant in
2001. These results show us that, as to the spread, we do not tell exactly when the London
and New York market opens in 2000 and 2001. The width of spread is not significantly
different from other hours even during the opening hours of London and New York.

Both the lack of the latter upswing of the U-shape in activities and the insignificant
market open effects in London and New York in terms of bid-ask spread may be due to
the recent widespread use of the EBS system. The U-shape is often thought of as coming
from inventory control at the end of the business hours in the market, but the EBS has
made the inventory control much easier—by making it possible and easier to find market
rates and counterparties in other regions of the world regardless of the local hours. This
may have contributed to the disappearance of the pick up of the activities toward the end
of regular business hours, and little changes of the bid-ask spread during the business
hours from Tokyo, London, and New York.20 However, the Tokyo market open effect on
the bid-ask spread as well as activities is still found significant because the FX trading
during the preceding two hours before the Tokyo market opens is extremely thin.




  +       ,-    .              ##


                                            *
7. Conclusion
In this paper, the intra-daily patterns were investigated from the rich data set of EBS
quotes and deals. Some of the findings are well-known such as the high activities at the
opening of the market, high correlations between quote entries and deals, and higher
activities associated with narrow spreads. However, some of the findings are somewhat
surprising. The following observations are new in the literature.

First, there is no U-shape intraday activity pattern in the yen/dollar market. The activities
are high during the opening hours but not ending hours. We base this judgment on several
observations. Careful observations on the peak of activities, exploiting the difference
between Tokyo and London in adoption of summer (daylight saving) and winter time to
conclude where the activities originate during the overlapping business hours. There is no
surge in activities toward the end of the New York afternoon hours. Even on Fridays,
there is no pick up in activities in the NY afternoon hours.

Second, intra-day patterns of activities and bid-ask spreads are quite stable over the time
(yearly comparison), or over the week (day-of-the-week comparisons). Namely, the peak
of activities is observed in the opening hours (9am in Tokyo; 8am in Europe/7am London,
and 8-10am New York), and the troughs are late afternoon hours of New York, with
significant drops during the lunch hours in Tokyo and, to the lesser extent, in European
lunch hours. The regression shows that the effect of market opening in London and New
York on the bid-ask spread is insignificant in 2000 and 2001: that is, the width of spread is
insignificantly different from the average even at the opening hours of these two markets.
We still find, however, the significantly different and large spread during the Tokyo
market open hour.

Third, the bid-ask spread is generally negatively correlated with the indicator of
activities: Higher activities are associated with narrow spreads and low activities are
associated with wide spreads. However, the first hour, or to be more specific the first
half hour of the Tokyo market (GMT Hour 0) has a slightly wider spread than other hours
of comparable activities.

Although we have found several interesting facts in the newly available data, there are
many tasks left for future research. First, changes in the exchange rate and an activity
indicator may be correlated. If the deal is done on one side only, then the exchange rate
may move toward that direction. The price impact of deals will be investigated in the
future. Second, macroeconomic announcements are often planned during the hour that
are before the market opening (say, 8:45 am). However, other markets are open in the
case of foreign exchange markets. Additional activities on the day of announcements
may be detected not in the market (say, NY) where it is announced but in other markets
(say, London).
References:

Andersen, Torben G. and Tim Bollerslev (1997). “Intraday Periodicity and Volatility
Persistence in Financial Markets,” Journal of Empirical Finance, vol. 4: 115-158.

Andersen, Torben G. and Tim Bollerslev (1998). “Deutsche Mark-Dollar Volatility:
Intraday Activity Patterns, Macroeconomic Announcements, and Longer Run
Dependencies,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 53, Issue 1, February: 219-265.

Baillie, Richard T. and Tim Bollerslev (1990). “Intra-Day and Inter-Market Volatility in
Foreign Exchange Rates,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 58: 565-585.

Bank of International Settlements (BIS) (2002). Triennial Central Bank Survey 2001
Triennial Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity
2001 - Final Results, Basle: Bank of International Settlements, March 18, 2002.
 [http://www.bis.org/publ/rpfx02.htm#pgtop]

Bank of Japan (2001). Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market
Activity in April 2001: Turnover Data, Japan, Tokyo: Bank of Japan, October 10, 2001.
[http://www.boj.or.jp/en/ronbun/ronbun_f.htm]

Foster, F. Douglas, and S. Vish Viswanathan, (1993). “Variations in Trading Volume,
Return Volatility, and Trading Costs: Evidence on Recent Price Formation Models,”
Journal of Finance 48, 187-211.

Goodhart, Charles; Takatoshi Ito; and Richard Payne, (1996) “One Day in June 1993: A
Study of the Working of the Reuters 2000-2 Electronic Foreign Exchange Trading
System,” in J. A. Frankel, G. Galli, and A. Giovannini (eds.) The Microstructure of
Foreign Exchange Markets, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press: 107-179.

Goodhart, Charles and Richard Payne, (1996) “Microstructural Dynamics in a Foreign
Exchange Electronic Broking System” Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
15, no. 6: 829-852.

Goodhart, Charles, A.E. and Maureen O’Hara, (1997). “High Frequency Data in
Financial Markets: Issues and Applications” Journal of Empirical Finance, vol. 4:
73-114.
Harris, Larry (1986). “A Transaction Data Survey of Weekly and Intraday Patterns in
Stock Returns,“ Journal of Financial Economics, Vol.16, 99-117.

Hsieh, David A. and Allan W. Kleidon, (1996). “Bid-Ask Spreads in Foreign Exchange
Markets: Implications for Models of Asymmetric Information” in J. A. Frankel, G. Galli,
and A. Giovannini (eds.) The Microstructure of Foreign Exchange Markets, Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press: 41-67.

Ito, Takatoshi, Richard K. Lyons, and Michael T. Melvin, (1998). “Is There Private
Information in the FX Market? The Tokyo Experiment” The Journal of Finance, vol. LIII,
no. 3, June: 1111-1130.

Lyons, Richard (1995). “Tests of Microstructural Hypotheses in the Foreign Exchange
Market,” Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 39: 321-351.

Lyons, Richard (1996). “Foreign Exchange Volume: Sound and Fury Signifying
Nothing?” in J. A. Frankel, G. Galli, and A. Giovannini (eds.) The Microstructure of
Foreign Exchange Markets, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press: 183-205.

Lyons, Richard (1997). “A simultaneous trade model of the foreign exchange hot
potato”. Journal of International Economics 42, 275-2

Lyons, Richard (1998). “Profits and Position Control: A Week of FX dealing” Journal of
International Money and Finance, vol. 17: 97-115.

Lyons, Richard (2001). The Microstructure Approach to Exchange Rates, Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Wood, Robert, Thomas McInish, and Keith Ord (1985). “An Investigation of Transaction
data on NYSE Stocks,” Journal of Finance, Vol.40, 723-741.
The Data Cleaning
Examining the raw EBS data, some irregularities were found.
(1) [Negative bid-offer spread] The bid and offer levels are reversed (i.e., negative
    spread).
Comments: This does not make sense (if the time slice is recording at the time of xx.00
second).
Cleaning: When the reversal (i.e., negative spread) is found, those entries are erased, and
then the bid and offer for those seconds are filled as those of just before.

(2) [Deals not on the bid or ask] Deals are recorded not exactly on the bid or ask.
Comments: This happens for two reasons. First, there are multiple deals during a
one-second interval. Each may be on the bid and ask of the moment. But only the
lowest given and the highest paid are recorded. The bid and ask may move during the
one-second period. Therefore it is deviated at the one-second slice data. Second, deals
may not occur at the ask or bid price, due to credit line constraints.

(3) [Reversal of Recorded Deals] Some recorded deals show reversal of bid-ask
Comments: Could it be possible that deals are recorded some time (a second or two, or even a fraction
of second) later than actual deal. Between the time of deal done and the recording of such a deal, a
new bid or offer may show up.
/      0 $1       # !        # /               -#
Geographical distribution of reported foreign exchange market turnover
Daily averages in April, in billions ofUSD, 2001
                                Amount % share
Asia            Japan               147        9.1
                rest                168       10.3
Europe          UK                  504       31.1
                rest                319       19.7
North America US                    254       15.7
                Canada                42       2.6
Oceania                               56       3.4
Total                              1618        100
Data source: Triennial Central Bank Survey 2001, BIS.
Notes: The reported foreign exchange market turnover, adjusted for local double-counting
(“net-gross”). Since there are other regions that are not included in the four regions, the sum of the
four regions do not add up to 100 percent. Aggregation of markets by author.
Original Source: Table B.7, BIS(2002): Triennial Central Bank Survey 2001.


Table 1-2: Dollar/Yen Turnovers by Region

Unit: daily average, in millions of USD


                            Amount % share
Asia          Japan          101634       31.2
              rest            37020       11.4
Europe        UK              74382       22.9
              rest            32960       10.1
North AmericaUS               62145       19.1
              Canada           3287        1.0
Oceania                        7434        2.3
Total                        325464        100
Data source: BIS, Triennial Central Bank Survey 2001


Notes: The US dollar against the yen turnover, net of local inter-dealer, double-counting by country
and currency, in April 2001. Aggregation of markets by author.
Original Source: Table E-5, BIS(2002): Triennial Central Bank Survey 2001.




                                                   &
Table 2: Data summary; Jan 1, 1999 – December 28, 2001, excluding Saturdays,
Sundays, and national holidays (in at least one of the three major markets)


Quote
   Raw data
        Number of price changes          8,501,732

   Filtered data
          Number of price changes        8,429,303
                  bid-side only          4,776,979
                  ask-side only          4,908,881

        spread       mean                 0.020846
                     variance             0.000261
                     skew                    1.727
                     kurtosis                7.492

   Price change with negative bid-ask spread
         number of price changes             72,429
         average spread (absolute value) 0.010155

Deal
   Number of deals
       bid-side                          3,113,109
       ask-side                          3,287,321

   Deals with negative bid-ask spread
         number of deals                   24,119
         spread (absolute value)         0.005375




                                                 '
Table 3: T-test for difference between two GMT hours
    hour               quote revisions      deals           bid-ask spread
    0, 1                7.670 ***          3.526    ***     7.991 ***
    1, 2               10.819 ***          9.814    ***    -0.207
    2, 3               19.609 ***         17.899    ***    -7.150 ***
    3, 4              -15.516 ***        -12.891    ***     1.766
    4, 5               -9.650 ***         -9.219    ***     6.822 ***
    5, 6               -9.276 ***         -9.450    ***     1.776
    6, 7               -3.763 ***         -5.102    ***     1.567
    7, 8               -0.867             -0.672           -1.761
    8, 9                6.437 ***          7.826    ***    -5.377 ***
   9, 10                5.963 ***          8.377    ***    -9.309 ***
  10, 11                0.390              1.758           -4.078 ***
  11, 12              -13.080 ***        -12.662    ***     4.737 ***
  12, 13               -8.148 ***         -7.535    ***     3.496 ***
  13, 14               -2.265             -1.782            0.824
  14, 15                7.084 ***          7.132    ***    -5.818 ***
  15, 16               14.749 ***         12.834    ***   -10.284 ***
  16, 17               14.022 ***         12.331    ***    -6.843 ***
  17, 18                3.250 ***          4.532    ***    -2.268
  18, 19                7.249 ***          6.429    ***    -0.685
  19, 20               10.884 ***          8.599    ***    -1.762
  20, 21               12.467 ***         10.720    ***     0.533
  21, 22                1.210              0.341            4.927 ***
  22, 23              -13.441 ***        -15.357    ***     5.111 ***
   23, 0               37.592 ***         35.332    ***    -2.801 ***
***: significant at 1%
**: significant at 5%




                                               (
Table 4-1: Intraday timeline: GMT Clock and corresponding Local time of the three major markets
Normal (Winter)
  GMT        0 1       2    3       4       5       6       7       8    9 10 11 12        13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22                              23
 Tokyo        9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 +0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 +7 +8
 London       0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23
   NY       -19 -20 -21 -22 -23 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Daylight saving time (Summer)
  GMT         0 1 2 3         4             5       6       7       8    9 10 11    12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21                               22 23
 Tokyo        9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 +0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 +7 +8
 London       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 +0
   NY       -20 -21 -22 -23 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

March-April (1week)
  GMT        0 1       2    3       4       5       6       7       8    9 10 11    12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22                                  23
 Tokyo        9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 +0 +1 +2 +3 +4 +5 +6 +7 +8
 London       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 +0
   NY       -19 -20 -21 -22 -23 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18

Peaks of activities are Hours 0,8,13-15 in the winter; Hours0,7,12-14 in the summer     i
Troughs of activities are Hours 3,10-11, and 22 in the winter; Hours 3,10-11, 21 in the summer i




Table 4-2: Adjusted GMT Clock and corresponding Local time of the three major markets
Adjusted GMT clock
  GMT       0 1       2     3   4       5       6       7       8       9 10 11    12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21                          22 23 24
Tokyo(w)    9 10      11    12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21                             22    23   +0    +1    +2    +3    +4    +5    +6    +7    +8   (x)
 Tokyo(s)   9 10      11    12 13 14 (x) 15 16 17 18 19 20                            21    22   23   +0    +1    +2    +3    +4    +5    +6    +7    +8
London(w) 0 1          2     3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                                   13    14   15    16    17    18    19    20    21    22    23   (x)
London(s)   1 2        3     4 5 6 (x) 7 8 9 10 11 12                                 13    14   15    16    17    18    19    20    21    22    23    +1
  NY(w) -19 -20      -21   -22 -23 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                                     8     9   10    11    12    13    14    15    16    17    18   (x)
  NY(s)   -20 -21    -22   -23 0 1 (x) 2 3 4 5 6 7                                     8     9   10    11    12    13    14    15    16    17    18    19




                                                                             )
Table 5-1: Deals and Quote revisions


dependent variable: number of deals
                     Constant                     s.e.        quote revision         s.e.
whole sample          -154.381 ***              1.89066          1.06831 ***      3.32E-03
    1999              -212.836 ***              4.27835           1.2116 ***      6.89E-03
    2000              -120.585 ***              2.32828          1.00376 ***      4.60E-03
    2001              -118.118 ***              2.53696         0.949443 ***      4.39E-03

number of deals = constant + *number of quote revision
                (-154.4) (1.07)




Table 5-2:
Panel A: Hour 0 effect and correlation between number of quote revisions and spread
Dependent variable: mean of spread
Hour 0 effect
                    Constant            s.e.        quote revision       s.e.     Hour0 dummy        s.e.
whole sample         0.02285 ***     1.42E-04        -3.99E-06 ***    2.54E-07     -3.89E-07      4.78E-07
    1999             0.02595 ***     3.38E-04        -6.74E-06 ***    5.56E-07      1.08E-06      9.67E-07
    2000             0.02100 ***     1.75E-04        -3.34E-06 ***    3.52E-07     -1.14E-06 **   6.57E-07
    2001             0.02266 ***     2.01E-04        -3.58E-06 ***    3.52E-07     -1.37E-06 **   7.13E-07

mean of spread = constant + *number of quote revision + *H0dummy*number of quote revision
                (0.023) (-3.99E-06)                  (3.89E-07)




Panel B: Hour 0 effect and Correlation between number of deals and spread
Dependent variable: mean of spread
Hour 0 effect
                    Constant           s.e.         number of deals     s.e.      Hour0 dummy       s.e.
whole sample          0.0229 ***                     -5.40E-06 ***                  5.58E-07
    1999              0.0248 ***                     -5.75E-06 ***                  1.32E-06
    2000              0.0215 ***                     -6.23E-06 ***                 -3.90E-07
    2001              0.0233 ***                     -6.80E-06 ***                 -4.88E-07

mean of spread = constant + *number of deals + *H0dummy*number of deals
                (0.023) (-5.40E-06)        (5.58E-07)




                                                          *
Table 5-3
Panel A: Monday opening (Hour 0) effect and correlation between the number of quote
revisions and spread.
Dependent variable: mean of spread
Monday Hour 0 effect
                    Constant            s.e.     quote revision       s.e.       Monday H0 dummy s.e.
 full sample         0.02287 ***     1.42E-04     -4.05E-06 ***    2.50E-07        9.36E-07     1.09E-06
     1999            0.02592 ***     3.37E-04     -6.65E-06 ***    5.44E-07        1.79E-06     2.10E-06
     2000            0.02103 ***     1.75E-04     -3.47E-06 ***    3.47E-07        1.17E-06     1.52E-06
     2001            0.02267 ***     2.01E-04     -3.67E-06 ***    3.49E-07       -3.70E-07     1.74E-06

mean of spread = constant + *number of quote revision + *MondayH0dummy*number of quote revision
                (0.023) (-4.05E-06)                  (9.36E-07)



Panel B: Monday opening (Hour 0) effect and correlation between number of deals and
spread
Dependent variable: mean of spread
Monday Hour 0 effect
                    Constant           s.e.      number of deals      s.e.       Monday H0 dummy   s.e.
 full sample          0.0229 ***                  -5.39E-06 ***                   2.19E-06 **
     1999             0.0248 ***                  -5.68E-06 ***                   2.23E-06
     2000             0.0215 ***                  -6.31E-06 ***                   2.91E-06 *
     2001             0.0233 ***                  -6.83E-06 ***                   4.68E-07

mean of spread = constant + *number of deals + *MondayH0dummy*number of deals
                (0.023) (-5.39E-06)        (2.19E-06)
/       &0
2       3$ #                     4                 2       5        #        6
             all                              1999                            2000                       2001
             Coefficient              s.e.    Coefficient             s.e.     Coefficient         s.e.  Coefficient      s.e.
C                 272.31 ***            7.23       314.60 ***          13.94      249.51     ***   10.39     254.27 ***   11.90
H0DUM             414.92 ***           10.22       500.85 ***          19.72      358.77     ***   14.69     388.17 ***   16.83
H1DUM             319.66 ***           10.22       358.63 ***          19.72      269.31     ***   14.69     332.62 ***   16.83
H2DUM             189.72 ***           10.22       227.35 ***          19.72      141.57     ***   14.69     201.77 ***   16.83
H3DUM              -4.93               10.22       -15.49              19.72      -28.00     **    14.69      28.59 **    16.83
H4DUM             136.24 ***           10.22       146.81 ***          19.72       90.38     ***   14.69     172.23 ***   16.83
H5DUM             240.82 ***           10.22       298.05 ***          19.72      184.19     ***   14.69     242.41 ***   16.83
H6DUM             249.95 ***           12.32       273.53 ***          23.84      232.56     ***   17.57     243.20 ***   20.37
H7DUM             253.90 ***           13.17       231.45 ***          25.38      247.17     ***   18.81     281.22 ***   21.84
H8DUM             366.59 ***           10.62       386.38 ***          20.43      314.41     ***   15.28     400.45 ***   17.51
H9DUM             331.80 ***           10.22       326.03 ***          19.72      287.91     ***   14.69     381.65 ***   16.83
H10DUM            268.24 ***           10.22       242.06 ***          19.72      249.27     ***   14.69     312.77 ***   16.83
H11DUM            283.13 ***           10.58       243.78 ***          20.36      266.05     ***   15.22     338.93 ***   17.43
H12DUM            281.68 ***           12.35       234.21 ***          23.90      268.68     ***   17.62     342.13 ***   20.43
H13DUM            338.44 ***           13.51       276.31 ***          26.00      301.86     ***   19.28     439.18 ***   22.46
H14DUM            381.17 ***           13.32       304.74 ***          25.64      354.74     ***   19.03     485.64 ***   22.12
H15DUM            400.12 ***           10.63       365.62 ***          20.44      368.89     ***   15.29     466.94 ***   17.52
H16DUM            301.66 ***           12.10       298.75 ***          23.43      277.09     ***   17.27     329.93 ***   19.98
H17DUM            115.35 ***           10.22       116.87 ***          19.72      102.79     ***   14.69     126.52 ***   16.83
H18DUM             86.15 ***           10.22        93.10 ***          19.72       62.30     ***   14.69     103.45 ***   16.83
H19DUM             29.75 ***           10.22        11.29              19.72       32.87     **    14.69      44.53 ***   16.83
H20DUM            -36.45 ***           10.22       -67.55 ***          19.72      -28.51     **    14.69     -14.28       16.83
H21DUM           -101.77 ***           10.22      -129.06 ***          19.72      -88.84     ***   14.69     -88.33 ***   16.83
H22DUM           -108.76 ***           10.22      -119.68 ***          19.72     -106.43     ***   14.69    -100.52 ***   16.83
LNOPEN            173.48 ***           11.73       228.13 ***          22.73      125.30     ***   16.76     170.66 ***   19.36
LNOPEN2           174.03 ***           11.73       211.50 ***          22.73      120.26     ***   16.76     192.85 ***   19.36
NYOPEN            173.44 ***           11.83       248.51 ***          22.90      142.62     ***   16.89     128.58 ***   19.55
NYOPEN2           189.38 ***           12.56       264.99 ***          24.25      170.72     ***   17.93     130.67 ***   20.83
NYOPEN3           214.22 ***           11.83       255.97 ***          22.90      202.18     ***   16.89     183.56 ***   19.55
LNLUNCH           -62.08 ***           11.05       -65.42 ***          21.46      -78.03     ***   15.79     -44.41 ***   18.17
Note: ***, ** and * indicate the significance at the 1,5, and 10%, respectively.
/       &0
2       "$ #                                     6
             all                              1999                            2000                            2001
             Coefficient              s.e.    Coefficient              s.e.    Coefficient           s.e.     Coefficient            s.e.
C                0.02066 ***        3.03E-04       0.0229 ***       7.42E-04 0.019135        ***   3.38E-04     0.020023    ***   4.00E-04
H0DUM          -1.43E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -1.88E-03 **           1.05E-03 -1.28E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -1.15E-03    **    5.65E-04
H1DUM          -3.64E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -4.65E-03 ***          1.05E-03 -3.22E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -3.07E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H2DUM          -3.58E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -4.83E-03 ***          1.05E-03 -3.07E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -2.90E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H3DUM          -2.01E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -2.57E-03 ***          1.05E-03 -1.94E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -1.53E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H4DUM          -2.37E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -3.39E-03 ***          1.05E-03 -1.94E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -1.83E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H5DUM          -3.60E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -4.96E-03 ***          1.05E-03 -2.92E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -2.95E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H6DUM          -3.46E-03 ***        5.16E-04 -3.84E-03 ***          1.27E-03 -3.15E-03       ***   5.73E-04    -3.42E-03    ***   6.85E-04
H7DUM          -3.57E-03 ***        5.51E-04 -3.60E-03 ***          1.35E-03 -3.42E-03       ***   6.13E-04    -3.72E-03    ***   7.34E-04
H8DUM          -3.64E-03 ***        4.45E-04 -4.57E-03 ***          1.09E-03 -3.23E-03       ***   4.98E-04    -3.19E-03    ***   5.88E-04
H9DUM          -2.51E-03 ***        4.28E-04 -3.73E-03 ***          1.05E-03 -1.99E-03       ***   4.79E-04    -1.86E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H10DUM         -2.97E-04            4.28E-04 -1.40E-03 *            1.05E-03 3.75E-04              4.79E-04     9.45E-05          5.65E-04
H11DUM          3.92E-04            4.43E-04 -4.14E-04              1.08E-03 7.78E-04        *     4.96E-04     7.82E-04    *     5.86E-04
H12DUM          6.01E-04            5.17E-04 1.23E-03               1.27E-03 3.49E-04              5.74E-04     2.46E-04          6.87E-04
H13DUM          1.58E-04            5.66E-04 1.36E-03               1.38E-03 -6.44E-04             6.28E-04    -2.39E-04          7.55E-04
H14DUM         -5.87E-04            5.58E-04 -3.69E-04              1.36E-03 -8.68E-04       *     6.20E-04    -5.70E-04          7.43E-04
H15DUM         -7.20E-05            4.45E-04 -9.94E-04              1.09E-03 1.32E-04              4.98E-04     5.87E-04          5.89E-04
H16DUM          1.29E-03 ***        5.07E-04 8.47E-04               1.25E-03 1.07E-03        **    5.63E-04     1.93E-03    ***   6.72E-04
H17DUM          4.91E-03 ***        4.28E-04 4.51E-03 ***           1.05E-03 4.36E-03        ***   4.79E-04     5.86E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H18DUM          6.05E-03 ***        4.28E-04 6.74E-03 ***           1.05E-03 5.00E-03        ***   4.79E-04     6.43E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H19DUM          6.60E-03 ***        4.28E-04 6.73E-03 ***           1.05E-03 6.05E-03        ***   4.79E-04     7.01E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H20DUM          7.94E-03 ***        4.28E-04 7.43E-03 ***           1.05E-03 7.85E-03        ***   4.79E-04     8.53E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H21DUM          7.61E-03 ***        4.28E-04 7.56E-03 ***           1.05E-03 7.13E-03        ***   4.79E-04     8.13E-03    ***   5.65E-04
H22DUM          3.78E-03 ***        4.28E-04 3.59E-03 ***           1.05E-03 3.58E-03        ***   4.79E-04     4.18E-03    ***   5.65E-04
LNOPEN         -7.88E-04 *          4.91E-04 -2.49E-03 **           1.21E-03 -1.28E-04             5.46E-04     1.99E-04          6.51E-04
LNOPEN2 -7.91E-04 *                 4.91E-04 -2.30E-03 **           1.21E-03 -2.65E-04             5.46E-04     1.49E-04          6.51E-04
NYOPEN         -1.23E-03 ***        4.95E-04 -2.91E-03 ***          1.22E-03 -6.06E-04             5.50E-04    -1.98E-04          6.57E-04
NYOPEN2 -2.18E-03 ***               5.26E-04 -5.06E-03 ***          1.29E-03 -8.96E-04       *     5.84E-04    -6.45E-04          7.00E-04
NYOPEN3 -1.96E-03 ***               4.95E-04 -4.57E-03 ***          1.22E-03 -9.51E-04       **    5.50E-04    -4.29E-04          6.57E-04
LNLUNCH 2.04E-03 ***                4.63E-04 1.46E-03               1.14E-03 2.02E-03        ***   5.14E-04     2.61E-03    ***   6.11E-04
Note: ***, ** and * indicate the significance at the 1,5, and 10%, respectively.
Figure 1: An illustration of price changes and transactions with negative spread




                                        Price changes with
                                        negative spread




                                                           Deal with negative spread
Figure 2-1: Summer 1999

                                    Statistics of activity, Summer 1999
                                excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                    1200                                                    0.06

                                                                            0.055
                    1000
                                                                            0.05

                                                                            0.045
                    800
                                                                            0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                    mean of spread
                                                                                                     deals
                    600                                                     0.035                    price change
                                                                                                     bid-ask spread
                                                                            0.03
                    400
                                                                            0.025

                                                                            0.02
                    200
                                                                            0.015

                       0                                                    0.01
                       ho 0
                             11

                       ho 2
                       ho 3
                       ho 4
                       ho 5
                       ho 6
                       ho 7
                       ho 8
                             19

                       ho 0
                       ho 1
                       ho 2
                             23
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8

                       ho r9
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur



                             1


                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1


                             2
                             2
                             2
                           u
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                     ho
                           ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho




                       ho




                       ho




Figure 2-2: Summer 2000

                                    Statistics of activity, Summer 2000
                                excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                    1200                                                    0.06

                                                                            0.055
                    1000
                                                                            0.05

                                                                            0.045
                    800
 number of quotes




                                                                            0.04
                                                                                    mean of spread




                                                                                                     deals
                    600                                                     0.035                    price change
                                                                                                     bid-ask spread
                                                                            0.03
                    400
                                                                            0.025

                                                                            0.02
                    200
                                                                            0.015

                       0                                                    0.01
                       ho 0
                       ho 1
                       ho 2
                       ho 3
                       ho 4
                       ho 5
                       ho 6
                       ho 7
                             18

                       ho 9
                       ho 0
                       ho 1
                       ho 2
                             23
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8

                       ho r9
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur



                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1


                             1
                             2
                             2
                             2
                           u
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                     ho
                           ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho




                       ho
Figure 2-3: Summer 2001

                                   Statistics of activity, Summer 2001
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread
                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    price change
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                      ho 0
                            11

                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                      ho 4
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                      ho 8
                            19

                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                            23
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8

                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur



                            1


                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1


                            2
                            2
                            2
                          u
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                    ho
                          ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                      ho




                      ho




Figure 2-4: Winter 1999

                                    Statistics of activity, Winter 1999
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread




                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    price change
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                      ho 4
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                            18

                      ho 9
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                            23
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8

                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur



                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1


                            1
                            2
                            2
                            2
                          u
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                    ho
                          ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                      ho




                                                   &
Figure 2-5: Winter 2000

                                    Statistics of activity, Winter 2000
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread
                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    price change
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                      ho 0
                            11

                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                      ho 4
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                      ho 8
                            19

                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                            23
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8

                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur



                            1


                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1


                            2
                            2
                            2
                          u
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                    ho
                          ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                      ho




                      ho




Figure 2-6: Winter 2001

                                    Statistics of activity, Winter 2001
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread




                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    price change
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                      ho 4
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                            18

                      ho 9
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                            23
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8

                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur



                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1


                            1
                            2
                            2
                            2
                          u
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                    ho
                          ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                      ho




                                                   '
Figure 3-1: The year of 1999

                                  Statistics of activity, 1999 year average
                                excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                    1200                                                       0.06

                                                                               0.055
                    1000
                                                                               0.05

                                                                               0.045
                    800
                                                                               0.04
  number of quote




                                                                                       mean of spread
                                                                                                        deals
                    600                                                        0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                        bid-ask spread
                                                                               0.03
                    400
                                                                               0.025

                                                                               0.02
                    200
                                                                               0.015

                       0                                                       0.01
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                            13

                      ho 14
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                      ho 8
                      ho 19
                      ho 0
                            21

                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                            24
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3

                       ho 4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur


                            1
                            1
                            1




                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1


                            2


                            2
                            2
                          u
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                     ho
                           ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho


                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                      ho




                      ho




Figure 3-2: The year of 2000

                                 Statistics of activity, 2000 (year average)
                                excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                    1200                                                       0.06

                                                                               0.055
                    1000
                                                                               0.05

                                                                               0.045
                    800
                                                                               0.04
  number of quote




                                                                                       mean of spread




                                                                                                        deals
                    600                                                        0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                        bid-ask spread
                                                                               0.03
                    400
                                                                               0.025

                                                                               0.02
                    200
                                                                               0.015

                       0                                                       0.01
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                      ho 14
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                      ho 8
                      ho 19
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                           24
                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3

                       ho 4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur


                           1
                           1
                           1
                           1


                           1
                           1
                           1
                           1


                           2
                           2
                           2
                           2
                          u
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                     ho
                           ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho


                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                                                      (
Figure 3-3: The year of 2001

                                   Statistics of activity, 2001 year average
                                 excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                     1200                                                      0.06

                                                                               0.055
                     1000
                                                                               0.05

                                                                               0.045
                     800
  number of quotes




                                                                               0.04




                                                                                       mean of spread
                                                                                                        deals
                     600                                                       0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                        bid-ask spread
                                                                               0.03
                     400
                                                                               0.025

                                                                               0.02
                     200
                                                                               0.015

                        0                                                      0.01
                       ho 0
                       ho 1
                       ho 2
                             13

                       ho 14
                       ho 5
                       ho 6
                       ho 7
                       ho 8
                       ho 19
                       ho 0
                             21

                       ho 2
                       ho 3
                             24
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3

                        ho 4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                       ho r9
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur
                           ur


                             1
                             1
                             1




                             1
                             1
                             1
                             1


                             2


                             2
                             2
                           u
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                      ho
                            ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho


                        ho
                        ho
                        ho
                        ho




                       ho




                       ho




                                                      )
Figure 4-1: Monday, 2001

                                   Statistics of activity, Monday 2001
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread
                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                     ho 0
                     ho 1
                     ho 2
                           13

                     ho 14
                     ho 5
                     ho 6
                     ho 7
                     ho 8
                     ho 19
                     ho 0
                           21

                     ho 2
                     ho 3
                           24
                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3

                      ho 4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                     ho r9
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur


                           1
                           1
                           1




                           1
                           1
                           1
                           1


                           2


                           2
                           2
                         u
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                    ho
                          ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho


                      ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho




                     ho




                     ho




Figure 4-2: Tuesday, 2001

                                   Statistics of activity, Tuesday 2001
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread




                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                     ho 0
                     ho 1
                     ho 2
                     ho 3
                     ho 14
                     ho 5
                     ho 6
                     ho 7
                     ho 8
                     ho 19
                     ho 0
                     ho 1
                     ho 2
                     ho 3
                          24
                           0
                           1
                           2
                           3

                      ho 4
                           5
                           6
                           7
                           8
                     ho r9
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur


                          1
                          1
                          1
                          1


                          1
                          1
                          1
                          1


                          2
                          2
                          2
                          2
                         u
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                    ho
                          ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho


                      ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho




                                                   *
Figure 4-3: Wednesday, 2001

                                  Statistics of activity, Wednesday 2001
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread
                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                     ho 0
                     ho 1
                     ho 2
                           13

                     ho 14
                     ho 5
                     ho 6
                     ho 7
                     ho 8
                     ho 19
                     ho 0
                           21

                     ho 2
                     ho 3
                           24
                            0
                            1
                            2
                            3

                      ho 4
                            5
                            6
                            7
                            8
                     ho r9
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur


                           1
                           1
                           1




                           1
                           1
                           1
                           1


                           2


                           2
                           2
                         u
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                        ur
                    ho
                          ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho


                      ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho




                     ho




                     ho




Figure 4-4: Thursday, 2001

                                   Statistics of activity, Thursday 2001
                               excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                   1200                                                    0.06

                                                                           0.055
                   1000
                                                                           0.05

                                                                           0.045
                   800
                                                                           0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                   mean of spread




                                                                                                    deals
                   600                                                     0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                    bid-ask spread
                                                                           0.03
                   400
                                                                           0.025

                                                                           0.02
                   200
                                                                           0.015

                      0                                                    0.01
                     ho 0
                     ho 1
                     ho 2
                     ho 3
                     ho 14
                     ho 5
                     ho 6
                     ho 7
                     ho 8
                     ho 19
                     ho 0
                     ho 1
                     ho 2
                     ho 3
                          24
                           0
                           1
                           2
                           3

                      ho 4
                           5
                           6
                           7
                           8
                     ho r9
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur


                          1
                          1
                          1
                          1


                          1
                          1
                          1
                          1


                          2
                          2
                          2
                          2
                         u
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                       ur
                    ho
                          ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho


                      ho
                      ho
                      ho
                      ho
Figure 4-5: Friday, 2001

                                     Statistics of activity, Friday 2001
                                excluding Sundays and JP, UK, US holidays


                    1200                                                    0.06

                                                                            0.055
                    1000
                                                                            0.05

                                                                            0.045
                    800
                                                                            0.04
  number of quote




                                                                                    mean of spread
                                                                                                     deals
                    600                                                     0.035                    quote revisions
                                                                                                     bid-ask spread
                                                                            0.03
                    400
                                                                            0.025

                                                                            0.02
                    200
                                                                            0.015

                       0                                                    0.01
                      ho 0
                      ho 1
                      ho 2
                            13

                      ho 14
                      ho 5
                      ho 6
                      ho 7
                      ho 8
                      ho 19
                      ho 0
                            21

                      ho 2
                      ho 3
                            24
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3

                       ho 4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                      ho r9
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur
                          ur


                            1
                            1
                            1




                            1
                            1
                            1
                            1


                            2


                            2
                            2
                          u
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                         ur
                     ho
                           ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho


                       ho
                       ho
                       ho
                       ho




                      ho




                      ho
Figure 5-1 Monday opening (Hour 0), average of 1999

                                                                   Statistics of Activity, Monday 1999, GMT0
                                                                          excluding JP, UK, US holidays


                   90                                                                                                              0.06


                   80                                                                                                              0.055

                                                                                                                                   0.05
                   70

                                                                                                                                   0.045
                   60
                                                                                                                                   0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                                                                           mean of spread
                   50                                                                                                                                       deals
                                                                                                                                   0.035                    quote revisions
                   40                                                                                                                                       bid-ask spread
                                                                                                                                   0.03
                   30
                                                                                                                                   0.025

                   20
                                                                                                                                   0.02

                   10                                                                                                              0.015

                   0                                                                                                               0.01
                        0:00-   5:00-   10:00-   15:00-   20:00-   25:00-   30:00-    35:00-   40:00-   45:00-   50:00-   55:00-
                        4:59    9:59    14:59    19:59    24:59    29:59    34:59     39:59    44:59    49:59    54:59    59:59




Figure 5-2 Monday opening (Hour 0), average of 2000

                                                                   Statistics of Activity, Monday 2000, GMT0
                                                                          excluding JP, UK, US holidays


                   90                                                                                                              0.06


                   80                                                                                                              0.055

                                                                                                                                   0.05
                   70

                                                                                                                                   0.045
                   60
                                                                                                                                   0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                                                                           mean of spread




                   50                                                                                                                                       deals
                                                                                                                                   0.035                    quote revisions
                   40                                                                                                                                       bid-ask spread
                                                                                                                                   0.03
                   30
                                                                                                                                   0.025

                   20
                                                                                                                                   0.02

                   10                                                                                                              0.015

                   0                                                                                                               0.01
                        0:00-   5:00-   10:00-   15:00-   20:00-   25:00-   30:00-    35:00-   40:00-   45:00-   50:00-   55:00-
                        4:59    9:59    14:59    19:59    24:59    29:59    34:59     39:59    44:59    49:59    54:59    59:59
Figure 5-3 Monday opening (Hour 0), average of 2001

                                                                   Statistics of Activity, Monday 2001, GMT0
                                                                          excluding JP, UK, US holidays


                   90                                                                                                              0.06


                   80                                                                                                              0.055

                                                                                                                                   0.05
                   70

                                                                                                                                   0.045
                   60
                                                                                                                                   0.04
 number of quote




                                                                                                                                           mean of spread
                   50                                                                                                                                       deals
                                                                                                                                   0.035                    quote revisions
                   40                                                                                                                                       bid-ask spread
                                                                                                                                   0.03
                   30
                                                                                                                                   0.025

                   20
                                                                                                                                   0.02

                   10                                                                                                              0.015

                   0                                                                                                               0.01
                        0:00-   5:00-   10:00-   15:00-   20:00-   25:00-   30:00-    35:00-   40:00-   45:00-   50:00-   55:00-
                        4:59    9:59    14:59    19:59    24:59    29:59    34:59     39:59    44:59    49:59    54:59    59:59
