NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMICS OF CORPORATE TAX SELFISHNESS
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 10858
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10858
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

An earlier version of this paper was presented at the National Tax Association meetings in Chicago,
November 13, 2003. I am grateful to Orna Gafni and Benjamin Potter for research assistance, to Rosanne
Altshuler, Joseph Bankman, Michelle Hanlon, James Hines, and Eric Toder for comments on an earlier draft,
and to helpful comments received from participants at the University of North Carolina Tax Symposium and
the Public Economics United Kingdom Tax Weekend.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Economics of Corporate Tax Selfishness
Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 10858
October 2004
JEL No. H25, H26
ABSTRACT
This paper offers an economics perspective on corporate tax noncompliance. It first reviews what
is known about the extent and nature of corporate tax noncompliance and the resources devoted to
enforcement. It then addresses the supply of corporate noncompliance—the industrial organization
of the tax shelter industry—as well as the demand for corporate tax noncompliance, focusing on how
the standard Allingham-Sandmo approach needs to be modified when applied to public corporations.
It then discusses the implications of a supply-and-demand approach for the analysis of the incidence
and efficiency cost of corporate income taxation, and the very justification for a separate tax on
corporation income. Along the way it addresses policy proposals aimed at increased disclosure of
corporate tax activities to both the IRS and to the public.
Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street, Room A2120D
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

1.

Introduction
The corporation income tax occupies a tenuous place in the economics of

taxation. The theory of taxation stresses the importance of looking through the corporate
entity and tracing the incidence of the tax to the shareholders, workers, and customers. In
a comprehensive income tax, there is no reason to tax the income generated by
corporations any differently than any other source of income, and justifications have
centered on its role as a backstop or withholding device for an imperfect personal income
tax. The sharp decline in the relative size of federal corporation income tax revenues
since the 1950’s, from 6.4 percent of GDP in 1951 to less than 1.5 percent of GDP in the
last few years, has been welcomed by some as a benign development. Indeed, part of the
decline has been due to a process of “do-it-yourself integration,” as a growing fraction of
businesses operate as pass-through entities such as S corporations and limited liability
companies, and as indebtedness increases.
Many recent events suggest that the time is ripe for a rethinking of how we tax
corporations. By setting a maximum personal tax rate of 15 percent on dividends, the
2003 tax act featured the most fundamental change since World War II in the taxation of
corporate-source income and took a significant step in the general direction of integrating
the corporate and personal income tax systems. This change in the tax law happened
amidst much controversy regarding abusive avoidance and evasion among corporations,
the political fallout of which may partly explain why the integration came in the form of
tax reductions in the personal tax rather than the corporate tax. The Enron scandals,
although focused on improper accounting, brought to light the extensive use of Enron
subsidiaries in tax haven countries, and the misdeeds of the executives of other
corporations, such as Tyco, have apparently included tax evasion of one sort or another.
A series of articles in the New York Times, written by David Cay Johnston, has focused
attention on highly sophisticated tax avoidance schemes. Finally, the deficit pendulum
has swung back to the large positive position. Whenever it does, politicians look for
apparently “painless” ways to raise revenue and look to the IRS to expand its
enforcement rather than curb its zealousness; indeed, audit resources are starting to
increase slightly, after some years of very large declines.

My purpose in this paper is to offer an economics perspective on the issue of
corporate tax reporting behavior, and to focus on what economics can contribute to the
policy debate about corporate tax noncompliance. If successful, this review will help to
clarify the issues involved and identify where further research is especially needed.
Before proceeding, though, I owe the reader an explanation for the title of the paper.
I chose the word selfishness in the title of a paper about corporate tax reporting, including
evasion and abusive avoidance behavior, for several reasons. First, I want to avoid
getting bogged down trying to distinguish between what technically is (illegal) tax
evasion and what is (legal) tax avoidance. Second, the title signals my intention to
discuss the social responsibility of the corporation, and whether this is a case in which
private agents pursuing their own “selfish” interest can promote the public good. Finally,
I want to emphasize the importance of addressing what is the corporate “self.” Of course,
to economists the word selfishness does not have the same negative connotations it
suggests to others. At some point in our first economics course, we read the words of
Adam Smith: “It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker that
we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.” Smith argued that each
individual seeking to better the lives of his or her family (often referred to as ‘selfish”
behavior) can, if under the appropriate institutions, promote the public good. But the
“invisible hand” promotes the general welfare only under certain conditions about the
institutional framework and incentives. I explore to what extent it applies to corporate
tax avoidance and evasion.

2.

Some Facts
2.1 Corporate Tax Noncompliance
I begin with corporate tax noncompliance: corporation income tax that legally is

owed but is not reported or paid. Due to the nature of tax noncompliance, getting a
handle on its magnitude is not easy. What we do know is based on the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) Tax Compliance Measurement Program, or TCMP, that featured intensive
examinations of a random sample of tax returns filed for tax years from the early 1970’s
until 1988; the corporate tax gap measures are primarily based on TCMP studies done in

2

1977, 1980 and 1983 and on routine operational audits from the mid-1980’s. By
comparing these examined returns with the original returns as filed, supplemented by
other evidence, the IRS estimated the total amount of underreported income and
overstated subtractions in each of these years (and projections for later years) and the
total loss of tax revenue--the “tax gap.” The estimates for the corporation income tax gap
come from three sources. For small corporations the IRS used TCMP data, adjusted for
underreporting unlikely to be detected by the TCMP. For medium-sized corporations, the
gap was calculated by estimating, based on operational (i.e., non-TCMP) audits, how
much tax revenue would have been generated if the IRS examined all these corporations’
tax returns. Finally, for large corporations, because the IRS routinely examines a high
percentage of these companies, examination results were used as the basis of estimates of
the tax gap.1 The IRS has made tax gap estimates for tax year 2001, but not later, based
on a rough projection from the 15- to 20-year-old TCMP and other data, assuming that
the compliance rates for each major component have not changed in the past two
decades.2 Corporate underreporting in 2001 is estimated at $29.9 billion, of which
corporations with over $10 million in assets make up $25.0 billion.3 As a benchmark for
comparison, estimated individual underreporting in 2001 is $148.8 billion. Compared to
estimated 2001 tax year receipts paid voluntarily and in a timely fashion of $142.4 billion
and $930.1 billion for corporate and individual income tax collections, respectively, the
underreporting rate (calculated as underreported tax divided by receipts plus
underreported tax) is 17.4 percent and 13.8 percent for corporations and individuals,
respectively.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) calculates an annual measure of
corporate misreporting, in order to adjust the National Income and Product Accounts
(NIPA) measure of corporate profits, which is based on data from corporate tax returns as
1

This description is based on U.S. General Accounting Office (1988). One potentially important problem
with this data is that the examination reports do not distinguish between adjustments that change the timing
of tax liability and adjustments that change the liability in a way that will not be offset in future years. For
this reason it is difficult to know the present value of the recommended adjustments from IRS
examinations.
2
The tax gap numbers are drawn from Internal Revenue Service (2004a).
3
Underreporting is only one of the three components of the total tax gap, which is estimated to be $282.5
billion. The other two components are nonfiling and underpayment. There is no estimate for corporate
nonfiling, and underpayment is a quite different issue.

3

filed.4

The BEA estimate for corporations reporting a profit is based on actual tax

settlements--the change in income recommended by the IRS examination team reduced
by the overall ratio of actual settlements to recommendations.5 For loss companies, the
adjustment is calculated by multiplying total losses by an estimate of the percentage by
which losses are reduced during audit. Table 1 shows the NIPA estimates of corporate
tax misreporting since 1988, in total dollars and as a percentage of misreporting plus total
receipts less deductions, the tax-return-based measure that the BEA procedures begin
from.6 This ratio was 13.8 percent in 2000, compared to the 17.4 percent figure based on
the IRS methodology that extrapolates from two-decades-old data assuming no change in
compliance rates. This series shows an increase in the misreporting rate since the mid1990’s, but puts the 2000 misreporting rate below the rates of the 1989 through 1992
period. The complete series (that begins in 1929) shows that this ratio never reached 10
percent until 1981, and peaked in 1983 at 17.9 percent.

2.2 Abusive Corporate Tax Shelters
For conceptual reasons it is impossible to measure how much corporate tax
avoidance—legal actions taken to reduce tax liability--is going on. If avoidance is
anything that corporations do to reduce their tax liability, it could include such activities
as purchasing tax-exempt bonds, which is certainly legal, not at all nefarious, but also
certainly done purely for tax reasons. Recent attention has focused on so-called
“abusive” tax transactions, including shelters. The General Accounting Office defines
abusive shelters to be “very complicated transactions promoted to corporations and
4

The BEA methodology is discussed in Petrick (2002, p. 7).
In contrast, the IRS tax gap measures are based on the recommendations of the return audit, unadjusted
for how much tax was ultimately assessed after any appeals process. This is defended in part as an
approximate adjustment for the fact that IRS examiners do not detect all underreporting. Another
methodological difference is that the BEA projects the average amount of recommended adjustment per
return to all returns by multiplying this figure by the total number of returns, thus implicitly assuming that
the examined returns are representative of all corporate returns. In contrast, the IRS tax gap methodology
for mid-sized corporations (with assets between $10 and $100 million) projects the results of audited
returns to the whole population with some acknowledgment that returns audited are not representative of
the entire population, and indeed have higher unreported income than unexamined returns. The first
methodological difference would make the BEA estimates of underreporting lower than the IRS tax gap
measure, while the second methodological difference would make it higher. I am grateful to Alan Plumley
and Eric Toder of the IRS for insights about these issues.
6
Note that the NIPA table refers to misreported income, not understated tax liability as in the IRS corporate
tax gap studies.
5

4

wealthy individuals to exploit tax loopholes and provide large, unintended tax benefits.”7
This is as good a definition as any, but it clearly is not a precise definition. Recently an
IRS contractor estimated the tax revenue loss from abusive tax shelters in 1999 to be
between $14.5 and $18.4 billion, 50 percent higher than in 1993.8 This estimate was
based on IRS’s Statistics of Income data for the largest U.S. companies, Compustat
financial data, and surveys of IRS field offices. Other estimates based on familiarity with
the industry, but not quantitative analysis, have been in the same ballpark.9 Extrapolating
these estimates to 2001 suggests that abusive tax shelter may equal more than half of the
total corporate tax gap.
There is also indirect evidence that tax shelters cost the government a large and
growing amount of revenue. Several studies have documented a large and growing gap
between the book income reported on public corporations’ financial statements and the
tax income of corporations, which remains even after eliminating what arises from
known differences in the accounting procedures used for book and tax income.10 As the
authors of these studies admit, even the adjusted difference might have nothing at all to
do with either evasion or abusive tax shelters. But as of yet there is no better explanation.
2.3 Corporate Tax Enforcement Resources
There is no disputing that IRS resources devoted to enforcement have dropped
drastically since 1996. Between fiscal years 1996 and 2003, the number of examination
full-time-equivalent positions (revenue agents and tax auditors) dropped by 26 percent,
accompanied by a sharp decline in the fraction of returns that are examined.11 Table 2
shows how this decline in resources translated into declines in the percentage of
corporation returns subject to examination, known as the coverage ratio. As an example,
7

U.S. General Accounting Office (2003, p. 1). The word “unintended” refers to the intentions of the
legislators, not the promoters or taxpayers.
8
U.S. General Accounting Office (2003, p. 13). Several caveats to the estimates are presented there,
including the warning that “Both IRS and contractor officials believe the …results are more useful to
predict returns with abusive shelters than they are to value the size of the abusive shelter problem.” (p. 13)
9
The most widely cited of such estimates is Bankman (1999), who estimated the annual revenue loss from
abusive tax shelters at $10 billion.
10
See Department of the Treasury (1999), Desai (2003), Manzon and Plesko (2001), and Mills, Newberry,
and Trautman (2002).
11
According to IRS (2004b), Table 7a, the number of total examination FTEs was 17,129 in fiscal year
1996, and was 12,612 in 2003.

5

the coverage ratio for corporations with assets between $1 million and $5 million fell
from 7.92 percent to 1.55 percent from fiscal year 1997 to fiscal year 2003, and from
51.67 percent to 29.73 percent for corporations with assets over $250 million. Among
Subchapter C corporations (that are subject to the corporation income tax), the coverage
ratio rises monotonically with size, and the 1500 or so largest companies that are in the
Coordinated Industry Case program are for the most part subject to annual, even
continual, audit. For these companies the decline in enforcement resources would be
reflected not in whether there was an audit, but in the effectiveness of the audit.12
Of course, the declining coverage ratio and possibly declining quality of
examinations could be a cause of increased evasion and abusive shelter use. Although
there is no evidence that establishes this, it would be consistent with the standard
economic model of evasion, discussed below.
3.

The Economics of Corporate Tax Selfishness
3.1 The Economic Theory of Tax Evasion: Demand
The standard economics model of the demand for tax evasion on the part of

taxpayers is spare but powerful.13 It poses the decision about whether to evade and, if so,
how much to evade, as a choice regarding tax evasion as a choice under uncertainty—a
gamble—in which there is a tradeoff between a gain if the evasion is undetected and a

12

Note that as of 2002, the Large and Mid-Size Business Division (LMSB) of IRS was expecting to
increase the portion of its examination resources devoted to combating abusive shelters from 3 percent in
2002 to 20 percent in 2004. See U.S. General Accounting Office (2003, p. 21).
13

There is a large non-economics literature--by criminologists, sociologists, lawyers, and even
anthropologists--on corporate crime generally, that sometimes alludes to corporate tax evasion. The classic
work on criminology that introduced the term “white collar crime” (Sutherland 1940, 1949) paid brief
attention to corporate tax evasion, but didn’t elaborate on its distinctive characteristics. Much of the
modern literature adopts a perspective on corporations that is familiar to economists: looking through the
legal entity to the individuals within the corporation. Conley and O’Barr (1997, p. 6) assert that “to say
that the corporation has engaged in misconduct is to say that some of the people have misbehaved in ways
that the law chooses to attribute to the corporate entity.” Sociologists usually stress that organizational
dynamics can generate actions different from those that individuals might take on their own. For example,
Clinard and Yeager (1980, p. 43) say that “the first step in understanding corporate illegality is to drop the
analogy of the corporation as a person and analyze the behavior of the corporation in terms of what it really
is: a complex organization.”

6

loss if the evasion is detected and penalized.14 In this framework, noncompliance is
determined by the probability of detection and punishment, the penalty structure, and the
risk aversion of the potential evader. The framework is entirely amoral: taxpayers are
neither honest nor dishonest, but merely rational calculators of what is in their best
interest. The fact that tax evasion is illegal is only relevant because, with some
probability, it might incur a penalty. The fact that tax payments finance government
services that the taxpayer values is also completely irrelevant, because each taxpayer in a
large jurisdiction free rides on the tax payments of others.
The existing economics literature on the demand for tax evasion focuses almost
entirely on evasion by individuals, not businesses.15 However, for a number of reasons,
understanding tax noncompliance of large, particularly publicly-held, companies may
require a different conceptual framework. For individuals, it is natural to assume that risk
aversion—meaning that the utility cost of a big penalty is greater than the utility gain
from an equal dollar of tax saving—limits the amount of evasion that is optimal. This
assumption is also plausible for closely-held small businesses whose owners’ wealth is
generally not well-diversified. In these situations, it is clear that the tax situation of the
company and the tax situation of the owners are intimately related, and must be analyzed
simultaneously. But the assumption of risk aversion seems unsatisfactory for a large
publicly-held firm, because presumably the shareholders hold diversified portfolios,
implying that the firm should behave as if it is risk-neutral, even if its shareholders are
not. If the decision-maker acts in a risk-neutral manner, the model must contain some
other factor that rules out corner solutions (i.e., no evasion at all if evasion is worse than a
fair gamble, or reporting no tax liability at all if it is better than fair), such as more

14

The seminal paper is by Allingham and Sandmo (1972). The subsequent economics literature on tax
evasion and enforcement is surveyed in Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998) and in Slemrod and Yitzhaki
(2002).
15
An interesting exception is Andreoni (1992), who likens some business tax evasion to a last-resort loan
from the IRS, with the IRS as a “loan shark;” Rice (1992), discussed below, finds some evidence that is
consistent with this notion. There is also a small literature that addresses tax compliance by firms within the
deterrence framework, assuming a unitary decision-maker. This strand of the literature, nicely reviewed in
Cowell (2004), focuses on how the tax rate, probability of detection and penalty rate affect the two choices
of evasion (usually expressed as the fraction of sales concealed from an output tax) and output, when there
is a costly concealment technology. Some of the models in this tradition assume that the firm is riskaverse, while in others the firm is assumed to behave in a risk-neutral way.

7

evasion increasing the probability of detection or penalties. Changing the standard model
in this way generally does not qualitatively alter the predictions of the model.
The implications of the separation between ownership and control in public
corporations are more intriguing, for two reasons. First, many non-economist scholars,
and some economists, argue that evasion choices made by individuals involve more than
a cost-benefit calculation, and reflect the taxpayer’s sense of duty, perception of the
fairness of the tax system and trust in government and the political system more
broadly.16 There is, to be sure, much experimental and empirical evidence to suggest that
people do not behave as free riders in all situations at all times and that taxpayer behavior
may be affected by both intrinsic motivation (civic virtue, or duty) and extrinsic
motivation (the threat of punishment).17 If increasing extrinsic motivation—say with
more punitive enforcement policies—“crowds out” intrinsic motivation by making
people feel that they pay taxes because they have to, rather than because they want to,
deterrence-based polices may be less effective than the standard economic model of
evasion suggests. In this situation, compliance may be sustained by the perception that
the tax authority acts respectfully toward citizens--while at the same time protecting the
honest from the free rider--by giving taxpayers the benefit of the doubt when it finds a
mistake, by sanctioning small violations more mildly, and by sanctioning large and basic
violations more heavily.
It is, however, an open question whether public corporations’ tax compliance
behavior is motivated by civic virtue, and thereby can be influenced by the factors
outside of the deterrence model such as the perception of fair treatment. For one thing,
much of the behavior in question is arguably about (legal) avoidance, not (illegal)
evasion.18 There is a respectable view with a long tradition that tax avoidance raises no
issues of ethics or virtue. The famed judge Learned Hand said: "Over and over again
courts have said that there is nothing sinister in so arranging one'
s affairs so as to keep
taxes as low as possible. Everybody does so, rich or poor, and all do right, for nobody
owes any public duty to pay more taxes than the law demands. Taxes are enforced

16

These new perspectives on tax evasion are critically reviewed in Slemrod (2003).
Frey (1997 and elsewhere) has presented this argument.
18
This statement applies to much of the tax avoidance behavior of individuals, as well.

17

8

exactions, not voluntary contributions."19 According to this view, not taking optimal
(from the corporation’s point of view) advantage of legal opportunities for tax avoidance
is like giving a gift to government--giving such gifts may reflect civic virtue, but not
giving them is not a sign of ethical failure. But not everyone agrees with Judge Hand.
Referring to the recent spate of (legal) corporate inversions,20 Senator Charles Grassley
of Iowa, the Ranking Republican member of the Finance Committee, remarked that
“these expatriations aren’t illegal, but they’re sure immoral. During a war on terrorism,
coming out of a recession, everyone ought to be pulling together. If companies don’t
have their hearts in America, they ought to get out.”21
Because there is often no clear, bright line between avoidance and evasion,
corporate tax planning is a matter of creative compliance, under which the companies
“set their lawyers to work on the legal form of their activities to package or repackage
them in ways they can claim fall beyond the ambit of disadvantageous, or within the
ambit of advantageous, law.”22 To be sure, creative compliance is facilitated because the
tax law is exceedingly complex and open to alternative interpretations, and this
undoubtedly facilitates ethical rationalizations of positions taken. But how far this is
pushed depends on a willingness to aggressively seek out alternative interpretations and
innovative legal forms that take advantage of gaps in the law, and the unanticipated
effects of combining parts of the law.
Little is known about how and why, holding constant the chance of getting caught
and the penalty for noncompliance, corporations differ among themselves in their
aggressiveness regarding pushing the envelope of the tax law, and whether their behavior
would respond to initiatives designed to strengthen intrinsic motivation. It is plausible
that this is affected by whether the managers view paying taxes as a civic virtue or duty,
and so abusive corporate avoidance has an ethical dimension just as evasion does, and
may be responsive to non-deterrence aspects of the tax system. But a manager acting in
the interest of the shareholders arguably should repress his or her own civic virtues, and
19

Hand (1947).
Inversion refers to when a U.S. corporation liquidates and re-forms as a company incorporated in a lowtax foreign country that operates a territorial system of taxation (that is, it taxes only income earned within
its borders), usually in order to reduce its U.S. tax liability on income earned outside of the United States.
See Desai and Hines (2002).
21
Grassley (2002).
22
McBarnet (2001) develops this perspective.
20

9

not be distracted from profit maximizing. In the classic-modern statement of this view,
Milton Friedman argued that corporate executives as employees of the owners of the
business have a responsibility to increase profits “while conforming to the rules and laws
of society.”23 Friedman directed his argument at those who argue that corporations
should contribute to social causes, which he characterized as spending the stockholders’
money through decreased returns, spending the customers’ money through higher prices,
and spending the employees’ money through lower wages. These causes may or not be
worthwhile, argued Friedman, but the individuals whose money is being spent should
make those decisions on an individual basis. Friedman’s reference to conforming to the
law makes clear that he was not advocating “optimal” tax evasion by corporations. But,
by extension, his argument does apply to tax avoidance in the sense mentioned earlier,
that not pursuing all legal avenues to reduce tax liability constitutes a contribution to
government: if shareholders want to make contributions to the Bureau of Public Debt,
that is their right, but widely-held corporations should not. Presumably, though,
Friedman would approve of a corporation reining in its tax aggressiveness if, for
example, public disclosure of its behavior would damage the public image of the
company and thereby drive away some customers or investors. Responding in this way is
not a contribution to a social cause but rather a defensive investment to increase profits
and, ultimately, share price.24
How tax-aggressive the shareholders want the corporation to be has to be
conveyed to the managers who make such decisions. How this gets conveyed is ignored
in nearly all of the small existing literature on business tax noncompliance, which
assumes that the firm owner makes the tax reporting decision without delegating
decision-making responsibility.25 Although this assumption makes sense for small,
closely-held businesses, in a large, publicly-held corporation decisions about taxes (and,
inter alia, accounting) are not made by the shareholders directly but rather by their
agents, whether that is the chief financial officer or the vice president for taxation. In
23

Friedman (1970).
Many of these issues have been addressed in the context of corporate environmentalism.
25
One exception is Chen and Chu (forthcoming), who investigate corporate tax evasion with a standard
principal-agent model in which a risk-neutral owner of a firm hires a risk-averse manager. They focus on
the efficiency loss due to the separation of management and control, and do not address the relative
efficacy of penalties on the principal and agent, a key focus of Crocker and Slemrod (forthcoming),
discussed below.
24

10

order to align the incentives of the decision-makers with the interests of the shareholders,
the shareholders can tie the decision-makers’ compensation, explicitly or implicitly, to
observable outcomes such as the average effective tax rate or after-tax corporation
profitability that affect the share price, or else tie compensation directly to the share price,
as through the granting of stock options or restricted stock.
In this setting the insights generated by the standard deterrence model of the
demand for evasion may not apply. For example, if penalties for evasion apply to the
agent, the company can alter the compensation contract with the tax director, to offset the
intended consequences of IRS policy. Enforcement strategies directed at the tax director
and at the corporation itself may have different impacts on corporate behavior. Because
each of these policies is available to the government, it is valuable to know whether there
is an a priori reason to prefer one to the other.26
That tax departments are increasingly counted on as innovative profit centers and
that tax managers are increasingly provided incentives to produce profit is consistent with
evidence from a 2001 survey of corporate tax departments.27 Of the various measures
used to evaluate the performance of tax departments, the one most often cited was the
savings, or value added, they provided: 86 percent cited this performance measure, up
from 75 percent in 1997. Of those 86 percent, 63 percent said that this measure affected
the compensation of tax department personnel. The effective tax rate was cited as a
measure used to evaluate performance by 58 percent of respondents, up from 48 percent
in 1997. Furthermore, the number of mentions of each of three possible performance
measures that included the word “accuracy” declined substantially between 1997 and
2001. In a separate survey of Fortune 1000 tax directors, 46 percent of the directors
26

It has not always been that way under U.S. law. Although in the 19th century courts held corporations
responsible for an assortment of crimes under the strict liability rule—that is, when “intent” is not
relevant—courts demonstrated an aversion to punishing corporations for such crimes. Before that the
prevailing doctrine held that (1) corporations are legal artifacts that do not have a mind or soul, and thus
cannot have criminal intent, (2) the corporation is not authorized to do unlawful acts so if they do, they do
in their personal capacity, and (3) fines are injurious to stockholders rather than the agents who are directly
responsible for the violations of the law. It was only in 1909, in New York, C. & H. R. R. Co. v. United
States 212 U.S. 481, that the Supreme Court established clearly that corporations could commit and be
punished for a large class of crimes. See Sutherland (1949, p. 52). The issue of whether corporations can
be punished has a long history. In 1250 Pope Innocent IV stated that corporations could not be
excommunicated because they, unlike their owners, had neither minds nor souls, and therefore could not
sin.
27
Hollingsworth (2002, pp. 67-8).

11

ranked the effective tax rate as the most important factor driving the tax department’s
overall objectives, compared to 16 percent who ranked compliance first. Even more
strikingly, when asked about the single most important factor used to evaluate the
performance of the tax department, 36 percent said the effective tax rate, while none said
accuracy.28
Whether enforcement directed at the company or at the tax director is more
effective can be addressed in a costly state falsification model, in which the tax manager
is assumed to possess private information regarding the extent of legally permissible
reductions in taxable income, and may also lower tax liability through illegal evasion.29
In such a model only the latter has real costs, but the shareholders cannot distinguish
between the two so, to the extent it is incentivized, the tax manager’s compensation must
rely on measures, such as average tax rates, that depend on both legal avoidance and
illegal tax evasion.30 The incentives of the manager to engage in tax evasion are affected
by the nature of the contractual relationship between the shareholders of a firm and the
manager of the company’s tax affairs, and one can characterize formally how the optimal
incentive compensation contract for the manager will change in response to alternative
enforcement policies imposed by the IRS.31 In this model penalties imposed on the
manager directly are more effective in reducing evasion than are those imposed on
shareholders, because the latter are diluted when they are conveyed to the tax decisionmakers via changes in the compensation contract that adjusts partially to the incentives
generated by increased sanctions against illegal evasion.32
This framework provides some insight into a policy initiative that has attracted
some attention recently: public disclosure of certain bottom-line items, such as tax

28

Clark, Martire & Bartolomeo, Inc. (2000).
Crocker and Slemrod (forthcoming).
30
The model assumes that information about how much evasion occurred becomes public information too
late for it to be part of the compensation contract.
31
A literature in the law and economics field investigates the socially optimal division of sanctions on
corporations and individual employees for social harms generally. For example, Kraakman (1984)
emphasizes the possibility that the corporation’s assets are inadequate to pay for the harm. Polinsky and
Shavell (1993) argue that the total magnitude of public sanctions may exceed the sanctions that a firm can
impose on its employees.
32
The model does not consider another possible effect of imposing penalties directly on managers—that
over time tax managers will be drawn from people who have a relatively low cost of a given monetary
penalty.
29

12

liability, from corporation income tax returns.33 It suggests that public disclosure will
facilitate performance-based compensation for corporate tax managers, because it would
enable benchmarking of their performance against the performance of competitors
subject to unobservable but correlated shocks to the company’s own tax situation. Thus,
any reduction in evasion due to corporations’ wish to avoid being publicly labeled a tax
avoider would to some extent be offset by the improved ability of corporations to finetune the incentives for tax minimization they offer their tax directors.
The same modeling framework can address the fact that, as recent corporate
scandals attest to, compensation contracts that reward managerial performance also
reward misreporting by managers of indicators of that performance, such as income. To
be sure, there are principal-agent models that can accommodate either the problem of
“hidden action” (when the actions of the managers are unobservable) or the problem of
“hidden information” (when the information provided by managers cannot be verified),
but not both. Recent research has, though, formalized how the optimal design of
managerial compensation balances incentivizing the managers and minimizing the cost of
falsified information.34 In general the optimal contract does not eliminate accounting
fraud, as to do that would too greatly limit the incentives provided to the manager to take
actions that legitimately increase earnings. The next step in this research agenda is to see
what insights are generated by a model in which both accounting reports and tax reports
can be falsified, and there is some cost to having the two reports diverge. In such a
framework, the proposed new M-3 schedule on corporation tax returns, designed to make
differences between financial accounting income and taxable income more transparent,
increases the amount of information provided to the IRS.
The attention to managerial compensation suggests that any trend toward
increased corporate tax noncompliance could be the result of the proliferation of stock
options and other incentivized compensation. However, this explanation leaves open

33

See Lenter, Shackelford, and Slemrod (2003) for a discussion of the arguments for and against this
proposal.
34
Crocker and Slemrod (2004). See also Goldman and Slezak (2003).

13

whether the relationship is causal or whether both trends resulted from a change in
“corporate culture.”35
The most basic predictions of the deterrence model as it relates to the demand for
corporate tax noncompliance--that higher penalties and higher probabilities of penalties
being imposed deter evasion--have not been subject to much empirical testing. Some
intriguing empirical patterns did emerge from a careful econometric study of small (with
assets between $1 and $10 million in 1980) corporations based on TCMP data.36 It
showed that compliance is positively related to being publicly traded and in a highly
regulated industry, so that characteristics that assure public disclosure of information also
tend to encourage better tax compliance.37 Second, the empirical analysis suggests that
firm profitability exerts two opposing effects. Managers of corporations whose profit
performance falls short of its industry norm may resort to noncompliance as a means of
shaving costs. In contrast, high-profit companies may take advantage of their greater
ability to underreport income without being audited. Finally, although the reporting gap
grows with value added as a measure of firm size, the ratio of noncompliance to valueadded declines with firm size, suggesting that noncompliance is a regressive
phenomenon, at least among this group of smaller companies.38
There is some empirical evidence linking how executives are compensated and
the likelihood of accounting manipulation and fraud. Companies whose CEOs have
relatively high amounts of equity incentives, in the form of unrestricted stock and
immediately exercisable options, are more likely to engage in earnings management by
reporting small earnings increases more than small earnings decreases and also reporting
long strings of increasing earnings.39 Earnings management intensity, as measured by the
absolute value of discretionary accruals, is increasing in the amount of stock-based
35

Anecdotal familiarity with corporate tax departments suggests that there is (or was, until recently) a large
cross-sectional variation in corporate culture relating to tax aggressiveness. What underlies this variation
has not been explored much by economists, although see Kreps (1990) for an essay that relates corporate
culture to establishing a reputation for reasonably resolving unforeseen circumstances. However, because
how tax-aggressive a company is seldom publicly revealed, it is unlikely to affect this sort of reputation.
36
Rice (1992).
37
Tannenbaum (1993) argued the Rice (1992) finding that publicly-traded companies have higher
compliance may have nothing to do with public disclosure, and instead might reflect the fact that publiclytraded companies are more likely to have managers who are independent of its owners, and therefore are
less fearful of commingling the owners’ personal affairs with those of the corporation.
38
See also Morton (1992) on the characteristics of small business tax noncompliance.
39
Ke (2002).

14

compensation (including options) and bonuses, and decreasing in salaries.40 There is
mixed empirical evidence on the relationship between the form of executive
compensation and accounting fraud. An early study based on a sample limited to
companies in high-growth industries found no evidence of a link between executive
compensation (specifically, whether the firm had an earnings-based bonus plan) and SEC
enforcement actions, but a more sophisticated recent analysis of firms accused of
accounting fraud by the SEC found that the probability of accounting fraud is increasing
in the percent of total executive compensation that is stock-based, controlling for the
financing needs and governance characteristics of the firm.41 Thus, there is empirical
support for the notion that a byproduct of incentivizing executive compensation to align
their interest with the shareholders is an increased incentive to falsify accounting reports.
The same may be true of tax reporting, but this has not yet been demonstrated. Nor are
the theoretical issues identical, because with tax evasion there is a third party other than
the shareholders and the managers—the IRS, representing all taxpayers’ interests—and
therefore in some situations both the shareholders and managers can profit at the expense
of the taxpayers.
Finally, there is intriguing evidence linking the tax reporting behavior of
companies to the tax reporting behavior on their personal tax returns of the managers of
these companies. For companies with assets of $10 million or less, noncompliant firms
are three times more likely to be managed by executives who have understated personal
taxes, even when the measure of personal noncompliance excludes business-related
income.42 This result suggests that, at least for relatively small corporations, managerial
preferences play a role in determining corporate tax noncompliance. There is no
systematic evidence demonstrates that this is also true for large public companies, where
the separation of ownership and control is more of an issue, although there is certainly
anecdotal evidence (e.g., Tyco’s accounting fraud and the personal tax evasion of its

40

Gao and Shrieves (2002) and Cheng and Warfield (2002).
Dechow et al. (1996) and Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2004b).
42
Joulfaian (2000). The relationship is less strong when the measure of personal noncompliance excludes
business-related income. This evidence may in part reflect endogenous discovery on the part of the IRS: if
they find that someone evades on their individual tax account, they look at the companies they are involved
with, and vice versa.
41

15

CEO, Dennis Kozlowski) of the two going hand in hand when corporate governance is
inadequate.
3.2 The Industrial Organization of the Tax Shelter Business: Supply
Another shortcoming of the traditional economic model of tax evasion based on
deterrence is that it considers only one side of the market for tax noncompliance—the
demand on the part of taxpayers. The model’s implicit assumption is that there is an
unlimited supply of tax evasion opportunities at a constant “price.” This assumption
seems reasonable when the act of evasion is, as in the traditional tax evasion model
designed with individual evasion in mind, envisioned as a simple underreporting of
income.43 It is a less attractive assumption when the issue is abusive tax shelters, where
there is a sector comprised of companies with specialized information about the tax law
and financial transactions that combine aspects of the tax law to produce highly
complicated tax shelters and market them to corporations.
Many believe that this market has grown substantially in recent years. Fortune
magazine recently reported that “with encouragement from shelter hustlers, a new
attitude is spreading: that the corporate tax department is a profit center all its own, and
that a high effective tax rate is a sign of weakness. ‘A potential client once said he would
hire the firm if we could get their tax rate down, because it was higher than their
competitors'and they were embarrassed,’ says one accountant.”44 The Joint Committee
on Taxation’s report on Enron used the same language, asserting that "Enron'
s tax
department became a source for financial statement earnings, thereby making it a profit
center for the company."45 The former Assistant Secretary of Treasury for Tax Policy,
Pamela F. Olson, also laid part of the blame for abusive tax shelters on the promoters,
asserting that “the sophistication of the transactions, combined with the cultural laxity
engendered among some taxpayers and promoters in the 90’s, made them possible.”46

43

When the act of evasion consist of supplying labor to the informal sector, the return to that activity may
decline as entry increases.
44
Novack (1998).
45
U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation (2003, p. 8).
46
Olson (2003, p. 2).

16

The ubiquity of tax shelters is reflected in a recent survey of the tax professionals
retained by medium-sized corporations.47 It revealed that 69.4 percent had been asked by
clients to look into tax shelters, and 55.5 percent had been approached by promoters
advertising tax shelters; only 7.5 percent admitted actually setting up a tax shelter for a
client. Undoubtedly, nearly all large corporations have been solicited by tax shelter
promoters, and nearly all have considered pursuing them.
Is there a supply-side explanation for the post-1990 growth in tax shelters? There
has been little systematic investigation of this issue, although a number of developments
over this period may have contributed to a reduction in the effective cost of providing a
shelter. One is the availability of increasingly sophisticated financial instruments that
facilitate eliminating the real risk exposure caused by a shelter and thereby isolating the
tax benefits. Another is the consolidation of the shelter business among the Big Five
accounting firms that can amortize the cost of developing a shelter over many purchasers.
Finally, some court decisions that favored a more literal reading of the tax laws reduced
the expected penalties associated with aggressive tax shelters.48
Understanding this sector is particularly important because several recent IRS
enforcement initiatives have focused on the promoters of tax shelters rather than the
taxpayers themselves, in part because of the difficulty of detecting taxpayer use of
shelters even if the IRS has access to the company’s financial information and the tax
return. For example, promoters (and taxpayers) are now required to disclose or register
transactions and maintain investor lists for six categories of transactions: tax avoidance
transactions, transactions that generate large tax losses, transactions that generate large
book-tax differences, transactions with contractual protection, transactions that are
marketed on a confidential basis, and transactions that result in tax credits even though
the underlying assets are held for a brief period of time. The IRS Commissioner has said
that “by auditing promoters and obtaining investor lists, we [IRS] can deter the promotion
of as well the thirst for such products.”49 (Notably, though, there is currently no penalty
for a taxpayer’s failure to disclose a reportable transaction, and the penalties on
promoters for the failure to register a transaction or the failure to maintain lists of
47

Slemrod and Venkatesh (2002).
I thank Joe Bankman for suggesting this characterization of the supply-side changes.
49
Everson (2003, p. 7).
48

17

participating taxpayers are low.) Moreover, Circular 230, which establishes standards of
ethical conduct required of professionals who practice before the IRS, is being reviewed
to see if it can be revised to help curb abusive transactions.
The IRS Commissioner has also stressed the importance of reacting quickly:
“Failure to identify and react to abusive transactions quickly…can allow the transaction
to spread…”50 However, adapting theoretical models of patent races to the case of tax
shelters suggest caution regarding the success of a strategy of reforming tax laws and
regulations to reduce the effectiveness of elaborate tax avoidance techniques as soon as
they are identified. Unless the tax law changes and new regulations can be made
retroactive, which may be undesirable on other grounds, a highly reactive policy may
encourage the rapid development of new tax avoidance techniques by innovators and
thereby place a great premium on being the first to develop and use a new tax avoidance
method.51 It might make more sense for the IRS to immediately publicize the tax
avoidance techniques they uncover, in the hope of discouraging others from subsequently
developing other methods. Indeed, the Treasury is considering implementing “yellow
light” rulings, public announcements that the IRS is aware of and evaluating a class of
transactions, even though the analysis may not be complete.52
The industrial organization of the tax promoter and tax planning business may be
affected by the Sarbanes-Oxley bill passed in 2002. As of now, neither Sarbanes-Oxley
nor Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) rules prohibit a company’s audit firm
from providing tax services that are pre-approved by the company’s audit committee.
However, the SEC distinguished traditional tax compliance and planning services from
the marketing of novel, tax-driven, financial products, referring to the Conference
Board’s Commission on Public Trust and Private Enterprise that, as a “best practice,”
auditors should not provide advice on “novel and debatable tax strategies and products
that involve income tax shelters.”53 The American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants has also suggested that “advice on tax strategies having no business purpose
other than tax avoidance is an appropriate dividing line for activities that should be
50

Everson (2003, p. 4).
This point is made in Hines (2004).
52
Everson (2003, p. 6).
53
Conference Board (2003, p. 36).

51

18

prohibited to auditing firms registered under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act.”54 The newly
formed Public Company Accounting Oversight Board has stated that “by looking at
compensation, promotion, and retention issues, our inspections will identify a firm’s
policies and practices that create incentives for firm audit personnel to promote such
transactions to their clients.”55 At its March 2003 meeting, the Board of Administration
of the California Public Employees’ Retirement System voted unanimously to withhold
its vote for directors if necessary and take additional actions to help ensure the
independence of the external auditor, including that the auditor should not be engaged in
any tax-related consulting work with audit clients outside the scope of the audit .
3.3 Supply Meets Demand
Once we recognize that for some types of abusive avoidance or evasion the
supply side is relevant, we can gain insight from the theory of tax incidence, which
addresses who ultimately bears the burden of a tax or other aspect of the tax system.
Incidence theory suggests that the answer depends on the elasticity of supply relative to
the elasticity of demand. The more elastic is demand relative to supply, the less likely is
the burden likely to reside on the consumer of the taxed product, and the more likely it is
to be shifted away through price changes. Because in the long run the resources used by
tax shelter promoters probably do have good alternative uses—suggesting that the longrun supply elasticity is high—penalties to either the taxpayer or the promoters will in the
long run be borne by the taxpayers. But the short-run incidence may differ, depending on
the structure of the tax shelter sector.
More intriguingly, the foregoing discussion calls into question a fundamental
tenet of tax incidence theory—that the impact of a tax does not depend on which side of
the market remits, or has the legal liability for, the tax. Every public finance textbook
features a supply-and-demand diagram illustrating how the incidence and efficiency
effects of a tax on say, food, will be the same whether the supplier or consumer must pay
the tax. (Sometimes it is unclear whether “pay” means “remit” or “is legally liable for.”)
Of course, any tax administrator will tell you that this ubiquitous textbook assertion is
54
55

AICPA (2003).
McDonough (2003, p. 9).

19

hopelessly naïve. When one accounts for the administrative and compliance costs of
raising taxes, which side of the market remits the tax is not at all a matter of indifference.
Indeed, the issue of whether income taxes should be collected at “source” figures
prominently in the modern history of the income tax. The first modern British income
tax, introduced in 1799 by Prime Minister and Chancellor of the Exchequer William Pitt,
was judged to be a failure, mostly because it raised much less revenue than expected and
was plagued with evasion. Its re-introduction in 1803 by Pitt’s successor Henry
Addington was a success, the key design change being the collection of revenues at
source, which to this day remains the backbone of the British, and most other countries’,
income tax systems.56
The textbook equivalence of Pitt’s and Addington’s income tax did not apply to
Great Britain two centuries ago, nor does it apply in many situations today. The point of
tax collection is not immaterial, and often there are ways for the government to collect
taxes that are economically equivalent according to the textbooks but are not equally
efficient in practice. Consider how taxes on labor income are collected. The legal
liability for the payment of income tax on wages and salaries rests on the worker, but via
withholding employers remit 78 percent of total personal income tax. For most
individual taxpayers, the act of filing a tax return is associated with a refund of money,
not a payment. The IRS correctly believes that it is much more efficient to collect and
monitor taxes remitted by a smaller group of employers compared to taxes remitted by a
hundred million or so employees.
This discussion touches on one of the principal arguments for the corporation
income tax—that it is an efficient way to withhold tax on behalf of shareholders. Richard
Bird of the University of Toronto has stated this argument best: “The key to effective
taxation is information, and the key to information in the modern economy is the
corporation. The corporation is thus the modern fiscal state’s equivalent of the customs
barrier at the border.”57 Even in a completely integrated system, the point of collection
can be either the corporation or the shareholder. Under the latter system, shareholders
would report their share of the pre-corporation earnings as taxable income based on
56
57

The Pitt-Addington episode is wonderfully recounted in Farnsworth (1951).
Bird (1996).

20

information provided to them by the company. If the corporation is the point of
collection, each shareholder would receive a credit against tax liability equal to the share
of corporation income taxes already paid (also based on company-provided information).
As long as the corporate tax rate is near the top of the individual tax rate scale, the filing
of individual tax returns would be, for most taxpayers, an occasion to get refunds rather
than pay additional tax. Even absent integration, the responsibility for remitting a special
tax on corporate-source income could, in principle, rest with the shareholders rather than
with the corporate entity. If the shareholder is the point of collection, no crediting system
is required.
The apparent proliferation of corporate tax shelters challenges the notion that the
corporation is the more efficient node of collection. If there are economies of scale in the
consumption of tax shelters, then collecting tax revenue from corporations might not be
that much more efficient than collecting it from shareholders, after all. Indeed, because
of the possibility of information reporting by corporations and matching this information
with shareholders’ income tax returns, dividend receipts are arguably much easier to
monitor than corporation income.
Resolving this issue brings us back to the separation of ownership and decisionmaking. Consider this question: would a corporation be as tax-aggressive if the tax
savings accrued directly to the shareholders by lowering their personal tax liability, and
not to the corporation? If the answer to this question is yes, then the point of collection is
immaterial to tax shelter policy. I suspect, though, that the answer is no, and that tax
savings that accrue directly to the shareholders would not, on average, be pursued quite
as aggressively by public corporations.
Public corporations also differ from individuals because they must report income
in their financial statements. To be sure, the income concepts and rules governing
financial statement income and taxable income are different. But in some areas, such as
the choice of LIFO or FIFO inventory accounting, they must be the same. There is
abundant evidence that corporations often make accounting decisions that increase tax
liability but allow them to report higher income in their financial statements.58 Indeed,
there is evidence that companies that fraudulently overstated their financial statement
58

See Shackelford and Shevlin (2001) for a review of this evidence.

21

income paid more tax than otherwise by so doing.59 The apparent fact that many
corporate managers are willing to pay more tax in order to report higher income on their
financial statements could possibly be used as a tax enforcement instrument, by linking
tax liability explicitly to financial statement income. Such a system was in place in 1987
and 1988, when the corporate alternative minimum tax base included one-half of any
positive difference between financial statement income and taxable income.
This discussion about the positive economics of corporate tax reporting behavior
highlights that there is a wide range of possible policy responses to corporate tax
selfishness. First are the demand-side, deterrence instruments, such as increasing the
probability of detection of evasion and the attendant penalties, with particular attention to
whether the penalties are assessed on the corporation, corporate executives, or on the
firms or individuals that comprise the supply side of tax shelters, promoters and so on.
Second are policies that rely on the particular characteristics of the supply side of tax
shelters, such as rules about disclosure of certain transactions to the IRS and public
disclosure of the IRS regarding questionable tax arrangements it is investigating. The
third, more loosely defined, policy category focuses on the unique nature of public
corporations as a point of tax remittance. It includes tying dividend tax relief to corporate
tax payments,60 public disclosure of corporate tax liabilities, and an alternative minimum
tax based on financial statement income.
4.

Why Should We Care?
Corporate tax evasion and abusive tax avoidance are matters of public policy

concern because they affect the fairness of the distribution of the tax burden as well as the
resource cost of raising taxes--bread-and-butter concerns of public economics. What
insights can an economics perspective offer to policy makers?
According to the economic theory of taxation, the incidence of corporation taxes
must be traced back to which people ultimately bear the burden of taxation-- be they the
59

See Erickson, Hanlon, and Maydew (2004a).
The law could require corporations to have paid least the full 35 percent corporate tax rate on the amount
of income that underlies any dividends in order for the dividends to qualify for preferential personal
taxation. A variant of this approach was part of the 2003 Bush administration corporate tax proposal, but it
did not survive in the legislation that established a maximum 15 percent tax rate on dividends.
60

22

company’s shareholders, managers, workers, or customers; from this perspective, it is not
interesting or even meaningful to say corporations are worse off or better off as a result
of a particular tax change. How the burden of the corporation income tax is distributed
among these groups remains highly controversial, and economic analysis focuses on how
the tax is shifted through its effect on the pre-tax rate of return, the prevailing wage rate,
and the relative price of corporate-produced goods. Note, though, that the theory of
corporation income tax incidence addresses a tax policy that applies generally to all
corporations. A singular act of evasion does not, by definition, apply to all corporations.
Although a policy that facilitates evasion for all corporations might attract entry and
thereby be shifted to customers through lower prices, a successful act of evasion by one
corporation will not be met by increased pressure from competitors. Thus, the windfall
gains to those companies that successfully play the tax lottery by acting aggressively
probably accrue to the shareholders in their role as residual claimants, shared to some
extent with the tax managers through incentivized compensation contracts.
If there are particular characteristics of corporations in certain sectors that
facilitate evasion or abusive avoidance, such as the presence of corporate intangibles, the
apparent gains that accrue to firms in these sectors via a lower effective tax rate will be
partially eroded to the extent that competitors have similar characteristics, and partly
benefit some other constituency, including this sector’s customers. The same argument
applies to the incidence of increasing deterrence instruments, such as the penalties for
detected evasion. As discussed earlier, the industrial organization of the tax shelter
promoter business will also be a factor in determining how the tax savings are shared
among the taxpayers and the tax shelter promoters. For example, if the promoter
business is perfectly competitive with free entry, in the long run most of the gains from
tax shelter “innovation” will accrue to the taxpayers; if not, some of the gain will accrue
to the promoters via high fees.61
Policies toward evasion and avoidance can, and should, also be evaluated as to
how they affect the resource cost of raising taxes. The tools of efficiency analysis and
optimal taxation can be extended in a fairly straightforward way so that they cover
enforcement policy instruments, such as the audit rate and penalties for detected tax
61

See Gergen (2002) for a related discussion. The insights of Hines (2004) also apply to this issue.

23

misreporting.62 Doing so reveals that tax policy instruments should be utilized so as to
equalize the marginal efficiency cost per dollar of revenue raised, which should in turn
equal the marginal social benefit of raising revenue. Expanding enforcement until the
marginal additional revenue collected equals the marginal cost is, upon reflection, the
wrong rule, because it mistakenly equates a transfer from the private sector to the public
sector with the marginal social benefit of raising revenue.63
Opportunities for tax evasion and abusive avoidance can distort resource
allocation in a variety of ways. It can cause inter-sectoral distortions because, for
example, companies that otherwise would not find it attractive might have a financial
subsidiary, or set up operations in a tax haven, to facilitate or camouflage abusive
avoidance or evasion.
An important and fascinating question concerns the relationship between evasion
or abusive avoidance and aggregate corporate activity. Could cracking down on this
behavior decrease corporate investment, because it eliminates what was essentially a doit-yourself tax cut? The answer depends on the relationship between the marginal cost to
the taxpayer of avoiding (if there were no cost, no tax would be paid) and the volume of
investment it undertakes.64 If there is no relationship, then cracking down on avoidance
and thereby increasing its cost will not decrease investment. More likely, the private cost
of a given (absolute, not relative) level of avoidance is lower when the scale of real
operations is higher, so that there is an implicit subsidy to investment. For example,
shifting a given amount of taxable income to a low-tax country is more likely to escape
transfer pricing rules the larger is the amount of real activity in the low-tax country. If
this is true, an “avoidance facilitating” effect makes real investment in the low-tax
country more attractive than otherwise, because increasing the scale of operations allows
more avoidance.

62

See Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1996) for how to generalize optimal taxation theory to cover enforcement
policy, and the pitfalls of doing so.
63
The question of optimal enforcement has an interesting international dimension. From the point of view
of any one country, it makes more sense to go after tax shifted out of the United States by a U.S. taxpayer
to another country as opposed to purely domestic evasion, because the U.S. taxpayer is at the margin
indifferent to which treasury the payment is made. From a global perspective, which treasury receives the
tax is only a distributional question, implying too many enforcement resources are devoted to enforcement
of cross-border income shifting.
64
This reasoning is developed in Slemrod (2001).

24

Neither tax evasion nor abusive tax avoidance directly creates value. Rather, tax
selfishness of either form is about rent seeking—transferring resources to the successfully
tax-minimizing company (more specifically, its stakeholders), and away from all other
taxpayers or beneficiaries of government programs. Consider the following thought
experiment: what if all corporate taxpayers were equally successful at reducing their tax
liability by the same percentage, and in response the government increased corporate tax
rates to maintain its corporate tax revenues? In this case, we are all back where we
started, with no valuable new consumer products created and new techniques for
producing the same products more efficiently. In fact, society is worse off than where we
started, because the process of tax planning and tax minimization is expensive. On
average the compliance cost of the federal and state income tax systems for a Fortune 500
company is more than $2 million.65 For mid-sized companies, the aggregate compliance
cost is about $22 billion.66 Not all of the compliance costs are associated with tax
planning done voluntarily by the corporation to reduce its effective tax rate. Some of it is
old-fashioned compliance cost—cost-center overhead rather than profit-center
investment—incurred in the prosaic chores of keeping records, calculating tax, and filing
the necessary forms. Much of the cost is, though, associated with the effort to bring tax
payments down. Indeed, there is evidence that, for large companies, higher compliance
costs are associated with a lower effective tax rate, other things equal, suggesting that at
least some of these costs represent tax planning.67
All of this cost, whether voluntarily incurred or not, represents a cost to the
nation. What is done voluntarily will generally be a good investment ex ante from the
company’s, or the shareholders’, perspective, but from the country’s point of view it
represents a deadweight loss. It is the responsibility of government to choose a tax
enforcement policy that minimizes the sum of the cost of enforcement and compliance
(and distortions to private behavior) while raising revenue in an equitable way. This is
the best we can do given the existing level of civic virtue. Perhaps exhortations to

65

Slemrod and Blumenthal (1996).
Slemrod and Venkatesh (2002).
67
Mills, Erickson, and Maydew (1998).

66

25

corporations to abandon tax minimization may enable the IRS to back off a bit, but I am
doubtful that the intrinsic motivation for corporate tax payments is a strong force.68
5. Policy
This is not the place to attempt a comprehensive evaluation of public policy
toward corporate tax evasion and abusive tax avoidance. But hopefully the foregoing
discussion sheds some light on the policy options. The standard deterrence model
suggests that evasion will decline if more enforcement resources can increase the
probability of detection, and if the penalties applied upon detection are increased. A
deterrence model of large publicly-owned corporations focuses attention on to whom the
penalties should be applied, and on the relationship of tax enforcement policy and
accounting policy. The standard model also presumes that evasion is detected
immediately upon audit, but the complexity and opacity of abusive tax shelter
arrangements imply that policy be focused on inducing disclosure of information to the
IRS, and on the supply side of the tax shelter promoter business. Public disclosure of tax
shelter information and book-tax differences may reduce the return to tax shelter
schemes, but the timing of the release is likely to be critical. Public disclosure of the tax
liability of corporations may focus public and legislative attention on the tax system and
might possibly “shame” corporations into being less aggressive, but this can’t be counted
on and may even backfire if it facilitates the benchmarking of corporate tax department
performance against the performance of competitors and causes a race to the bottom.
Imposing a tax cost on the divergence of financial statement income and taxable income
might to some extent harness for tax enforcement the value managers appear to place on
public reports of profitability.
Beyond the scope of this paper is the issue of to what extent policies addressed at
enforcement of corporate tax evasion and abusive avoidance are inherently difficult
because of the fundamental incoherency of the existing, or any, income tax. There is
something to this argument, although it is not very helpful for evaluating enforcement
68

Although it is unlikely that any one corporation will unilaterally abandon tax planning (doing so could
expose it to shareholder suits), corporate associations might facilitate voluntary restraint, if only to forestall
more onerous anti-shelter legislation. Even this is made less likely by the specter of competitors from
foreign countries who are not members of these associations.

26

policy under the current tax system. We must also be careful not to presume that
alternative tax systems that exist only in blueprint would be immune to inconsistencies
and shelter opportunities once hundreds of billion dollars of tax payments are in play.69
6. Research Agenda
The policy and practice of corporate tax avoidance and evasion are ahead of
economic theory and empirical analysis. This may be inevitable, given the inherent
difficulty of obtaining information about practices that are either definitely or arguably
illegal. A larger methodological issue lurks, as well. Our empirical understanding of
corporate behavior depends mostly on two sources of data, (publicly-available) financial
statements and (confidential, but characterized in aggregated form) tax returns. Both
sources of data are snapshots of what the corporate taxpayer wants some audience—
either the investing public or the IRS--to see, and are not necessarily accurate portrayals
of the real, underlying activities or the financial status of the taxpayer. In recent years
many investors have been reminded of this fact the hard way. We academics may be
misled along with the investors and the IRS if we ignore this and blithely assume the
reports to be the unvarnished truth.
We should be challenged, and not distracted, by this conundrum. There is a set of
empirical questions on which we can make progress, such as the interaction between
sheltering and real decisions, the cross-sectional determinants of corporate evasion and
the use of abusive tax shelters, and how accounting rules and enforcement affect tax
reporting and real decisions. There are subtle policy questions, such as the impact of
public disclosure of corporate tax return information, linking tax liability to financial
statement income, and the impact of penalties on corporate directors and abusive tax
shelter promoters, to which clear thinking about the demand and supply of tax evasion
and abusive avoidance can contribute.

69

For example, see Weisbach (2000) for a discussion of the loopholes that might arise under a HallRabushka flat tax.

27

References
Allingham, Maurice and Agnar Sandmo. “Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical
Analysis.” Journal of Public Economics 1 No. 3-4 (November, 1972): 323-338.
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. “SEC Proposals on Auditor
Independence, Non-Audit Services Affect Tax Practitioners.” The CPA Letter 83
(February/March, 2003).
Andreoni, James. “IRS as Loan Shark: Tax Compliance with Borrowing Constraints.”
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 49 No. 1 (October, 1992): 35-46.
Andreoni, James, Brian Erard, and Jonathan Feinstein. “Tax Compliance.” Journal of
Economic Literature 36 No. 2 (June, 1998): 818-860.
Bankman, Joseph. “Letters to the Editor.” Tax Notes 83 (June 21, 1999): 1813.
Bird, Richard M. “Why Tax Corporations?” Working Paper 96-2, prepared for the
Technical Committee on Business Taxation, Canada, December 1996.
Chen, Kong-Ping, and C.Y. Cyrus Chu. “Internal Control vs. External Manipulation: A
Model of Corporate Income Tax Evasion.” RAND Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Cheng, Qiang, and Terry D. Warfield. “Stock-based Compensation, Earnings
Management, and the Informativeness of Earnings.” University of Washington and
University of Wisconsin Working Paper. Seattle, WA and Madison, WI: University of
Washington and University of Wisconsin, 2002.
Clark, Martire & Bartolomeo. A Study of Fortune 1000 Tax Directors, prepared for
KPMG, December, 2000.

28

Clinard, Marshall B. and Peter C. Yeager. Corporate Crime. New York and London:
The Free Press, 1980.
Conference Board. Commission on Public Trust and Private Enterprise. 2003. Findings
and Recommendations. Part 3: Audit and Accounting. The Conference Board, Inc.
January 9.
Conley, John M. and William M. O’Barr. “Crime and Custom in Corporate Society: A
Cultural Perspective on Corporate Misconduct.” Law and Contemporary Problems 60
Nos. 3&4 (Summer & Autumn, 1997): 5-22.
Cowell, Frank. “Sticks and Carrots.” In The Crisis in Tax Administration, edited by
Henry Aaron and Joel Slemrod. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press
(forthcoming, 2004): 230-275.
Crocker, Keith and Joel Slemrod. “Corporate Tax Evasion with Agency Costs.” Journal
of Public Economics, forthcoming.
Crocker, Keith and Joel Slemrod. “The Economics of Managerial Compensation and
Accounting Fraud: A Problem of Contract Design in the Presence of Hidden Information
and Hidden Actions.” University of Michigan Business School working paper. Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan, October, 2003.
Dechow, Patricia, Richard Sloan, and Amy Sweeney. “Causes and Consequences of
Earnings Manipulations: An Analysis of Firms Subject to Enforcement Actions by the
SEC.” Contemporary Accounting Research 13 No. 1 (1996): 1-36.
Department of the Treasury. The Problem of Corporate Tax Shelters: Discussion,
Analysis, and Legislative Proposals, July, 1999.

29

Desai, Mihir. “The Divergence between Book Income and Tax Income.” In Tax Policy
and the Economy, Volume 17, edited by James M. Poterba: 169-206. Cambridge: NBER
and MIT Press, 2003.
Desai, Mihir, and James R. Hines Jr. “Expectations and Expatriations: Tracing the
Causes and Consequences of Corporate Inversions.” National Tax Journal 55, No. 3
(September, 2002): 409-40.
Erickson, Merle, Michelle Hanlon and Edward Maydew. “How Much Will Firms Pay for
Earnings That Do Not Exist? Evidence of Taxes Paid on Allegedly Fraudulent
Earnings?” The Accounting Review (April, 2004a), forthcoming.
Erickson, Merle, Michelle Hanlon and Edward Maydew. “Is There a Link between
Executive Compensation and Accounting Fraud?” Working paper, University of
Chicago, University of North Carolina, and University of Michigan, 2004b.
Everson, Mark W. Testimony before Senate Finance Committee. Washington, D.C.,
October, 21, 2003.
Farnsworth, A. Addington: Author of the Modern Income Tax. London: Stevens &
Sons, 1951.
Frey, Bruno. "A Constitution for Knaves Crowds Out Civic Virtues." Economic Journal
107 No. 443 (July, 1997): 1043-53.
Friedman, Milton. “The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profits.”
New York Times Magazine (September 13, 1970).
Gao, Pengjie and Ronald Shrieves. “Earnings Management and Executive
Compensation: A Case of Overdose of Option and Underdose of Salary?” Northwestern
University and University of Tennessee at Knoxville working paper, 2002.

30

Gergen, Mark P. “The Logic of Deterrence: Corporate Tax Shelters.” Tax Law Review
55 (2002): 255.
Goldman, Eitan and Steve L. Slezak. “The Economics of Fraudulent Misreporting.”
University of North Carolina and University of Cincinnati working paper, November 3,
2003.
Grassley, Charles. Grassley Announces Bill to Rein in Corporate Expatriation. Press
Release. Washington, D.C., April 11, 2002.
Hand, Judge Learned. Commissioner v. Newman, 159 F.2d 848 (2nd Cir., 1947,
dissenting opinion).
Hines, James R. Jr. “On the Timeliness of Tax Reforms.” Journal of Public Economics
88, No. 5 (April, 2004): 1043-59.
Hollingsworth, Tracy. Manufacturers Alliance/MAPI Survey of Corporate Tax
Departments—4th Edition. Arlington, VA: Manufacturers Alliance/MAPI, 2002.
Internal Revenue Service. Interactive Tax Gap Map. National Headquarters Office of
Research, March 31, 2004a.
Internal Revenue Service. Audit Information Management System Closed Case
Database, personal correspondence with IRS, June 14, 2004b.
Johnson, Shane A., Harley E. Ryan, and Yisong S. Tian. “Executive
Compensation and Corporate Fraud.” Louisiana State University working paper, 2002.
Joulfaian, David. “Corporate Income Tax Evasion and Managerial Preferences.” Review
of Economics and Statistics 82 No. 4 (November, 2000): 698-701.

31

Ke, Bin. “Why Do CEOs of Publicly Traded Corporations Prefer Reporting Small
Increases in Earnings and Long Duration of Consecutive Earnings Increases?”
Pennsylvania State University Working Paper. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State
University, 2002.
Kraakman, R.H. “Corporate Liability Strategies and the Costs of Legal Controls.” Yale
Law Journal 93 (1984): 857-898.
Kreps, David M. “Corporate Culture and Economic Theory.” In Perspectives on
Positive Political Economy, edited by J. Alt and K. Shepsle, 90-143. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Lenter, David, Douglas Shackelford, and Joel Slemrod. “Public Disclosure of Corporate
Tax Return Information: Accounting, Economics and Legal Issues.” National Tax
Journal 56 No. 4 (December, 2003): 803-830.
McBarnet, Doreen. “When Compliance Is Not the Solution But the Problem: From
Changes in Law to Changes in Attitude.” Centre for Tax System Integrity Working
Paper No. 18. Canberra, ACT: Australian National University, Research School of
Social Sciences, August, 2001.
McDonough, William J. Testimony before Senate Finance Committee. Washington,
D.C., October 21, 2003.
Manzon, G., Jr. and George Plesko. “The Relation between Financial and Tax Reporting
Measures of Income.” Tax Law Review 55 No. 2 (2001): 175-214.
Mills, Lillian, Merle Erickson, and Edward Maydew. “Investments in Tax Planning,”
Journal of the American Taxation Association 20 No. 1 (Spring, 1998) 1-20.

32

Mills, Lillian, Kaye Newberry, and William B. Trautman. “Trends in Book-Tax Income
and Balance Sheet Differences.” IRS Research Bulletin, Publication 1500. Washington,
DC: Government Printing Office, 2002.
Morton, Carolyn M. “Trends in the Compliance of Small Corporations.” IRS Research
Bulletin, Publication 1500. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office, December,
1992.

Novack, Janet. “The Hustling of X-Rated Shelters.” Fortune (December 14, 1998).
Olson, Pamela F. Testimony before Senate Finance Committee. Washington, D.C.,
October 21, 2003.
Petrick, Kenneth A. Corporate Profits: Profits before Tax, Profits Tax Liability, and
Dividends. Methodology paper. U.S. Department of Commerce, Economics and
Statistics Administration, Bureau of Economic Analysis, September 2002.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell. “Should Employees Be Subject to Fines and
Imprisonment Given the Existence of Corporate Liability?” International Review of Law
and Economics 13 (1993): 239-257.
Rice, Eric. “The Corporate Tax Gap: Evidence on Tax Compliance by Small
Corporations.” In Why People Pay Taxes, edited by Joel Slemrod, 125-161. Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan, 1992.
Shackelford, Douglas, and Terrence Shevlin. “Empirical Tax Research in
Accounting.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 31 (2001): 321-87.
Slemrod, Joel. “A General Model of the Behavioral Response to Taxation.”
International Tax and Public Finance 8 No. 2 (March, 2001): 119-128.

33

Slemrod, Joel. “Trust in Public Finance.” In Public Finance and Public Policy in the
New Century edited by Sijbren Cnossen and Hans-Werner Sinn. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2003: 49-88.
Slemrod, Joel, and Marsha Blumenthal. “The Income Tax Compliance Cost of Big
Business.” Public Finance Quarterly 24 No. 4 (October, 1996): 411-38.

Slemrod, Joel, and Varsha Venkatesh. The Income Tax Compliance Costs of Large and
Mid-Sized Businesses. Report to the Internal Revenue Service Large and Mid-Size
Business Division. Washington, D.C., September, 2002.

Slemrod, Joel and Shlomo Yitzhaki. “The Cost of Taxation and the Marginal Efficiency
Cost of Funds.” International Monetary Fund Staff Papers. Vol. 43, No. 1 (May, 1996):
25-34.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki. “Tax Avoidance, Evasion, and Administration.” In
Handbook of Public Economics, Volume 3, edited by Alan Auerbach and Martin
Feldstein. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science, North-Holland, 2002: 1423-1470.

Sutherland, Edwin H. “White Collar Criminality.” American Sociological Review 5
(February, 1940): 1-12
Sutherland, Edwin H. White Collar Crime. New York: The Dryden Press, 1949.
Tannenbaum, Robert. “Corporate Tax Disclosure: Good or Bad for the
Commonwealth?” Working paper prepared for the Massachusetts Special Commission
on Business Tax Policy, May 28, 1993.
U.S. Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. Tax Compliance Activities
Report. Washington, D.C., April, 2002.

34

U.S. General Accounting Office. Challenges Remain in Combating Abusive Tax
Shelters. Testimony before the Senate Finance Committee on Finance. Washington,
D.C., October 21, 2003.
U.S. General Accounting Office. IRS’ Tax Gap Studies. GAO/GGD-88-66BR.
Washington, D.C., 1988.
U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation. Report of Investigation of Enron
Corporation and Related Entities Regarding Federal Tax and Compensation Issues, and
Policy Recommendations (JCS-3-03). Washington, D.C., February, 2003.
Weisbach, David. “Ironing Out the Flat Tax.” Stanford Law Review 52 No. 3 (February,
2000): 599-664.

35

Table 1
NIPA Estimate of Misreporting on Corporate Income Tax Returns, 1988-2000
Ratio of Misreporting
to Misreporting
Misreporting
Total Receipts Less
Plus Total Receipts
Estimate ($bil.)
Total Deductions ($bil.)
Less Total Deductions (%)
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

60.9
66.7
65.2
67.6
70.7
72.5
78.1
85.7
94.1
107.7
119.5
136.1
146.8

412.1
391.6
378.8
352.1
415.0
507.9
585.1
717.8
797.6
905.5
834.5
925.4
914.2

Source: National Income and Product Accounts, Table 7.16, lines 1 and 2.

36

12.9
14.6
14.7
16.1
14.6
12.5
11.8
10.7
10.6
10.6
12.5
12.8
13.8

Table 2
Examination Coverage Percentages for Corporations, by Asset Class
Fiscal Years 1996-2003

Corporation income tax returns, total
Balance sheet returns by size of
total assets:
Under $250,000
$250,000 under $1,000,000
$1,000,000 under $5,000,000
$5,000,000 under $10,000,000
$10,000,000 under $50,000,000
$50,000,000 under $100,000,000
$100,000,000 under $250,000,000
$250,000,000 or more
No balance sheet returns

1996
2.34

1997
2.73

1998
2.09

1999
1.54

2000
1.13

2001
0.96

2002
0.97

2003
0.88

1.04
2.76
6.64
14.08
19.88
21.29
27.57
49.61
1.13

1.20
3.58
7.92
16.40
20.59
20.23
24.15
51.67
1.19

0.77
2.52
6.39
13.51
17.99
18.18
19.59
38.34
0.96

0.46
1.68
4.92
10.27
14.86
16.36
18.68
35.13
0.67

0.30
1.10
2.97
7.01
11.69
14.79
17.63
32.41
0.62

0.25
0.78
2.05
5.33
9.67
12.38
17.82
33.04
0.66

0.24
0.76
2.08
4.63
7.79
10.68
15.91
34.39
0.93

0.24
0.64
1.55
3.46
6.23
9.78
12.99
29.73
1.22

Source: IRS (2004b).

37

