                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              LENGTH OF SERVICE AND THE OPERATION
                  OF INTERNAL LABOR MARKF2S




                      Katharine   G. Abraham
                        James   L. Medoff


                     Working Paper No. 1085




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                           March 1983




We are grateful to Jon Fay and Martin Van Denburgh for their
invaluable assistance on this project. The study has been sup-
ported by the National Science Foundation (Grant SES 82—08—539).
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #1085
                                                     March 1983




                   Length of Service and the Operation
                        of Internal Labor Markets




                                ABSTRACT




       This paper presents a suxmnary of the evidence which has recently

been   collected concerning the role of length of service in the operation
of internal labor markets. It argues       that these data are inconsistent

with the human capital model of the experience_earnings and experience—

layoff relationships. The paper concludes by asserting that if we are

ever to fully understand the role of service, new data are needed.




Katherine G. Abraham                             James L. Medoff
Sloan School of Management                       Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology            Harvard University
E52—453D                                         Littauer Center 115
Cambridge,   Massachusetts   02139               Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

(617) 253—2661                                    (617) 495—4209
                                        1




     Everyone knows that employees with more years of service at a company

normally receive higher pay than comparable employees who have spent less time

with the same firm.' Within the economics profession, the conventional wisdom

of the 1960s and 1970s has been that the observed higher relative earnings of

employees with longer service reflect greater accumulation of human capital

through on—the—job training and thus higher relative productivity.2 There

are, however, numerous other plausible explanations for the higher relative

earnings of employees with longer service in which relative productivity plays

a much less significant role. For instance, Jacob Mincer recognized the

possibility that the positive association between job tenure and earnings

might only "reflect the prevalence of institutional arrangements such as

seniority provisions in employment practices." He then implicitly describes

one approach to testing the human capital belief: "Such practices, however,

do not contradict the productivity—augmenting hypothesis, unless it can be

shown that growth of earnings under seniority provisions is largely

independent of productivity growth."3

     Although the test required to establish empirically that the human

capital explanation of the company service—earnings profile is superior to

alternaUve .iodels in which other factors determine earnings growth seems

straightforward,   there is no evidence demonstrating that tenure—earnings
differentials can   in fact be explained by tenure—productivity differentials.

As a result, important beliefs about earnings differentials and related

labor market phenomena have been held without any apparent empirical foundation.
                                       2




     Our work on the operation of enterprise internal labor markets has

produced very strong evidence that at least the within—grade or within—job

fraction of the observed return to years of company service (40 to 80 percent

of the total return to company service in the settings for which we have seen

data) cannot be explained on the basis of an underlying relationship between

service and productivity. Furthermore, we have collected survey data which

imply that years of service play a significant role in promotion decisions for

a very large fraction of our country's workforce; for those employees, the

cross—grade or cross—job earnings differential associated with service must

also be considered at least in part a return to service per se.   It would thus

appear that junior workers are typically paid less, and senior workers more,

than the value of their marginal product. One might expect this sort of

deferred compensation scheme to be accompanied by constraints on firms'

ability to cheat workers out of the return promised for the "second half" of

their work lives; we hae gathered evidence that senior employees at most U.S.

firms do in fact enjoy substantial protection against being involuntarily

terminated. Our results raise the intriguing question of why senior workers

receive higher earnings than their junior peers, even though they are no more

productive.

     The remainder of this paper discusses how the facts just stated were

discovered and the necessity for the collection of additional facts if we are

to hold empirically—based beliefs about why service per se plays such an

important role in private sector U.S. enterprises.
                                      3



The Facts on Service—Earnings Differentials
Within Grades or Jobs

     To determine whether service—earnings differentials can be explained by

service—productivity differentials, it is necessary to search for measures of

individuals' relative contributions to their firms. We looked first at the

computerized personnel files for exempt (roughly, managerial and professional)

employees of four major U.S. corporations; each file had information on

individuals' job performance, company service, and earnings. At three of

these companies the performance ratings were done by the employee's immediate

supervisor; at the fourth, in addition to the immediate supervisor's rating,

there was a ranking of each employee relative to others in an appropriate

comparison group. Later, }Ialasz gained access to a comparable data set for a

sample of nonexempt salaried employees.4

     Under all of the companies' evaluation procedures, supervisors are

instructed to base their rating or ranking on how well an individual, in the

year of evaluation, is carrying out the responsibilities of his or her job.

Thus, a performance review should reflect an employee's current level of

performance relative to the level of performance deemed normal for someone in

his or her position. It follows that the relative contributions of employees

can be assessed from their performance ratings only if the employees hold

similar jobs.

     For compensation purposes, most companies assess the relative importance

and difficulty of their myriad exempt and nonexempt salaried positions and

group them into grade levels. Thus, it seems reasonable to assume that within

a grade level, a higher performance rating implies higher productivity. It is

for this reason that we, and }Lalasz, were forced to look within grades in
                                        4




 doing our analysis of the determinants of service—earnings differentials.

 Fortunately, however, the portion of the total return to years of service

 occurring within grade was between 40 and 50 percent of the total differential

 for our four samples of white, male, exempt employees and 50 percent for

 Halasz's sample of nonexempt salaried employees.

      The key finding of these analyses was that none of the substantial,

within—grade, service—earnings differentials could be explained by a within—

grade, service—performance differential. Contrary to what would be expected

under the on—the—job training model, while greater service moved employees

toward the upper tail of the earnings distribution for their grade level, it

did not move them toward the upper tail of the relevant performance

distribution. Once employees are assigned to grades, the salary advantage

that accrues with company service appears to be automatic, and hence,

independent of productivity.

     This result has been challenged on two grounds. First, it has been

charged that the estimated service—performance differential is biased downward

since a negative partial correlation between years of service and unobserved

quality was induced by the necessity of looking only within grade levels.

(This bias would be brought about by a promotion system under which merit at

least sometimes prevails over seniority, so that longer service within grade

implies more times passed over for promotions.) Second, it has been claimed

that performance ratings, even for samples of white males, are not valid

indicators of relative productivity.

     There likely is a negative within—grade correlation between service and

ability (largest in absolute value for exempt employees and smallest in
                                      5




absolute value for unionized hourly workers), so that the estimated within—

grade effect of service on performance is probably biased downward. It must

be remembered, however, that the estimated within—grade effect of service on

earnings is biased downward in the same way. The goal of the analyses of

employees' positions in the relevant performance and salary distributions was

not to derive consistent estimates of the effect of service on either

performance or salary. Rather, they were intended to yield an answer to the

question: Can performance explain the substantial within—grade earnings

advantage enjoyed by longer—service salaried employees at the firms we have

studied? Our answer of 'no" does not depend on the consistency of the

estimate of the impact of service on performance or on earnings. All that the

response depends on is that the difference between these two estimated service

effects (which have been made comparable through the construction of the

performance and earnings categories used in the models estimated) be a

consistent estimate of ihe difference between the two "true" service effects.

We know of no reason why it should not be.

     In our previously cited articles on the issue at hand, we go to great

lengths to address the most likely criticisms of subjective performance

ratings. In light of what we have been able to learn from our review of the

relevant personnel literature, from the case studies we have done, and from

various analyses with company personnel data, we feel very comfortable

assuming that performance ratings are good indicators of employees' relative

productivity in the year of evaluation. The diverse evidence we have seen

seems to support strongly the interpretation that we have given to our results
                                       6




 concerning the ability of rated performance to explain the within—grade return

to years of service.

     Further support for our conclusion regarding within—grade service—

earnings differentials can be derived from a recent econometric case study

done by Yanker in which an "objective" productivity measure is used to conduct

an analysis like those just discussed.5    Yanker examined

productivity and earnings data for approximately 400 blue collar employees at

a unionized manufacturing plant. The productivity measure used was equal to

the time a worker took to do his or her job divided by the standard time for

performing the job. The study found that none of the within—job service—

earnings differential (80 percent of the total service—earnings differential)

could be explained on the basis of more senior workers having higher

productivity.

     An appendix to this paper summarizes the studies just mentioned, plus

twenty—one other studies relating some index of productive value to tenure or

age in various settings.   These analyses examined employees within disparate

occupations: production workers (in the wooden household furniture, footwear,

and apparel industries); scientists; engineers; teachers; mail sorters; and

office workers. Fourteen of these additional studies used objective measures

of productive value including: furniture, shoes, or apparel produced;

publications; patents; students' standardized test scores; mail sorted; pages

typed; items filed; or cards punched. This research provides support for the

proposition that, beyond a typically short orientation period, those who have

greater than average service typically perform no better or less well than

those with similar assignments who have less than average service. When
                                           7




considered together with    the   evidence from various sources that wages have a

strong positive relationship with tenure within occupational group, these

investigations strongly imply that more (less) senior employees are generally

paid uiore (less) than the value of their marginal product. Extant evidence on

service—productivity differentials seems to have the same implication about

the role of productivity in explaining within—grade or within—job service—

earnings differentials whether the index of relative productive value is based

on an •'objective" measure or on a subjective" performance rating.



The Facts on the Role of Service per se
in Promotion Decisions

         To determine whether the 20 to 60 percent of the monetary return to years

of company service that occurs across grades can be explained in terms of a

service—productivity differential, it is necessary to understand the role of

service independent of productivity in promotion decisions. To take a step in

this direction, we surveyed a randomly selected sample of 1,025 Standard and

Poor's companies about, among other things, the conditions under which a

junior employee would be promoted ahead of a senior coworkers who was not as

good a performer.6 The question asked was:

         In actual practice, are junior employees prornted
         instead of more senior employees who want the job?

 (   ) Yes,   if it is believed that the junior employee will do better than
         the senior employee on the next job or on later jobs.

 (   ) Yes,   if it is believed that the junior employee viii do significantly
         better than the senior employee on the next job or on later jobs.

 (   )   No, never.
                                        8



 The responses to this query are summarized in Table 1.      They indicate that T6

 percent of private sector, nonagricultural, nonconstruction, unionized       hourly
 employees work in settings where senior employees are favored substantially

 vhen promotion decisions are made; for nonunion hourly employees, the

 comparable estimate is 56 percent; for non—exempt salaried employees, 50

 percent; and for exempt salaried employees, 48   percent.    Overall, we estimate
 that perhaps 60 percent of our country's private sector, nonagriculcural,

 rionconstruction employees work in settings where senior employees are favored

 substantially in the promotion process.7 Hence, for this large part of the

 U.S. workforce, it appears that the piece of the total monetary return to

seniority that can be linked to senior employees who have been promoted to

better—paying jobs than are held by otherwise comparable junior employees is

to a significant extent a reward to seniority per se, rather than simply a

reward for higher productivity. Moreover, it should be noted that the 60

percent figure estimates the fraction of the private sector, nonagricultural,

nonconstruction workforce employed where senior employees seem to be favored

substantially in promotion choices; the percentage working where senior

employees are favored at all is likely to be much greater. This is because in

many settings senior employees can be expected to have a significantly higher

probability of being promoted than their junior colleagues when the

comparisons are limited to those with the same productivity.

     Hence, it appears that only just over a third of private sector

nonagricultural, nonconstructjon employment in the United States is found in

aettings where the sole monetary return to seniority per se is    the   substantial

premium that occurs within grade level or job category; the other nearly two—thirds
                                                        TABLE   1

                SUMMARY OF RESPONSES TO SURVEY
                                               QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO WHETHER JUNIOR EMPLOYEES
                              ARE TYPICALLY PROMOTED INSTEAD OF
                                                                SENIOR EMPLOYEESa

                                                                    Junior Employees
                                          Junior Employees          Promoted Ahead of
                                          Promoted Ahead of         Senior Employees
                                          Senior Employees           If Expected to Do
                                          If Expected to Do
                                                                                           Junior Employees
                    Number of Responses                             Significantly Better   Never Promoted
                                          Better on the Next        on the Next Job
                    for Indicated Group                                                    Ahead of
                                          Job or on Later Jobs      or on Later Jobs       Senior Employees
 Hourly employees
 covered by a
 collective                135                   23.7                     43.0                   33.3
 bargaining
 agreement

 Hourly employees
 not covered by a          158                   44.3                     41.1                   14.6
 collective
 bargaining
 agreement

Nonexempt
salaried                    74                  40.5                     44.6                   14.9
employees


Exempt                     25                   52.0                     48.0
employees                                                                                        0.0




aThe survey on which these results are
                                       based was sent to a sample of
 nonconstruction companies randomly selected from                    1,025 prIvate sector, nonagricultural,
                                                  the 1981 Standard and Poor's
 requested to provide information for the one                                  Register. Respondents were
this group could consist of                  largest group of employees affected by their
                            hourly, nonexempt salaried or exempt                          personnel decisions;
whether a majority of the           In
                                                                 employees. A separate question asked
                          employees    this       was covered hy a
observations for covered nonexempt salaried group                  col)cctlve bargaining agreement; no
tabulations.                                employees or covered exempt employees were InCiUtICd in the
                                          10




appears to be found where the earnings advantage associated with seniority

independent of productivity occurs both as a result of the assignments given

to employees and as a result of the way they are paid for doing a given task.


The Facts on the Role of Service per se
in Termination Decisions

     We would expect that the compensation scheme found at most U.S.

workplaces would go hand—in--hand with a provision designed to protect workers

from being cheated Out of the return promised for the "second half" of their

work lives. To determine the extent to which protection of this nature

conditioned firms' decision making about which employees to terminate when

some could not be retained, we also asked the folloving question of our

randomly selected samp:'.e of firms:8

     In the event of a workforce reduction, are senior employees
     permanently laid off in place of junior employees?

     (    )    Yes, if it is believed that the junior employee will be
               worth more on net to the company than the senior
               employee.
     (    )   Yes, if it is believed that the junior employee will be
               worth significantly more on net to the company than the
               senior employee.
     ()        No, never.

     The expression "worth more on net" was used to mean "worth more consider-

ing both performance and earnings, today and in the future." The "signifi

cantly more on net' and the "no, never" responses are thus consistent with the

statement that the firm can be expected to incur significant short—run costs

to protect its senior workers' earnings claims.

     The answers from the survey respondents who had witnessed involuntary

terminations are summarized in Table 2. They indicate that approximatelY 85

percent of U.S. private sector, nonagricultural, nonconstruction employees
                                                         TABLE   2

              SUMMARY OF RESPONSES TO SURVEY QUESTIONS PERTAINING TO WHETHER SENIOR EMPLOYEES
                          ARE PERMANENTLY LAiD OFF IN PLACE OF JUNIOR EMPLOyBESa


                                                                     Senior Employee
                                         Senior Employee             Permanently Laid Of f
                                         Permanently Laid Off        if Junior Employee      Senior Employee
                                         If Junior Employee          Believed to Be Worth    Never Permanently
                   Number of Responses   Believed to Be Worth        Signif!cantly           Laid Of f in Place
                   for indicated Group   More on Net                 More on Net             of Junior Employee

Hourly employees           73                   2.7%                       13.7%                  83.6%
covered by a
collective
bargaining
agreement

Hourly employees           71                  14.1°!.                     43.7%                  42.3%
not covered by a
collective
bargaining
agreement

Nonexempt                  16                  18.8%                       50.0°!.                31.3%
salaried
employees


Exempt                      5                  20.0%                       80.0%                   0.0%
employees




aihese results are based on the same survey as the results reported in Table 1. There are fewer observations
 on firms' permanent layoff practices than on firms' promotion practices because only respondents who had
 witnessed a reduction in force could describe their finns' permanent layoff practices.
                                      12




work in settings where senior employees do in fact enjoy substantially greater

protection against job loss than junior employees doing similar work.9

Importantly, there appear to be substantial differences between union and

nonunion settings in this regard. Rules protecting senior workers against

being permanently laid off before their junior coworkers appear to be both more

prevalent and stronger under trade unions. For hourly employees, almost 100

percent of the responses pertaining to groups covered by collective bargaining

implied that seniority in and of itself receives substantial weight in

termination decisions, while only 85 percent of the responses pertaining to

noncovered groups indicated that this is the case. As for "strength," while

84 percent of our survey responses that pertained to unionized hourly

employees indicated that a senior worker would never be involuntarily

terminated before a junior worker, the same was true for only 42 percent of

the responses pertaining to nonunion hourly employees.



The Facts to Be Collected

     An explanation of why senior workers doing a given job ifl   U.S. corpora
tions receive higher salaries than their junior, but no less valuable,

coworkers remains to be documented. At present, there are a number of

theories that might be considered consistent with our findings. One group of

potertial explanations revolves around the notion that employers and employees

may enter Into Implicit contracts that provide that earnings be deferred

toward the end of the worklife. Firms may offer such contracts: (1) to deter

quits or behavior that would lead to discharge;10 (2) to discourage workers

with high propensities to quit from seeking employment with the firm;11   (3)   to
                                       13



                                                     and (4) to insure
improve morale by giving employees regular raises,

relatively risk—averse employees against slow earnings growth that might
                                                 growth.12 A second type of
otherwise be associated with slow productivity

explanation might be that such contracts avoid the unpleasantness felt by a

supervisor who has to fire or reduce the relative salary of a long—time

subordinate. A third issue that deserves mention is that societal beliefs ——
                                                          —— may condition
for   example, the idea that elders should be respected

employeest beliefs concerning "just" relative compensation.

       Unfortunately, at this point, all of these theories suffer the same

deficiency as the human capital theory about the service—earnings profile:

absence of an empirical basis. More facts concerning enterprise internal

labor markets must be forthcoming if we are to do more than guess about why

service independent of productivity is rewarded so highly in the pricing and

allocation of labor. We must remember that statements with no factual basis

are conjectures, no matter how empirical they may sound. Empiricism requires

data.
                                        14




                                     FOOTNOTES




       1We should emphasize that all the discussion arid   evidence   presented in
thispaper refers to enterprise internal labor markets; Doeringer arni Piore
(1971), PP. 2—4, explores the distinction between enterprise and craft internal
lchor markets.
       2The human capital model of investment in   on—the—job training is laid out
in   Becker (1964), pp. 13—37.

     3Rincer (1974), p. 12. Mincer has seniority provisions under collective
bargaining agreements in mind when he makes this statement, but his logic
applies equally well in other institutional settings.

       4See Medoff (1977), Medoff andAbraham (1980, 1981), and Ralasz (1980).

       5See Yanker (1980).

     6See Abraham and Medoff (1982a) for a fuller discussion of these survey
results.

     7This very rough estimate was obtained by weighting the estimates for
union hourly employees, nonunion hourly employees and salaried employees by
the fractions of private sector, nonagricultural, nonconstruction employment
in each of these same three groups. The employment figures were derived from
the May 1978 Current Population Survey (CPS): union members paid by the hour,
17 percent; nonmembers paid by the hour, 43 percent; and nonhourly employees,
40 percent, of which 8 percent were union and 92 percent were nonunion. There
was no way to distinguish noriexempt and exempt salaried employment on the CPS.

       8See Abraham and Medoff (1982b) for a fuller discussion of these survey
results.

       This very rough estimate was derived using the approach described in
footnote 7.

     10For development of a model along these lines, see Becker and Stigler
(1974) and Lazear (1979).

       See Salop and Salop (1976) and Viscusi (1978).

     12Models with much this flavor have been developed by Harris and
Holmstrom (1981) and loannides and Pissarides (1982).
                                         15



                                     REFERENCES


Abraham, Katharine C., and James L. Medoff. "Years of Service and Probability
     of Promotion." Mimeographed (1982)(a).

            and          .  "Length of Service, Terminations and the Nature of
     the Employment Relationship." Mimeographed (1982)(b).

Becker, Gary S. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with
     Special Reference to Education. New York: National Bureau of Economic
     Research, 1964.

           and George J. Stigler. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and
     Compensation of Enforcers." Journal of Legal Studies 3 (1974), pp. 1—18.

Doeringer, Peter B., and Michael J. Piore. Internal Labor Markets and
     Manpower Analysis. Lexington, MA: Heath Lexington Books, 1971.

Halasz,   Peter J."What Lies Behind the Slope of the Age—Earnings Profile?"
     Harvard College Senior Honors Thesis (1980).

Harris, Milton, and Bengt holmstrom. "Ability, Performance and Wage
     Dynamics." Mimeographed (1981).

loannides, Yannis M., and Christopher A. Pissarides. "Wages and Employment
     with Firm—Specific Seniority." Mimeographed (1982).

Lazear, Edward P. "Why   is ThereMandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
     Economy 87 (December 1979), pp. 1261—1284.

Medoff, James L. "The Earnings Function: A Glimpse Inside the Black Box."
     Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 594 (1977).

            and Katharine G. Abraham. "Experience, Performance, and
     Earnings." Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (December 1980), pp. 703—
     736.

___________, and ___________•"Are Those Paid More Really More Productive? The
     Case of Experience." Journal of Human Resources 16 (Spring 1981), pp.
     186—216.

Mincer, Jacob. Schooling, Experience     and Earnings. New York: National Bureau
     of   Economic Research, 1974.
Salop,Joanne and Steven Salop. "Self—Selection and Turnover in the Labor
     Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics 90 (November 1976), pp. 619—627.

Viscusi, W. Kip. "Self—Selection, Learning—Induced Quits and the Optimal
     Wage Structure." Mimeographed (1978).

Yanker, Robert H. Jr. "Productivity Versus Seniority: What Is the Determining
     Pactor in Regard to Wages and    Promotion?"   Harvard College Senior Honors
     Thesis (1980).
                                        APPENDIX



              SUXARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO ThE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                           EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO pRODUCflVITya




                                      Methodology and Conclusions
  Subject Group
    and Study


Recently—hired first    Performance ratings for approximately 200 persons hired over a
line supervisors at     six year period were used in the analysis. Other factors the
a manufacturing         same, years in supervisory position had a positive effect on
                        rated performance. However, the mean amount of company service
plant (Brown [1982]).
                        among those in the sample was only three years.

Exempt employees at     Data on salary, performance rating assigned by supervisor, job
a large manufacturing   grade level and individual characteristics for approximately
firm (Medoff and        8,000 white male employees at a large company were taken from
Abraham [1981]).        that company's computerized personnel file. Approximately
                        40 percent of the higher earnings associated with seniority
                        took the form of higher earnings within grade level. While
                        additional company service beyond the mean amount increased
                        the probability of being towards the top of the within-grade-
                        level salary distribution, it decreased the probability of being
                        towards the top of the within—grade—level performance distri-
                        bution. In addition, analysis of longitudinal data on pay and
                        performance revealed that, for those staying in the same job
                        grade level over time, relative within—grade—level salary rose
                        but relative within—grade—level rated performance fell.

Production and ware-    Salary, performance rating, job grade level and infornation on
house employees at a    individual characteristics were taken from approximately 300
nonunion manufac-       non—exempt employees' personnel records. For these employees,
                        approximately 50 percent of the return to seniority took the
turing plant (Halasz
[1980]).                form of higher earnings within grade level. Additional
                        company service beyond the mean amount increased the proba-
                        bility of being towards the top of the within—grade—level
                        salary distribution but decreased the probability of being
                        towards the top of the within—grade—level performance distri-
                        bution.

                        Cross—sectional results virtually identical to those reported
Exempt employees at
two large manufac-      in Medoff and Abraham (1981) were obtained with data for
                        several thousand white male employees at each of two large
turing firms (Medoff
and Abraham [1980]).    manufacturing firms.
                                               A2



                  SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                               EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY a
                                           (continued)




  Subject Group                          Methodology and Conclusions
    and Study


Blue collar               Data on hourly rate of pay, productivity, job grade level and
employees at a            individual characteristics for approximately 400 workers were
unionized                 taken from their personnel records. The productivity measure
manufacturing plant       was equal to the time the worker took to do his/her job divided
(Yanker [1980]).          by the standard time for performing the job. Approximately
                          80 percent of the earnings return to seniority occurred within
                          job grade level; none of this within—grade--level return could
                          be explained on the basis of more senior workers having higher
                          productivity.

Scientists                 Cross—sectional data for a random sample of U.S. scientists
(Cole [19781).             in six disciplines showed a peak among those aged 40 to 44
                           both in mean number of papers published and in the importance
                           of published works as measured by number of citations. How-
                           ever, all differences in mean output between adjacent age
                           groups were very small. Longitudinal data for the cohort
                           of U.S. mathematicians who got their Ph.D.'s between 1947
                           and 1950 showed no relationship between time since receiving
                           Ph.D. and either number of publications or number of citations
                           to those publications.

Airline                    Cross—sectional results very similar to those in Medoff and
managers                   Abraham (1981) were obtained using data for approximately
(Medoff [1977]).           800 managers employed by an airline.

Sixth grade                The change between third grade and sixth grade in individual
teachers                   students' composite achievement score on the Iowa Test of
(Summers and               Basic Skills was used as a measure of educational output.
Wolfe [1977]).             Sixth grade teachers' experience was measured in years, up to
                           11 years. A total of 627 usable observations were obtained.
                           Controlling for other factors, students whose third—grade
                           scores were above the norm benefited from additional sixth--
                           grade teacher experience, but among those with third—grade
                           scores below the norm, additional teacher experience was
                           associated with smaller changes in test score.

Scientists and             Performance data was collected for 290 researchers in 22
engineers (Hall            research and development organizations using questionnaires
and Mansfield              which asked people to rate their own performance relative to
11975]).                   others in similar positions by placing themselves on a 7—point
                                                                       (continued)
                                                A3



                  SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO ThE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                               EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY a
                                           (continued)




  Subject Group                          Methodology and Conclusions
    and Study


                          scale ranging from "in top 5%" to "in the lower 25%". The same
                          questionnaire was readininistered to 90 of the researchers two
                          years later. Cross—sectional analyses of the two sets of
                          responses found self—rated performance to be uncorrelated with
                          seniority.

Inner—city third          Progress made during third grade in math and in reading by each
grade teachers            of approximately 900 black students was measured using changes
(Murnane [1975]).         in the students' standard scores on Metropolitan Achievement
                          Tests. Controlling for other factors, the biggest improvement
                          in students' test scores was observed for teachers with three
                          to four years of experience. Teachers with five or more years
                          of experience were found to be no more effective or less
                          effective than teachers with three or four years of experience.

Engineers in              Three measures of performance were collected for approximately
technology—based          2,500 design and development engineers at six companies: (1)
commercial                performance ratings done by management; (2) management evalua—
industries (Dalton        tions of the complexity of engineers' assignments; and (3)
and Thompson [1971]).     engineers' own assessments of what happens to the productivity
                          of those doing technical work as they age. Rated performance
                          was highest for those aged 31 to 35 and fell sharply there-
                          after. Those 26 to 30 performed the most complex tasks, with
                          older engineers doing much less complex work. The engineers
                          themselves said peak productivity for those doing technical
                          work occurred at age 38. However, salaries were substantially
                          higher for those in each successive age bracket through the
                          41 to 45 year-old group and were level beyond age 45.

3econd and                Cross—sectional data from a survey covering 1,061 third—grade
third grade               students in a large California school system was used. Indi—
teachers                  vidual students' third grade Stanford Achievement test scores
(Hanushek                 were used as a measure of educational output, Controlling
[1970])                   for students' first grade test scores and other relevant
                          factors, neither second grade teachers' experience nor third
                          grade teachers' experience was found to have any significant
                          effect on third grade test score.
                                               A4



                  SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                               EXPERIENCE AND ACE TO PRODUCTIVITya
                                           (continued)




  Subject Group                          Methodology and Conclusions
    and Study


Male production           Data was collected on 113 male production managers in one divi-
managers (Tenopyr         sion of a rocket engine development and manufacturing concern.
[1969]).                  The study focused on how well various tests of leadership
                          potential predict managerial success, but included a corre-
                          lation analysis of seniority versus performance. Two measures
                          of performance were used:  (1) immediate supervisors were
                          asked to check descriptive statements about each manager and
                          integral weights from 0 to 4 were applied in scoring the
                          checklists; and (2) the company's labor relations staff rated
                          the manager's handling of employee relations matters on a
                          7—interval scale. For the 86 subjects for whom both per-
                          formance measures were available, seniority was not found to
                          be significantly correlated with either rating.

Research                   Longitudinal data on average number of papers published per
scientists                 year during each of two successive five—year periods was
(Eiduson [1966]).          collected for 40 research scientists ranging in age from their
                           30's to their 60's. Subjects' curriculum vitae were the source
                           of the publication information. Productivity was steady for
                           those aged 30 to 39 at the end of the first five—year period,
                           grew slightly for those aged 40 to 49, and fell off for those
                           aged 50 or greater.

Research                   Number of patent memoranda, number of patent applications and
chemists                   number of patents issued were used as measures of productivity.
(Stewart and               Altogether 962 man—years worth of data for 89 men in one
Sparks [1966]).            division of a large industrial scientific research organiza-
                           tion were collected. Each of these 962 man—years was treated
                           was treated as a separate observation in a cross—sectional
                           analysis. All three patent variables were positively corre-
                           lated with length of service; however, the positive associa-
                           tion between patent activity and length of service was much
                           weaker beyond 10 years of service than prior to that cutoff.

Employees of               Supervisors were asked to complete a performance evaluation
one multi—                 of each of their subordinates, rating them on "overall
department firm            effectiveness," which was not explicitly defined. A signif i—
(Svetik, Prien,            cant negative correlation was found between these ratings and
and Barnet [19661).        individual employees' length of service. The supervisors'
                           ratings were also negatively correlated with salary.
                                                   AS



                   SUMMARY   OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                                  EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                              (continued)




   Subject Group                             Methodology and Conclusions
     and Study


 Federal mail                Production records covering an eight—week period for approxi—
 sorters (Bureau             mately 6,000 workers in twelve cities were analyzed. An index
 of Labor
                             of performance was computed for each worker by dividing his/her
 Statistics
                             production score by the average production score of all workers
 [1964)).                    aged 35 to 44 doing similar work in the same city. Those with
                             less than six months service had the lowest
                                                                         average performance
                             index; beyond six months, length of service seemed to be unim-
                             portant.

 Scientists and               Five measures of current performance were collected for a
 engineers in                 cross—section of 1,311 scientists and engineers working in 11
 research
                              research laboratories: (1) contribution to scientific knowl—
 laboratories
                              edge, as judged by colleagues; (2) overall usefulness to
 (Pelz [1964)).
                              laboratory, again as judged by colleagues; (3) published
                             papers; (4) patent applications; and (5) unpublished papers.
                             All the performance measures were for the five—year period
                             prior to the date of the study. For those in research labora-
                             tories, measured performance typically was highest among those
                             aged 35—44 as of the time of the study; for those in
                                                                                   develop-
                             ment laboratories, the peak occurred among those 45 to 49.
                             Performance among those immediately beyond the peak age group
                             was sharply lower. A second peak in performance was evident
                             10 to 15 years beyond the first performance peak.
Office workers           Data on physical volume of production per hour worked over an
doing routine work       observation period of 4 to 12 weeks was collected for approxi—
such as typing,          mately 6,000 workers in 5 federal agencies and 21 private
filing, posting,         companies. An index of performance was computed for each
sorting and card         worker by taking the ratio of his/her output to the average
punching (Bureau         output of those aged 35 to 44 employed at the same firm
of Labor
                         and doing comparable work. Among workers with 9 months or
Statistics [1960]).      more experience on the job, there was practically no differ-
                         ence in the mean value of the performance index
                                                                         across age
                         groups, either within occupational groups or when an average
                         was taken across the occupational groups. A
                                                                      large proportion
                         of those included in the sample were under incentive payment
                         schemes. However, the results looked very similar for those
                         under incentive and those under time payment plans.
                                              A6


                 SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                              EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                          (continued)




 Subject Group                           Methodology and Conclusions
   and Study


Technical employees       Performance of approximately 900 technical employees in one
in a large research       firm was estimated using cross—sectional data on individuals'
and engineering           positions in the annual order—of—merit rankings of technical
firm (Oberg [1960)).      employees. These rankings were done on a department by department
                          basis for salary administration purposes. The criterion used
                          in ranking was the workers' "present value to the company."
                          This criterion was not defined more precisely. Among those
                          doing research and development work, performance was highest
                          for those 30 to 35 and fell off gradually thereafter. Among
                          those doing engineering work, performance fell off for those
                          aged 32 through SO, then showed a second peak for those in
                          their 50's.

Retail sales              The dollar volume of sales for clerks in two large department
personnel                 stores were used to form performance ratings of 1 through 4,
(Canadian                 depending on each individuals' quartile position in the dis—
Department of             tribution of dollar sales for his/her department. At one
Labor [1959]).            store, mean rated performance was lower for those with less
                          than 3 years' service than for those in the longer service
                          groups, and weakly but positively related to service there-
                          after. At the second store, mean rated performance was lower
                          for those with less than 6 years' service than for those with
                          more service and again weakly but positively related to service
                          thereafter.

Production workers        For approximately 5,100 workers in 15 footwear establishments
in the wood               and 11 furniture establishments, output per worker—hour was
household furniture       measured using average straight time hourly piecework earnings.
industry and the          The production index used for comparison purposes was each
footwear industry         individual's average hourly earnings divided by the mean of
(Bureau of Labor          average hourly earnings for those of the same sex in the
Statistics [1957]).       35 to 44 age group doing the same job in the same plant. In
                          both industries and for both sexes, the mean value of the
                          production index was highest for those aged 25 to 34 and fell
                          beyond that age group.

Production workers        Piecework earnings data for 933 workers in the footwear industry
in the footwear           and 1,284 workers in the clothing industry were studied. The
industry and the          data were used to create a production index like that used in
clothing industry         Bureau of Labor Statistics (1957), The mean value of this pro—
(Bureau of Labor          duction index was stable for all age groups through age 54 and
Statistics (1956]).       approximately 10 percent lower for those aged 55 to 64.
                                                A7



                  SUMMARY OF STUDIES PERTAINING TO THE RELATIONSHIP OF TENURE,
                               EXPERIENCE AND AGE TO PRODUCTIVITY
                                           (continued)




  Subject Group                          Methodology and Conclusions
    and Study


Outstanding people        The goal of this study was to identify the age by which numerous
in a variety of           individuals in various fields had done their best work or
professional              achieved their highest average rate of productivity. In the
occupations               majority of occupations, it was found that the individuals'
(Lehman [1953]).          best work had been done by age 40. However, it should be
                          emphasized that the study focused on selected outstanding
                          individuals rather than on a representative sampling of members
                          of any occupation.

Shopcraft railroad        Relative speed of work for a cross—section of 701 employees of
employees (Mater          one railroad was used as a measure of worker efficiency.
[1941]).                  Holding age constant, efficiency appeared to peak at about
                          10 years of service and fall thereafter.

Employees of large        Records on productivity of workers at six companies were
New England               broken down into a comparison of productivity by age
manufacturing             groups for 172 textile weavers, 127 textile spinners and
companies                 147 workers in nonferrous metal manufacturing. The records
(Palmer and               did not show any tendency for productivity to vary with age.
Brownell [1939]).




a5 summary includes all the studies we know of from which inferences can be drawn
 concerning the relationship between individuals' age or experience and their pro-
 ductivity. For the sake of keeping the list of manageable size, we have excluded
 studies which related mean group age or experience to group output. However, the
 conclusions of the studies based on group data do not seem to differ much from the
 conclusions of those based on individual data.
                                         A8




Sources Cited in Appendix:

Brown, Charles. "Estimating the Determinants of Employee Performance."
     Journal of Human Resources 17 (Spring 1982), pp. 178—194.

Canadian Department of Labor Economics and Research Branch. Age and Performance
     in Retail Trade. Ottawa: The Queen's Printer and Controller of Stationery,
     1959.

Cole, Stephen. Age and Scientific Performance. New York: Center for the
     Social Sciences, Columbia Uniersity, 1978.

Dalton, Gene W., and Paul H. Thompson. "Accelerating Obsolescence of Older
     Engineers." Harvard Business Review 49 (September—October 1971), pp.
     57—6 7.

Eiduson, Bernice T. 'Productivity Rate in Research Scientists." American
     Scientist 54 (1966), pp. 57—63.

Halasz, Peter Jonathan. "What Lies Behind the Slope of the Age—Earnings
     Profile." Harvard College Senior Honors Thesis (1980).

Hall, Douglas T. and Roger Mansfield.   "Relationships of Age and Seniority
     with Career Variables of Engineers and Scientists," Journal of Applied
     Psychology 60 (1975), pp. 201—210.

Hanushek, Eric. "The Production of Education, Teacher Quality, and Efficiency."
     In Do Teachers Make a Difference? Office of Education, Department of
     Health, Education and Welfare. Washington: Government Printing Office,
     1970.

Lehman, Harvey C.   Age and   Achievement. Princeton:   Princeton University
     Press, 1953.

Mater, Dan H. "A Statistical Study of the Effect of Seniority Upon Employee
     Efficiency." Journal of Business of the University of Chicago 14 (April
     1941), pp. 169—204.

Medoff, James L. "The Earnings Function: A Glimpse Inside the Black Box."
     Harvard Institute of Economic Research Discussion Paper No. 594 (1977).

                        and Abraham, Katharine C. "Experience, Performance,
     and Earnings." Quarterly Journal of Economics 95 (December 1980), pp.
     703—7 36.

                        and ________________________. "Are Those Paid More
     Really More Productive?   The Case of Experience." Journal of Human
     Resources 16 (Spring 1981), pp. 186—216.

Murnane, Richard J. The Impact of School Resourceso the Learning of Inner
     City Children. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Ballinger, 1975.
                                         A9



 Oberg, Winston, "Age and Achievement——and the Technical Man." Personnel
      Psychology 13 (Autumn 1960), pp. 245—259.

 Palmer, Dwight L., and John A. Browneli. "Influence of Age on Employment
      Opportunities." Monthly Labor Review (April 1939), pp. 765—780.

 Pelz, Donald C. "The 'Creative Years' and the Research Environment."    LEEE
      Transactions on Engineering Management Vol. EM—li (March 1964), pp.
      23—29.

 Stewart, Naomi, and William J. Sparks. "Patent Productivity of Research
      Chemists as Related to Age and Experience." Personnel and Guidance
      Journal 45 (September 1966), pp. 28—36.

 Summers, Anita A., and Barbara L. Wolfe. "Do Schools Make a Difference?"
      The American Economic Review 67 (September 1977), pp. 639—652.

Svetiik, Byron, et al. "Relationships Between Job Difficulty, Employee's
     Attitude Toward His Job, and Supervisory Ratings of the Employee's
     Effectiveness." Journal of Applied Psychology 48 (1964), pp. 320—324.

Tenopyr, Mary L. "The Comparative Validity of Selected Leadership Scales
     Relative to Success in Production Management." Personnel Psychology 22
     (1969), pp. 77—85.

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Comparative Job Performance by Age: Large
     Plants in the Men's Footwear and Household Furniture Industries.
     Bulletin No. 1223. Washington: Government Printing Office, November
     1957.


                                                       Comparative Job
     Performance by Age: Office Workers. Bulletin No. 1273. Washington:
     Government Printing Office, February 1960.

                                                      Job Performance and
_______________________________________________________•
     Age: A Study in Measurement. Bulletin No. 1203. Washington: Govern-
     ment Printing Office, September 1956.

_______________________________________________________• "The Job Performance
     of Federal Mail Sorters by Age." Monthly Labor Review (March 1964),
     pp. 296—300.

Yanker, Robert H. Jr. "Productivity Versus Seniority: What is the
     Determining Factor in Regard to Wages and Promotion?" Harvard College
     Senior Honors Thesis (1980).
