NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE US GENDER PAY GAP IN THE 1990s:
SLOWING CONVERGENCE
Francine D. Blau
Lawrence M. Kahn
Working Paper 10853
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10853
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

Preliminary draft. Comments welcome. The authors thank seminar participants at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cornell University, the University of Washington, Seattle, and Washington University, St.
Louis for helpful comments and Fidan Kurtulus and Joan Moriarty for excellent research assistance. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2004 by Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The US Gender Pay Gap in the 1990s: Slowing Convergence
Francine D. Blau and Lawrence M. Kahn
NBER Working Paper No. 10853
October 2004
JEL No. J16, J3, J7
ABSTRACT
We use data from the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to study the slowdown in
the convergence of female and male wages in the 1990s compared to the 1980s. We find that
changes in human capital do not contribute to the trends, since women improved their relative human
capital to a comparable extent in the 1980s and the 1990s. Occupational upgrading of women and
deunionization explain a portion of the slower 1990s convergence since the positive effect of these
factors on women’s relative wage gains was larger in the 1980s. However, the largest factor
accounting for the slowing of wage convergence is the trend in the “unexplained gap,” which is
sufficient to more than fully account for the slowdown in wage convergence in the 1990s. Factors
that may have contributed to the slower narrowing of the unexplained gender pay gap include
changes in labor force selectivity, changes in gender differences in unmeasured characteristics and
labor market discrimination, and changes in the favorableness of supply and demand shifts. We find
some evidence consistent with each of these factors suggesting that each may have played a role in
explaining the observed trends.
Francine D. Blau
School of Industrial and Labor Relations
Cornell University
265 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
and NBER
fdb4@cornell.edu
Lawrence M. Kahn
School of Industrial and Labor Relations
Cornell University
264 Ives Hall
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
lmk12@cornell.edu

I. Introduction

After thirty years of relative constancy, the gender pay gap in the United States narrowed
substantially in the 1980s. For example, published tabulations from the Census Bureau on the
median annual earnings of year-round, full-time workers indicate that the female-to-male ratio
rose from 59.7 to 68.7 percent between 1979 and 1989—a gain of 9.0 percentage points.
However, the rate of convergence slowed markedly in the following decade, with a further
increase to 72.2 percent by 1999—an increase of only 3.5 percentage points. Specific estimates
of female relative earnings growth over the two periods differ depending on earnings measures
and end points, but the picture of slowing convergence in the 1990s is robust and has been noted
by a number of observers (e.g., Blau and Kahn 2000; Fortin and Lemieux 2000; and Welch
2000).1
A useful starting point for analyzing the slowdown in women’s relative wage gains in the
1990s is to consider what is known about the sources of female gains in the 1980s. In earlier
work (Blau and Kahn 1997), we suggested that the 1980s gains were surprising in that they
occurred during a period of rising wage inequality in which less skilled workers of both sexes
were faring poorly. To the extent that this trend reflected rising returns to skills and to
employment in high-wage sectors, it could be expected to disadvantage women as a group
relative to men. We presented evidence that women were able to successfully “swim upstream”
against the current of rising inequality due to a number of factors which offset its adverse effects:
women narrowed the gender gap in skills, particularly their labor market experience (see also
O’Neill and Polachek 1993), and upgraded their occupations; deunionization reduced the gender
pay gap because men lost union jobs at a faster rate than women; and women also benefited from
a substantial narrowing of the “unexplained” pay gap, which may reflect a reduction in labor
market discrimination, an improvement in women’s unmeasured characteristics, or more
1

Blau and Kahn (2000) report similar trends for the gender earnings ratio based on hourly earnings of full-time
workers computed from the CPS; they find it increased from 65.5% in 1978 to 74.1% in 1988 and 78.2% in 1998.

favorable demand and supply shifts for women compared to men. The latter may result if factors
affecting the wage structure, such as technological change, proceeded in ways that favored
women relative to men.
Based on these findings, one may identify a number of possible sources for the slower
progress of women in the 1990s—each of which could potentially play role. First, relative
improvements in women’s measured characteristics may have proceeded at a slower pace in the
1990s than in the 1980s. Blau and Kahn (2000) note in particular the possibility that women
enhanced their average experience levels at a slower pace in the 1990s. This is plausible in that
increases in female labor force participation rates were much slower in the 1990s than in the
1980s (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 2002, Ch. 4), although it is not possible to directly infer trends
in women’s average experience levels from trends in their participations rates (e.g., Goldin
1990).2 The impact of trends in the gender gap in experience as well as of other measured
characteristics will be a primary focus of our investigation of the 1990s trends.
Another possibility is that discrimination narrowed at a slower pace in the 1990s. Views
on this are mixed. On the one hand, the General Accounting Office (GAO) issued a report in
2001 based on Current Population Survey (CPS) data that found that the gender salary gap
among full-time managers actually increased in the majority of industries surveyed between
1995 and 2000 (GAO 2001, p. 19). These findings have provoked renewed concerns about
“glass ceilings,” as exemplified by a 2002 report by Representatives John D. Dingell and
Carolyn B. Maloney (Offices of John D. Dingell and Carolyn B. Maloney, 2002). On the other
hand, O’Neill (2003) argues that, at least within occupations, we have largely achieved pay
parity between men and women, implying that the slowing in convergence was inevitable. For
example, she reports that in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) sample in 2000,
aged 35-43 at that time, the female/male hourly pay ratio adjusted for schooling, ability,
experience and occupational characteristics was 97.5% (the raw pay ratio was 78.2%). O’Neill
2

This is because increases in female labor participation can be due to increased entry or increased labor force
attachment of women, or a combination of both.
2

concludes that, although gender role differences continue to cause a gender pay gap,
discrimination against women is largely a thing of the past.3
Other explanations center around the possibility that demand- and supply-side shifts
played out differently in the 1980s and 1990s resulting in a larger decrease in the gender pay gap
as well as a larger increase in male inequality in the 1980s than in the 1990s. Welch (2000), for
example, points to a rising relative demand for intellectual skills relative to physical strength,
due to technological advances, which benefited women as a group relative to men and highskilled compared to low-skilled men. In this view, the slowing increase in male inequality that
occurred in the 1990s (e.g., Katz and Autor 1999) is consistent with a tapering off of these
demand shifts and thus of slower relative progress of women. Note that this perspective leads
one to expect an inverse relationship between trends in male wage inequality and trends in the
gender pay gap. Such an inverse relationship is also expected based on Fortin and Lemieux’s
(2000) analysis, which posits that women’s gains result in men’s losses as, for example, women
enhance their skills and move up the job hierarchy, displacing men as they do so.
In this paper, we shed light on each of these possible sources of slowing convergence in
the 1990s using data from the Michigan Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the only
nationally representative data base that contains information on workers’ actual labor market
experience. Ours is the first study to provide a detailed examination of this issue employing
micro-level data and including information on experience, which has been shown to be an
extremely important factor in explaining the gender pay gap (Mincer and Polachek 1974) and, as
we have seen, its trends.
Data on wages are available only for a self-selected group of labor force participants.
The resulting selection bias (Heckman 1979) is of particular concern if, as we have seen,
women’s labor force participation grew more rapidly in one period (the 1980s) than in the other
(the 1990s). The direction of any bias is unclear, a priori. An obvious scenario is that, as
3

Of course, if occupational representation reflects employer hiring decisions, then controlling for occupation may
lead to us to underestimate the full extent of discrimination against women.
3

women’s employment rises relative to men’s, women included in the sample of wage earners
may become less positively selected as those with lower potential wage offers are drawn in. If
this is the case, comparisons of observed relative wages over time may underestimate the
convergence in wage offers. However, an individual may also be out of the labor force because
he or she has an especially high value of home time, a possibility that is particularly credible for
women. Regardless of whether the growth in female employment is positively or negatively
selected, it is important to take account of selection in assessing the wage offers of women
relative to men. The longitudinal nature of the PSID allows us to implement recently devised
adjustments for sample-selection bias (Neal 2004).

II. Trends in the Gender Pay Gap: Overall Patterns

Table 1 contains information on male and female real wages for 1979, 1989 and 1998,
based on the PSID. (Additional details regarding the data are presented below.) Since our two
time periods are of unequal length (i.e., ten and nine years, respectively), for comparability, here
and elsewhere in the paper, changes over each period are expressed as the average annual change
(uncompounded) multiplied by ten. Mirroring the trends we discussed above based on published
data, we find that the pay gap fell substantially faster in the 1980s than in the 1990s: the gender
differential in log wages fell 0.164 log points from 1979 to 1989 compared to a ten year rate of
decline of .075 log points from 1989 to 1998. The implied female-to-male pay ratio rose from
63 percent in 1979 to 74 percent in 1989 and 80 percent in 1998. The data in the table also
reflect well-known trends in real wage growth, with men’s real wages declining or stagnating
and women’s real wages growing at 10 to 11 percent over the two periods.4 Wage inequality as
measured by the standard deviation of log wages or the 90-10 gap in log wages rose in each
decade for both men and women, with larger increases in the 1980s than in the 1990s. The

4

These are approximations based on the log wage differences.
4

slowing increase in wage inequality in the 1990s has been noted by several authors (e.g., Katz
and Autor 1999).
Figure 1, which displays the gender pay gap at the indicated percentiles of the male and
female wage distributions, shows that the gender pay gap fell substantially throughout the wage
distribution in the 1980s, with much smaller declines throughout the distribution in the 1990s.
The figure also indicates little wage convergence at the top of the distribution in the 1990s, a
finding consistent with the concerns raised by the GAO report cited above. We will examine
this issue below controlling for gender differences in measured characteristics by using quantile
regression techniques.
Rising skill prices may induce changes in the gender pay gap that are unrelated to
women’s relative qualifications or to the extent of discrimination against them. A simple
measure which controls for such changes in wage structure is the mean female percentile in the
male wage distribution, although such a measure does face some criticisms that are considered
below. The female percentiles presented in Table 1 indicate that the behavior of this indicator
was similar to the gender pay ratio: women moved up in the male pay distribution in both
periods, but the pace of this upward progression was slower in the 1990s than in the 1980s. On
average, woman outearned 24% of men in 1979, 35% in 1989, and 39% in 1998.

III. Decomposing the Changes in the Gender Wage Gap
A. Analytical Framework
Using a decomposition suggested by Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1991)—JMP—and
implemented to analyze trends in the U.S. gender pay gap in the 1980s by Blau and Kahn (1997),
we identify, in an accounting sense, the contribution to changes over time in the gender pay gap
of i) changes in the measured characteristics of women compared to men, ii) changes in the
prices of measured characteristics; and iii) changes in the unexplained gap (corrected for the

5

impact of changes in the prices of unmeasured characteristics).5 The portions of the JMP
decomposition dealing with the quantities and prices of measured characteristics are fairly
noncontroversial, while there has been more disagreement about the decomposition of the
residual. We first explain the decomposition and then consider criticisms and qualifications.
The basic insight of the JMP framework is that, since prices change over time in ways
that may advantage or disadvantage women, it is useful to separately identify the impact of
gender-specific factors like relative qualifications of women and discrimination against them
from the effect of wage structure (or price changes that are common to both sexes). Intuitively,
if, as the human capital model suggests, women have less experience than men, on average, the
higher the return to experience, all else equal, the higher will be the gender gap in pay.
Similarly, if, due to discrimination or other factors, women tend to work in different occupations
and industries than men, the higher the return to working in the male sector, the larger will be the
gender pay gap. This reasoning suggests that rising wage inequality due to increasing returns to
skill and sector would adversely affect women’s relative pay.
On the other hand, a rising relative demand for intellectual skills relative to physical
strength (Welch 2000), or for white collar relative to blue collar workers (Berman, Bound and
Griliches 1994) due to technological advances, may benefit women as a group relative to men
but also increase male wage inequality (see also, Blau and Kahn 1997). Following this
reasoning, rising wage inequality might be expected to have opposing negative and positive
effects on women’s relative wages, with the dominant effect being an empirical question. The
negative effects are captured in the components of the JMP decomposition that measure the
impact of changes in measured and unmeasured prices on changes in the gender pay gap. The
impact of technological change and other factors that potentially positively affect the relative

5

This framework or a simpler correction for a group’s position in the wage distribution has been used to study
trends over time or international differences in the labor market outcomes of blacks, women and immigrants (e.g.,
Juhn, Murphy and Pierce 1991; LaLonde and Topel 1992; Blau and Kahn 1992, 1996, and 1997; Borjas 1995; Datta
Gupta, Oaxaca and Smith 2003; and Welch 2003).
6

demand for female workers will be included in the effect of changes in the unexplained portion
of the gender pay gap.
Institutional changes are an additional factor that can affect the return to skill but may
have gender-specific effects as well. For example, deunionization likely raises wage inequality
and the price of skills, since unions compress wages (DiNardo, Fortin and Lemieux 1996). One
might therefore expect that deunionization would raise the gender pay gap by making wage
floors less prevalent. But in the 1980s, the unionization rate fell more for men than for women,
actually helping to explain the falling gender pay gap (Blau and Kahn 1997). We can directly
assess the latter impact of deunionization more easily than technological change, since we can
observe it directly. However, any more general effects of deunionization through spill-over or
threat effects on the nonunion sector, will not be measured by our analysis.6
Using the JMP framework, we begin with a male wage equation:
(1)

Yit = XitBt + σtθit,

where Yit is the log of wages; Xit is a vector of explanatory variables; Bt is a vector of
coefficients; θit is a standardized residual (i.e. with mean zero and variance 1 for each year); and
σt is the residual standard deviation of male wages for that year (i.e., its level of male residual
wage inequality). The difference in the gender pay gap between two years 0 and 1 (i.e., 1979-89
and 1989-98) can be decomposed into four components as follows (for additional details see
Appendix A and Juhn, Muphy and Pierce 1991):

(2)

Observed X's Effect = (∆X1-∆X0)B1

(3)

Observed Prices Effect = ∆X0(B1-B0)

6

Given the relatively small size of the union sector in the United States, such effects are not likely to be large
empirically, and indeed a recent study does not find much evidence of them (Farber 2003). Note, however, the
evidence suggests that the union impact on the nonunion sector in many other OECD countries is substantial and
hence that international differences in the extent of unionism have a substantial effect on the overall wage
distribution and on the relative wages of women (e.g., Blau and Kahn 1996).
7

(4)

Gap Effect = (∆θ1-∆θ0)σ1

(5)

Unobserved Prices Effect =∆θ0(σ1-σ0)

where a ∆ prefix signifies the average male-female difference for the variable immediately
following.
The Observed X's Effect reflects the contribution of changing male-female differences in
observed labor market qualifications (X). It measures the impact of, e.g., a decrease in the
gender gap in experience on the change in the pay gap. The Observed Prices Effect reflects the
impact of changes in prices of observed labor market characteristics, as indexed by male prices.
For example, given that women have lower actual experience levels, an increase in the return to
experience would weight the female experience deficit more heavily and hence raise the gender
pay gap, ceteris paribus. The Gap Effect measures the effect of changing differences in the
relative positions of men and women in the male residual wage distribution. That is, it gives the
contribution to the change in the gender gap that would result if the level of residual male wage
inequality had remained the same and only the percentile rankings of the female wage residuals
had changed. It would, for example, capture the effect of an improvement in women’s
unmeasured characteristics or a reduction in the extent of discrimination against women.
Finally, the Unobserved Prices Effect reflects the impact of differences in residual inequality
between the two years. It measures the contribution to the change in the gender gap that would
result if the percentile rankings of the female wage residuals had remained the same and only the
extent of male residual wage inequality had changed. Suppose, as is likely, that unmeasured
deficits in relative skills or discrimination lower women's position in the male distribution of
wage residuals. The larger the penalty to being below average in the residual distribution, the
larger the gender pay gap will be. The sum of the gap and unobserved prices effects is equal to
the change in the "unexplained" differential, which is commonly taken as an estimate of
discrimination in a conventional decomposition.

8

Recently, this decomposition has come under a variety of criticisms, particularly the
decomposition of the residual into a portion representing the effect of changes in the treatment or
unmeasured characteristics of women and a portion representing the impact of changes in prices.
For example, Suen (1997) has argued that labor market discrimination can lead to a spurious,
mechanical positive relationship between the female percentile (in the male distribution) and
male wage inequality.7 Specifically, suppose the only source of gender pay differentials is
discrimination taking the form of a constant discount on female wages of d log points
independent of any skill prices. Then an increase in male wage inequality will mechanically
raise the typical woman’s percentile in the male wage distribution, and the female percentile will
be uninformative about the relative treatment or qualifications of women. On the other hand, if
discrimination takes a more complicated form in which the impact of discrimination is affected
by changes in the wage structure (Edin and Richardson 2002), then the female percentile in male
distribution will be informative about women’s treatment. For example, in a model where one’s
wage is determined by one’s position in a job hierarchy, the female percentile could be an
indicator of placement in the wage hierarchy.8 In such a scenario, a rising return to placement in
the job hierarchy would raise the observed gender pay gap, even in the absence of any increase
in discrimination against women, and changes (or stability) in the average female percentile
would be highly informative about women’s labor market position.
This discussion suggests that the relevance of Suen’s (1997) criticism is an empirical
question. There is some indirect evidence in our results and elsewhere that the female percentile
in the male distribution is informative about women’s treatment or unmeasured skill levels.
First, Table 1 shows that women’s placement in the male distribution increased both in the 1980s
and the 1990s, with a faster increase in the 1980s, mirroring the time pattern in the rise of the
7

Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce (1991) and Blau and Kahn (1992, 1996 and 1997) also discussed the possibility that
discrimination could complicate the interpretation of the residual.
8
Of course, women’s productivity can also affect their position in the job hierarchy; thus even in this scenario, we
would not be able to distinguish discrimination from unmeasured productivity. But we would be able to use the
JMP decomposition to disentangle gender-specific factors from wage structure as causes of the changing gender
gap.
9

female/male pay ratio (although it must be acknowledged that the behavior of the female
percentile also mirrors the changes in male inequality). Below, we present similar findings for
women’s percentile ranking in the distribution of wage residuals and the magnitude of
unexplained gender pay gap. Second, our results in Table 1 and below indicate that men and
women have experienced similar changes in wage inequality (see also, Blau and Kahn 1997;
Blau 1998), suggesting that both have been subject to broadly similar forces impacting wage
structure.9
An additional implicit criticism of the JMP approach is suggested by the Welch (2000)
model discussed above in which technological progress raises the return to intellectual skills,
lowering the gender pay gap and raising male wage inequality, while in the JMP framework,
rising skill prices necessarily hurt those with lower skills. We have noted above that both these
alternatives may be captured in the JMP decomposition, with the net effect being an empirical
issue. Interestingly, Welch (2000) finds empirically, using time series CPS data, that women’s
relative wages are negatively correlated with the male 50-10 wage gap (an effect that is nearly
significant) but significantly positively correlated with the male 90-50 wage gap. The first
finding is consistent with the JMP approach and suggests that the male 50-10 gap may be an
indicator of the return to skills such as experience in which women have a deficit, while the
second finding is consistent with Welch’s model in which rising intellectual skill prices help
women.
A final criticism of the JMP method is based on Fortin and Lemieux’s (1998; 2000)
model discussed above in which rising female relative wages cause rising male wage inequality,
as men are displaced in the job hierarchy by women. Their approach does not invalidate the
reasoning in which rising prices of measured skills for which women have a deficit or rising
returns to working in male sectors raise the gender pay gap. However, their model suggests that
9

Similarly, across countries, male and female wage inequality are very highly correlated, again suggesting that men
and women are both similarly affected by labor market prices (Blau and Kahn 1996). In addition, across countries,
there is little relationship between the female percentile and male wage inequality (Blau and Kahn 2000), a piece of
evidence not consistent with the existence of a mechanical relationship between the two.
10

it may be artificial to simulate what would happen to women’s wages if they moved up the
hierarchy (i.e., their percentile ranking in the male distribution of wage residuals increased) but
the male distribution of wage residuals was kept fixed. We therefore use caution in interpreting
the JMP residual decomposition.

B. Data and Specifications
Three waves of the PSID are employed to compare the rate of convergence in the 1980s
and the 1990s—1980, 1990 and 199910—allowing us to compute average hourly earnings for
1979, 1989 and 1998. In addition to spanning the appropriate time period, the economy was
expanding in each of these years, suggesting that overall macroeconomic conditions may have
been similar: the unemployment rate was 5.8% in 1979, 5.3% in 1989 and 4.5% in 1998 (BLS
web site: www.bls.gov, accessed 6/9/03). We initially restrict our analysis of wages to workers
who were, as of the survey date, full-time, nonagricultural employees age 18-65; the selfemployed were excluded. To maximize sample size, we use both the PSID’s random sample and
its poverty oversample populations and in all analyses employ the sampling weights supplied in
the PSID files. Patterns were similar when we restricted ourselves to the random sample. The
wage measure used is average real hourly earnings during the previous calendar year expressed
in 1983 dollars using the Personal Consumption Expenditures deflator from the National Product
Accounts. We excluded anyone earning less than $1 or more than $250 per hour in 1983 dollars.
The Appendix contains details on the construction of the key experience variables.
The PSID collects detailed work history data only for “heads” of families and “wives”
(including cohabitors) rather than for all adult individuals. We therefore also make some
comparisons with the March CPS for the same years in order to gauge the representativeness of
the PSID. A comparison of the data in Table 1 with tabulations from the March Current
Population Survey (CPS) for the same years, shown in Table A1, indicates that trends in the
10

After the 1997 survey, the PSID began surveying respondents every other year rather than annually. Thus, there
are no PSID data available for 2000.
11

gender pay gap, wage inequality, and female placement in the male wage distribution in the
PSID are very similar to those in the CPS.11 The CPS comparisons give us some confidence in
the representativeness of the PSID.12
Two specifications are employed in implementing the decomposition. The “human
capital” specification includes race, education variables, and experience variables (see Appendix
Tables A2 and A3 for variable means and regression results). The race variable is primarily a
control. Sample sizes were insufficient to perform separate analyses for nonwhites, although
results were very similar when we confined the sample to whites only. Education is measured by
three variables including years of schooling and dummies for college degree only and for
advanced degree. Experience includes full-time and part-time experience and their respective
squares.13
The second “full” specification augments the human variables with a collective
bargaining coverage indicator and a set of 19 occupation and 25 industry dummy variables that
include some two digit and some one digit categories, depending on cell size. Controlling for
sector in this way is potentially interesting, since existing research finds that much of the gender
gap is associated with location of employment (Blau 1977; Groshen 1991; Bayard, Hellerstein,
Neumark and Troske 2003). Further, factors such as deunionization and occupation and industry
shifts clearly in part reflect changing demand for labor, and this specification allows us to
examine the importance of these factors. We thus present some results controlling for these
11

The CPS data refer to average hourly wage and salary earnings for full-time, nonagricultural wage and salary
workers age 18-65 in the indicated calendar year. All analyses use CPS March Supplement sampling weights.
12
The only noticeable difference between the PSID and CPS data is that real wage levels were consistently 9-14%
higher in the PSID than the CPS. About 1-2 percentage points of this 9-14% can be explained by differences in the
definition of the earnings variable. Specifically, in the CPS, the earnings variable is wage and salary income. In the
PSID, this variable is available for heads but not wives. Therefore, for analyses using the PSID, we use total labor
earnings for people who report that they were not self employed on their main job. For men and female heads in the
PSID, we are able to compute both wage and salary earnings and total labor earnings; total labor earnings are about
1-2% higher than wage and salary earnings. As regards the remaining differences, other researchers have also noted
that income or earnings levels tend to be higher in the PSID than in the CPS data (Kim and Stafford 2000;
Gouskova and Schoeni undated; and Gottschalk and Moffitt 1992).
13
In view of the possibility that the returns to education changed differently for different experience groups (Card
and Lemieux 2001), we also implemented the JMP decomposition interacting the three education variables with full
time experience and its square; the results were unchanged.
12

variables and have moreover attempted to specify the categories in as detailed a fashion as
possible to make the results as informative as possible. However, the sector variables are also
potentially endogenous as they themselves are likely to be affected by relative wages through
both worker supply and employer demand decisions. Further, access to occupations, industries
and unionized workplaces may be affected by employer discrimination. We thus present results
for both specifications but interpret the “full” specification cautiously.
We have not controlled for marital status or number of children, although they may be
important factors influencing the pay gap. An alternative would have been to include them as
productivity characteristics. However, such an approach is problematic since these variables
may well proxy higher skills for men (see Korenman and Neumark 1991, for the analysis of
marital status), but possibly lower skills for women, even controlling for actual labor market
experience (e.g., Waldfogel 1998). The approach we have followed allows us to place a sharper
interpretation in the decomposition on the impact of differences in labor market skills.

C. Empirical Results
Tables 2A and B show the results of the JMP decomposition of changes in the gender pay
gaps across our two periods: 1979-89 and 1989-98. We first consider the descriptive statistics
presented in 2A and then the full decomposition results in 2B. Table 2A shows similar patterns
of rising residual inequality for both men and women. While the residual standard deviation rose
faster in the 1990s than the 1980s, the residual 90-10 gap increased more rapidly in the 1980s
than the 1990s—a pattern similar to that for overall wage inequality (see Table 1).14 The similar
14

In the CPS, both the residual 90-10 gap and the residual standard deviation increased more rapidly in the 1980s
than the 1990s. The CPS regressions control for potential not actual experience, since information on actual
experience is not available in the CPS; and education is measured as years of schooling only, since explicit
information on college and advanced degrees is not available in the CPS data except in 1999. The CPS changed its
education question in 1994. For the 1999 CPS, we used Jaeger’s (1997) suggested mapping of the new education
variable into the traditional years of schooling measure. The JMP results using the CPS and the PSID are quite
similar when the same potential experience and education specification is employed (see Table A4). Note that the
relative educational attainment of women increased somewhat more in the 1980s and somewhat less in the 1990s in
the CPS than in the PSID data. Specifically, the changes in the (male minus female) gender gap in mean years of
schooling were 0.006 (PSID) and –0.098 (CPS) in the 1980s; and –0.266 (PSID) and –0.080 (CPS) in the 1990s.
13

trends in residual inequality for men and women give us some confidence that the JMP
assumption of a common labor market for men and women may be valid, however, as noted
above, supply and demand shifts that affect men and women differently will be captured in the
unexplained portion of the differential and provide a possible explanation for changes in the
unexplained gender pay gap over time.
In both specifications, the average female residual fell dramatically in the 1980s but was
virtually constant over the 1990s. This residual is the conventional measure of labor market
discrimination but is generally acknowledged to also include the effects of gender differences in
omitted variables. These results indicate that, controlling for the human capital variables,
including actual labor market experience, the gender wage ratio increased from 70.8 to 81.9
percent between 1979 and 1989, and remained roughly constant at 81.2 percent in 1998. In the
full specification, which adds controls for industry, occupation and collective bargaining
coverage, the ratio increased from 81.6 percent in 1979 to 91.0 percent in 1989 and remained at
91 percent in 1998. The mean female percentile in the residual distribution, a measure that, in
the context of the JMP framework is independent of possible adverse shifts in the prices of
unobservables, followed a similar pattern, rising sharply in the 1980s and only very slightly in
the 1990s.
Table 2B show the decompositions of the changes in the gender pay gap over the 1980s
and the 1990s. The 1980s decomposition is very similar to our earlier work that which covered
the 1979-88 period (Blau and Kahn 1997).15 Specifically, the human capital specification shows
that women improved their relative experience levels in the 1980s, contributing to a 0.0528 log
point fall in the gender pay gap, or about 1/3 of the total decline. In addition, women moved up
These differences in educational trends in the PSID and CPS are reflected in the Observed X’s effects shown in the
Table A4.
15
Note that the results for the 1980s presented in this paper differ somewhat from those presented in Blau and
Kahn (1997) for two reasons, in addition to the slight difference in time period. First, the earlier study employed
only the PSID random sample whereas in the current study, to maximize sample size, we use both the PSID’s
random sample and its poverty oversample populations (and employ the appropriate sampling weights). Second,
taking advantage of the larger sample size we specify a more detailed set of industry and occupation controls in the
current study.
14

the male residual distribution, an effect contributing to a 0.1801 log point decrease in the gender
pay gap, or more than the actual decline. However, both measured prices and unmeasured prices
changed to women’s detriment and served to increase the gender pay gap by 0.0651 log points.
The full specification for the 1980s yields a larger observed X effect and a gap effect that is
smaller in absolute value, suggesting that more of the observed change in the gender pay gap can
be explained with the addition of the occupation, industry and union controls. In addition to the
upgrading in female labor market experience, women’s occupations improved, and
deunionization had a greater negative effect on men’s than on women’s wages, since men lost
union jobs at a faster rate than women. Measured prices served to raise the gender pay gap
overall, although occupational price effects were negative.16
Comparing the JMP decompositions for the 1980s and the 1990s can reveal some of the
sources of the slowdown in the convergence of the gender pay gap. Using either the human
capital or the full specification, we find that women upgraded their human capital as measured
by education and experience to a similar degree in the two decades. In the 1980s this upgrading
consisted entirely of rising experience and, consistent with speculations based on aggregate labor
force participation rates, decreases in the gender gap in experience contributed considerably less
to wage convergence in the 1990s than in the 1980s. The gender gap in years of full-time
experience decreased by .7 years between 1989 and 1998, compared to 2.3 years between 1979
and 1989. However, rising relative educational attainment of women played a much larger role
in the 1990s, and thus, the sum of the effects of education and experience was similar in the
1980s and 1990s. Although men had an edge in the incidence of college degrees in earlier years,
by 1998 the incidence of college degrees was slightly (1.2 percentage points) higher among
women.17
16

The negative occupational price effect contrasts with our earlier work and is likely due to our ability to more
finely define occupation in the larger samples we now use.
17
Women became 50 percent of those receiving bachelor’s degrees in 1981-82 and their representation has
increased steadily since then to 57.3 percent in 2000-2001 (see NCES web site: http://nces.ed.gov, accessed
9/17/03). The relative educational attainment of women full-time workers is influenced by these trends, as well as
by selection into full-time employment and the retirement of earlier, less well-educated cohorts. As noted above,
increases in relative years of schooling completed of women are somewhat larger in the 1980s and somewhat
15

The full specification shows that, while occupational upgrading and deunionization
contributed to women’s relative wage gains in both periods, these factors had larger effects in the
1980s than the 1990s, explaining roughly 0.0241 log points of the 0.0890 faster closing of the
gender pay gap in the 1980s, or about 27%. Occupational shifts were similar in a number of
respects in both periods. Women increased their relative representation in managerial
occupations and in professional jobs (both overall and excluding k-12 teaching) and reduced
their relative representation in clerical and service jobs at about the same pace in the two
decades. However, the gender difference in representation in craft and operator jobs declined
more rapidly in the 1980s than the 1990s. This was because men moved out of (or lost) these
jobs at a faster rate in the earlier decade. The results for collective bargaining coverage reflect a
slowing pace of deunionization for both men and women in the 1990s than in the 1980s, with a
smaller gender difference in the rate of deunionization in the 1990s. The larger loss of relatively
high-paying blue collar and unionized employment for men in the 1980s than in the 1990s may
be indicative of larger demand shifts favoring women in the 1980s.
While more favorable shifts in occupations and collective bargaining coverage for
women in the 1980s help to explain some of the faster convergence in that decade, adverse
trends in measured and unmeasured prices worked to widen the gender pay gap more in the
1980s than the 1990s. Specifically, trends in measured prices were estimated to slow
convergence in the 1980s compared to the 1990s by .0588 (human capital specification) to .0442
(full specification) log points, while trends in unmeasured prices worked to slow convergence in
1980s relative to the 1990s by 0.0121 to 0.0188 log points.
The results in Table 2B indicate that the primary factor accounting for the more rapid
convergence in women’s wages in the 1980s was the gap effect: unexplained gender differences
in wages, corrected for unmeasured price changes using the JMP decomposition, narrowed more
smaller in the 1990s in the CPS than in the PSID. If education played a more even role across the two decades than
suggested by the PSID data, human capital factors taken as a whole (i.e., including the slowing convergence in
experience between men and women in the 1990s) might explain more of the slowing convergence in the gender
pay gap between in the 1990s. However, note too that the CPS had a major revision of its educational variables
between 1990 and 1999, making comparability of the education variables in the two CPS’s problematic.
16

dramatically in both the human capital and full specifications in the 1980s than in the 1990s; and
this difference is more than sufficient to fully account for the slowdown in convergence in the
1990s. Women’s more rapid movements up the male distribution in the 1980s produced gap
effects narrowing the gender gap by 0.1279 to 0.1801 log points, in contrast to the much smaller
negative effects of 0.0063 to 0.0074 log points for the 1990s. This contrast means that,
controlling for measured human capital and sector, women’s relative labor market position
improved much more in the 1980s than the 1990s. While it is reassuring to have a measure of
changes in the unexplained gap that is corrected for the negative effects on women’s wages (in
some models) of widening residual male inequality, in fact our conclusions are similar if we
restrict ourselves to changes in the conventionally defined unexplained differential also shown in
Table 2B.
The slower convergence in the unexplained gap in the 1990s compared to the 1980s has
at least three possible, nonmutually exclusive substantive sources: first, gender differences in
unmeasured characteristics may have narrowed at a faster pace in the 1980s than in the 1990s;
second, reductions in labor market discrimination against women may have proceeded at a faster
pace in the 1980s than in the 1990s; and finally, demand and supply conditions for women may
have changed more favorably in the 1980s than the 1990s. An additional factor to be considered
is the change in labor force selectivity among men and women in each period, which may have
contributed to an apparent slowdown in wage convergence overall and/or in the unexplained
gender pay gap. In the following section, we consider some evidence that each of these factors
may have played a role in the faster 1980s convergence in the relative wages of women.
Evidence on the impact of selectivity is considered prior to the assessment of the impact of the
other factors since it is important to know whether the differential trends in the unexplained gap
persist after adjusting for selection bias.

17

IV. Factors Contributing to a Slowing Convergence in the Unexplained Gender Pay Gap
in the 1990s

A. Changes in Labor Force Selectivity

Our approach to analyzing the impact of labor force selectivity on trends in the raw and
unexplained gender wage gap is to get more information on the wages of those not included in
our sample of full-time employed workers. An alternative would be to build sample selection
models and then predict the wage offers of those without observed wages (Heckman 1979).
However, since the identification conditions required for the successful implementation of such
techniques are potentially severe, we take the more modest approach of looking harder for
evidence on offers. We proceed in several stages, each of which allows us to include a
successively larger portion of the adult population in our calculations.
First, we add all of those with observed hourly earnings in the current year to our base
sample of full-time workers; that is, we include part-time workers. Second, for those with no
earnings in a given year for which we measure wages, we use the longitudinal nature of the PSID
to recover a real hourly earnings observation from the most recent year for which one is
available, with a maximum window of four years. Third, for those for whom we still have no
observation on wages under these procedures, in the spirit of Neal and Johnson’s (1996) and
Neal’s (2004) analyses of black-white wage differentials, we include some additional individuals
by making assumptions about whether they placed above or below the median in real wage
offers. Specifically, we assume that individuals with at least a college degree and at least eight
years of actual full-time labor market experience had above the median wage offer for their
gender; and that those with less than a high school degree and less than eight years of actual
labor full-time market experience had below median wage offers for their gender. Note that this
procedure takes into account that for women it would not be appropriate to assume that all those
outside the wage sample have below median wage offers, since some women are outside the
18

wage sample due to a high value of home time rather than a low wage offer. Further, our
imputations take into account, in addition to education, actual labor market experience, a crucial
variable influencing women’s wages.18 If these wage assumptions are valid, we can use median
regression to estimate raw (i.e., unadjusted) and human-capital corrected gender differences in
wage offers for the expanded group.19 Koenker and Bassett (1978) show that under some nonnormal distributions, the sample median has a smaller asymptotic variance than the sample
mean, suggesting that median regression may well estimate effects of explanatory variables with
smaller errors than linear regression.
Table 3 shows the fraction of the population included in our base sample of full-time
workers and in our successively more inclusive wage samples.20 It indicates that our base
sample is indeed very selective with respect to women, with only 41% of women in the
population included in 1979, rising to 50% in 1989 and 53% in 1998. Moreover, since this
group grew very quickly in the 1980s and more slowly in the 1990s, selection may have
differentially affected the wage trends during these two periods. In contrast, the inclusion of
men in the full-time sample is much greater and fluctuates less over time—including 80 to 83

18

Applying these assumptions to individuals who had observed wage offers misclassifies 9-15% of men and 1421% of women with less than twelve years of school and less than eight years’ actual labor market experience and
17-22% of men and 11-20% of women with at least a college degree and at least eight years’ actual experience.
Thus, while the imputation clearly makes some errors, they may have a low incidence. Results were not sensitive to
some alternative education and experience cutoffs for inclusion in these imputed wage samples.
19
While this assertion is correct for the raw gap, we need stronger assumptions about unobserved wage offers in
order to make conclusions about the human capital-corrected pay gap. Specifically, for the individuals without
observed wage offers, we need to assume that those with less than a high school degree and less than eight years’
full time experience had below median wage offers conditional on their human capital levels; by the same token we
must assume that those with college degrees and at least eight years’ full time experience had above median wage
offers conditional on their human capital. A similar point is made by Neal (2004). These assumptions are discussed
further below.
20
Those who were self-employed or agricultural workers as of the time wages were analyzed (1979, 1989 or 1998)
are excluded from both the numerator and the denominator for all samples in Table 3. In retrieving past wages for
sample (c), we exclude individuals who were agricultural workers at the time their past wage was measured. We
did not exclude individuals whose past wage was based on self-employment because, for the 1977 and 1978
samples of wives, we were unable to determine self-employment status. However, in supplementary analyses for
1989 and 1998 (when self-employment status of wives could be determined), we excluded individuals whose past
wage was based on self-employment and found virtually identical results to those reported here. Moreover, when
we added the self-employed and agricultural workers to all of the samples in Table 3, the findings for the selection
corrections were similar to those reported below.
19

percent of the population over the period. Thus, concerns about selection are centered primarily
on women, and results for this group will drive our selection-correction adjustments.
Table 3 shows that we add substantially to the female and male samples when we include
all those with earnings in the prior year (i.e., part-time workers): the share of all women with
wage observations now ranges from 68 to 77%, while for men, the sample includes 92 to 94% of
the population. Recovering past observed wages for those without current observations using a
four-year window adds 10 to 13 percentage points to female coverage and 4 to 5 percentage
points to male coverage. Finally, making our above and below median imputations for selected
individuals without present or recovered past wage observations leads to very high rates of
coverage of the population: fully 86-91% of women and 96-98% of men are now covered. Not
only is the coverage within a given year much closer for men and women than under less
inclusive definitions of the sample, the rise in female coverage for the expanded sample—4.3
percentage points (1979-89) and 0.4 percentage points (1989-98)—is much less than for the fulltime employed sample—8.7 percentage points (1979-89) and 2.8 percentage points (1989-98).
Table 4 shows median log wage gaps (Panel A) and the changes in these gaps (Panel B)
for the four samples described above. Two estimates for each year are presented. The first is the
raw (unadjusted) gap and the second is the gap controlling for human capital. Panels A.I and B.I
give our findings based on OLS regressions (repeated here for comparison). Panels A.II and B.II
report our findings based on median (quantile .50) regressions estimated on the indicated
samples. The raw gap is the difference in the predicted median male and female log wages
based on the estimated median regression coefficients from separate male and female regressions
under the human capital specification and the actual male and female means of the explanatory
variables.21 The second, the median gender log wage gap controlling for human capital, is the

21

Note that, unlike OLS regressions, quantile regressions do not necessarily pass through the median of the
dependent variable and the means of the independent variables. Thus, the predicted value of the male and female
medians and the resulting gender gap is not necessarily equal to the actual male and female medians or the gender
gap calculated from them.
20

difference in predicted median male and female log wages when both the male and female
regressions are evaluated at the female means.
As may be seen in Panel A, median raw and human capital pay gaps for the sample of
full-time employed workers are similar to those obtained using OLS regressions. Within each
year, the size of the raw pay gap grows as we add individuals with less attachment to the labor
force. Inspection of the predicted raw medians indicates that, on average, those included in the
full-time employed sample are a positively selected group compared to those added to form our
most inclusive sample (d).22 Since we add considerably more females than males, the raw pay
gap widens.
Table 4 provides some indirect evidence on the potential impact of selection on the
slowdown in convergence in the gender pay gap in the 1990s. Focusing on a comparison of the
trends for the medians for the full-time employed sample and the most inclusive of the three
expanded samples, we see that the raw gap closed more slowly in the 1980s for the expanded
sample (0.1535 log points) than for the full-time employed sample (0.1737 log points).
Similarly, convergence in the unexplained gap was also slower for the expanded sample (0.1319
log points) than for full-time employed workers (0.1582 log points).
The results imply that, due to sample selection, the 1980s gains in women’s relative wage
offers were overstated. At first glance it might be expected that using the observed wages of
workers with full-time jobs should have caused us to understate the gains, since, as Table 3
shows, the female full time work force was getting substantially larger over the 1980s, and
median wage offers were lower among those without full-time jobs than among the full-time
work force. The key to understanding why the selectivity-corrected offers closed more slowly
than the observed wage offers in the 1980s lies in the changes in the degree of selectivity of the
women included in full-time sample (group a) as the female labor force grew. Our results

22

For men, predicted median log wages of full-time, employed workers (group a) were .10 to .14 log points higher
than those added to the full-time employed to form our most inclusive group (d); for women, they were .22 to .29
log points higher.
21

suggest that female labor force growth over this period was positively selected,23 and this is
indeed consistent with considerable evidence on female labor force participation trends. For
example, Juhn and Murphy (1997) find that employment gains for married women over the
1970s and 1980s were largest for wives of middle- and high-wage men who themselves tend to
be more skilled.24 This pattern is in turn related to the rising returns to skills over this period,
which drew high-skilled women into the labor force. Our findings suggest that this positive
selection characterized not only the observable characteristics of women in the labor force (as
reflected in our results for the raw gap) but also their unobserved characteristics (as reflected in
our results for the unexplained gap).
The selection adjustments had less impact for the 1990s, as might be expected based on
the slower growth in the female labor force for that period. Convergence in the raw gap was
faster in the expanded sample, where the gender gap fell by 0.0997 log points, than in the fulltime employed sample, where it decreased by 0.0867 log points. This may reflect the large entry
of relatively low-skilled, female single-family heads during this decade about which there is a
sizable literature (e.g., Blank 2000; and Meyer and Rosenbaum 2001). Female gains in the gap
controlling for human capital were also somewhat faster in the expanded sample (0.0187 log
points) than the full-time sample (0.0078 points).
Can sample selectivity help explain the slowdown in convergence between male and
female wages in the 1990s? Table 4 suggests that it is indeed part of the explanation.
Specifically, the last two columns of Panel B compare changes in the raw and human capitalcorrected gender pay gap in the 1990s and the 1980s. Looking at trends for the medians for our
most restricted sample, the full-time employed, the raw pay gap converged 0.0870 log points
more slowly in the 1990s than in the 1980s, and the difference between the two decades in the
human capital corrected pay gap was even greater, closing 0.1504 log points more slowly in the
23

The estimated wage offers for women not included in group (a) were 25.2 percent lower than those in group (a)
in 1979, but 33.2 percent lower in 1989—again indicating that the full-time employed had become more positively
selected relative to those not included.
24
See also Blau (1998) and references therein.
22

1990s than in the 1980s. However, in our most inclusive sample (d), the raw gap closed 0.0538
log points more slowly in the 1990s, and human capital corrected gap closed 0.1133 log points
more slowly. The comparison across the two samples implies that as much as 0.0332 log points
(i.e. 0.0870-0.0538) of the 0.0870 log point less rapid closing of the raw pay gap among the fulltime employed in the 1990s was due to sample selection. Table 4 shows a comparable effect of
selection on the human capital-corrected gender pay gap: 0.0371 log points of the 0.1504 log
point less rapid closing of the human capital-corrected gender pay gap in the 1990s was due to
sample selection. This implies that sample selection can explain about 25% (i.e., 0.0371/0.1504)
of the slowdown in the narrowing of the unexplained pay gap (in the human capital
specification) that we observe among the full-time employed. While this is a significant effect,
our examination of selection does not alter our conclusion, based on OLS regressions for the
full-time employed sample, that there was considerably less convergence in the unexplained
gender pay gap in the 1990s than in the 1980s.25

B. Changes in Gender Differences in Unmeasured Characteristics and Labor Market
Discrimination
As we have seen, even after our correction for sample selection, we conclude that the
reduction in the unexplained gender pay gap was considerably smaller in the 1990s than in the
1980s. In this section we consider two possible sources of such a difference—slower reductions
25

As noted earlier, in order to make conclusions about changes in the human capital-corrected pay gap where we
include those whose wages are imputed as below or above median, we must assume that their wage offers are above
median or below median, conditional on their human capital levels. This assumption is more likely to be valid for
the group with less than a high school degree and less than eight years’ full time experience (for whom we assume
below conditional median wage offers) than for those with at least a college degree and at least eight years’ full time
experience (for whom we assume above conditional median wage offers). When we performed analyses like those
in Table 4 adding only the less educated, less experienced group, the results were virtually identical: selection is
estimated to account for 25% of the slowdown in the convergence in the unexplained pay gap, the same figure we
obtained in Table 4, row d. Moreover, when we make no imputations and include only those for whom we observe
a wage offer at some time in the past four years (group c in Tables 3 and 4), we obtain very similar results to those
when we add the workers with imputed above or below median wage offers: row c of Table 4B shows that
selection accounts for 27% of the slowdown in the closing of the unexplained gender pay; that is, (.1504.1098)/.1504=.270, suggesting that our conclusions about selection are not sensitive to adding those with imputed
wage offers.
23

in the gender difference in unmeasured characteristics and labor market discrimination in the
1990s. In the spirit of seeking as much homogeneity between the female and male samples when
addressing these issues, we return our focus to the full-time employed sample.
With respect to unmeasured characteristics, it is possible that increases in women’s
commitment to the labor market and their employers was greater in the 1980s than the 1990s,
even controlling for measured human capital and sector. Changes in such unmeasured
characteristics are, by definition, difficult to measure. However, the possibility that such shifts
played a role is given some support in Table 5, which shows annual hours of housework among
full-time employed workers. Both for all workers and for married workers separately, the gender
gap in housework hours closed much more rapidly in the 1980s than in the 1990s both absolutely
and relatively. If housework reduces the effort one can put into a job (Becker 1985; Hersch and
Stratton 1997), gender differences in potential effort on the job closed faster in the 1980s than
the 1990s. Of course, the changes in housework hours could also have been a response to
changing labor market opportunities; however, this does not invalidate the reasoning by which
housework exerts an independent effect on labor market success. It is also possible that these
differences in trends for gender differences in housework over the two decades are indicative of
faster convergence over the 1980s in other unmeasured characteristics as well. The faster
increase in female labor force participation in the 1980s, as well as the more rapid narrowing of
the gender gap in experience in that decade are also suggestive of a greater increase in women’s
commitment to the labor force in the earlier decade.
It is also possible that discrimination decreased by more in the 1980s than in the 1990s.
This might at first appear unlikely in that civil rights legislation passed in 1991 made the legal
environment more favorable toward antidiscrimination lawsuits in the 1990s than in the 1980s.
Specifically, the legislation allowed women to obtain compensatory and punitive damages for
intentional discrimination whereas only compensatory damages had been available under Title

24

VII.26 This contributed to a more rapid growth in job bias lawsuits over the 1990s, since
representing defendants in such suits became more lucrative for private law firms operating on a
contingency fee basis (Blau, Ferber and Winkler 2002, p. 243). Nonetheless, if women’s labor
force commitment changed more dramatically in the 1980s, as we speculated above, it is
possible that employers’ perceptions of women’s labor force commitment also changed more
dramatically in the 1980s. If so, one of the possible bases for statistical discrimination against
women may have eroded faster in the 1980s.
An additional scenario whereby discrimination could have narrowed more slowly in the
1990s is related to the glass ceiling hypothesis mentioned above. The so-called glass ceiling
problem refers to the explicit or, more likely, subtle barriers that inhibit women’s progress at the
highest echelons. If there is indeed such a problem, it may have had a greater negative impact on
women in the 1990s as women’s 1980s gains placed more of them into the higher-level positions
where glass-ceiling barriers might hinder their further upward progression. The unexplained
gender pay gaps estimated from quantile regressions presented in Table 6 are consistent with this
possibility. The results for the unexplained gender pay gap from median regressions are quite
similar to those based on OLS regressions (see, Tables 2A and 2B). The unexplained gap fell
substantially in the 1980s, with relatively little further convergence in the 1990s. At the 90th
percentile however, this pattern is even more pronounced, with the unexplained gap actually
increasing in the 1990s, especially in the human capital specification. Of course, as in any
analysis of this type, these findings may reflect, in whole or part, the impact of unmeasured
characteristics rather than discrimination.

C. Shifts in Supply and Demand
26

The 1991 law also reinstated the original judicial interpretation of Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act that in
disparate impact cases (i.e., cases in which an apparently neutral employment practice has an adverse impact on
women or minorities), the burden of proof rests with the employer to show the business necessity of the practice. A
1989 Supreme Court decision had shifted to the plaintiff the burden of proof of showing that the disparate impact
resulted from a specific business practice, and it also lowered the defendant’s rebuttal standard from one of showing
business necessity to one of showing that the practice merely contributed importantly to the firm’s goals (Gould
1993, p. 240).
25

In this section we consider the possibility that less favorable changes in supply and
demand for women during the 1990s than in the 1980s contributed to slower convergence in the
unexplained gap during the 1990s. We proceed in two steps. We first develop a simple supply
and demand model and use it to simulate the implied shifts in supply and demand that are
consistent with the observed changes in women’s relative wages and employment, based on
consensus estimates of the other relevant parameters (i.e., own and cross wage elasticities of
supply for men and women, and male-female elasticities of substitution in production). These
estimates assume that supply and demand shifts fully account for the difference in the human
capital-corrected wage gains of women between the two periods. We then provide some direct
estimates of demand shifts based on observed changes in employment in occupation-industry
cells that may be compared to the step one estimates of the required changes in demand that
would be necessary to account fully for the observed differences in convergence in the
unexplained gap between the two periods.
Let us begin by considering the following CES aggregate production function27:

(6)

Y=[(AfLf)p + (AmLm)p]1/p,

where Y is output, Lf and Lm are respectively the quantity of female and male labor employed, Af
and Am are demand shift terms, and p is related to σ, the elasticity of substitution between men
and women, as follows:

(7)

σ=1/(1-p).

We can think of at least two types of imperfect substitution between men and women that
could be characterized by equation (6). First, men and women may tend to do different jobs
27

This discussion of substitution in production between women and men follows Acemoglu’s (2002) analysis of
skilled worker-unskilled worker substitution.
26

within firms, in which case σ would be a metric for the degree of substitution between femaletype jobs (e.g., administrative support) and male-type jobs (e.g., production workers). Second,
men and women may work in different industries, implying that σ can measure the substitution
of industries with a disproportionately female workforce (e.g. ,personal services) for those with a
disproportionately male workforce (e.g., mining). Similarly, the demand shift terms Af and Am
may signify technological change disproportionately affecting female or male jobs within firms
or changes in final demand for output that affect industries with disportionately female or male
workforces.
Assuming profit maximization and competition, equation (6) implies that the female
relative wage equals the female relative marginal product:

(8)

ln(Wf/Wm) = [(σ-1)/σ]ln(Af/Am) – (1/σ)ln(Lf/Lm),

where Wf and Wm are respectively the average female and male wage rates.
On the supply side, suppose that we have the following functions determining the log of
female and male labor supply:

(9)

ln Lf=lnBf + ef lnWf + efm lnWm

(10)

ln Lm=lnBm + em lnWm + emf lnWf,

where Bf and Bm are, respectively, female and male labor supply shift terms, ef and em are,
respectively, female and male own wage labor supply elasticities, and efm and emf are,
respectively, female and male cross wage labor supply elasticities. These labor supply equations
can be derived from family utility or individual utility maximization models (Killingsworth and
Heckman 1986) and assume that all family income comes from earnings (thus the male wage
rate is a sufficient statistic for the potential nonlabor income available for women and vice
27

versa). Note that the cross wage terms in (9) and (10) combine the leisure complementaritysubstitution effect with the other family income effect in labor supply, since these are
uncompensated labor supply equations. Our empirical implementation of this framework will
take account of the fact that not all workers are married (see below).
Combining equations (8)-(10), we have the following expression for female relative
wages, assuming market clearing:

ln (Wf/Wm) = (σ+eTf)-1 [Df – Sf – (eTf-eTm)lnWm],

(11)

where eTf=ef-emf, eTm=em-efm, Df=(σ-1)ln(Af/Am), and Sf=ln(Bf/Bm).28
And, using (8) and (11), we can solve for the implied female relative demand and supply
shift terms:
(12)

Df = σln(Wf/Wm) + ln(Lf/Lm)

(13)

Sf = Df –(σ+eTf)ln(Wf/Wm) – (eTf-eTm)lnWm
= ln(Lf/Lm) - eTfln(Wf/Wm) – (eTf-eTm)lnWm.

While equations (12) and (13) are written for a single time period, if the demand and
supply elasticities remain constant, then we can express the change in the demand and supply
shifts as functions of the changes in the gender pay ratio, the gender ratio in labor supply, and the
male wage level. Based on the actual changes in female relative wages, female relative labor
input and male real wages, we may recover the implied shifts in female relative demand and
supply curves based on consensus estimates of the relevant parameters. The labor supply

28

The female relative demand shift term is (σ-1)ln(Af/Am) rather than simply ln(Af/Am) because the latter is in
output units, while multiplying by (σ-1) transforms the shift into employment units. Note also that female labor
augmenting technical change, which would be expressed as an increase in Af , leads to an increase in the demand for
female labor only if the elasticity of substitution is greater than one, a point made by Acemoglu (2002) in the
context of the relative demand for skilled labor.
28

literature provides estimates for own and cross wage elasticities of supply, while labor demand
studies provide estimates of the male-female elasticity of substitution in production.
For our estimates of own wage elasticities, we draw on three sources. First, Blundell and
MaCurdy (1999) report the median across 18-20 estimates of own wage labor supply elasticities
in various recent studies as 0.08 for men and 0.78 for married women. Second, Jacobsen (1998)
summarizes existing work as showing a median male labor supply elasticity of -0.09 and a
female elasticity of 0.77. And third, Filer, Hamermesh and Rees (1996) characterize the middlelevel estimates of labor supply elasticities as equaling 0.0 for men and 0.80 for women. Based
on these sources, we assume a value for own wage elasticity of labor supply of 0 for men and
0.78 for women. For the cross wage elasticities, Killingsworth (1983) reports a median spouse
wage elasticity of 0.13 for married men’s labor supply and -0.08 for married women’s labor
supply. In the PSID in 1990, roughly 72% of full-time employed men and 57% of full-time
employed women were married, spouse present (Census definition). In computing emf and efm,
then, we multiply these cross-elasticities by .72 and .57 respectively to account for the fact that
the overall gender pay gap estimate combines both married and unmarried workers.
Regarding demand-side substitution, in his major review of research in this area
Hamermesh (1993) listed only two studies that directly estimate the elasticity of substitution in
production between men and women (σ). First, Layard (1983, p. 524) found that for British
manufacturing for the 1949-69 period, the elasticity of substitution of men 21 years and over for
women 18 years and over was 2.0. Second, Lewis (1985) found that in Australia over the 197581 period, the substitution elasticity of men over 21 for women over 21 was 2.29. A recent study
by Weinberg (2000) adds to these two by estimating the male-female elasticity of substitution for
the US for the 1970-94 period. He obtains an estimate of 2.4, which is remarkably similar to the
elasticities obtained for Australia and Britain.29 We use the midpoint, 2.29, of the existing
29

Other studies examine the elasticity of complementarity (c), which in our context is the elasticity of the
female/male relative wage with respect to the male/female relative employment level, holding marginal cost and
other factor levels constant (see, for example, Borjas 1986a and b; and Grant and Hamermesh 1981). When there
are only two factors of production, σ=1/c, but with more than two factors, this no longer necessarily holds (Hicks
1970). Since the studies reporting the elasticity of complementarity all have several factors of production other than
29

estimates of σ in our simulations. But in view of the paucity of research on male-female
substitution, we examine the sensitivity of our conclusions with respect to alternative
assumptions about the magnitude of σ. We caution the reader that our simple model abstracts
from other factors of production (e.g., capital) and aggregates male and female inputs of different
age and education levels. Our goal is simply to determine whether a supply and demand
framework is plausible in explaining the slowdown in wage convergence between men and
women in the 1990s.
The final inputs we need in order solve the first difference versions of (12) and (13) are
changes in: female relative wages, female relative labor input, and male wages. To abstract
from compositional changes in the labor force, the effects of which were investigated above, we
control for human capital in estimating these wage changes. Thus, the female relative wage in a
given year is obtained by evaluating the difference in the male and female wage regression
coefficients using the female characteristics. Specifically, this is (Hm-Hf)Xf, where Hm and Hf are
respectively vectors of male and female median human capital log wage regression coefficients
and X is a vector of female means of the explanatory variables. The male wage is the predicted
wage using each year’s male wage equation applied to the 1990 sample of men (i.e., evaluated at
the 1990 male means of the explanatory variables), in order to control for compositional changes
in the male work force. We use the selectivity-bias corrected estimates of the wage regression
coefficients from the most inclusive sample (Table 4, sample d). However, our results are
qualitatively similar when we base them on OLS estimates of the human capital-corrected wage
changes.
Table 7 gives the results of simulations based on three assumed values for σ: 2.29 (the
median of the three values cited above), a high value of 3.0, and a low value of 1.0. In addition,
implied demand and supply shifts are shown for both efficiency unit and hours measures of labor
input. The results are qualitatively similar in each case. First, the female relative supply curve
adult men and women (as do Layard 1983 and Lewis 1985), we cannot recover the relative wage elasticity of female
relative demand (i.e., the substitution elasticity) from these studies.
30

shifted to the right in both the 1980s and the 1990s, but with a much smaller shift in the latter
period. Second, there was a very large rightward shift in female relative demand in the 1980s
that more than outweighed the supply shift; the rightward shift in female demand was much
smaller in the 1990s. Thus, while the rightward shift in both the supply and demand curves
diminished in the 1990s, the slowing of the female demand shift from the 1980s to the 1990s was
much greater than the slowing of the supply shift.
The results in Table 7 suggest that technological, organizational and industrial
composition changes were much more favorable for women in the 1980s than the 1990s. We
can provide some more direct evidence on this issue by examining the degree to which changes
in the industrial-occupational structure of employment favored women in the 1980s and the
1990s. To do this, we compute demand indexes similar to those specified by Katz and Murphy
(1992). Following Katz and Murphy (1992), we construct industry-occupation cells and view
the "output" of particular occupation groups as an intermediate product. A relative demand
index, ln(1+∆DEMf), was computed for women relative to men for the two time periods 1980-90
and 1990-99:
(14)

∆DEMf = Σocof(∆Eo/Ef),

where o refers to occupation-industry cell, cof is the female share of the labor input in
occupation-industry cell o over the pooled sample 1980, 1990 and 1999, ∆Eo is the difference
between the 1990 and 1980 or 1999 and 1990 share of total labor input employed in cell o, and
Ef is the 1980 or 1990 share of total labor input accounted for by women. The demand index
thus measures the degree to which 1980-90 or 1990-99 shifts in occupation-industry structure
favored women, using pooled 1980, 1990 and 1999 weights.
Estimates of such demand indexes are likely to be biased, so caution must be taken in
interpreting the empirical results. When labor input is measured in hours or employment, the
index will understate the shift in demand for women that would have occurred at constant
relative wages, since women’s wages rose more than men’s over the sample period. This
31

understatement will be more severe in the 1980s when women’s relative wages were rising faster
than in the 1990s. However, when labor input is measured in efficiency units (earnings),
depending on the overall elasticity of demand for labor, the index could overstate or understate
the shift in demand for women at constant relative wages. With inelastic labor demand, the
index will overstate the shift toward women, while with elastic labor demand, the index will
understate this shift; if the labor demand elasticity is -1, the index will accurately show the shift
in labor demand at constant wages. In his review of many studies of labor demand, Hamermesh
(1993) suggests that the elasticity of labor demand is less than zero but greater than -1, with a
likely range of -0.15 to -0.75. This suggests that earnings based measures of labor demand shift
will overstate the shift toward women during this period and will do so by more in the 1980s
than the 1990s, in contrast to hours based measures. A perhaps greater source of bias, is that, the
index does not take into account within industry-occupation cell demand changes. For example,
it is possible that within each cell, physical strength became less important, and the relative
demand for women rose. The probable importance of this factor leads us to conclude that both
work hour and efficiency unit specifications of the demand index could underestimate true
demand increases for women. We will return to this issue below.
In computing the demand indexes, we use 1980, 1990 and 1999 March CPS data because
the CPS sample sizes allow us to construct more detailed industry-occupation cells than the
PSID. We include part-time and full-time nonagricultural workers, and both the self-employed
and wage and salary workers. However, because of the difficulty in measuring self-employment
income, earnings-based measures of labor income include only wage and salary earnings. As
noted, the base shares of female labor input (cof) are computed using pooled 1980, 1990 and
1999 samples. In pooling these CPS files, we adjusted the CPS sampling weights so that each
year receives the same weight. We obtained similar results using either the 1980, 1990 or 1999
female shares as our base. We use three alternative disaggregations by sector. First, we
disaggregate sector by 43 mostly 2-digit industries. Demand shifts based on industry alone
provide a between-industry demand shift measure. Second, we construct 129 industry32

occupation cells based on the same 43 industries crossed with three occupational categories: (a)
professionals and managers; (b) clerical and sales workers; and (c) craft, operative, laborer and
service occupations. Third, we construct 215 industry-occupation cells based on the same 43
industries now crossed with five occupational categories: (a) professionals, (b) managers; (c)
clerical and sales workers; (c) craft, operative, and laborer occupations; and (d) service
occupations. Comparing demand indexes using industry-occupation cells and those using only
industry can shed light on within-industry demand shifts. Moreover, comparing the fiveoccupation with the three-occupation specification can provide some evidence on the importance
of within industry-occupation cell shifts.
Table 8 shows the results of these computations. For both definitions of labor input and
each of the industry-occupation breakdowns, demand shifts were favorable toward women in the
1980s. Estimated demand shifts for the 1990s based on industry are also positive, although
smaller than for 1980; those based on industry-occupation cells are close to zero and negative in
two cases. Before considering the differences between the trends over the 1980s and 1990s in
greater detail, a comment is in order about the between industry vs. the within industryoccupation cell estimates. For the 1980s, between industry demand shifts are estimated to be
only slightly less favorable to women than estimates based on industry-occupation cells, while in
the 1990s, between industry demand shifts are more favorable to women than those based on
industry-occupation cells. This means that within industry occupational employment shifts
were, on net, only slightly favorable to women in the 1980s, and unfavorable to women in the
1990s.. Inspection of the data revealed that this was principally due to the clerical and sales
category for which demand was estimated to have only slightly increased over the 1980s and to
have decreased in the 1990s. This outcome for the 1990s is consistent with a decrease in the
demand for clerical workers with technological changes like word processing programs,
computerized data processing, automatic teller machines, etc. However, it may also to some
extent reflect the movement of women out of clerical jobs as better opportunities became
available.
33

For supply and demand shifts to account for the larger closing of the unexplained gap in
the 1980s, demand shifts should be more favorable to women in the 1980s than in the 1990s.
This is indeed what is consistently indicated by the shift-share results in Table 8. For example,
based on the estimates including an industry-occupation breakdown (rows B and C), demand
shifts were 0.0346 to 0.0409 log points larger in the 1980s than in the 1990s. These estimated
differences between the two decades are smaller than those required by our simulations in Table
7 to account fully for the slower closing of the unexplained gap in the 1990s. Moreover, within
each decade, the estimated demand shifts in Table 8 are generally smaller than the shift in female
supply implied by our Table 7 simulations. However, it is certainly possible that the shift-share
analysis understates the true growth in demand, and particularly the extent of faster growth in the
1980s.
One obvious factor is that it is possible that a finer break down of industry-occupation
categories would produce a greater difference in the trends between the two decades. This is at
least suggested by the fact that our estimate of the difference between the two decades is larger
when we take occupation into account than when we only look at industry. Moreover, it is
possible that the kinds of gender-biased increases in the demand for intellectual skills discussed
by Welch (2000) manifested themselves within industry-occupation cells. One indicator of the
increased demand for “brains” over “brawn” is the growth in the incidence of computer use at
work. The observation that women are more likely than men to use computers at work suggests
that women as a group may have benefited from shifts in demand associated with
computerization. Autor, Katz and Krueger (1998) for example note that the groups that had the
most rapid increase in computer usage in the 1980s and early 1990s (the highly educated, whites,
white collar workers and women) also had the largest wage increases. While the interpretation
of this correlation is under some dispute (DiNardo and Pischke 1997), the finding suggests that
growing computer use has raised the demand for women. Diffusion of computers likely also
benefited women because computers restructure work in ways that de-emphasize physical
strength (Weinberg 2000). Consistent with these arguments, Weinberg (2000) found for the
34

1984-93 period that, within industry-occupation cells, growth in overall computer usage in the
cell increased women’s share of hours worked among both computer users and nonusers.
Computerization rose more rapidly in the 1980s than in the 1990s and hence this may be
a factor in explaining the slowdown in convergence in the 1990s. Friedberg (2003) reports that
computer use increased from 24.4 percent of workers in 1984 to 37.3 percent in 1989, for an
annual rate of increase of 8.9%; in contrast, the annual increase between 1989 and 1997 was only
3.9% (p. 514). Combining Weinberg’s estimates of the impact of increased computer use on the
female hours share with Friedberg’s data on the growth in computer usage, we estimate that
rising computer use increased women’s share of hours by 0.0765 log points over the 1980s
compared to 0.0295 log points over the 1990s under Weinberg’s “high estimates,” and 0.0470
log points in the 1980s compared to 0.0181 log points in the 1990s under his “low estimates.”30
This suggests a plausible source of within industry-occupation demand shifts favoring women
relative to men to a greater extent in the 1980s than in the 1990s that is not captured by our shiftshare analysis. While even adding these estimates to those presented in Table 8, we would still
fall short of the demand shifts required by the simulation, this finding may be indicative of other
factors positively affecting the demand for women within industry-occupation cells.
Finally, as noted above, the effects of industry, occupation and union coverage shown in
Table 2B, taken together, are consistent with a slowdown in the growth of female demand in the
1990s. Specifically, Table 2B shows that women’s relative industry-occupation location and
union status changes together contributed to a 0.0476 log point closing in the gender wage gap in
the 1980s, but to only a 0.0211 log point closing in the 1990s, with both occupational shifts and
deunionization, in particular, contributing less to convergence in the 1990s. The smaller
contribution of occupational shifts was due to men’s greater loss of craft and operator jobs in the
30

Friedberg provides data on computer use only for 1984, 1989, 1993, and 1997. The estimates in the text use
linear interpolation to obtain computer use in 1998 and assume 0 incidence of computer use in the workplace in
1979. The latter is consistent with Autor, Katz and Krueger’s (1998) observation that the IBM PC was introduced
in 1981 and the Apple II in 1977. If we instead use linear interpolation to estimate 1979 computer use, we estimate
that rising computer use increased women’s share of hours by 0.0268 log points (Weinberg low estimate) to 0.0437
log points (Weinberg high estimate) over the 1980s; and 0.0181 log points (Weinberg low estimate) to 0.0295 log
points (Weinberg high estimate) over the 1990s.
35

1980s than the 1990s; and men also lost union jobs more rapidly in the earlier period. Technical
change has been widely cited as a factor in the shrinking of blue collar employment (e.g., Katz
and Murphy 1992) and is likely to also be a significant cause of deunionization, as computers
make it easier to substitute away from relatively unionized routine manual jobs (Autor, Levy and
Murnane 2003).

VI. Conclusion

This paper has used PSID data to study the slowdown in the convergence of female and
male wages in the 1990s compared to the 1980s. After decades of near constancy, between 1979
and 1989 the female/male hourly pay ratio rose by 17.8 percent—from 63.2 to 74.5 percent.
However, convergence slowed in the 1990s, with the ratio rising to 79.7 in 1998, an increase of
7.2 percent on a ten-year basis. We first decomposed the slowdown in convergence into a
portion due to changes in women’s relative human capital levels and other measured
characteristics; a portion that was unexplained by such changes in gender differences in
measured characteristics; and a portion due to changes in overall prices in the labor market.
Our decompositions showed that women improved their relative human capital to a
comparable extent in the 1980s and the 1990s. In the 1980s this upgrading consisted entirely of
rising experience and, consistent with what might be expected based on the slowing growth in
women’s labor force participation rates in the 1990s, decreases in the gender gap in experience
contributed considerably less to wage convergence in the 1990s. However, rising relative
educational attainment of women played a much larger role in the 1990s, and thus, the sum of
the effects of education and experience was similar in the two decades. In contrast, while
occupational upgrading and deunionization contributed to women’s relative wage gains in both
decades, the impact of these factors was greater in the 1980s. While women increased their
relative representation in managerial and professional jobs and reduced their relative
representation in clerical and service jobs at about the same pace in both periods, men moved out
36

of (or lost) craft and operator jobs at a faster rate in the 1980s. And, as the pace of
deunionization slowed for both men and women in the 1990s, the gender difference in the rate of
deunionization also declined. Thus, slowing convergence in sectoral location in the 1990s is part
of the explanation for the slowdown in wage convergence. The results of our decompositions
also indicate that the price of skills and returns to location in favorable sectors of the economy
cannot explain why the gender pay gap fell faster in the 1980s than in the 1990s. These prices
changed to the detriment of women in the 1980s and had very little effect in the 1990s.
Controlling for human capital, sector, and the prices of measured and unmeasured labor
market skills, we found that women made much larger gains in relative wages in the 1980s than
in the 1990s. This difference, which is “unexplained” by our regression analyses, was sufficient
to more than fully account for the slowdown in wage convergence in the 1990s. We then
considered the factors that may have contributed to these changes in the convergence of the
unexplained gender pay gap, including changes in labor force selectivity, changes in the gender
difference in unmeasured characteristics and labor market discrimination, and changes in the
favorableness of supply and demand shifts. We present some evidence consistent with each of
these factors suggesting that each may have played a role in explaining the observed trends.
First, we considered the role of labor force selectivity. Using median regression
methods, we conclude that gender convergence in wage offers over the 1980s was significantly
overstated by the focus on employed women in full-time jobs. This suggests that female labor
force growth over the 1980s was positively selected; a finding that is consistent with studies of
female labor force participation trends over that period. The much smaller growth in the female
labor force over the 1990s was found to be slightly negatively selected, perhaps reflecting the
large entry of relatively low-skilled, female single-family heads during this decade. Taking the
trends for both periods into account, our results imply that as much as 25 percent of the apparent
slowdown in convergence in the unexplained gender pay gap was an artifact of labor force
selection. While this is a significant effect, the selection results do not alter our conclusion,

37

based on OLS regressions for the full-time employed sample, that there was considerably less
convergence in the unexplained gender pay gap in the 1990s than in the 1980s.
Second, we examined evidence on changes in the gender difference in unmeasured
characteristics and labor market discrimination. We found some indirect evidence in support of
both of these factors. Specifically, we found that the gender gap in housework hours closed
much more rapidly in the 1980s than in the 1990s both absolutely and relatively. While these
changes could have in part been a response to changing labor market opportunities, it is also
possible that they represent, at least in part, exogenous behavioral shifts and that they are
indicative of faster convergence over the 1980s in other unmeasured characteristics as well. The
faster increase in female labor force participation in the 1980s, as well as the more rapid
narrowing of the gender gap in experience in that decade are also suggestive of a greater increase
in women’s commitment to the labor force in the earlier decade. With respect to discrimination,
we speculated that if there was there was indeed a greater growth in women’s labor force
commitment in the 1980s, one of the possible bases for statistical discrimination against women
may have eroded faster in that decade. We also presented some evidence from quantile
regressions that was consistent with a greater negative effect of glass ceiling barriers on
women’s relative wages in the 1990s, as women’s 1980s gains placed more of them into the
higher-level positions where glass-ceiling barriers might hinder their further upward progression.
Of course, as in any analysis of this kind, these findings could reflect the impact of unmeasured
characteristics rather than discrimination.
Finally, it is likely that due to technological change and changes in the composition of
final demand, the demand for labor in sectors where women predominate rose faster in the 1980s
than in the 1990s. To study this issue, we constructed a supply-demand model of women’s
relative wages and relative employment. We used consensus estimates of labor supply and
production substitution elasticities, along with the observed changes in women’s relative
employment and relative wages (adjusted for selection and human capital) to infer the shifts in
female relative demand and supply consistent with the observed trends. The model implied that
38

a large reduction in demand shifts favoring women in the 1990s compared to the 1980s was the
major factor explaining the slowdown in wage convergence. We obtained some direct evidence
on these shifts by constructing shift-share demand indexes using CPS data for 1980-1990 and
1990-1999. Based on changes in the overall occupational-industrial distribution of employment,
we conclude that demand did indeed shift more favorably toward women in the 1980s than the
1990s. Although the magnitudes of our indexes were much smaller than required by the
theoretical model, we noted that demand shifts favoring women could also operate within
industry and occupation cells and thus not be measured by our analysis. We presented some
evidence on one factor, computerization, which proceeded more rapidly in the 1980s than in the
1990s and likely contributed to increasing demand for women within occupation-industry cells.

39

Appendix A: The Decomposition of Changes in the Gender Pay Gap
Following JMP’s notation, suppose that we have for male worker i and year t a male
wage equation:
(1A)

Yit = XitBt + σtθit,

where Yit is the log of wages; Xit is a vector of explanatory variables; Bt is a vector of
coefficients; θit is a standardized residual (i.e. with mean zero and variance 1 for each year); and
σt is the residual standard deviation of male wages for that year (i.e. its level of male residual
wage inequality). As will be clear in our explanation of the implementation of the
decomposition below, following JMP, we do not impose normality on the distribution of
residuals.
The male-female log wage gap for year t is:
(2A)

Dt ≡ Ymt - Yft = ∆XtBt + σt∆θt

where the m and f subscripts refer to male and female averages, respectively; and a ∆ prefix
signifies the average male-female difference for the variable immediately following. Equation
(2A) states that the pay gap can be decomposed into a portion due to gender differences in
measured qualifications (∆Xt) weighted by the male returns (Bt), and a portion due to gender
differences in the standardized residual from the male equation (∆θt) multiplied by the money
value per unit difference in the standardized residual (σt). We also perform the decomposition
using the female wage equations and obtain similar results.31 Note that the final term of (2A)
corresponds to the "unexplained" differential in a standard decomposition of the gender
differential when the contribution of the means is evaluated using the male function.
The difference in the gender pay gap between two years 0 and 1 (i.e., 1979-89 and 198998) can then be decomposed using (2A):
(3A)

D1 - D0 = (∆X1-∆X0)B1 + ∆X0(B1-B0) + (∆θ1-∆θ0)σ1 + ∆θ0(σ1-σ0).

The first term of (3A) is the Observed X’s Effect; the second term is the Observed Prices Effect;
the third term is the Gap Effect and the fourth term is the Unobserved Prices Effect. Following
31

Datta Gupta, Oaxaca and Smith (2003) suggest performing Juhn, Murphy Pierce decompositions on pooled male
and female wage samples. We chose not to do this because the coefficients in such equations confound
compositional effects (e.g. the female composition of dummy variable categories) and true returns to human capital
and rents.

JMP, we estimate the gap and the unmeasured prices effects empirically using the entire
distribution of male and female wage residuals in each year. Specifically, to compute (∆θ1∆θ0)σ1, we first give each woman in year 0 a percentile number based on the ranking of her
wage residual (from the year 0 male wage regression) in the year 0 distribution of male wage
residuals. We then impute the wage residual of each woman in year 0, given her percentile
ranking in year 0 and the distribution of male wage residuals in year 1. So, taking the 1979-89
comparison as an example, if a woman ranks at the 20th percentile of the male distribution of
wage residuals in 1979, she would be given the residual corresponding to the 20th percentile of
the 1989 male distribution of wage residuals. The average of these imputed residuals (multiplied
by -1) is our estimate of ∆θ0σ1. (Recall that the mean male residual is always zero.) The
average 1989 female residual from the 1989 male wage regression (multiplied by -1) constitutes
our estimate of ∆θ1σ1. The difference between the actual and imputed residuals yields (∆θ1∆θ0)σ1. The fourth term of (3), ∆θ0(σ1-σ0), is obtained analogously. Note, again, that by using
the actual distribution of male residuals, we do not impose normality on the residual distribution.

41

Appendix B: Computation of Actual Full Time and Part Time Experience
Whenever people join the PSID panel for the first time as a head or wife, they are asked
how many years they worked since they were 18 years old, and of these years, how many
involved full-time work. In addition, in 1976 and 1985, the PSID asked all heads and wives
these two questions regardless of when they joined the panel. The answers to these questions
form the base from which we calculate actual full time experience and part time experience
(which is defined as total experience minus full time experience). Once we have these initial
values for full time and part time experience, we fill in the period between the date these
questions were asked and the focal year (e.g. 1980, 1990 or 1999) by using the longitudinal work
history data collected for all heads and wives in the years after they join the panel or in the years
after 1976 or 1985, whichever comes last. For example, suppose one joined the panel in 1987
and we want to compute full time and part time experience as of the 1990 survey. These were
collected as of 1987. We then add 1 to total labor market experience for each year between 1987
and 1990 in which the person worked positive hours and 1 for full time experience for each year
the person worked at least 1500 hours. Part time experience is increased by 1 for each year there
were positive but less than 1500 hours of employment.
This procedure allows us to fill in the experience history of all respondents for all years
of the survey with one exception: the PSID began skipping alternate years with the 1999 survey,
meaning that there was no 1998 survey. We therefore have no information on annual work hours
between 1997 and 1998. To fill in this missing year of experience, we use the 1999 male and
female samples and estimate logit models separately by gender for having positive work hours
and for working at least 1500 hours in the previous year and in the year preceding the 1997
survey (for those who joined in 1999 and therefore have no data from the 1997 survey, we
already have their complete work experience data). The explanatory variables include the race,
schooling and experience variables in the human capital model, plus a marital status indicator
and the number of children living with the respondent. To estimate part time and full time
experience for the missing year (i.e. the year between 1997 and 1999), we average the two
predicted values for these variables from the 1999 logit and the 1997 logit.

42

References
Acemoglu, Daron, “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic
Literature 40 (March 2002): 7-72.
Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have
Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113
(November 1998): 1169-1213.
Autor, David H., Frank Levy, and Richard J. Murnane, “The Skill Content of Recent
Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
118 (November 2003): 1279-1333.
Bayard, Kimberly, Judith Hellerstein, David Neumark, and Kenneth Troske, "New Evidence on
Sex Segregation and Sex Difference in Wages From Matched Employee-Employer
Data," Journal of Labor Economics, 21 (October 2003): 887-922.
Becker, Gary S., "Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division Labor," Journal of Labor
Economics 3 (January 1985 Supp): S33-S58.
Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches, “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
U.S. Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109 (May 1994): 367-397.
Blank, Rebecca M., "Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government—Fighting Poverty:
Lessons from Recent U.S. History," Journal of Economic Perspectives 14 (Spring 2000):
3-19.
Blau, Francine D., “Trends in the Well-being of American Women, 1970-1995,” Journal of
Economic Literature 36 (March 1998): 112-165.
Blau, Francine D., Equal Pay in the Office (Lexington, MA: DC Heath, 1977).
Blau, Francine D., Marianne Ferber and Anne Winkler, The Economics of Women, Men and
Work, 4rh edition (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002).
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “The Gender Earnings Gap: Learning from
International Comparisons,” American Economic Review 82 (May 1992): 533-538.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "Wage Structure and Gender Earnings Differentials:
an International Comparison," Economica 63 (May 1996 supplement): S29-S62.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, "Swimming Upstream: Trends in the Gender Wage
Differential in the 1980s," Journal of Labor Economics, 15 (January 1997 Part 1): 1-42.
Blau, Francine D. and Lawrence M. Kahn, “Gender Differences in Pay,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 14 (Fall 2000): 75-99.
Blundell, Richard, and Thomas MaCurdy, “Labor Supply: A Review of Alternative
Approaches,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3A (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999), pp. 1559-1695.

Borjas, George J., “The Demographic Determinants of the Demand for Black Labor,” in Richard
Freeman and Harry Holzer, eds., The Black Youth Employment Crisis (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1986a), pp. 191-232.
Borjas, George J. “The Sensitivity of Labor Demand Functions to Choice of Dependent
Variable,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (February 1986b): 58-66.
Borjas, George J., “Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What Happened to
Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (April 1995): 201245.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux, “Can Relative Supply Explain the Rising Return to College
for Younger Man: A Cohort-Based Analysis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (May
2001): 705-746.
Datta Gupta, Nabanita, Ronald L. Oaxaca and Nina Smith, “Swimming Upstream, Floating
Downstream: Comparing Women’s Relative Wage Position in the U.S. and Denmark,” IZA
Discussion Paper No. 756 (Bonn, Germany: April 2003).
DiNardo, John, Nicole M. Fortin and Thomas Lemieux, "Labor Market Institutions and the
Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach," Econometrica 64
(September 1996): 1001-1044.
DiNardo, John and Jörn-Steffen Pischke, “The Returns to Computer Use Revisited: Have Pencils
Changes the Wage Structure Too?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (February 1997):
291-303.
Edin, Per-Anders and Katarina Richardson, “Swimming with the Tide: Solidarity Wage Policy and
the Gender Earnings Gap,” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 104 (March 2002): 49-67.
Filer, Randall K., Daniel S. Hamermesh, and Albert E. Rees, The Economics of Work and Pay, Sixth
Edition (New York: Harper-Collins 1996).
Fortin, Nicole M. and Thomas Lemieux, “Rank Regressions, Wage Distributions, and the
Gender Gap,” Journal of Human Resources 33 (Summer 1998): 610-643.
Fortin, Nicole M. and Thomas Lemieux, Are Women’s Wage Gains Men’s Losses? A
Distributional Test,” American Economic Review 90 (May 2000): 456-460.
Friedberg, Leora, “The Impact of Technological Change on Older Workers: Evidence from Data
on Computer Use,” Industrial & Labor Relations Review 56 (April 2003): 511-529.
Goldin, Claudia Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American Women
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990).
Gottschalk, Peter and Robert Moffitt, “Earnings and Wage Distributions in the NLS, CPS and
PSID,” Part I of Final Report to the U.S. Department of Labor, Grant No. E-9-J-0047,
“Earnings Mobility and Earnings Inequality in the United States.”
Gould IV, William B., Agenda for Reform: The Future of Employment Relationships and the
Law (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1993).

44

Gouskova, Elena and Robert F. Schoeni, “Comparing Estimates of Family Income in the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics and the March Current Population Survey, 1968-1999,”
Unpublished working paper, University of Michigan, undated.
Grant, James H. and Daniel S. Hamermesh, “Labor Market Competition Among Youths, White
Women and Others,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 63 (August 1981): 354360.
Groshen, Erica L., "The Structure of the Female/Male Wage Differential: Is it Who Your Are,
What You Do, or Where You Work?" Journal of Human Resources 26 (Summer 1991):
457-472.
Hamermesh, Daniel S., Labor Demand (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993).
Heckman, James J., “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrica 47 (January
1979): 153-162.
Hersch, Joni and Leslie Stratton. “Housework, Fixed Effects and Wages of Married Workers.”
Journal of Human Resources 32 (Spring 1997): 285-307.
Hicks, John, “Elasticity of Substitution Again: Substitutes and Complements,” Oxford
Economic Papers 22 (November 1970): 289-296.
Jacobsen, Joyce P., The Economics of Gender, 2nd Edition (Oxford, UK: Blackwell, 1998).
Jaeger, David A., “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
Recommendations for Researchers,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 15 (July
1997): 300-309.
Juhn, Chinhui and Kevin M. Murphy, “Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply,” Journal of
Labor Economics 15 (January 1997, part 1): 72–97.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, "Accounting for the Slowdown in BlackWhite Wage Convergence," in Marvin H. Kosters, ed., Workers and Their Wages
(Washington D.C., AEI Press, 1991), pp. 107-143.
Katz, Lawrence F. and David H. Autor, "Changes in the Wage Sructure and Earnings
Inequality," in Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 3A, in Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card, eds. (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999), pp. 1463-1555.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, "Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and
Demand Factors," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107 (February 1992): 35-78.
Killingsworth, Mark R., Labor Supply (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Killingsworth, Mark R. and James J. Heckman, “Female Labor Supply: A Survey,” in Orley
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 1
(Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1986), pp. 103-204.
Kim, Yong-Seong and Frank P. Stafford, “The Quality of PSID Income Data in the 1990s and
Beyond,” Unpublished working paper, University of Michigan, December 2000.
Koenker, Roger and Gilbert Bassett, Jr., “Regression Quantiles,” Econometrica 46 (January
1978): 33-50.
45

Korenman, Sanders and David Neumark, "Does Marriage Really Make Men More Productive?"
Journal of Human Resources 26 (Spring 1991): 282-307.
LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel, “The Assimilation of Immigrants in the U.S. Labor
Market,” in George J. Borjas and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration and the Work
Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas (Chicago IL:
University Of Chicago Press, 1992), pp. 67-92.
Layard, Richard, “Youth Unemployment in Britain and the United States Compared,” in Richard
B. Freeman and David A. Wise, eds., The Youth Labor Market Problem: Its Nature,
Causes, and Consequences (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982), pp. 499-531.
Lewis, Philip E. T., “Substitution Between Young and Adult Workers in Australia,” Australian
Economic Papers 24, No. 44 (June 1985): 115-126.
Meyer, Bruce D. and Dan T. Rosenbaum, “Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
Labor Supply of Single Mothers,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, (August 2001):
1063-1114.
Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek, "Family Investments in Human Capital: Earnings of
Women," Journal of Political Economy 82 (March/April 1974 pt. 2): S76-S108.
Neal, Derek, “The Measured Black-White Wage Gap among Women Is Too Small,” Journal of
Political Economy 112 (February 2004, Supplement): S1-S28.
Neal, Derek A. and William R. Johnson, “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage
Differences,” Journal of Political Economy 104 (October 1996): 869-895.
Offices of Representatives John D. Dingell and Carolyn B. Maloney, “A New Look Through the
Glass Ceiling: Where are the Women?”, Report, January 2002.
O’Neill, June, “The Gender Gap in Wages, circa 2000,” American Economic Review 93 (May
2003): 309-314.
O'Neill, June and Solomon Polachek, "Why the Gender Gap in Wages Narrowed in the 1980s,"
Journal of Labor Economics. 11 (January 1993 pt. 1): 205-228.
Suen, Wing, "Decomposing Wage Residuals: Unmeasured Skill or Statistical Artifact?" Journal
of Labor Economics 15, Part 1 (July 1997): 555-566.
United States General Accounting Office (GAO), “Women in Management: Analysis of
Selected Data From the Current Population Survey,” Report to Congressional Requesters,
Washington, DC, October 2001.
Waldfogel, Jane. "The Family Gap for Young Women in the United States and Britain: Can
Maternity Leave Make a Difference? Journal of Labor Economics 16 (July 1998): 505545.
Weinberg, Bruce A., “Computer Use and the Demand for Female Workers.” Industrial & Labor
Relations Review 53 (January 2000): 290-308.
Welch, Finis, “Growth in Women’s Relative Wages and in Inequality Among Men: One
Phenomenon or Two?” American Economic Review 90 (May 2000): 444-449.

46

Welch, Finis, “Catching Up: Wages of Black Men,” American Economic Review 93 (May
2003): 320-325.

47

Figure 1: Gender Gap, Log Hourly Earnings, by Percentile, Full-Time Workers, PSID
0.55
0.5

1979

0.45
0.4
0.35

1989

0.3
0.25
0.2
1998

0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

Table 1: Overview of Wage Trends (1983 Dollars), 1979, 1989 and 1998
Changes
(Average Annual Change X 10)
1979-89
1989-98
-0.0506
0.0222
0.0628
0.0360
0.2470
0.0483

Log Male Wage
Std. Dev.
90-10 Differential

1979
2.3841
(0.5060)
1.1703

1989
2.3335
(0.5688)
1.4173

1998
2.3535
(0.6012)
1.4608

Log Female Wage
Std. Dev.
90-10 Differential

1.9255
(0.4836)
1.1369

2.0387
(0.5432)
1.3655

2.1261
(0.5663)
1.3710

0.1132
0.0596
0.2286

0.0971
0.0257
0.0061

Gender Log Wage Differential

0.4586

0.2948

0.2274

-0.1638

-0.0749

Implied Female/Male Pay Ratio

0.6322

0.7447

0.7966

0.1125

0.0577

Mean Female Percentile in the Male
a
Wage Distribution

24.31

35.16

38.93

10.85

4.19

Note: Table contains full-time, nonfarm wage and salary workers aged 18-65 years from the Michigan
Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Wages are computed as annual earnings divided by annual work hours.
Years refer to the period during which income was earned. The Implied Female /Male Pay Ratio is
(exp (ln wf)/exp(ln wm)), where ln wf and ln wm are, respectively, the average log female and log male
wage.
a

Computed by assigning each woman a percentile ranking in the indicated year's male wage distribution
and calculating the female mean of these percentiles.

Table 2A: Decomposition of Changes in the Gender Pay Gap, 1979-89 and
1989-98: Descriptive Statistics
Human
Capital

Full

0.4411
0.4693
0.5092

0.4036
0.4211
0.4577

0.4204
0.4279
0.4741

0.3694
0.3766
0.4172

1.0279
1.1242
1.2051

0.9159
1.0283
1.0468

Female Residual 90-10 Differential
1979
1989
1998

0.9389
1.0637
1.1522

0.8448
0.9219
0.9790

Mean Female Residual from Male
Wage Regression
1979
1989
1998

-0.3458
-0.2003
-0.2088

-0.2035
-0.0943
-0.0935

Implied Gender Wage Ratio (Adjusted
for Measured Xs)
1979
1989
1998

0.7077
0.8185
0.8116

0.8159
0.9100
0.9107

Mean Female Residual Percentile
1979
1989
1998

27.00
36.71
37.68

34.57
43.15
44.18

a

Male Residual Standard Deviation
1979
1989
1998

b

Female Residual Standard Deviation
1979
1989
1998
a

Male Residual 90-10 Differential
1979
1989
1998

b

a
b

Residuals from a male wage regression.
Residuals from a female wage regression.

Notes: The human capital specification includes controls for race, education and
experience. The full specification includes, in addition, controls for occupation,
industry and collective bargaining coverage. See Table A2 for variable means
and Table A3 for regression results.

Table 2B: Decomposition of Changes in the Gender Pay Gap, 1979-89 and 1989-98: Decomposition Results
(Average Annual Changes X 10)
1979-89
Human
Capital
Full

1989-98
Human
Capital
Full

Change in Differential (D1 - D0)

-0.1638

-0.1638

-0.0748

-0.0748

0.0890

0.0890

Observed X's
All X's
Education variables
Experience variables
Occupation variables
Collective Bargaining
Industry variables

-0.0488
0.0002
-0.0528
----------

-0.0923
-0.0013
-0.0458
-0.0287
-0.0218
0.0029

-0.0560
-0.0354
-0.0192
----------

-0.0676
-0.0291
-0.0165
-0.0190
-0.0074
0.0053

-0.0072
-0.0356
0.0336
----------

0.0247
-0.0278
0.0293
0.0097
0.0144
0.0024

Observed Prices
All B's
Education variables
Experience variables
Occupation variables
Collective Bargaining
Industry variables

0.0305
0.0042
0.0248
----------

0.0378
0.0043
0.0216
-0.0181
0.0074
0.0218

-0.0283
0.0026
-0.0322
----------

-0.0064
0.0022
-0.0267
0.0536
-0.0005
-0.0359

-0.0588
-0.0016
-0.0570
----------

-0.0442
-0.0021
-0.0484
0.0717
-0.0078
-0.0577

Unexplained Differential
Gap Effect
Unobserved Prices

-0.1455
-0.1801
0.0346

-0.1092
-0.1279
0.0187

0.0094
-0.0063
0.0157

-0.0009
-0.0074
0.0065

0.1549
0.1738
-0.0189

0.1083
0.1205
-0.0122

Notes: The human capital specification includes controls for race, education and
experience. The full specification includes, in addition, controls for occupation,
industry and collective bargaining coverage. See Table A2 for variable means
and Table A3 for regression results.

(1989-98) - (1979-89)
Human
Capital
Full

Table 3: Fraction of Adult Population With Earnings Observations Under Different Sample Inclusion Rules
1979

1989

1998

Sample Inclusion Rule
a) Full Time Employed Workers

Men
0.8331

Women
0.4098

Men
0.7982

Women
0.4970

Men
0.8107

Women
0.5252

b) All with Hourly Earnings
Observations

0.9378

0.6804

0.9158

0.7572

0.9176

0.7692

c) All with Hourly Earnings
Observations in the Last Four Years

0.9737

0.8057

0.9695

0.8657

0.9567

0.8699

d) c) + those with (16+ yrs Educ and
8+ yrs Exp) or (<12 yrs Educ and <
8yrs Exp)

0.9763

0.8591

0.9764

0.9018

0.9639

0.9053

Source: PSID.

Table 4: Changes in Gender Pay Gaps at the Mean for Full-time Workers and at the Median Under Different Sample Inclusion Rules

Raw Gap

Raw Gap

1979

A. Gender Pay Gaps
I. Mean (Full-time Employed Workers)

Gap Controlling for
Human Capital

Gap Controlling for
Human Capital

Raw Gap

1989

Gap Controlling for
Human Capital
1998

0.4586

0.3458

0.2948

0.2003

0.2274

0.2088

a) Full Time Employed Workers

0.4790

0.3658

0.3052

0.2076

0.2272

0.2006

b) All with Hourly Earnings
Observations

0.5209

0.3462

0.3893

0.2223

0.3176

0.2264

c) All with Hourly Earnings
Observations in the Last Four Years

0.5456

0.3512

0.4244

0.2348

0.3430

0.2289

d) c) + those with (16+ yrs Educ and
8+ yrs Exp) or (<12 yrs Educ and <
8yrs Exp)

0.6201

0.3849

0.3769

0.2362

II. Median, Sample Inclusion Rule:

1979-1989

B. Chages in the Gender Pay Gaps

0.4666
0.2530
(Average Annual Changes X 10)
1989-1998

(1989-98) - (1979-89)

-0.1638

-0.1455

-0.0748

0.0094

0.0890

0.1549

a) Full Time Employed Workers

-0.1737

-0.1582

-0.0867

-0.0078

0.0870

0.1504

b) All with Hourly Earnings
Observations

-0.1317

-0.1239

-0.0796

0.0046

0.0520

0.1285

c) All with Hourly Earnings
Observations in the Last Four Years

-0.1212

-0.1164

-0.0905

-0.0066

0.0307

0.1098

d) c) + those with (16+ yrs Educ and
8+ yrs Exp) or (<12 yrs Educ and <
8yrs Exp)

-0.1535

-0.1319

-0.0997

-0.0187

0.0538

0.1133

I. Mean (Full-time Employed Workers)
II. Median, Sample Inclusion Rule:

Source: PSID. Raw Gap is the difference in predicted mean or median log male and log female wage, which is HmXm-HfXf, where Hm and Hf
are respectively vectors of male and female mean (Row I) or median (Rows IIa-d) human capital log wage regression coefficients and Xm and
Xf are respectively male and female means for the vector of explanatory variables, which include a dummy for white, years of schooling,
dummies for college degree and advanced degree, and part-time and full-time actual experience and their squares. The Gap Controlling
for Human Capital is (Hm-Hf)Xf.

Table 5: Annual Hours of Housework, Full Time Employed Wage and Salary Workers

A. All Workers
1979
1989
1998

Men

Women

Difference:
Male-Female

Ratio:
Male/Female

380.04
391.59
358.07

872.02
705.47
639.83

-491.98
-313.88
-281.76

0.436
0.555
0.560

11.55
-37.25

-166.55
-72.94

178.10
35.69

0.119
0.005

365.746
394.578
358.193

998.007
806.394
723.340

-632.26
-411.82
-365.15

0.366
0.489
0.495

28.83
-40.43

-191.61
-92.28

220.44
51.86

0.123
0.007

Changes (YEAR1 - YEAR0)*
1979-89
1989-98
B. Married Workers
1979
1989
1998
Changes (YEAR1 - YEAR0)*
1979-89
1989-98
*Average Annual Change X 10.
Source: PSID. Sample includes full time nonfarm wage and salary workers.

Table 6: Unexplained Gender Pay Gaps Based on Quantile Regressions, 1979-89 and 1989-98
Human
Capital

Full

Human
Capital

1979

A. Unexplained Gender Pay Gap

Full

Human
Capital

1989

Full
1998

50th Percentile

0.3658

0.2106

0.2076

0.1007

0.2005

0.0762

90th Percentile

0.3770

0.2539

0.2090

0.1439

0.2691

0.1655

B. Changes in the Unexlained
Gender Pay Gap

1979-89

Average Annual Change X 10
1989-98
(1989-98) - (1979-89)

50th Percentile

-0.1582

-0.1099

-0.0079

-0.0272

0.1503

0.0827

90th Percentile

-0.1680

-0.1100

0.0668

0.0240

0.2348

0.1340

Notes: The human capital specification includes controls for race, education and experience. The full specification
includes, in addition, controls for occupation, industry and collective bargaining coverage. The unexplained gap is
calculated as (BM -BF)XF, where BM and BF are vectors of coefficients from male and female quantile regression
equations and XF is a vector of female means.

Table 7: Estimated Female Demand and Supply Shifts (Based on Selectivity Corrected Wage Changes)
(Average Annual Changes X 10)

dln(W f/W m)

σ = 2.29
1979-1989
1989-1998
0.1319
0.0187

σ=3
1979-1989
1989-1998
0.1319
0.0187

σ=1
1979-1989
1989-1998
0.1319
0.0187

dln(W m)

-0.1108

-0.0230

-0.1108

-0.0230

-0.1108

-0.0230

dln(Lf/Lm) efficiency units

0.2467

0.0967

0.2467

0.0967

0.2467

0.0967

dln(Lf/Lm) work hours

0.1479

0.0164

0.1479

0.0164

0.1479

0.0164

Df (efficiency units)

0.5488

0.1395

0.6424

0.1528

0.3786

0.1154

Sf (efficiency units)

0.2373

0.1007

0.2373

0.1007

0.2373

0.1007

Df (work hours)

0.4500

0.0593

0.5436

0.0725

0.2798

0.0351

Sf (work hours)

0.1385

0.0204

0.1385

0.0204

0.1385

0.0204

Notes: σ is the male-female elasticity of substitution in production; dln(W f/W m) is the change in the human capital
corrected female/male log wage differential based on median regressions estimated on the most inclusive
sample (See Table 6, sample d); dln(W m) is the predicted change in the real male median wage for the 1990 male
sample using the 1980, 1990 and 1999 male median regression coefficients; dln(Lf/Lm) is the change in the ratio of
total female to total male labor input, including the self employed and part time workers; Df and Sf are respectively
the implied female demand and supply shifts. All estimates assume a female own wage labor supply elasticity (ef)
of 0.78; a male own wage labor supply elasticity (em) of 0; a female labor supply elasticity wrt male wages (efm)
of -0.0456; and a male labor supply elasticity wrt female wages (emf) of 0.0936.

Table 8: Demand Indexes for Women, Based on Industry-Occupation Shifts
(Annual Changes X 10)

Industry-Occupation Breakdown

Labor Input in Efficiency Units
1980-90
1990-99

Labor Input in Work Hours
1980-90
1990-99

A. 43 Industries

0.0515

0.0404

0.0276

0.0204

B. 43 Industries x 3 Occupations

0.0545

0.0136

0.0322

-0.0044

C. 43 Industries x 5 Occupations

0.0556

0.0148

0.0329

-0.0017

Source: March CPS for 1980, 1990 and 1999. The 43 industries are largely the 2 digit industries as
defined by the Census. The 3 occupation breakdown includes: (a) professionals and managers;
(b) clerical and sales workers; (c) craft, operative, laborer and service occupations. The 5 occupation
breakdown disaggregates category (a) into (a1) professionals and (a2) managers and category (c) into
(c1) craft, operative and laborer occupations and (c2) service workers.

Table A1: Overview of Wage Trends (1983 Dollars), 1979, 1989 and 1998, CPS Data
Changes
(Average Annual Change X 10)
1979-89
1989-98
-0.0242
0.0437
0.0538
0.0130

1979
2.2475
(0.5409)

1989
2.2233
(0.5947)

1998
2.2626
(0.6064)

1.8109
(0.4689)

1.9159
(0.5383)

2.0161
(0.5647)

0.1050
0.0694

0.1113
0.0293

Log Wage Differential

0.4366

0.3074

0.2465

-0.1292

-0.0677

Implied Female/Male Pay Ratio

0.6462

0.7354

0.7815

0.0891

0.0513

Mean Female Percentile in the Male
a
Wage Distribution

26.08

34.96

37.99

8.88

3.37

Log Male Wage

Log Female Wage

Note: Table contains full-time, nonfarm wage and salary workers aged 18-65 years from the Current
Population Survey. Wages are computed as annual earnings divided by annual work hours.
Years refer to the period during which income was earned. The implied female /male pay ratio is
(exp (ln wf)/exp(ln wm)), where ln wf and ln wm are, respectively, the average log female and log male
wage.
a

Computed by assigning each woman a percentile ranking in the indicated year's male wage distribution
and calculating the female mean of these percentiles.

Table A2: Means for the Regression Samples, PSID

white
schooling, years
college degree only
advanced degree
full time experience (yrs)
full time experience squared
part time experience (yrs)
part time experience squared
union coverage

1979
Men
Women
0.870
0.841
12.699
12.666
0.160
0.152
0.069
0.040
18.305
11.743
478.718 221.334
1.204
2.448
6.924
19.856

1989
Men
Women
0.885
0.831
13.295
13.256
0.203
0.177
0.082
0.069
18.280
14.008
447.901 273.692
1.667
2.697
10.150
24.927

1998
Men
Women
0.866
0.819
13.450
13.677
0.219
0.230
0.066
0.073
19.839
16.290
508.039 357.277
1.423
3.027
7.222
26.264

0.349

0.216

0.239

0.185

0.202

0.173

0.002
0.004
0.014
0.022
0.014
0.053
0.042
0.019
0.005
0.006
0.162
0.049
0.052
0.037
0.210
0.030
0.060
0.131
0.045
0.043

0.000
0.040
0.012
0.079
0.013
0.003
0.023
0.022
0.000
0.008
0.085
0.033
0.349
0.003
0.009
0.005
0.010
0.150
0.006
0.150

0.004
0.005
0.014
0.017
0.013
0.054
0.066
0.018
0.007
0.006
0.172
0.066
0.053
0.021
0.180
0.053
0.066
0.108
0.045
0.032

0.003
0.037
0.014
0.081
0.012
0.011
0.054
0.026
0.003
0.019
0.129
0.033
0.315
0.006
0.018
0.012
0.006
0.091
0.007
0.122

0.005
0.006
0.018
0.025
0.009
0.044
0.065
0.020
0.008
0.011
0.167
0.063
0.054
0.028
0.178
0.057
0.063
0.091
0.041
0.048

0.002
0.041
0.025
0.103
0.016
0.008
0.045
0.040
0.008
0.016
0.156
0.043
0.278
0.005
0.013
0.014
0.002
0.056
0.015
0.112

occupation variables
physician
other medical
accountant
teacher k-12
teacher college
architect
technician
public advisor
lawyer
other professional
manager
sales
clerical
foreman
other craft
protective service
transportation equip. operator
other operator
laborer
other service worker*

*Omitted cateory for the occupation dummy variables.

Table A2: Means for the Regression Samples, PSID (ctd)

Men

1979
Women

Men

1989
Women

Men

1998
Women

Industry Variables
mining
metal manufacturing
machinery
motor vehicles
other durables
food, tobacco
textiles, apparel
paper
chemicals
other nondurables
construction
transportation
communications
utilities
retail trade
wholesale trade
finance, ins. real estate
repair services
business services
personal services
recreation
publishing
medical services
educational services
professional sevices
public administration**

0.013
0.047
0.080
0.069
0.055
0.029
0.017
0.008
0.037
0.005
0.083
0.069
0.018
0.028
0.092
0.028
0.040
0.014
0.011
0.010
0.008
0.025
0.027
0.063
0.029
0.095

0.001
0.013
0.063
0.030
0.021
0.012
0.052
0.005
0.018
0.008
0.006
0.014
0.029
0.008
0.123
0.018
0.078
0.002
0.020
0.022
0.002
0.016
0.159
0.154
0.041
0.085

0.009
0.034
0.070
0.049
0.049
0.021
0.009
0.009
0.034
0.006
0.082
0.056
0.022
0.034
0.114
0.052
0.044
0.015
0.037
0.012
0.012
0.021
0.032
0.069
0.018
0.092

0.003
0.009
0.047
0.014
0.023
0.011
0.031
0.005
0.017
0.006
0.010
0.025
0.018
0.008
0.115
0.027
0.096
0.000
0.031
0.031
0.004
0.024
0.164
0.184
0.027
0.070

0.009
0.028
0.046
0.042
0.042
0.022
0.007
0.011
0.032
0.006
0.095
0.063
0.031
0.028
0.095
0.046
0.046
0.025
0.048
0.006
0.016
0.014
0.035
0.082
0.015
0.111

0.001
0.010
0.027
0.021
0.015
0.011
0.014
0.004
0.013
0.004
0.008
0.015
0.016
0.006
0.099
0.024
0.089
0.002
0.042
0.025
0.006
0.019
0.174
0.226
0.027
0.100

**Omitted category for the industry dummy variables.

Source: PSID. Sample includes full time employed wage and salary nonagricultural
workers age 18-65. Year refers to earnings date; explanatory variables are measured
as of the survey date (i.e. 1980, 1990 and 1999).

Table A3: Log Hourly Earnings Regression Results
1979 Men
Coef
SE
A. Human Capital Spec
white
schooling yrs
college degree only
advanced degree
full time experience (yrs)
full time experience squared
part time experience (yrs)
part time experience squared
2

0.1056
0.0550
0.0611
0.0851
0.0440
-0.0007
0.0003
0.0002

R
Sample size

0.2399
2816

B. Full Spec
white
schooling yrs
college degree only
advanced degree
full time experience (yrs)
full time experience squared
part time experience (yrs)
part time experience squared
union coverage
physician
other medical
accountant
teacher k-12
teacher college
architect
technician
public advisor
lawyer
other professional
manager
sales
clerical
foreman
other craft

0.0734
0.0444
0.0403
0.1445
0.0379
-0.0006
-0.0001
0.0002
0.2207
0.7873
0.0447
0.4959
0.2907
0.2752
0.5569
0.3928
0.2447
0.7053
0.3730
0.4414
0.2953
0.1886
0.3916
0.2403

0.0253
0.0046
0.0307
0.0420
0.0028
0.0001
0.0068
0.0004

1979 Women
Coef
SE
0.1021
0.0759
0.0462
0.2204
0.0303
-0.0005
0.0018
0.0001

0.0268
0.0066
0.0385
0.0607
0.0033
0.0001
0.0052
0.0003

0.2441
1922

0.0240
0.0048
0.0303
0.0447
0.0027
0.0001
0.0064
0.0004
0.0190
0.1929
0.1385
0.0820
0.0741
0.0828
0.0590
0.0569
0.0726
0.1260
0.1077
0.0466
0.0568
0.0540
0.0584
0.0456

1989 Men
Coef
SE
0.1589
0.0798
0.1351
0.1790
0.0475
-0.0007
-0.0034
0.0006

0.0275
0.0062
0.0332
0.0448
0.0031
0.0001
0.0062
0.0003

0.3193
2894

0.0690
0.0439
-0.0189
0.1681
0.0246
-0.0004
0.0004
0.0000
0.1691

0.0244
0.0065
0.0379
0.0590
0.0030
0.0001
0.0048
0.0002
0.0229

0.5149
0.2718
0.4199
0.5176
0.5734
0.4510
0.3942
0.8205
0.1769
0.3938
0.1501
0.1703
0.2720
0.2349

0.0521
0.0857
0.0551
0.0861
0.1780
0.0647
0.0693
0.7415
0.1032
0.0417
0.0566
0.0327
0.1608
0.0985

0.1015
0.0611
0.1182
0.2511
0.0385
-0.0005
-0.0050
0.0009
0.2764
0.1363
0.3071
0.3289
0.2524
0.3034
0.3819
0.3506
0.1038
0.4410
0.3772
0.3634
0.1448
0.0201
0.1655
0.1519

1989 Women
Coef
SE
0.1457
0.0990
0.1243
0.2175
0.0508
-0.0009
-0.0053
0.0004

0.0241
0.0072
0.0361
0.0498
0.0034
0.0001
0.0044
0.0002

0.3792
2290

0.0257
0.0061
0.0319
0.0447
0.0029
0.0001
0.0057
0.0003
0.0208
0.1414
0.1253
0.0876
0.0837
0.0886
0.0644
0.0592
0.0778
0.1143
0.1121
0.0537
0.0601
0.0601
0.0747
0.0534

0.1182
0.0511
0.1347
0.2886
0.0427
-0.0008
-0.0014
0.0002
0.2495
0.2444
0.4387
0.3061
0.3007
0.3290
0.4670
0.3775
0.3877
0.1991
0.4115
0.3174
0.3044
0.1393
0.1983
0.0658

1998 Men
Coef
SE
0.1818
0.0721
0.1712
0.2956
0.0431
-0.0007
-0.0106
0.0019

0.0313
0.0076
0.0382
0.0560
0.0039
0.0001
0.0103
0.0010

0.2824
2336

0.0222
0.0071
0.0347
0.0488
0.0031
0.0001
0.0040
0.0002
0.0231
0.1508
0.0507
0.0747
0.0496
0.0827
0.0855
0.0446
0.0584
0.1500
0.0702
0.0362
0.0533
0.0310
0.1098
0.0659

0.1166
0.0480
0.1710
0.3279
0.0363
-0.0006
-0.0088
0.0017
0.2687
0.9306
0.4500
0.4661
0.1185
0.3677
0.6320
0.5016
0.1641
0.7607
0.5562
0.5402
0.4311
0.2125
0.3458
0.3345

1998 Women
Coef
SE
-0.0100
0.0848
0.1643
0.2635
0.0447
-0.0007
0.0057
-0.0002

0.0293
0.0092
0.0419
0.0599
0.0041
0.0001
0.0060
0.0003

0.2990
1804

0.0293
0.0075
0.0367
0.0558
0.0036
0.0001
0.0095
0.0009
0.0271
0.1605
0.1367
0.0901
0.0852
0.1135
0.0703
0.0627
0.0852
0.1292
0.1048
0.0538
0.0629
0.0638
0.0763
0.0550

-0.0174
0.0497
0.1469
0.2245
0.0371
-0.0006
0.0056
-0.0004
0.2200
0.6871
0.5882
0.2153
0.2755
0.1107
0.4287
0.3598
0.2341
0.7789
0.4140
0.3730
0.2097
0.0481
0.1390
-0.0171

0.0269
0.0088
0.0395
0.0580
0.0038
0.0001
0.0056
0.0003
0.0303
0.2321
0.0628
0.0765
0.0554
0.0913
0.1186
0.0590
0.0621
0.1291
0.0901
0.0435
0.0629
0.0403
0.1518
0.0973

Table A3: Log Hourly Earnings Regression Results (ctd)
1979 Men
Coef
SE
B. Full Spec (ctd)
protective service
transport equip. oper
other operator
laborer
mining
metal mfg.
machinery
motor vehicles
other durables
food, tobacco
textiles, apparel
paper
chemicals
other nondurables
construction
transportation
communications
utilities
retail trade
wholesale trade
finance, ins. real est.
repair svc
business svc
personal svc
recreation
publishing
medical svc
educational svc
professional svc
2

R
Sample size

0.1515
0.1083
0.1431
0.1437
0.0781
0.0804
0.0606
0.1645
0.0402
0.0835
-0.1706
0.0275
0.1138
0.0756
0.0491
0.0667
0.1430
0.0453
-0.0949
0.0529
-0.0130
-0.0754
-0.0272
-0.0669
-0.2587
0.1784
-0.0171
-0.1758
-0.1250
0.3637
2816

0.0674
0.0539
0.0479
0.0559
0.0746
0.0489
0.0425
0.0443
0.0469
0.0559
0.0683
0.0944
0.0515
0.1162
0.0434
0.0445
0.0651
0.0561
0.0422
0.0570
0.0516
0.0743
0.0802
0.0858
0.0917
0.0589
0.0588
0.0538
0.0565

1979 Women
Coef
SE

0.1600
0.1609
0.1125
0.2327
0.2918
0.4721
0.0308
0.2850
0.0029
0.0216
-0.1610
0.1491
0.2262
-0.1669
0.2932
0.0600
0.2300
0.2195
-0.2062
-0.0559
0.0410
-0.4199
0.1475
-0.2254
0.1481
0.0291
-0.0109
-0.0707
-0.0110
0.4166
1922

0.1340
0.0965
0.0455
0.1199
0.2466
0.0846
0.0517
0.0605
0.0706
0.0866
0.0592
0.1317
0.0736
0.1045
0.1184
0.0817
0.0611
0.1011
0.0429
0.0720
0.0446
0.2239
0.0686
0.0695
0.2096
0.0777
0.0434
0.0449
0.0528

1989 Men
Coef
SE

0.0703
-0.0860
0.0124
-0.0051
0.1882
0.0479
0.1565
0.1913
0.0309
0.0111
-0.1158
0.0926
0.1124
-0.3764
0.0461
0.0630
0.1398
0.1370
-0.1201
0.0645
0.0653
-0.0846
0.0789
-0.0915
-0.1234
-0.0117
-0.1065
-0.3261
0.0746
0.4520
2894

0.0657
0.0588
0.0562
0.0616
0.0911
0.0570
0.0471
0.0518
0.0520
0.0660
0.0938
0.0899
0.0577
0.1095
0.0470
0.0497
0.0650
0.0557
0.0447
0.0518
0.0527
0.0761
0.0541
0.0823
0.0816
0.0654
0.0627
0.0518
0.0693

1989 Women
Coef
SE

0.3210
-0.0056
-0.1274
-0.1743
0.2386
0.0494
0.0198
0.0953
-0.0972
-0.0703
-0.1733
-0.1321
0.1240
-0.0323
0.0530
-0.0070
0.1766
0.0188
-0.3577
-0.0988
0.0458
0.0009
-0.0046
-0.1676
-0.2531
-0.1358
-0.1289
-0.2395
-0.0179
0.5192
2290

0.0832
0.1090
0.0452
0.1030
0.1491
0.0950
0.0537
0.0751
0.0657
0.0860
0.0617
0.1181
0.0706
0.1110
0.0878
0.0637
0.0681
0.0967
0.0431
0.0599
0.0423
0.3854
0.0573
0.0591
0.1300
0.0623
0.0412
0.0417
0.0596

1998 Men
Coef
SE

0.3101
0.1832
0.2066
0.1064
0.3168
0.2032
0.1580
0.2374
0.0568
0.0510
0.0332
0.1951
0.2503
-0.1928
0.0509
0.0595
0.3089
0.3296
-0.0705
0.0824
0.2005
-0.0067
0.1799
-0.0906
-0.2460
0.0875
0.0039
-0.1183
0.0883
0.4204
2336

0.0690
0.0634
0.0602
0.0678
0.1092
0.0707
0.0602
0.0618
0.0630
0.0756
0.1239
0.1014
0.0676
0.1260
0.0528
0.0556
0.0672
0.0696
0.0524
0.0615
0.0597
0.0773
0.0575
0.1318
0.0856
0.0896
0.0685
0.0570
0.0910

1998 Women
Coef
SE

0.4509
-0.3911
-0.1071
0.0156
0.2905
-0.0962
0.1057
0.1466
-0.0134
-0.0517
-0.2086
0.2264
0.2021
-0.1308
-0.0816
0.1011
0.1481
0.0070
-0.2984
-0.0657
0.0053
-0.2217
-0.0443
-0.3929
-0.3567
-0.0260
-0.1344
-0.2346
-0.0064
0.4573
1804

Source: PSID. Sample includes full time employed wage and salary nonagricultural workers age 18-65. Year refers to earnings date; explanatory
variables are measured as of the survey date (i.e. 1980, 1990, and 1999).

0.0948
0.2127
0.0676
0.0904
0.3320
0.1086
0.0746
0.0822
0.0934
0.1037
0.1021
0.1709
0.0968
0.1558
0.1153
0.0898
0.0872
0.1340
0.0498
0.0741
0.0497
0.2188
0.0610
0.0761
0.1366
0.0834
0.0458
0.0462
0.0721

Table A4: Decomposition of Changes in the Gender Pay Gap, 1979-89 and 1989-98,
CPS and PSID Samples, Potential Experience Specification

PSID

CPS

Change in Differential (D89-D79)

-0.1638

-0.1292

Observed X's

-0.0198

-0.0269

Observed Prices

0.0084

0.0022

Gap Effect

-0.1978

-0.1350

Unobserved Prices

0.0454

0.0306

Unexplained Differential (Gap Effect + Unobserved
Prices Effect)

-0.1524

-0.1044

Change in Differential (D98-D89)

-0.0748

-0.0677

Observed X's

-0.0428

-0.0174

Observed Prices

0.0013

-0.0040

Gap Effect

-0.0520

-0.0494

Unobserved Prices

0.0187

0.0032

Unexplained Differential (Gap Effect + Unobserved
Prices Effect)

-0.0333

-0.0462

A. Decomposition of Change 1979-89

B. Decomposition of Change 1989-98 (average
annual changes X 10)

Note: Wage equation includes white dummy variable, education, potential experience, and it
square.

