                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      OIL AND THE MACROECONOMY SINCE THE 1970s

                                              Robert Barsky
                                               Lutz Kilian

                                          Working Paper 10855
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10855


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2004 by Robert Barsky and Lutz Kilian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Oil and the Macroeconomy Since the 1970s
Robert Barsky and Lutz Kilian
NBER Working Paper No. 10855
October 2004
JEL No. E31, E32

                                           ABSTRACT

Increases in oil prices have been held responsible for recessions, periods of excessive inflation,

reduced productivity and lower economic growth. In this paper, we review the arguments supporting

such views. First, we highlight some of the conceptual difficulties in assigning a central role to oil

price shocks in explaining macroeconomic fluctuations, and we trace how the arguments of

proponents of the oil view have evolved in response to these difficulties. Second, we challenge the

notion that at least the major oil price movements can be viewed as exogenous with respect to the

US macroeconomy. We examine critically the evidence that has led many economists to ascribe a

central role to exogenous political events in modeling the oil market, and we provide arguments in

favor of 'reverse causality' from macroeconomic variables to oil prices. Third, although none of the

more recent oil price shocks has been associated with stagflation in the US economy, a major reason

for the continued popularity of the oil shock hypothesis has been the perception that only oil price

shocks are able to explain the US stagflation of the 1970s. We show that this is not the case.

Robert Barsky
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
356 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER
barsky@umich.edu

Lutz Kilian
University of Michigan
Department of Economics
309 Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
lkilian@umich.edu
Economists have long been intrigued by empirical evidence that suggests that oil price shocks

may be closely related to macroeconomic performance. This interest dates back to the 1970s.

The 1970s were a period of growing dependence on imported oil, unprecedented disruptions in

the global oil market and poor macroeconomic performance in the United States. Thus, it was

natural to suspect a causal relationship from oil prices to U.S. macroeconomic aggregates. Since

then a large body of work has accumulated that purports to establish this link on theoretical

grounds and to provide empirical evidence in its support. We do not attempt a comprehensive

survey of this literature, but rather provide an idiosyncratic synthesis of what we view as the key

issues in this debate and the insights gained over the last 30 years.

       The timing seems right for such an account. Although the experience of the 1970s

continues to play an important role in discussions of the link between oil and the macroeconomy,

there have been a number of new “oil price shocks” since the 1970s, notably the 1986 collapse of

oil prices and the 2000 boom in oil prices as well as the oil price increases associated with the

1990-91 Gulf war and the 2003 Iraq war. Given this richer case history, we are arguably in a

better position than two decades ago to distinguish the idiosyncratic features of each oil crisis

from the systematic effects.

       Increases in oil prices have been held responsible for recessions, periods of excessive

inflation, reduced productivity and lower economic growth. In this paper, we review the

arguments supporting such views. First, we highlight some of the conceptual difficulties in

assigning a central role to oil price shocks in explaining macroeconomic fluctuations, and we

trace how the arguments of proponents of the oil view have evolved in response to these

difficulties. Second, we challenge the notion that at least the major oil price movements can be

viewed as exogenous with respect to the U.S. macroeconomy. We examine critically the

evidence that has led many economists to ascribe a central role to exogenous political events in

                                                  1
modeling the oil market, and we provide arguments in favor of “reverse causality” from

macroeconomic variables to oil prices. Third, although none of the more recent oil price shocks

has been associated with stagflation in the U.S. economy, a major reason for the continued

popularity of the oil shock hypothesis has been the perception that only oil price shocks are able

to explain the U.S. stagflation of the 1970s. We show that this is not the case.



Why Oil Seems to Matter for the Macroeconomy

There is a widespread belief that exogenous political events in the Middle East cause recessions

in industrialized countries through their effect on the price of oil. This belief is fueled by the

close statistical relationship between political events in the Middle East and recessions in the

United States. Table 1 provides a list of the starting dates of U.S. recessions since 1972, as

dated by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). Most of these recessions were

preceded by political events in the Middle East that, in a popular reading of events, were

responsible for a subsequent increase in the price of oil, which in turn caused the recession. The

prima facie evidence for such a linkage is marred by the long and variable delays between oil

events and recessions in some cases. For example, the March 1999 OPEC meeting (if it was an

exogenous political event) preceded the March 2001 recession by two full years. Similarly, there

is a long delay between the Iranian revolution and the January 1980 recession and between the

outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war and the July 1981 recession. On the other hand, the November

1973 recession immediately followed the October war and the start of the oil embargo, and the

onset of the July 1990 recession even preceded the August 1990 invasion of Kuwait. This

irregular pattern argues against a mono-causal role for oil, but is still consistent with the view

that oil events at least contribute to recessions. Thus, it is easy to see why many observers



                                                  2
continue to assign an important role to political events in the Middle East in explaining U.S.

recessions.

       Even if we do not necessarily accept the view that exogenous political events in the

Middle East cause recessions in the United States, it is undoubtedly true that many recessions

since 1972 have been associated with major oil price increases, although again the association is

less than perfect. Figure 1 plots the real price of oil since 1972 with business cycle peaks

imposed as vertical lines. The recessions that started in November 1973 and July 1990 occurred

right before major oil price increases. The January 1980 recession followed a sustained oil price

increase in 1979. In contrast, the recessions starting in July 1981 and March 2001 actually

occurred during declines of the real price of oil, albeit within months of a peak. Thus, it seems

difficult to maintain that the two phenomena are unrelated.

       In addition to the perceived link between major oil price increases and recessions, oil has

been held responsible for the productivity slowdown in the 1970s. Table 2 relates the growth

rate of total factor productivity to the real price of oil for selected subperiods. The overall

relationship is heavily influenced by a period of unusually low growth in total factor productivity

in 1974-1985 that coincides with an unusually high real price of oil. This phenomenon has

prompted interest in establishing a theoretical link between oil prices and productivity that

continues to this day.

       Oil price shocks have also been said to cause inflation. Figure 2 plots the Consumer

Price Index (CPI) inflation rates for the United States with major oil dates indicated as vertical

lines. Figure 2 shows that indeed events such as the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, the collapse of

OPEC in 1986 or the 1999 OPEC meeting were followed by sharp, if short-lived, spikes in CPI

inflation. On the other hand, the relationship between oil price shocks and CPI inflation is not as

apparent as one might have expected. Some oil dates, such as the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war

                                                  3
in 1980, seem to have had little impact on CPI inflation, and others such as the outbreak of the

war in Afghanistan in 2001 and of the Iraq war of 2003 were followed by a fall in consumer

prices.1

           Conversely, several large spikes in the CPI inflation rate are clearly unrelated to oil

events. Indeed, the largest spike in monthly CPI inflation occurred in August 1973 well before

the October 1973 war, which by all accounts was unanticipated. The strongest case for a

relationship emerges from focusing on medium-term trends in inflation. In particular, the period

of sustained high inflation in the 1970s included two major oil events, which has given credence

to the notion that both the economic stagnation and the high inflation rates of the 1970s were

related to oil price shocks. The next section will review the explanations that have been

proposed for such a relationship.



How Oil Price Shocks May Affect the Macroeconomy

To the extent that disturbances in the oil market do have a causal effect on output, prices, and

productivity, through what channels do they operate? Below we will discuss a number of

mechanisms that might provide a causal link from oil prices to recessions, inflation and

economic growth.



How Oil Price Shocks May Cause Recessions

Suppose gross output Y is given by the production function Y = Q[K, L, O], where O , L and K

denote the quantities of imported oil, labor and capital services. A key insight that recurs in the



1
 In the case of the Iraq war of 2003 it may be argued that the war was well anticipated, causing the price of oil and
hence the inflation rate to spike before the outbreak of hostilities. The observed spike in CPI inflation is not large,
however, by historical standards.

                                                           4
literature on oil and macroeconomics is that the magnitude of the effect of an oil price shock on

gross output – holding L and K constant – must be small. A 1 percent reduction in oil usage

reduces gross output – to a first-order approximation – by a percentage amount corresponding to

the cost share of oil. This share of oil in output is thought to be no larger than 4 percent and may

be much smaller. With a unit elasticity of substitution between oil and value added, a 10 percent

increase in oil prices, for example, will result in a less than 0.5 percent reduction in gross output

(see Rotemberg and Woodford, 1996). Empirically, increases in oil prices appear to raise the

share of oil in output. This implies that the elasticity of substitution must be less than unity,

suggesting that the actual drop in gross output is even smaller.

       The corresponding effect of an oil price shock on value added, in contrast, is less clear.

Suppose, for example, that Y = Q[V(K, L), O], where V(K, L) is domestic value-added (which

may be thought of as real GDP). Then under perfect competition, there will not be a direct effect

of an oil price shock on value added at all, because changes in the quantity of oil do not shift the

demand curve for labor and capital services as a function of the wage and rental rates measured

in terms of value added. This benchmark result is weakened somewhat if we drop the

assumption of perfect competition and allow for a fixed mark-up. Under mark-up pricing, an oil

price increase does lower factor demand because firms apply the markup to all cost components,

including imported oil, not just to capital services and labor (Rotemberg and Woodford, 1996).

The magnitude of this effect on value added, however, is likely to be small for reasonable

markup ratios, unless we allow in addition for substantial changes in the markup over time. The

latter possibility is discussed by Rotemberg and Woodford (1996) who present a model

involving implicit collusion between oligopolists in the goods market that can yield output

responses to an oil price shock that are quantitatively important, though highly dependent on the

particular setup.

                                                  5
       Another way of undermining the benchmark result is to allow for capital-energy

complementarities in production. In the presence of capital-energy complementarities, one

would expect an oil price increase to lower real GDP by lowering the demand for capital

services. For example, it is sometimes claimed that the rise in energy prices during the 1970s

made part of the existing energy-intensive capital stock obsolete, causing a reduction in output

without any apparent change in measured capital inputs. If true, this economic depreciation of

capital should be reflected in lower prices for used equipment. There is, however, no real

empirical support for this notion. For example, Hulten, Robertson, and Wykoff (1989) found

that the price of used equipment did not change much after the 1973 oil shock, and that the price

of energy-intensive equipment actually increased in some cases. The obsolescence hypothesis

was also rejected by Bohi (1991) who found no relationship between the energy intensity of

industries and their output and employment changes following the oil price shocks of the 1970s.

Moreover, to the extent that old energy-inefficient capital depreciates, one would expect

increased investment in new energy-saving equipment that will offset at least in part the

recessionary effects of the oil price shock.

       Another potential channel of transmission is the transfer of wealth involved in paying

higher oil import bills. The total wealth transfer from the industrialized countries to the oil-

producing countries, however, will tend to be small, given the small expenditure on foreign oil

relative to GDP. Olson (1988) computes estimates of the extra import costs of about 1 percent of

GDP for 1974-1978 and for 1982-1985 and of about 2-3 percent for 1979-1981. Further, the

reduction in aggregate demand due to the wealth transfer occurs only to the extent that oil

producers have a lower propensity to purchase industrial countries’ output than domestic

consumers.




                                                  6
       In response to the difficulties with the preceding theoretical arguments, the literature has

shifted toward indirect effects set in motion by the response of economic agents to the higher

price of oil. We already mentioned models with time-varying mark-ups (Rotemberg and

Woodford 1996). Another model that explains how an oil price shock may lower real GDP is the

sectoral shifts model of Hamilton (1988). The principal propagation mechanism in this model is

that an oil price increase will depress purchases of energy-using goods such as automobiles. The

dollar value of such purchases may be large relative to the cost of gasoline. The shift in demand

causes reallocation of labor across sectors. If the movement of labor is costly, potentially large

reductions in value added may result. One important implication of this model is that the

response of output should be symmetric, whether the price of oil increases or decreases. For

example, the predicted rise in unemployment following the oil price increase of 1979-80 and that

following the collapse of OPEC prices in 1986 should have been about the same, given the

similarity of the overall magnitude of these oil price shocks. Clearly, however, there was no

increase in unemployment in 1986, casting doubt on the realism of this model.

       A related channel has been discussed by Bernanke (1983), who shows in a partial

equilibrium model that oil price shocks will tend to lower value added, because firms will

postpone investment as they attempt to find out whether the increase in the price of oil is

transitory or permanent. Gauging the importance of such indirect effects of oil on output is far

less straightforward than the corresponding exercise for the direct effects. Yet there is evidence

that the “waiting” effect discussed by Bernanke (1983) – if it exists – is small relative to the

apparent magnitudes that need explanation.

       The upper panel of Figure 3 plots monthly auto sales (millions of units sold) in the U.S.

The oil dates are imposed as vertical lines and indicate periods of large increases in uncertainty

about the price of oil. If uncertainty is an important channel by which oil price shocks cause

                                                  7
recessions, we would expect to see a sharp drop in sales of energy-using durables such as cars

after each major oil price change. Although there is some evidence that car sales fell after the

shocks of 1974, 1979 and 1990, the drops are rather small by historical standards and occur only

gradually. Moreover, in each case they merely represent the continuation of a decline that

started well before the oil date. For example, car sales in the United States had peaked nearly a

year before the October 1973 war. They also peaked well before the Iranian revolution and the

invasion of Kuwait. In some cases there is no evidence at all of a decline in car sales, notably in

the year following the 1980 and 1999 oil dates. Nor was there a change in trend after the 2001

and 2003 oil dates. Finally, in the year following the collapse of OPEC in 1986, car sales on

average increased. This finding suggests that the negative effect on car sales of the increased

uncertainty about oil prices in 1986 must have been small relative to the direct positive effect of

lower oil prices. Thus, the evidence that oil price shocks operate via a reduction in demand for

durables such as cars is weak. The data cast doubt both on the importance of the Bernanke

(1983) uncertainty effect and on the Hamilton (1988) model that relied on reductions in the

demand for consumer durables such as cars.2

         Other evidence paints a similar picture. The other panel of Figure 3 focuses on a broader

measure of monthly real consumption of durables. The qualitative conclusions are the same as

for car sales. There is no evidence of sharp drops in consumer spending after oil dates. In fact,

durables consumption appears largely stable after the 1973 and 1979 oil dates. It actually




2
  An alternative approach is to use the volatility of oil prices as a proxy for uncertainty. A more formal analysis
shows that there typically is an increase in oil price volatility following the oil dates, but often with a substantial
delay. The formal volatility measure that we used is the conditional variance of the percent change of the nominal
oil price. It was computed based on the fitted values of a generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity
model. There is some evidence that increases in oil price volatility in 1973-74, 1979-80 and 1990-91 may have been
associated with subsequent declines in car sales, but the lags are long and variable. There are no sudden and sharp
drops, as one might have expected based on the Bernanke (1983) model. Moreover, it is not clear to what extent
these declines are a cause of the recession or an effect.

                                                          8
increases after the 1980, 1986, 1999, 2001 and 2003 dates. Only in 1990 is there evidence of a

slight decline after the oil date. Similar results hold if we focus on the investment decisions of

firms. Figure 4 shows the corresponding data for real fixed nonresidential investment and real

investment in equipment and software. Neither series shows a sharp drop after oil dates, as one

might have expected in response to an increase in uncertainty. Even accounting for the long-run

trend in investment, these aggregate data provide no support for the notion that increased

uncertainty leads to a sharp fall in investment that in turn contributes to a recession.

       Yet another line of reasoning as to why oil price shocks may have indirect effects has

focused on the monetary policy response to oil price shocks. For instance, Bohi (1989) and

Bernanke, Gertler, Watson (1997) have investigated the possibility that the 1974 recession may

be understood as a consequence of the Federal Reserve’s policy response to the inflation

triggered by an oil price shock. The output effect arises, in this view, because the Fed responds

to evidence of rising inflation with a monetary tightening, thereby inducing a recession. Whether

monetary policy actually did respond to oil price shocks in this way continues to be a matter of

debate. For example, in the 1973-74 episode, the monetary tightening started eight months prior

to the 1973 oil date (e.g., Bernanke and Mihov, 1998).

       A second indirect monetary effect on output is due to the “wage-price spiral,” which

occurs if nominal wages are set in line with past price increases, while prices are set in line with

past wage increases. In this setting, an initial inflationary shock due to oil may be propagated, if

wage increases are accommodated by the central bank. To the extent that the real wage is

prevented from falling, a decline in value added will be required in response to an oil shock

(Bruno and Sachs, 1985). Although this explanation is popular, empirical studies suggest that

U.S. real wages actually did fall in response to higher oil prices (e.g., Bohi 1989, 1991; Keane

and Prasad, 1996; Rotemberg and Woodford, 1996). Even for Europe and Japan there is at best

                                                  9
limited support for this explanation. Thus, again the case that oil price shocks create recessions

is weak.



How Oil Price Shocks May Affect Inflation

Theories that can explain how oil might cause a recession still do not in general generate

stagflation, a phenomenon especially important for understanding the historical experience of the

1970s. Thus, it is important to address the additional role of oil price shocks, if any, in

explaining inflation. Interestingly, the existing literature has focused on the effect of oil price

shocks on aggregate output and left unchallenged the common notion that oil price shocks are by

necessity inflationary. Recently, Barsky and Kilian (2002), using an illustrative example that

builds on Gordon (1984) and Rotemberg and Woodford (1996), have verified that an oil price

shock indeed is unambiguously inflationary for the price of gross output. Hence, following an

oil price shock, one would expect stagflation in the form of a decline in industrial production and

increased inflation in the CPI. The same model, however, also implies that there is no theoretical

presumption that the GDP deflator would increase in response to an oil price shock, although it

might under certain conditions. This analysis is important because it explains important

differences between the observed response of CPI inflation and of inflation in the GDP deflator

to oil price shocks.

       Of course, in principle a more complicated theoretical model – involving, say, markups

and wage-price interactions – could deliver an unambiguous increase in the GDP deflator in

response to an oil price shock. It is important, however, not to lose sight of the fact that there is

no convincing empirical evidence that oil price shocks are associated with higher inflation rates

in the GDP deflator. There is strong evidence only of sharp changes in the CPI inflation rate

following major oil price changes (Barsky and Kilian, 2002).

                                                  10
How Oil Price Shocks May Affect Economic Growth

Oil price shocks may also have long-term consequences for economic growth. Notably, the rise

in the price of oil in 1974 has been blamed for the productivity slowdown, which is often dated

as beginning in 1973 (although there is a case that it began earlier, perhaps in the late 1960s, as

discussed in Hansen 2001). The relationship between oil price increases and changes in total

factor productivity was explored extensively in the Fall 1988 “Symposium on the Productivity

Slowdown” in this journal. Olson (1988) in that issue concluded that “the evidence has not been

kind” to oil-based explanations of the productivity slowdown. The fundamental problem is that

the cost of energy is too small a part of GDP to explain the productivity slowdown. Olson

quantified the U.S. productivity losses that may be attributed to substitution away from oil and

concluded that they were much too small to explain the productivity slowdown. He also noted

that the opportunities for substitution were sharply limited during the initial years following the

1973 oil price shock. This view is now widely accepted. In response, some economists have

focused on alternative channels of transmission that operate through some other variable with

important effects on productivity. One possibility is that energy-inefficient capital was made

obsolete by higher oil prices, resulting in an unmeasured decline in the capital stock, which

would look like a decline in productivity in the data. As we have discussed earlier, there is no

empirical support for that notion. Although a number of additional and more elaborate

arguments have been advanced that in principle might establish a link from oil prices to

productivity changes, none of these models can claim solid empirical support.



Where Do Oil Price Shocks Come From?

Conventional wisdom suggests that major increases in the price of oil tend to be driven by

exogenous political events in the Middle East. Even if we accept the notion that turmoil in the

                                                 11
Middle East may cause sharp increases in the price of oil, however, recent history demonstrates

that Middle East disturbances do not necessarily raise the price of oil and that major oil price

increases may occur even in the absence of such shocks. For example, the increase in the real

price of oil between March 1999 and November 2000 was certainly a major increase, but during

that period military conflicts in the Middle East were conspicuously absent. Even more difficult

to explain for adherents of the conventional view is the fact that after November 2000 the oil

price fell, despite Middle East turmoil and the high likelihood that most of Iraq’s oil exports

would remain off global markets, on top of low inventories that were further strained by one of

the coldest winters in recent memory. Neither the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, nor

the outbreak of the war in Afghanistan and the stocking up of the U.S. Strategic Petroleum

Reserve could stem the decline in crude oil prices in 2001.

       Many observers would be willing to concede that major movements in oil prices are

possible even in the absence of exogenous political shocks, but would argue that the 1999-2000

oil price increase must have been engineered by the OPEC oil cartel. This interpretation begs the

question of how this cartel suddenly acquired new powers in March 1999, having been unable to

force a sustained increase in oil prices since 1986, and how the same cartel just two years later

seemed to be on the verge of collapse. It seems implausible that the Mexican oil minister by his

eloquence alone in 1998 managed to unify a cartel that had steadily lost influence since 1986.

Nor is it obvious why those rhetorical powers failed the oil minister in 2001. There have been

many OPEC meetings since 1986, but only the March 1999 decision was followed by a sustained

increase in oil prices. Clearly, it takes more than a cartel meeting to drive up prices. What then

was different about 1999-2000? One plausible answer is that OPEC decisions are far from

exogenous and in fact respond to global macroeconomic conditions.




                                                 12
The Role of Cartels

The view that worldwide demand for oil is essential in understanding oil prices does not imply

that OPEC was inconsequential. A key channel that links the stability of oil cartels to

macroeconomic forces is described in standard theoretical models of cartels such as Rotemberg

and Saloner (1986) and Green and Porter (1984). Producers trade off the immediate gains from

abandoning the cartel against the present value of the future cartel rents foregone. This logic

suggests that, all else equal, unusually low real interest rates as in the 1970s should be conducive

to the formation of cartels and that high real interest rates should be detrimental. Furthermore,

the work of Green and Porter implies that the ability of cartels to keep prices high will be

procyclical if producers are unable to tell whether other cartel members are cheating by

exceeding their production quota. More specifically, in times of unexpectedly low demand,

when prices fall below a trigger point, cartel members will choose to flood the market with their

output. The assumption of imperfectly observable output is particularly appealing for crude oil

producers. The actual production level of crude oil can only be estimated in many cases, and

reliable output statistics become available at best with a long lag. Thus, strong economic

expansions, all else equal, should strengthen oil cartels and major recessions weaken them.3

       This model helps to explain the surplus production of oil following the Asian crisis of

1997-98 as well as the apparent success of OPEC during 1999-2000. Although real interest rates

were not unusually low by historical standards over the latter period, cumulative GDP growth in

the United States was extraordinarily high – high enough to offset the less-than-stellar growth

performance of Europe and Japan. The same economic theory suggests that (all else equal) a

pending recession should undermine the stability of OPEC. As Figure 1 shows, the turning point




                                                 13
for oil prices indeed occurred as the first signs of a possible U.S. recession emerged in late 2000.

Within weeks the oil price began to slip, and its fall accelerated throughout 2001. Shortly

thereafter, the New York Times (Banerjee, 2001) referred to the prospect of a devastating price

war, as OPEC is unable to enforce its goal of a major cut in oil production in the face of falling

demand. This analysis does not deny the importance of political efforts aimed at strengthening

or sustaining the oil cartel; rather the point is that such activities – unlike wars – are not

exogenous and that the sustainability of cartels will be determined to an important extent by the

macroeconomic environment.

        The above discussion abstracts from international features of the oil market. A further

element in OPEC’s price decisions is likely to be the exchange rate of the dollar vis-à-vis other

major currencies. Indeed, the depreciation of the dollar was an important element in OPEC’s

justification for higher oil prices in the 1970s (e.g., Terzian, 1985). To the extent that the dollar

depreciates with respect to European or Japanese currencies, goods denominated in those

currencies become more expensive, and there will be an incentive to make up for the loss in

OPEC purchasing power by increasing the price of oil in dollar terms. At the same time, a

weaker dollar also will tend to stimulate demand for oil in the rest of the world, thereby

strengthening the cartel and driving up the price of oil.



The Role of Major Political Events in the Middle East: An Overview

Once one accepts that the 1999-2000 tripling of oil prices was not caused by exogenous political

events in the Middle East, the question arises naturally to what extent previous oil price increases



3
  Rotemberg and Saloner (1986), in sharp contrast to Green and Porter, argue that cartels should break up in booms.
That conclusion is not empirically supported for the oil market, however, and indeed driven by the counterfactual
assumption of perfectly observable output.


                                                        14
were perhaps driven by the same endogenous forces. It is useful to start with the anatomy of

major oil price increases. It is widely believed that sudden and large changes in the price of oil

tend to be caused by unpredictable exogenous political events in the Middle East that represent

shifts of the supply curve for oil. Often these “shocks” are associated with military events such

as the outbreak of wars. Figure 5 shows the percentage change in the nominal price of oil since

March 1971, when U.S. oil production reached full capacity and the U.S. became dependent on

foreign oil. Episodes of major wars or major civil unrest are indicated by vertical bars and

include the October war of 1973, the Iranian revolution in late 1978, the outbreak of the Iran-Iraq

war in late 1980, the invasion of Kuwait in 1990, the start of the war in Afghanistan in October

2001 and of the war in Iraq in March 2003. We also included the collapse of OPEC in 1986 and

the period of possible OPEC price management since March 1999 for comparison.

       Clearly, not all so-called oil shocks follow the same pattern. For example, the period

after the October war of 1973, the period after the collapse of OPEC in late 1985, and the period

immediately after the invasion of Kuwait in 1990 are characterized by sharp spikes in oil prices.

The period following the Iranian revolution of 1978-79 and that following the 1999 OPEC

meeting are, in contrast, characterized by relatively small, but persistent positive rates of change.

Nor are the 2001 and 2003 wars associated with sharp spikes in oil prices. These differences

suggest important differences in the genesis of these oil events. For example, the casual

observer would be led to conclude that the 1999-2000 increase in oil prices is much more akin to

the 1979-80 increase than to the 1973-74 or the 1990 episode.

       We conclude that there have been many plausibly exogenous political events in the

Middle East, but the magnitude and pattern of the subsequent changes in the price of crude oil

varies greatly. Thus, it is far from obvious what the precise channel is by which exogenous




                                                 15
events affect the price of oil and whether there is a link at all. This is the question we turn to

next.



The Role of Wars

It may seem that wars in the Middle East are natural candidates for inducing major changes in oil

prices, but this link is far from obvious. A perhaps simplistic view is that oil price shocks reflect

shocks to the supply of oil in the form of interruptions of the production (or shipments) of crude

oil from the Middle East. As we will show, this interpretation is difficult to sustain. A more

sophisticated view is that in response to wars or the threat of war in the Middle East, there will

be an increase in precautionary demand for oil, which may cause sharp increases in the price of

oil when the supply of oil is inelastic, as is especially likely in times of capacity constraints. In

this latter interpretation, wars shift the demand for oil, rather than the supply of oil. Demand for

oil shifts because oil consumers attempt to stockpile oil when they feel that the likelihood of a

major oil supply interruption has increased. This second explanation may help explain seeming

discrepancies in the timing and in the magnitude of the oil price shock. Its main limitation is that

the effect depends on largely unobserved shifts in expectations.

        A first way of seeing that the oil supply shock view must be missing something important

is to note that supply cuts of similar magnitude seem to have had very different effects on the

price of oil. For example, although the case for an exogenous production cut following the

outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war in late 1980 is strong, the data in Figures 1 and 5 reveal that the

apparent effect on the price of oil was quite small compared to the effect of the invasion of

Kuwait. This seems rather curious, given that the magnitudes of the production cuts were almost

the same with a 7.2 percent and 8.8 percent drop relative to pre-war levels, respectively

(Hamilton, 2003).

                                                  16
       A second reason to doubt the oil supply shock view is the timing of some major oil price

increases and commonly cited political events. For example, most of the 1979 increase in the

price of oil occurred more than half a year after the Iranian revolution broke out (but before the

outbreak of the Iran-Iraq war in late 1980). Thus, the exogeneity of the production cut during the

revolution is not in doubt, but the extent to which the observed temporary production cut after

October 1978 is actually related to the rapid oil price increases after May 1979 is not clear.

       Even more curious is the fact that this particular oil price increase in 1979-80, very much

unlike the sharp oil price spike following the 1990 war, occurred in the form of small, but

persistent price increases extending over a period of almost two years. It is unclear why the

typical response of oil prices to a production cut should look so qualitatively different when the

nature of the shock is presumably identical and why these increases only occurred when Iran had

resumed oil exports.

       This evidence argues against the existence of a mechanical link between war-induced

cuts in oil supplies and the price of oil. Instead, the effect of a supply cut will depend very much

on the response of other suppliers of oil (including Saudi Arabia as the country with the most

spare capacity) and on demand conditions in the oil market, reflecting both the overall

macroeconomic environment in the world and the degree of anxiety of oil consumers about

future supplies. Moreover, increased uncertainty about future oil supplies may shift the price of

oil even in the absence of a war-induced production cut. A case in point is the 2003 Iraq war.

The 2003 Iraq war, unlike many of the other events in Figure 5, was clearly anticipated. By

definition, at the time of the oil price increase, no war-related production cutbacks had occurred

(nor was there significant damage to oil facilities during the war). Thus, all of the observed oil

price increase may be attributed to uncertainty. Comparing oil price data in the summer of 2002

(when the possibility of a war was first openly discussed) to the price in March 2003, right

                                                 17
before hostilities broke out, suggests an uncertainty premium of about $5 or $6 per barrel. This

is roughly the same amount by which the price fell after the war had officially ended.

         Of course, increased fears about future oil supplies may arise from events other than the

threat of war in major oil producing countries in the Middle East – any event with adverse effects

on the political stability of these countries could generate such fears. Arguably conflicts such as

the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the war in Afghanistan, the 1982 invasion of

Lebanon by Israel and subsequent clashes with Syria, or the Palestinian uprising in Israel and its

occupied territories all have repercussions for the political stability of major oil-producing

nations and hence would be expected to raise the price of oil. If such increases do not seem

large, as the evidence suggests, this fact only reinforces our point that there is no automatic link

between political events and fears of supply interruptions. As noted by Mabro (1998), in the

absence of taut demand conditions in the oil market, political flare-ups are unlikely to cause

dramatic shifts in the price of oil.4



The Role of Embargoes

The 1973 oil price shock took the form of a sharp spike, similar to that of 1990 in magnitude. At

first sight, this fact is suggestive of a war-based explanation, but the observed increase in the

price of oil in late 1973 and early 1974 occurs only after a delay. It does not appear to be

directly related to the October 1973 war or damage to oil facilities in that conflict. In fact, most

countries involved in military action – Egypt, Jordan, Syria, Iraq – were not even major oil




4
  A case in point is the rise in oil prices in early May 2004 following terrorist attacks on oil facilities in Saudi
Arabia. As the New York Times (Sachs, 2004) notes, “it is the combination of fears of what might happen and the
fundamental tightness of the market that has sent prices higher”. The article elaborates that “while recent attacks on
oil facilities did not do much damage, traders worry that a more serious disruption of Middle East oil production
remains possible and that it would shake the fragile stability of the already strained oil market.”

                                                         18
producers at the time.5 Rather, the fall in oil supplies is mainly related to the tightening of the oil

embargo imposed by Arab OPEC countries in late 1973. An embargo, unlike a war, is likely to

be endogenous with respect to macroeconomic conditions.

        The key question then is to what extent that embargo decision was driven by political as

opposed to economic considerations. Hamilton (2003) rightly points out that political

considerations did play some role in the embargo decision. Barsky and Kilian (2002) instead

stress historical and institutional evidence in support of the endogeneity of the 1973 embargo

decision to macroeconomic conditions. In the latter view, there was no trade-off between

political and economic objectives at the time when the embargo and the associated production

cuts were instituted.6 Once the economic objective of a higher price of oil had been achieved in

early 1974, however, the political objectives of the embargo were quietly discarded along with

the embargo itself.

        Moreover, the observed price increases for oil over that 1973-74 period were not much

different from those of some industrial commodities for which political considerations can be

ruled out, casting doubt on the importance of the oil embargo. This fact is consistent with the

view that the observed spike in the price of oil in late 1973 can be explained as the result of

unique institutional features in the oil market, which led to a delayed adjustment of the price of

oil to a preceding demand boom (Barsky and Kilian, 2002). If there was a component of the

1973-74 oil price increase that can be attributed to the war, it is likely to have been fears about

future oil supplies in late 1973, but, as noted earlier, those fears must also be viewed against the

macroeconomic background of a world economy that was booming at that time.

5
 Egypt, Jordan, and Syria were not even members of OPEC. Iraq’s oil output amounted to about 3.8 percent of
world oil production in September of 1973 (U.S. Energy Information Administration, 1994). Its share fell to 3.3
percent in October 1973 (covering the period during and after the war).




                                                        19
The Role of Global Macroeconomic Conditions

As shown earlier, neither cartel decisions nor the imposition of oil embargoes nor the effects of

political uncertainty on the price of oil are independent of global macroeconomic conditions.

Apart from their indirect effects through institutions, macroeconomic conditions also affect the

price of oil directly by shifting the demand for oil. This view has long been recognized by oil

economists. For example, the survey by Mabro (1998), "OPEC Behavior 1960-1998:A Review

of the Literature", in the Journal of Energy Literature gives considerable (favorable) attention to

the endogenous elements of oil price determination. Curiously, mainstream economists have

often been slow to embrace the notion that oil prices respond to economic forces, as one would

expect of other industrial commodity prices.

         The importance of shocks to the demand for oil was strikingly illustrated by the drop in

the price of oil following the Asian crisis of 1997-98. It also is essential in understanding the

upswing in oil prices in 1999-2001, as discussed earlier. Barsky and Kilian (2002) suggest that

some of the same forces that help us understand oil price movements in 1997-2001 also help

explain the sustained increases in oil prices in the 1970s. Unlike in the late 1990s, the upward

pressure on oil prices in the 1970s, in this view, was caused not by a shift in productivity, but by

worldwide monetary expansions that drove output levels above potential for sustained periods

and were followed by periods of unusually low real interest rates. As these booms gave way to

recessions and increases in real interest rates, oil prices started falling in the early 1980s and

ultimately collapsed in early 1986, despite the best efforts of the OPEC cartel to sustain them at

higher levels.




6
  This situation is not unlike that of the Spanish conquistadores who aimed to procure ships from the Spanish king to
serve the double objective of finding gold and converting heathens across the Atlantic. Is it reasonable to presume
that the Spanish would have sailed just for the latter objective?

                                                         20
       Central to this demand-driven account of oil price movements is that in the short run, the

effective supply curve for oil – which depends on pipelines and tanker capacity at least as much

as on oil reserves in the ground – can be very steep. That view is consistent with oil industry

sources that suggest that the industry tended to be at capacity in times of high world economic

activity. In the long run, high oil prices due to strong demand for oil stimulate an expansion of

capacity. It stands to reason that the collapse of oil prices in the 1980s would not have happened

as fast as it did, if the high oil price in 1974 had not induced many countries to increase oil

production. Given the considerable delays in expanding oil production, however, the shift in the

long-run supply curve did not have material effects on the price of oil until more than half a

decade later.



Are Oil Price Shocks Essential in Explaining Stagflation?

We have shown that the evidence for the alleged link from oil price changes to macroeconomic

performance may have been overstated. Some of our points are new, but many of the arguments

have been known for years. Despite the mounting evidence to the contrary, the oil shock view

has proved surprisingly resilient because of another piece of evidence that - at first sight -

appears as the “smoking gun” in this controversy: the appearance of stagflation during the 1970s.

       Stagflation has been defined as a period of high unemployment in combination with

rising inflation or, alternatively, a high level of inflation. The choice of definition matters. Until

the 1970s, it was commonly accepted that inflation is caused by excess demand. In its modern

guise, this view has been embedded in the so-called accelerationist Phillips curve, which implies

that inflation increases when the economy is overheated and declines when there is slack in the

economy.



                                                 21
         The perception that the early 1970s, unlike earlier periods, were characterized by

increasing inflation in combination with unemployment in excess of the natural rate (as is

sometimes claimed even today (e.g., Blanchard, 2002, p. 185)), cast doubt on the accelerationist

model. Evidence that the economy remains below potential, while inflation continues to rise, is

inconsistent with the standard accelerationist model of the macroeconomy and thus would seem

to require a different explanation, presumably one based on supply shocks that shift the Phillips

curve. This fact helps explain the increased focus on oil price increases as supply shifters in the

early 1970s. However, there never was a significant period of rising inflation along with excess

unemployment in 1973-1975. Rather, stagflation in the data occurred in the form of periods of

slow or negative economic growth alongside high levels of inflation. Thus, the data are

consistent with the accelerationist model, making it unnecessary to appeal to special factors such

as oil shocks.

         Figure 6 shows quarterly data (at annual rates) for 1973:I to 1975:IV on unemployment,

the deviation of log real GDP from trend, inflation in the CPI and inflation in the GDP deflator.7

The unemployment rate is presented relative to the rate of 5.5 percent, which roughly

corresponds to zero deviation of output from the trend, and is a plausible estimate of the natural

rate of unemployment. Over the period 1973:I to 1974:III, the economy was in decline but

unemployment was still below the natural rate. Inflation tended to rise over this period.8 In




7
  The deviations of output from trend were computed using the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter. Hodrick and Prescott
(1997) proposed that we view the time series for log real GDP as the sum of a cyclical component and a growth
component. The latter may be removed by a statistical filter that leaves an estimate of the business cycle component
in the form of deviations from a smooth time trend. The degree of smoothness may be regulated by choosing a
constraint parameter λ. We estimated the growth component over 1960 to 2003 with the conventional parameter
choice of λ = 1600.
8
  The spike in CPI inflation in 1974.I reflects the temporary effect of the OPEC oil price increase. The differential
effect of the oil price increase on CPI and deflator inflation data is consistent with the theory on the price of gross
output and value added discussed previously.

                                                          22
contrast, inflation tended to fall from late 1974 through the end of 1975 – the part of the

recession in which unemployment exceeded the natural rate. This behavior is strikingly

consistent with the accelerationist Phillips curve with – of course - some disturbance, but not one

larger than is found in other historical periods.9

         Once it is clear that rising deflator inflation in combination with abnormally high

unemployment is not a strong feature of the data, a definition of stagflation based on such a

pattern becomes largely irrelevant, as does the demonstration that an accelerationist model

cannot account for this hypothetical pattern. Our analysis also helps us to understand the

conspicuous absence of stagflationary patterns following subsequent oil price shocks. In fact,

none of the major oil price increases since the 1980s have been associated with stagflation.



Conclusion

It is commonly believed that there is a close link from political events in the Middle East to

changes in the price of oil, and in turn from oil price changes to macroeconomic performance in

the United States. As to the first belief, we stressed that exogenous political events in the Middle

East are but one of several factors driving oil prices, and that the effect of seemingly similar

political events may differ greatly from one episode to the next, in accordance with variations in

demand conditions in the oil market and global macroeconomic conditions. As to the second

belief, we showed that the timing of oil price increases and recessions is consistent with the

notion that oil price shocks may contribute to recessions without necessarily being pivotal. We

investigated several leading theoretical explanations for a contractionary effect of oil price



9
  For example, although the increase in the deflator inflation rate slowed down considerably in 1974.IV, deflator
inflation started declining only in 1975.I.


                                                         23
increases, but found little empirical support for any one explanation, either because the

magnitude of the predicted effect can be shown to be small a priori, or because the theory has

implications that are not supported by U.S. macroeconomic data. We also showed that oil price

shocks are neither necessary nor sufficient to explain stagflation in real GDP and in the implicit

GDP deflator. Thus, we conclude that disturbances in the oil market are likely to matter less for

U.S. macroeconomic performance than has commonly been thought.




                                                24
Acknowledgements



The authors thank Brad De Long, Timothy Taylor and Michael Waldman for helpful comments.

Part of this paper was written while the second author was serving as an adviser to the European

Central Bank. The opinions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the

European Central Bank or its staff.
References

Ball, Laurence, and N. Gregory Mankiw. 2002. “The NAIRU in Theory and Practice.” Journal
       of Economic Perspectives. Fall, 16:4, pp. 115-136.

Banerjee, Neela. 2001. “Oil Prices in Flux as OPEC Decides Against Cut in Output.” The New
       York Times, November 15, C1.

Barsky, R.B., and L. Kilian. 2002. “Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great
       Stagflation? A Monetary Alternative.” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001, 16, B.S.
       Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds., Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 137-183.

Bernanke, B.S., and I. Mihov 1998. “Measuring Monetary Policy,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, 113:3, 869-902.

Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics. February, 98:1, pp. 85-106.

Bernanke, B.S., M. Gertler, and M.W. Watson. 1997. “Systematic Monetary Policy and the
      Effects of Oil Price Shocks.“ (with discussion) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
      1, pp. 91-148.

Blanchard, O. 2002. “Comments on ‘Do We Really Know that Oil Caused the Great
      Stagflation? A Monetary Alternative’ by Robert Barsky and Lutz Kilian.” in NBER
      Macroeconomics Annual 2001, 16, B.S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff, eds., Cambridge, MA:
      MIT Press, pp. 183-192.

Bohi, Douglas R. 1989. Energy Price Shocks and Macroeconomic Performance. Washington,
       D.C.: Resources for the Future.

Bohi, Douglas R. 1991. “On the Macroeconomic Effects of Energy Price Shocks.” Resources
       and Energy, June, 13:2, pp. 145-162.

Bruno, Michael, and Jeffrey D. Sachs. 1985. Economics of Worldwide Stagflation. Cambridge,
       MA: Harvard University Press.

Friedman, Milton. 1968. “The Role of Monetary Policy.” American Economic Review. March,
      58:1, pp. 1-17.

Green, Edward J., and Robert H. Porter. 1984. “Noncooperative Collusion under Imperfect Price
       Information,” Econometrica. January, 52:1, pp. 87-100.

Gordon, Robert J. 1984. “Supply Shocks and Monetary Policy Revisited.” American Economic
      Review. May, 74:2, pp. 38-43.

Hamilton, James D. 1988. “A Neoclassical Model of Unemployment and the Business Cycle,”
      Journal of Political Economy. June 96:3, pp. 593-617.
Hamilton, James D. 2003. “What is an Oil Shock?” Journal of Econometrics. April, 113:2, pp.
      363-398.

Hansen, B.E. 2001. “The New Econometrics of Structural Change: Dating Changes in U.S.
      Labor Productivity,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15, 117-128.

Hodrick, Robert J., and Edward C, Prescott 1997. “Postwar U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
      Investigation,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking. February, 29:1, pp. 1-16.

Hulten, Charles R., James W. Robertson, and Frank C. Wykoff. 1989. “Energy Obsolescence
       and the Productivity Slowdown.” in Dale W. Jorgenson and Ralph Landau, eds.
       Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 225-258.

Keane, Michael P., and Eswar S. Prasad. 1996. “The Employment and Wage Effects of Oil Price
       Changes: A Sectoral Analysis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, pp. 389-400.

Mabro, Robert. 1998. “OPEC Behavior 1960-1998: A Review of the Literature,” The Journal of
      Energy Literature. June, 4:1, pp. 3-27.

Olson, Mancur 1988. “The Productivity Slowdown, the Oil Shocks, and the Real Cycle. Journal
       of Economic Perspectives. Fall, 2:4, pp. 43-69.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1968. “Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor Market Equilibrium.” Journal of
        Political Economy. Part 2, 76:4, pp. 678-711.

Roberts, John M. 1995. “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve.” Journal of Money,
       Credit and Banking. Part 1. November, 27:4, pp. 975-984.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Garth Saloner. 1986. “A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Business
      Cycles and Price Wars During Booms,” American Economic Review. June, 76:3, pp. 390-
      407.

Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford. 1996. “Imperfect Competition and the Effects of
      Energy Price Increases on Economic Activity,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking.
      November, 28(4), Part 1, pp. 550-77.

Sachs, Susan. 2004. “Attacks in Mideast Raise Fear of More at Oil Installations,” New York
       Times, May 8, C1.

Terzian, P. (1985), OPEC. The Inside Story. London: Zed books.

United States Energy Information Administration. 1994. Historical Monthly Energy Review:
       1973-1992. U.S. Government Printing Office.




                                              3
                          Figure 1: Real Price of U.S. Crude Oil Imports and NBER Recessions
                                                      1971.3-2003.12

                         50

                                Recession                                 Recession                 Recession
                         45
                                November                                  July                      March

                                1973                                      1990                      2001
                         40


                         35
       1982-84 Dollars




                         30


                         25                   Recession

                                              January
                         20
                                              1980

                         15

                                                     Recession
                         10
                                                     July

                         5                           1981


                         0
                                 1975       1980            1985   1990               1995   2000




Source: Department of Energy, Federal Reserve Economic Database (FRED), and NBER. The
        oil price data are constructed as in Barsky and Kilian (2002). The oil price has been
        deflated by the U.S. CPI for urban consumers.
                                Figure 2: Monthly CPI Inflation Rates and Oil Dates
                                                  1971.3-2004.3

           30
                 October       Iranian          Iran-Iraq          OPEC              Kuwait            OPEC   Afghan Iraq
                 war           revolution       war                collapse          invasion          meeting War   War
           25
                 1973          1979             1980               1986              1990              1999   2001   2003


           20



           15
 Percent




           10



            5



            0



            -5



           -10
                        1975             1980               1985              1990              1995          2000


Source: FRED.
                                        Figure 3: Oil Price Uncertainty and Real Consumption of Durables
                                                              Monthly 1971.3-2003.7

                                                                   Auto Sales In United States
                                 16
                                      October            Iranian                                    Kuwait            OPEC               Iraq
                                      war                revolution                                 invasion          meeting            war
                                 14
                                      1973               1979                                       1990              1999               2003
                                                               Iran-Iraq                                                        Afghan
                      Millions
                                 12                            war                                                              war
                                                               1980                                                             2001
                                 10

                                  8                                               OPEC
                                                                                  collapse
                                  6                                               1986
                                            1975         1980              1985              1990              1995             2000


                                                                  Real Durables Consumption

                           1000       October            Iranian                  OPEC              Kuwait            OPEC
Billions of 2000 Dollars




                                      war                revolution               collapse          invasion          meeting          Iraq
                            800       1973               1979                     1986              1990              1999             war
                                                               Iran-Iraq                                                        Afghan 2003
                            600                                war                                                              war
                                                               1980                                                             2001
                            400

                            200

                                  0
                                            1975         1980              1985              1990              1995             2000



                                 Source: FRED, Department of Energy and BEA. Oil dates have been imposed as vertical lines
                                                 Figure 4: Oil Price Uncertainty and Real Investment
                                                               Quarterly 1971.I-2003.IV

                                                           Real Nonresidential Fixed Investment
                           1400
                                       October         Iranian                   OPEC              Kuwait            OPEC
Billions of 2000 Dollars   1200        war
                                       1973
                                                       revolution
                                                       1979
                                                                                 collapse
                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                   invasion
                                                                                                   1990
                                                                                                                     meeting
                                                                                                                     1999
                           1000
                                                              Iran-Iraq                                                        Afghan
                           800                                war                                                              war
                                                              1980                                                             2001
                           600                                                                                                          Iraq
                                                                                                                                        war
                           400                                                                                                          2003

                           200

                             0
                                        1975           1980               1985              1990              1995         2000


                                                       Real Investment in Equipment and Software
                           1000
                                       October         Iranian                   OPEC              Kuwait            OPEC
Billions of 2000 Dollars




                           800         war             revolution                collapse          invasion          meeting
                                       1973            1979                      1986              1990              1999

                           600                                                                                                 Afghan
                                                              Iran-Iraq                                                        war
                                                              war                                                              2001
                           400
                                                              1980
                                                                                                                                        Iraq
                           200                                                                                                          war
                                                                                                                                        2003

                             0
                                        1975           1980               1985              1990              1995         2000




                            Source: FRED. Oil dates have been imposed as vertical lines.
                   Figure 5: Percentage Change in the Nominal Price of Crude Oil Imports
                                                         1971.3-2003.12


          50
             October         Iranian         Iran-Iraq          OPEC              Kuwait            OPEC Afghan Iraq
             war             revolution      war                collapse          invasion          meeting War War
          40 1973            1979            1980               1986              1990              1999    2001 2003


          30


          20


          10
Percent




           0


          -10


          -20


          -30


          -40


          -50
                      1975            1980               1985              1990              1995         2000



          Source: See Figure 1.
                                      Figure 6:
CPI Inflation, Inflation in the GDP Deflator, HP-Detrended Log Real GDP, and the
                    Unemployment Rate in Excess of 5.5 Percent
                             Quarterly 1973:I to 1975:IV

      4                                         0.05


      3


      2
                                                   0
      1


      0


     -1                                         -0.05
          1973.5 1974 1974.5 1975 1975.5 1976           1973.5 1974 1974.5 1975 1975.5 1976
             Unemployment rate - 5.5%                      HP-detrended log real GDP

     14                                           14


     12                                           12


     10                                           10


      8                                            8


      6                                            6

      4                                            4
          1973.5 1974 1974.5 1975 1975.5 1976           1973.5 1974 1974.5 1975 1975.5 1976
               GDP Deflator inflation                             CPI inflation

      Source: FRED.
Table 1
The Coincidence of Oil Dates and Recessions after 1972


Business Cycle Peak            Events Associated with
                       Subsequent Major Oil Price Increase
November 1973          October War and Oil Embargo
                       October 1973-early 1974
January 1980           Iranian Revolution
                       October 1978-February 1979
July 1981              Outbreak of Iran-Iraq War
                       September 1980
July 1990              Invasion of Kuwait
                       August 1990
March 2001             OPEC Meeting
                       March 1999
Source: The business cycle dates are from the National Bureau of Economic Research at
<http://www.nber.org/cycles>.



Table 2
Growth in Total Factor Productivity and the Real Price of Oil Imports


                       1950-1959          1960-1973           1974-1985           1986-2001
 Real Price of           20.47              17.72               43.42               20.82
      Oil
 TFP Growth               1.99               1.18                0.31                1.34
  (percent)
Source: FRED. The productivity series is annual multifactor productivity in the private
        manufacturing sector. The oil price data are constructed as in Barsky and Kilian (2002).
        The oil price index has been deflated by the U.S. GDP deflator and expressed in 2000
        dollars.
