                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE CROSS-SECTION OF VOLATILITY AND EXPECTED RETURNS

                                              Andrew Ang
                                            Robert J. Hodrick
                                              Yuhang Xing
                                             Xiaoyan Zhang

                                         Working Paper 10852
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10852


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




We thank Joe Chen, Mike Chernov, Miguel Ferreira, Jeff Fleming, Chris Lamoureux, Jun Liu, Laurie
Hodrick, Paul Hribar, Jun Pan, Matt Rhodes-Kropf, Steve Ross, David Weinbaum, and Lu Zhang for helpful
discussions. We also received valuable comments from seminar participants at an NBER Asset Pricing
meeting, Campbell and Company, Columbia University, Cornell University, Hong Kong University, Rice
University, UCLA, and the University of Rochester. We thank Tim Bollerslev, Joe Chen, Miguel Ferreira,
Kenneth French, Anna Scherbina, and Tyler Shumway for kindly providing data. We especially thank an
anonymous referee and Rob Stambaugh, the editor, for helpful suggestions that greatly improved the article.
Andrew Ang and Bob Hodrick both acknowledge support from the NSF. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Andrew Ang, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Cross-Section of Volatility and Expected Returns
Andrew Ang, Robert J. Hodrick, Yuhang Xing, and Xiaoyan Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 10852
October 2004
JEL No. G12, G13

                                             ABSTRACT

We examine the pricing of aggregate volatility risk in the cross-section of stock returns. Consistent

with theory, we find that stocks with high sensitivities to innovations in aggregate volatility have low

average returns. In addition, we find that stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility relative to the Fama

and French (1993) model have abysmally low average returns. This phenomenon cannot be

explained by exposure to aggregate volatility risk. Size, book-to-market, momentum, and liquidity

effects cannot account for either the low average returns earned by stocks with high exposure to

systematic volatility risk or for the low average returns of stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility.

Andrew Ang
Marshall School of Business, USC
Department of Finance
701 Exposition Blvd, Room 701
Los Angeles CA 90089-1427
and NBER
aa610@columbia.edu

Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu

Yuhang Xing
Rice University
yxing@rice.edu

Xiaoyan Zhang
Cornell University
xz@cornell.edu
   It is well known that the volatility of stock returns varies over time. While considerable
research has examined the time-series relation between the volatility of the market and the ex-
pected return on the market (see, among others, Campbell and Hentschel (1992), and Glosten,
Jagannathan and Runkle (1993)), the question of how aggregate volatility affects the cross-
section of expected stock returns has received less attention. Time-varying market volatility
induces changes in the investment opportunity set by changing the expectation of future mar-
ket returns, or by changing the risk-return trade-off. If the volatility of the market return is a
systematic risk factor, an APT or factor model predicts that aggregate volatility should also be
priced in the cross-section of stocks. Hence, stocks with different sensitivities to innovations in
aggregate volatility should have different expected returns.
   The first goal of this paper is to provide a systematic investigation of how the stochastic
volatility of the market is priced in the cross-section of expected stock returns. We want to de-
termine if the volatility of the market is a priced risk factor and estimate the price of aggregate
volatility risk. Many option studies have estimated a negative price of risk for market volatility
using options on an aggregate market index or options on individual stocks.1 Using the cross-
section of stock returns, rather than options on the market, allows us to create portfolios of
stocks that have different sensitivities to innovations in market volatility. If the price of aggre-
gate volatility risk is negative, stocks with large, positive sensitivities to volatility risk should
have low average returns. Using the cross-section of stock returns also allows us to easily con-
trol for a battery of cross-sectional effects, like the size and value factors of Fama and French
(1993), the momentum effect of Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), and the effect of liquidity risk
documented by Pástor and Stambaugh (2003). Option pricing studies do not control for these
cross-sectional risk factors.
   We find that innovations in aggregate volatility carry a statistically significant negative price
of risk of approximately -1% per annum. Economic theory provides several reasons why the
price of risk of innovations in market volatility should be negative. For example, Campbell
(1993 and 1996) and Chen (2002) show that investors want to hedge against changes in mar-
ket volatility, because increasing volatility represents a deterioration in investment opportuni-
ties. Risk averse agents demand stocks that hedge against this risk. Periods of high volatility
also tend to coincide with downward market movements (see French, Schwert and Stambaugh
(1987), and Campbell and Hentschel (1992)). As Bakshi and Kapadia (2003) comment, assets
with high sensitivities to market volatility risk provide hedges against market downside risk.
The higher demand for assets with high systematic volatility loadings increases their price and


                                                 1
lowers their average return. Finally, stocks that do badly when volatility increases tend to have
negatively skewed returns over intermediate horizons, while stocks that do well when volatil-
ity rises tend to have positively skewed returns. If investors have preferences over coskewness
(see Harvey and Siddique (2000)), stocks that have high sensitivities to innovations in market
volatility are attractive and have low returns.2
    The second goal of the paper is to examine the cross-sectional relationship between id-
iosyncratic volatility and expected returns, where idiosyncratic volatility is defined relative to
the standard Fama and French (1993) model.3 If the Fama-French model is correct, forming
portfolios by sorting on idiosyncratic volatility will obviously provide no difference in average
returns. Nevertheless, if the Fama-French model is false, sorting in this way potentially provides
a set of assets that may have different exposures to aggregate volatility and hence different aver-
age returns. Our logic is the following. If aggregate volatility is a risk factor that is orthogonal
to existing risk factors, the sensitivity of stocks to aggregate volatility times the movement in
aggregate volatility will show up in the residuals of the Fama-French model. Firms with greater
sensitivities to aggregate volatility should therefore have larger idiosyncratic volatilities relative
to the Fama-French model, everything else being equal. Differences in the volatilities of firms’
true idiosyncratic errors, which are not priced, will make this relation noisy. We should be able
to average out this noise by constructing portfolios of stocks to reveal that larger idiosyncratic
volatilities relative to the Fama-French model correspond to greater sensitivities to movements
in aggregate volatility and thus different average returns, if aggregate volatility risk is priced.
    While high exposure to aggregate volatility risk tends to produce low expected returns, some
economic theories suggest that idiosyncratic volatility should be positively related to expected
returns. If investors demand compensation for not being able to diversify risk (see Malkiel
and Xu (2002), and Jones and Rhodes-Kropf (2003)), then agents will demand a premium for
holding stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility. Merton (1987) suggests that in an information-
segmented market, firms with larger firm-specific variances require higher average returns to
compensate investors for holding imperfectly diversified portfolios. Some behavioral models,
like Barberis and Huang (2001), also predict that higher idiosyncratic volatility stocks should
earn higher expected returns. Our results are directly opposite to these theories. We find that
stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility have low average returns. There is a strongly significant
difference of -1.06% per month between the average returns of the quintile portfolio with the
highest idiosyncratic volatility stocks and the quintile portfolio with the lowest idiosyncratic
volatility stocks.


                                                   2
   In contrast to our results, earlier researchers either found a significantly positive relation
between idiosyncratic volatility and average returns, or they failed to find any statistically sig-
nificant relation between idiosyncratic volatility and average returns. For example, Lintner
(1965) shows that idiosyncratic volatility carries a positive coefficient in cross-sectional regres-
sions. Lehmann (1990) also finds a statistically significant, positive coefficient on idiosyncratic
volatility over his full sample period. Similarly, Tinic and West (1986) and Malkiel and Xu
(2002) unambiguously find that portfolios with higher idiosyncratic volatility have higher av-
erage returns, but they do not report any significance levels for their idiosyncratic volatility
premiums. On the other hand, Longstaff (1989) finds that a cross-sectional regression coeffi-
cient on total variance for size-sorted portfolios carries an insignificant negative sign.
   The difference between our results and the results of past studies is that the past literature
either does not examine idiosyncratic volatility at the firm level or does not directly sort stocks
into portfolios ranked on this measure of interest. For example, Tinic and West (1986) work
only with 20 portfolios sorted on market beta, while Malkiel and Xu (2002) work only with
100 portfolios sorted on market beta and size. Malkiel and Xu (2002) only use the idiosyncratic
volatility of one of the 100 beta/size portfolios to which a stock belongs to proxy for that stock’s
idiosyncratic risk and, thus, do not examine firm-level idiosyncratic volatility. Hence, by not di-
rectly computing differences in average returns between stocks with low and high idiosyncratic
volatilities, previous studies miss the strong negative relation between idiosyncratic volatility
and average returns that we find.
   The low average returns to stocks with high idiosyncratic volatilities could arise because
stocks with high idiosyncratic volatilities may have high exposure to aggregate volatility risk,
which lowers their average returns. We investigate this issue and find that this is not a complete
explanation. Our idiosyncratic volatility results are also robust to controlling for value, size,
liquidity, volume, dispersion of analysts’ forecasts, and momentum effects. We find the effect
robust to different formation periods for computing idiosyncratic volatility and for different
holding periods. The effect also persists in both bull and bear markets, recessions and expan-
sions, and volatile and stable periods. Hence, our results on idiosyncratic volatility represent a
substantive puzzle.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we examine how aggregate
volatility is priced in the cross-section of stock returns. Section II documents that firms with
high idiosyncratic volatility have very low average returns. Finally, Section III concludes.




                                                 3
        I. Pricing Systematic Volatility in the Cross-Section

A. Theoretical Motivation
When investment opportunities vary over time, the multi-factor models of Merton (1973) and
Ross (1976) show that risk premia are associated with the conditional covariances between as-
set returns and innovations in state variables that describe the time-variation of the investment
opportunities. Campbell’s (1993 and 1996) version of the Intertemporal CAPM (I-CAPM)
shows that investors care about risks from the market return and from changes in forecasts of
future market returns. When the representative agent is more risk averse than log utility, assets
that covary positively with good news about future expected returns on the market have higher
average returns. These assets command a risk premium because they reduce a consumer’s abil-
ity to hedge against a deterioration in investment opportunities. The intuition from Campbell’s
model is that risk-averse investors want to hedge against changes in aggregate volatility because
volatility positively affects future expected market returns, as in Merton (1973).
   However, in Campbell’s set-up, there is no direct role for fluctuations in market volatility to
affect the expected returns of assets because Campbell’s model is premised on homoskedastic-
ity. Chen (2002) extends Campbell’s model to a heteroskedastic environment which allows for
both time-varying covariances and stochastic market volatility. Chen shows that risk-averse in-
vestors also want to directly hedge against changes in future market volatility. In Chen’s model,
an asset’s expected return depends on risk from the market return, changes in forecasts of future
market returns, and changes in forecasts of future market volatilities. For an investor more risk
averse than log utility, Chen shows that an asset that has a positive covariance between its return
and a variable that positively forecasts future market volatilities causes that asset to have a lower
expected return. This effect arises because risk-averse investors reduce current consumption to
increase precautionary savings in the presence of increased uncertainty about market returns.
   Motivated by these multi-factor models, we study how exposure to market volatility risk is
priced in the cross-section of stock returns. A true conditional multi-factor representation of
expected returns in the cross-section would take the following form:

                                                                     K
                                                                     X
           i
          rt+1          i
               = ait + βm,t   m
                            (rt+1             i
                                  − γm,t ) + βv,t (vt+1 − γv,t ) +          i
                                                                           βk,t (fk,t+1 − γk,t ),   (1)
                                                                     k=1

       i                                     i                                                i
where rt+1 is the excess return on stock i, βm,t is the loading on the excess market return, βv,t
                                                        i
is the asset’s sensitivity to volatility risk, and the βk,t coefficients for k = 1 . . . K represent

                                                 4
loadings on other risk factors. In the full conditional setting in equation (1), factor loadings,
conditional means of factors, and factor premiums potentially vary over time. The model in
                                                            m
equation (1) is written in terms of factor innovations, so rt+1 − γm,t represents the innovation in
the market return, vt+1 −γv,t represents the innovation in the factor reflecting aggregate volatility
risk, and innovations to the other factors are represented by fk,t+1 − γk,t . The conditional
mean of the market and aggregate volatility are denoted by γm,t and γv,t , respectively, while the
conditional mean of the other factors are denoted by γk,t . In equilibrium, the conditional mean
of stock i is given by:

                                                                                     K
                                                                                     X
                          ait   =        i
                                    Et (rt+1 )   =    i
                                                     βm,t λm,t   +    i
                                                                     βv,t λv,t   +          i
                                                                                           βk,t λk,t ,   (2)
                                                                                     k=1


where λm,t is the price of risk of the market factor, λv,t is the price of aggregate volatility risk,
and the λk,t are prices of risk of the other factors. Note that only if a factor is traded is the
conditional mean of a factor equal to its conditional price of risk.
    The main prediction from the factor model setting of equation (1) that we examine is that
stocks with different loadings on aggregate volatility risk have different average returns.4 How-
ever, the true model in equation (1) is infeasible to examine because the true set of factors is
unknown and the true conditional factor loadings are unobservable. Hence, we do not attempt to
directly use equation (1) in our empirical work. Instead, we simplify the full model in equation
(1), which we now detail.


B. The Empirical Framework
To investigate how aggregate volatility risk is priced in the cross-section of equity returns we
make the following simplifying assumptions to the full specification in equation (1). First, we
use observable proxies for the market factor and the factor representing aggregate volatility risk.
We use the CRSP value-weighted market index to proxy for the market factor. To proxy innova-
tions in aggregate volatility, (vt+1 − γv,t ), we use changes in the V IX index from the Chicago
Board Options Exchange (CBOE).5 Second, we reduce the number of factors in equation (1)
to just the market factor and the proxy for aggregate volatility risk. Finally, to capture the con-
ditional nature of the true model, we use short intervals, one month of daily data, to take into
account possible time-variation of the factor loadings. We discuss each of these simplifications
in turn.



                                                             5
                               B.1. Innovations in the V IX Index

The V IX index is constructed so that it represents the implied volatility of a synthetic at-the-
money option contract on the S&P100 index that has a maturity of one month. It is constructed
from eight S&P100 index puts and calls and takes into account the American features of the
option contracts, discrete cash dividends and microstructure frictions such as bid-ask spreads
(see Whaley (2000) for further details).6 Figure 1 plots the V IX index from January 1986 to
December 2000. The mean level of the daily V IX series is 20.5%, and its standard deviation
is 7.85%.


                                  [FIGURE 1 ABOUT HERE]


   Because the V IX index is highly serially correlated with a first-order autocorrelation of
0.94, we measure daily innovations in aggregate volatility by using daily changes in V IX,
which we denote as ∆V IX. Daily first differences in V IX have an effective mean of zero (less
than 0.0001), a standard deviation of 2.65%, and also have negligible serial correlation (the
first-order autocorrelation of ∆V IX is -0.0001). As part of our robustness checks in Section
C, we also measure innovations in V IX by specifying a stationary time-series model for the
conditional mean of V IX and find our results to be similar to using simple first differences.
While ∆V IX seems an ideal proxy for innovations in volatility risk because the V IX index is
representative of traded option securities whose prices directly reflect volatility risk, there are
two main caveats with using V IX to represent observable market volatility.
   The first concern is that the V IX index is the implied volatility from the Black-Scholes
(1973) model, and we know that the Black-Scholes model is an approximation. If the true
stochastic environment is characterized by stochastic volatility and jumps, ∆V IX will reflect
total quadratic variation in both diffusion and jump components (see, for example, Pan (2002)).
Although Bates (2000) argues that implied volatilities computed taking into account jump risk
are very close to original Black-Scholes implied volatilities, jump risk may be priced differ-
ently from volatility risk. Our analysis does not separate jump risk from diffusion risk, so our
aggregate volatility risk may include jump risk components.
   A more serious reservation about the V IX index is that V IX combines both stochastic
volatility and the stochastic volatility risk premium. Only if the risk premium is zero or constant
would ∆V IX be a pure proxy for the innovation in aggregate volatility. Decomposing ∆V IX
into the true innovation in volatility and the volatility risk premium can only be done by writing

                                                6
down a formal model. The form of the risk premium depends on the parameterization of the
price of volatility risk, the number of factors and the evolution of those factors. Each different
model specification implies a different risk premium. For example, many stochastic volatility
option pricing models assume that the volatility risk premium can be parameterized as a linear
function of volatility (see, for example, Chernov and Ghysels (2000), Benzoni (2002), and
Jones (2003)). This may or may not be a good approximation to the true price of risk. Rather
than imposing a structural form, we use an unadulterated ∆V IX series. An advantage of this
approach is that our analysis is simple to replicate.


                                 B.2. The Pre-Formation Regression

Our goal is to test if stocks with different sensitivities to aggregate volatility innovations (prox-
ied by ∆V IX) have different average returns. To measure the sensitivity to aggregate volatility
innovations, we reduce the number of factors in the full specification in equation (1) to two, the
market factor and ∆V IX. A two-factor pricing kernel with the market return and stochastic
volatility as factors is also the standard set-up commonly assumed by many stochastic option
pricing studies (see, for example, Heston, 1993). Hence, the empirical model that we examine
is:
                         rti = β0 + βM
                                     i               i                 i
                                       KT · M KTt + β∆V IX · ∆V IXt + εt ,                       (3)

where M KT is the market excess return, ∆V IX is the instrument we use for innovations in
                                      i         i
the aggregate volatility factor, and βM KT and β∆V IX are loadings on market risk and aggregate

volatility risk, respectively.
      Previous empirical studies suggest that there are other cross-sectional factors that have ex-
planatory power for the cross-section of returns, such as the size and value factors of the Fama
and French (1993) three-factor model (hereafter FF-3). We do not directly model these effects
in equation (3), because controlling for other factors in constructing portfolios based on equa-
tion (3) may add a lot of noise. Although we keep the number of regressors in our pre-formation
portfolio regressions to a minimum, we are careful to ensure that we control for the FF-3 factors
and other cross-sectional factors in assessing how volatility risk is priced using post-formation
regression tests.
      We construct a set of assets that are sufficiently disperse in exposure to aggregate volatility
innovations by sorting firms on ∆V IX loadings over the past month using the regression (3)
with daily data. We run the regression for all stocks on AMEX, NASDAQ and the NYSE, with
more than 17 daily observations. In a setting where coefficients potentially vary over time, a

                                                  7
1-month window with daily data is a natural compromise between estimating coefficients with
a reasonable degree of precision and pinning down conditional coefficients in an environment
with time-varying factor loadings. Pástor and Stambaugh (2003), among others, also use daily
data with a 1-month window in similar settings. At the end of each month, we sort stocks into
quintiles, based on the value of the realized β∆V IX coefficients over the past month. Firms in
quintile 1 have the lowest coefficients, while firms in quintile 5 have the highest β∆V IX loadings.
Within each quintile portfolio, we value-weight the stocks. We link the returns across time to
form one series of post-ranking returns for each quintile portfolio.
   Table I reports various summary statistics for quintile portfolios sorted by past β∆V IX over
the previous month using equation (3). The first two columns report the mean and standard
deviation of monthly total, not excess, simple returns. In the first column under the heading
‘Factor Loadings,’ we report the pre-formation β∆V IX coefficients, which are computed at the
beginning of each month for each portfolio and are value-weighted. The column reports the
time-series average of the pre-formation β∆V IX loadings across the whole sample. By con-
struction, since the portfolios are formed by ranking on past β∆V IX , the pre-formation β∆V IX
loadings monotonically increase from -2.09 for portfolio 1 to 2.18 for portfolio 5.


                                   [TABLE I ABOUT HERE]


   The columns labelled ‘CAPM Alpha’ and ‘FF-3 Alpha’ report the time-series alphas of
these portfolios relative to the CAPM and to the FF-3 model, respectfully. Consistent with the
negative price of systematic volatility risk found by the option pricing studies, we see lower
average raw returns, CAPM alphas, and FF-3 alphas with higher past loadings of β∆V IX . All
the differences between quintile portfolios 5 and 1 are significant at the 1% level, and a joint test
for the alphas equal to zero rejects at the 5% level for both the CAPM and the FF-3 model. In
particular, the 5-1 spread in average returns between the quintile portfolios with the highest and
lowest β∆V IX coefficients is -1.04% per month. Controlling for the M KT factor exacerbates
the 5-1 spread to -1.15% per month, while controlling for the FF-3 model decreases the 5-1
spread to -0.83% per month.


                        B.3. Requirements for a Factor Risk Explanation

While the differences in average returns and alphas corresponding to different β∆V IX loadings
are very impressive, we cannot yet claim that these differences are due to systematic volatility

                                                 8
risk. We will examine the premium for aggregate volatility within the framework of an uncon-
ditional factor model. There are two requirements that must hold in order to make a case for a
factor risk-based explanation. First, a factor model implies that there should be contemporane-
ous patterns between factor loadings and average returns. For example, in a standard CAPM,
stocks that covary strongly with the market factor should, on average, earn high returns over the
same period. To test a factor model, Black, Jensen and Scholes (1972), Fama and French (1992
and 1993), Jagannathan and Wang (1996), and Pástor and Stambaugh (2003), among others, all
form portfolios using various pre-formation criteria, but examine post-ranking factor loadings
that are computed over the full sample period. While the β∆V IX loadings show very strong
patterns of future returns, they represent past covariation with innovations in market volatility.
We must show that the portfolios in Table I also exhibit high loadings with volatility risk over
the same period used to compute the alphas.
   To construct our portfolios, we took ∆V IX to proxy for the innovation in aggregate volatil-
ity at a daily frequency. However, at the standard monthly frequency, which is the frequency
of the ex-post returns for the alphas reported in Table I, using the change in V IX is a poor
approximation for innovations in aggregate volatility. This is because at lower frequencies, the
effect of the conditional mean of V IX plays an important role in determining the unanticipated
change in V IX. In contrast, the high persistence of the V IX series at a daily frequency means
that the first difference of V IX is a suitable proxy for the innovation in aggregate volatility.
Hence, we should not measure ex-post exposure to aggregate volatility risk by looking at how
the portfolios in Table I correlate ex-post with monthly changes in V IX.
   To measure ex-post exposure to aggregate volatility risk at a monthly frequency, we follow
Breeden, Gibbons and Litzenberger (1989) and construct an ex-post factor that mimics aggre-
gate volatility risk. We term this mimicking factor F V IX. We construct the tracking portfolio
so that it is the portfolio of asset returns maximally correlated with realized innovations in
volatility using a set of basis assets. This allows us to examine the contemporaneous relation-
ship between factor loadings and average returns. The major advantage of using F V IX to
measure aggregate volatility risk is that we can construct a good approximation for innovations
in market volatility at any frequency. In particular, the factor mimicking aggregate volatility
innovations allows us to proxy aggregate volatility risk at the monthly frequency by simply
cumulating daily returns over the month on the underlying base assets used to construct the
mimicking factor. This is a much simpler method for measuring aggregate volatility innova-
tions at different frequencies, rather than specifying different, and unknown, conditional means


                                                9
for V IX that depend on different sampling frequencies. After constructing the mimicking ag-
gregate volatility factor, we will confirm that it is high exposure to aggregate volatility risk that
is behind the low average returns to past β∆V IX loadings.
   However, just showing that there is a relation between ex-post aggregate volatility risk expo-
sure and average returns does not rule out the explanation that the volatility risk exposure is due
to known determinants of expected returns in the cross-section. Hence, our second condition for
a risk-based explanation is that the aggregate volatility risk exposure is robust to controlling for
various stock characteristics and other factor loadings. Several of these cross-sectional effects
may be at play in the results of Table I. For example, quintile portfolios 1 and 5 have smaller
stocks, and stocks with higher book-to-market ratios, and these are the portfolios with the most
extreme returns. Periods of very high volatility also tend to coincide with periods of market
illiquidity (see, among others, Jones (2003) and Pástor and Stambaugh (2003)). In Section C,
we control for size, book-to-market, and momentum effects, and also specifically disentangle
the exposure to liquidity risk from the exposure to systematic volatility risk.


                       B.4. A Factor Mimicking Aggregate Volatility Risk

Following Breeden, Gibbons and Litzenberger (1989) and Lamont (2001), we create the mim-
icking factor F V IX to track innovations in V IX by estimating the coefficient b in the following
regression:
                                     ∆V IXt = c + b0 Xt + ut ,                                    (4)

where Xt represents the returns on the base assets. Since the base assets are excess returns,
the coefficient b has the interpretation of weights in a zero-cost portfolio. The return on the
portfolio, b0 Xt , is the factor F V IX that mimics innovations in market volatility. We use the
quintile portfolios sorted on past β∆V IX in Table I as the base assets Xt . These base assets are,
by construction, a set of assets that have different sensitivities to past daily innovations in V IX.7
We run the regression in equation (4) at a daily frequency every month and use the estimates of
b to construct the mimicking factor for aggregate volatility risk over the same month.
   An alternative way to construct a factor that mimics volatility risk is to directly construct a
traded asset that reflects only volatility risk. One way to do this is to consider option returns.
Coval and Shumway (2001) construct market-neutral straddle positions using options on the
aggregate market (S&P 100 options). This strategy provides exposure to aggregate volatility
risk. Coval and Shumway approximate daily at-the-money straddle returns by taking a weighted
average of zero-beta straddle positions, with strikes immediately above and below each day’s

                                                 10
opening level of the S&P 100. They cumulate these daily returns each month to form a monthly
return, which we denote as ST R.8 In Section D, we investigate the robustness of our results to
using ST R in place of F V IX when we estimate the cross-sectional aggregate volatility price
of risk.
    Once we construct F V IX, then the multi-factor model (3) holds, except we can substitute
the (unobserved) innovation in volatility with the tracking portfolio that proxies for market
volatility risk (see Breeden (1979)). Hence, we can write the model in equation (3) as the
following cross-sectional regression:

                       rti = αi + βM
                                   i               i                   i
                                     KT · M KTt + βF V IX · F V IXt + εt                       (5)

where M KT is the market excess return, F V IX is the mimicking aggregate volatility factor,
     i         i
and βM KT and βF V IX are factor loadings on market risk and aggregate volatility risk, respec-

tively.
    To test a factor risk model like equation (5), we must show contemporaneous patterns be-
tween factor loadings and average returns. That is, if the price of risk of aggregate volatility is
negative, then stocks with high covariation with F V IX should have low returns, on average,
over the same period used to compute the βF V IX factor loadings and the average returns. By
construction, F V IX allows us to examine the contemporaneous relationship between factor
loadings and average returns and it is the factor that is ex-post most highly correlated with in-
novations in aggregate volatility. However, while F V IX is the right factor to test a risk story,
F V IX itself is not an investable portfolio because it is formed with future information. Nev-
ertheless, F V IX can be used as guidance for tradeable strategies that would hedge market
volatility risk using the cross-section of stocks.
    In the second column under the heading ‘Factor Loadings’ of Table I, we report the pre-
formation βF V IX loadings that correspond to each of the portfolios sorted on past β∆V IX load-
ings. The pre-formation βF V IX loadings are computed by running the regression (5) over daily
returns over the past month. The pre-formation F V IX loadings are very similar to the pre-
formation ∆V IX loadings for the portfolios sorted on past β∆V IX loadings. For example, the
pre-formation βF V IX (β∆V IX ) loading for quintile 1 is -2.00 (-2.09), while the pre-formation
βF V IX (β∆V IX ) loading for quintile 5 is 2.31 (2.18).




                                                 11
                              B.5. Post-Formation Factor Loadings

In the next to last column of Table I, we report post-formation β∆V IX loadings over the next
month, which we compute as follows. After the quintile portfolios are formed at time t, we
calculate daily returns of each of the quintile portfolios over the next month, from t to t + 1. For
each portfolio, we compute the ex-post β∆V IX loadings by running the same regression (3) that
is used to form the portfolios using daily data over the next month (t to t+1). We report the next
month β∆V IX loadings averaged across time. The next month post-formation β∆V IX loadings
range from -0.033 for portfolio 1 to 0.018 for portfolio 5. Hence, although the ex-postβ∆V IX
loadings over the next month are monotonically increasing, the spread is disappointingly very
small.
   Finding large spreads in the next month post-formation β∆V IX loadings is a very stringent
requirement and one that would be done in direct tests of a conditional factor model like equa-
tion (1). Our goal is more modest. We examine the premium for aggregate volatility using
an unconditional factor model approach, which requires that average returns are related to the
unconditional covariation between returns and aggregate volatility risk. As Hansen and Richard
(1987) note, an unconditional factor model implies the existence of a conditional factor model.
However, to form precise estimates of the conditional factor loadings in a full conditional set-
ting like equation (1) requires knowledge of the instruments driving the time-variation in the
betas, as well as specifying the complete set of factors.
   The ex-post β∆V IX loadings over the next month are computed using, on average, only 22
daily observations each month. In contrast, the CAPM and FF-3 alphas are computed using
regressions measuring unconditional factor exposure over the full sample (180 monthly obser-
vations) of post-ranking returns. To demonstrate that exposure to volatility innovations may
explain some of the large CAPM and FF-3 alphas, we must show that the quintile portfolios
exhibit different post-ranking spreads in aggregate volatility risk sensitivities over the entire
sample at the same monthly frequency for which the post-ranking returns are constructed. Av-
eraging a series of ex-post conditional one month covariances does not provide an estimate of
the unconditional covariation between the portfolio returns and aggregate volatility risk.
   To examine ex-post factor exposure to aggregate volatility risk consistent with a factor
model approach, we compute post-ranking F V IX betas over the full sample.9 In particular,
since the FF-3 alpha controls for market, size, and value factors, we compute ex-post F V IX




                                                12
factor loadings also controlling for these factors in a 4-factor post-formation regression:

 rti = αi + βM
             i                i               i               i                   i
               KT · M KTt + +βSM B · SM Bt + βHM L · HM Lt + βF V IX · F V IXt + εt , (6)



where the first three factors M KT , SM B and HM L constitute the FF-3 model’s market, size
and value factors. To compute the ex-post βF V IX loadings, we run equation (6) using monthly
frequency data over the whole sample, where the portfolios on the LHS of equation (6) are the
quintile portfolios in Table I that are sorted on past loadings of β∆V IX using equation (3).
    The last column of Table I shows that the portfolios sorted on past β∆V IX exhibit strong
patterns of post-formation factor loadings on the volatility risk factor F V IX. The ex-post
βF V IX factor loadings monotonically increase from -5.06 for portfolio 1 to 8.07 for portfolio
5. We strongly reject the hypothesis that the ex-post βF V IX loadings are equal to zero, with a
p-value less than 0.001. Thus, sorting stocks on past β∆V IX provides strong, significant spreads
in ex-post aggregate volatility risk sensitivities.10


                           B.6. Characterizing the Behavior of F V IX

Table II reports correlations between the F V IX factor, ∆V IX, and ST R, as well as correla-
tions of these variables with other cross-sectional factors. We denote the daily first difference
in V IX as ∆V IX, and use ∆m V IX to represent the monthly first difference in the V IX in-
dex. The mimicking volatility factor is highly contemporaneously correlated with changes in
volatility at a daily frequency, with a correlation of 0.91. At the monthly frequency, the cor-
relation between F V IX and ∆m V IX is lower, at 0.70. The factors F V IX and ST R have a
high correlation of 0.83, which indicates that F V IX, formed from stock returns, behaves like
the ST R factor constructed from option returns. Hence, F V IX captures option-like behavior
in the cross-section of stocks. The factor F V IX is negatively contemporaneously correlated
with the market return (-0.66), reflecting the fact that when volatility increases, market returns
are low. The correlations of F V IX with SM B and HM L are -0.14 and 0.26, respectively.
The correlation between F V IX and U M D, a factor capturing momentum returns, is also low
at -0.25.


                                    [TABLE II ABOUT HERE]


    In contrast, there is a strong negative correlation between F V IX and the Pástor and Stam-
baugh (2003) liquidity factor, LIQ, at -0.40. The LIQ factor decreases in times of low liquidity,

                                                  13
which tend to also be periods of high volatility. One example of a period of low liquidity with
high volatility is the 1987 crash (see, among others, Jones (2003) and Pástor and Stambaugh
(2003)). However, the correlation between F V IX and LIQ is far from -1, indicating that
volatility risk and liquidity risk may be separate effects, and may be separately priced. In the
next section, we conduct a series of robustness checks designed to disentangle the effects of
aggregate volatility risk from other factors, including liquidity risk.


C. Robustness
In this section, we conduct a series of robustness checks in which we specify different mod-
els for the conditional mean of V IX, use windows of different estimation periods to form
the β∆V IX portfolios, and control for potential cross-sectional pricing effects due to book-to-
market, size, liquidity, volume, and momentum factor loadings or characteristics.


                    C.1. Robustness to Different Conditional Means of V IX

We first investigate the robustness of our results to the method measuring innovations in V IX.
We used the change in V IX at a daily frequency to measure the innovation in volatility because
V IX is a highly serially correlated series. But, V IX appears to be a stationary series, and using
∆V IX as the innovation in V IX may slightly over-difference. Our finding of low average
returns on stocks with high βF V IX is robust to measuring volatility innovations by specifying
various models for the conditional mean of V IX. If we fit an AR(1) model to V IX and
measure innovations relative to the AR(1) specification, we find that the results of Table I are
almost unchanged. Specifically, the mean return of the difference between the first and fifth
β∆V IX portfolios is -1.08% per month, and the FF-3 alpha of the 5-1 difference is -0.90%, both
highly statistically significant. Using an optimal BIC choice for the number of AR lags, which
is 11, produces a similar result. In this case, the mean of the 5-1 difference is -0.81% and the
5-1 FF-3 alpha is -0.66%, and both differences are significant at the 5% level.11


                      C.2. Robustness to the Portfolio Formation Window

In this subsection, we investigate the robustness of our results to the amount of data used to
estimate the pre-formation factor loadings β∆V IX . In Table I, we use a formation period of one
month, and we emphasize that this window was chosen a priori without pretests. The results
in Table I become weaker if we extend the formation period of the portfolios. Although the


                                                14
point estimates of the β∆V IX portfolios have the same qualitative patterns as Table I, statistical
significance drops. For example, if we use the past 3-months of daily data on ∆V IX to compute
volatility betas, the mean return of the 5th quintile portfolio with the highest past β∆V IX stocks
is 0.79%, compared with 0.60% with a 1-month formation period. Using a 3-month formation
period, the FF-3 alpha on the 5th quintile portfolio decreases in magnitude to -0.37%, with
a robust t-statistic of -1.62, compared to -0.53%, with a t-statistic of -2.88, with a 1-month
formation period from Table I. If we use the past 12-months of V IX innovations, the 5th
quintile portfolio mean increases to 0.97%, while the FF-3 alpha decreases in magnitude to
-0.24%, with a t-statistic of -1.04.
   The weakening of the β∆V IX effect as the formation periods increases is due to the time-
variation of the sensitivities to aggregate market innovations. The turnover in the monthly
β∆V IX portfolios is high (above 70%) and using longer formation periods causes less turnover,
but using more data provides less precise conditional estimates. The longer the formation win-
dow, the less these conditional estimates are relevant at time t, and the lower the spread in the
pre-formation β∆V IX loadings. By using only information over the past month, we obtain an
estimate of the conditional factor loading much closer to time t.


                  C.3. Robustness to Book-to-Market and Size Characteristics

Small growth firms are typically firms with option value that would be expected to do well
when aggregate volatility increases. The portfolio of small growth firms is also one of the
Fama-French (1993) 25 portfolios sorted on size and book-to-market that is hardest to price by
standard factor models (see, for example, Hodrick and Zhang (2001)). Could the portfolio of
stocks with high aggregate volatility exposure have a disproportionately large number of small
growth stocks?
   Investigating this conjecture produces mixed results. If we exclude only the portfolio among
the 25 Fama-French portfolios with the smallest growth firms and repeat the quintile portfolio
sorts in Table I, we find that the 5-1 mean difference in returns is reduced in magnitude from
-1.04% for all firms to -0.63% per month, with a t-statistic of -3.30. Excluding small growth
firms produces a FF-3 alpha of -0.44% per month for the zero-cost portfolio that goes long
portfolio 5 and short portfolio 1, which is no longer significant at the 5% level (t-statistic is
-1.79), compared to the value of -0.83% per month with all firms. These results suggest that
small growth stocks may play a role in the β∆V IX quintile sorts of Table I.
   However, a more thorough characteristic-matching procedure suggests that size or value


                                                15
characteristics do not completely drive the results. Table III reports mean returns of the β∆V IX
portfolios characteristic-matched by size and book-to-market ratios, following the method pro-
posed by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1997). Every month, each stock is matched
with one of the Fama-French 25 size and book-to-market portfolios according to its size and
book-to-market characteristics. The table reports value-weighted simple returns in excess of
the characteristic-matched returns. Table III shows that characteristic controls for size and
book-to-market decrease the magnitude of the raw 5-1 mean return difference of -1.04% in Ta-
ble I to -0.90%. If we exclude firms that are members of the smallest growth portfolio of the
Fama-French 25 size-value portfolios, the magnitude of the mean 5-1 difference decreases to -
0.64% per month. However, the characteristic-controlled differences are still highly significant.
Hence, the low returns to high past β∆V IX stocks are not completely driven by a disproportion-
ate concentration among small growth stocks.


                                   [TABLE III ABOUT HERE]


                               C.4. Robustness to Liquidity Effects

Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) demonstrate that stocks with high liquidity betas have high aver-
age returns. In order for liquidity to be an explanation behind the spreads in average returns of
the β∆V IX portfolios, high β∆V IX stocks must have low liquidity betas. To check that the spread
in average returns on the β∆V IX portfolios is not due to liquidity effects, we first sort stocks
into five quintiles based on their historical Pástor-Stambaugh liquidity betas. Then, within each
quintile, we sort stocks into five quintiles based on their past β∆V IX coefficient loadings. These
portfolios are rebalanced monthly and are value-weighted. After forming the 5 × 5 liquidity
beta and β∆V IX portfolios, we average the returns of each β∆V IX quintile over the five liquidity
beta portfolios. Thus, these quintile β∆V IX portfolios control for differences in liquidity.
   We report the results of the Pástor-Stambaugh liquidity control in Panel A of Table IV,
which shows that controlling for liquidity reduces the magnitude of the 5-1 difference in average
returns from -1.04% per month in Table I to -0.68% per month. However, after controlling for
liquidity, we still observe the monotonically decreasing pattern of average returns of the β∆V IX
quintile portfolios. We also find that controlling for liquidity, the FF-3 alpha for the 5-1 portfolio
remains significantly negative at -0.55% per month. Hence, liquidity effects cannot account for
the spread in returns resulting from sensitivity to aggregate volatility risk.



                                                 16
                                  [TABLE IV ABOUT HERE]


   Table IV also reports post-formation βF V IX loadings. Similar to the post-formation βF V IX
loadings in Table I, we compute the post-formation βF V IX coefficients using a monthly fre-
quency regression with the 4-factor model in equation (6) to be comparable to the FF-3 alphas
over the same sample period. Both the pre-formation β∆V IX and post-formation βF V IX load-
ings increase from negative to positive from portfolio 1 to 5, consistent with a risk story. In
particular, the post-formation βF V IX loadings increase from -1.87 for portfolio 1 to 5.38 to
portfolio 5. We reject the hypothesis that the ex-post βF V IX loadings are jointly equal to zero
with a p-value less than 0.001.


                              C.5. Robustness to Volume Effects

Panel B of Table IV reports an analogous exercise to that in Panel A except we control for
volume rather than liquidity. Gervais, Kaniel and Mingelgrin (2001) find that stocks with high
past trading volume earn higher average returns than stocks with low past trading volume. It
could be that the low average returns (and alphas) we find for stocks with high βF V IX loadings
are just stocks with low volume. Panel B shows that this is not the case. In Panel B, we control
for volume by first sorting stocks into quintiles based on their trading volume over the past
month. We then sort stocks into quintiles based on their βF V IX loading and average across the
volume quintiles. After controlling for volume, the FF-3 alpha of the 5-1 long-short portfolio
remains significant at the 5% level at -0.58% per month. The post-formation βF V IX loadings
also monotonically increase from portfolio 1 to 5.


                            C.6. Robustness to Momentum Effects

Our last robustness check controls for the Jegadeesh and Titman (1993) momentum effect in
Panel C. Since Jegadeesh and Titman report that stocks with low past returns, or past loser
stocks, continue to have low future returns, stocks with high past β∆V IX loadings may tend
to also be loser stocks. Controlling for past 12-month returns reduces the magnitude of the
raw -1.04% per month difference between stocks with low and high βF V IX loadings to -0.89%,
but the 5-1 difference remains highly significant. The CAPM and FF-3 alphas of the portfo-
lios constructed to control for momentum are also significant at the 1% level. Once again, the
post-formation βF V IX loadings are monotonically increasing from portfolio 1 to 5. Hence, mo-



                                               17
mentum cannot account for the low average returns to stocks with high sensitivities to aggregate
volatility risk.


D. The Price of Aggregate Volatility Risk
Tables III and IV demonstrate that the low average returns to stocks with high past sensitivities
to aggregate volatility risk cannot be explained by size, book-to-market, liquidity, volume, and
momentum effects. Moreover, Tables III and IV also show strong ex-post spreads in the F V IX
factor. Since this evidence supports the case that aggregate volatility is a priced risk factor in the
cross-section of stock returns, the next step is to estimate the cross-sectional price of volatility
risk.
    To estimate the factor premium λF V IX on the mimicking volatility factor F V IX, we first
construct a set of test assets whose factor loadings on market volatility risk are sufficiently dis-
perse so that the cross-sectional regressions have reasonable power. We construct 25 investible
portfolios sorted by βM KT and β∆V IX as follows. At the end of each month, we sort stocks
based on βM KT , computed by a univariate regression of excess stock returns on excess market
returns over the past month using daily data. We compute the β∆V IX loadings using the bivari-
ate regression (3) also using daily data over the past month. Stocks are ranked first into quintiles
based on βM KT and then within each βM KT quintile into β∆V IX quintiles.
    Jagannathan and Wang (1996) show that a conditional factor model like equation (1) has the
form of a multi-factor unconditional model, where the original factors enter as well as additional
factors associated with the time-varying information set. In estimating an unconditional cross-
sectional price of risk for the aggregate volatility factor F V IX, we recognize that additional
factors may also affect the unconditional expected return of a stock. Hence, in our full spec-
ification, we estimate the following cross-sectional regression that includes FF-3, momentum
(U M D), and liquidity (LIQ) factors:

             i
  rti = c + βM               i                   i
               KT · λM KT + βF V IX · λF V IX + βSM B · λSM B
                                         i               i                 i             i
                                      + βHM L · λHM L + βU M D · λU M D + βLIQ · λLIQ + εt (7)



where the λs represent unconditional prices of risk of the various factors. To check robustness,
we also estimate the cross-sectional price of aggregate volatility risk by using the Coval and
Shumway (2001) ST R factor in place of F V IX in equation (7).
    We use the 25 βM KT × β∆V IX base assets to estimate factor premiums in equation (7) fol-

                                                 18
lowing the two-step procedure of Fama-MacBeth (1973). In the first stage, betas are estimated
using the full sample. In the second stage, we use cross-sectional regressions to estimate the
factor premia. We are especially interested in ex-post factor loadings on the F V IX aggregate
volatility factor, and the price of risk of F V IX. Panel A of Table V reports the results. In
addition to the standard Fama and French (1993) factors M KT , SM B and HM L, we include
the momentum factor U M D, and Pástor and Stambaugh’s (2003) non-traded liquidity factor,
LIQ. We estimate the cross-sectional risk premium for F V IX together with the Fama-French
model in regressions I. In regression II, we check robustness of our results by using Coval
and Shumway’s (2001) ST R option factor. Regressions III and IV also include the additional
regressors U M D and LIQ.


                                   [TABLE V ABOUT HERE]


   In general, Panel A shows that the premiums of the standard factors (M KT , SM B, HM L)
are estimated imprecisely with this set of base assets. The premium on SM B is consistently
estimated to be negative because the size strategy performed poorly from the 1980’s onwards.
The value effect also performs poorly during the late 1990’s, which accounts for the negative
coefficient on HM L.
   In contrast, the price of volatility risk in regression I is -0.08% per month, which is statisti-
cally significant at the 1% level. Using the Coval and Shumway (2001) ST R factor in regression
II, we estimate the cross-sectional price of volatility risk to be -0.19% per month, which is also
statistically significant at the 1% level. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
the cross-section of stock returns reflects exposure to aggregate volatility risk, and the price of
market volatility risk is significantly negative.
   When we add the U M D and LIQ factors in regressions III and IV, the estimates of the
F V IX coefficient are essentially unchanged. When U M D is added, its coefficient is insignif-
icant, while the coefficient on F V IX barely moves from the -0.080 estimate in regression I
to -0.082. The small effect of adding a momentum control on the F V IX coefficient is con-
sistent with the low correlation between F V IX and U M D in Table II and with the results in
Table IV showing that controlling for past returns does not remove the low average returns on
stocks with high βF V IX loadings. In the full specification regression IV, the F V IX coefficient
becomes slightly smaller in magnitude at -0.071, but the coefficient remains significant at the



                                                    19
5% level with a robust t-statistic of -2.02. Moreover, F V IX is the only factor to carry a rel-
atively large absolute t-statistic in the regression, which estimates seven coefficients with only
25 portfolios and 180 time-series observations.
   Panel B of Table V reports the first-pass factor loadings on F V IX for each of the 25 base
assets from Regression I in Panel A. Panel B confirms that the portfolios formed on past β∆V IX
loadings reflect exposure to volatility risk measured by F V IX over the full sample. Except for
two portfolios (the two lowest βM KT portfolios corresponding to the lowest β∆V IX quintile),
all the F V IX factor loadings increase monotonically from low to high. Examination of the
realized F V IX factor loadings demonstrates that the set of base assets, sorted on past β∆V IX
and past βM KT , provides disperse ex-post F V IX loadings.
   From the estimated price of volatility risk of -0.08% per month in Table V, we revisit Table
I to measure how much exposure to aggregate volatility risk accounts for the large spread in
the ex-post raw returns of -1.04% per month between the quintile portfolios with the lowest
and highest past β∆V IX coefficients. In Table I, the ex-post spread in F V IX betas between
portfolios 5 and 1 is 8.07 − (−5.06) = 13.13. The estimate of the price of volatility risk is
−0.08% per month. Hence, the ex-post 13.13 spread in the F V IX factor loadings accounts for
13.13 × −0.080 = −1.05% of the difference in average returns, which is almost exactly the
same as the ex-post -1.04% per month number for the raw average return difference between
quintile 5 and quintile 1. Hence, virtually all of the large difference in average raw returns in
the β∆V IX portfolios can be attributed to exposure to aggregate volatility risk.


E. A Potential Peso Story?
Despite being statistically significant, the estimates of the price of aggregate volatility risk from
Table V are small in magnitude (-0.08% per month, or approximately -1% per annum). Given
these small estimates, an alternative explanation behind the low returns to high β∆V IX stocks is
a Peso problem. By construction, F V IX does well when the V IX index jumps upward. The
small negative mean of F V IX of -0.08% per month may be due to having observed a smaller
number of volatility spikes than the market expected ex-ante.
   Figure 1 shows that there are two episodes of large volatility spikes in our sample coinciding
with large negative moves of the market: October 1987 and August 1998. In 1987, V IX
volatility jumped from 22% at the beginning of October to 61% at the end of October. At the
end of August 1998, the level of V IX reached 48%. The mimicking factor F V IX returned
134% during October 1987, and 33.6% during August 1998. Since the cross-sectional price of

                                                 20
risk of CV IX is -0.08% per month, from Table V, the cumulative return over the 180 months
in our sample period is -14.4%. A few more large values could easily change our inference.
For example, only one more crash, with an F V IX return of the same order of magnitude as
the August 1998 episode, would be enough to generate a positive return on the F V IX factor.
Using a power law distribution for extreme events, following Gabaix, Gopikrishnan, Plerou
and Stanley (2003), we would expect to see approximately three large market crashes below
three standard deviations during this period. Hence, the ex-ante probability of having observed
another large spike in volatility during our sample is quite likely.
   Hence, given our short sample, we cannot rule out a potential Peso story and, thus, we are
not extremely confident about the long-run price of risk of aggregate volatility. Nevertheless,
if volatility is a systematic factor as asset pricing theory implies, market volatility risk should
be reflected in the cross-section of stock returns. The cross-sectional Fama-MacBeth (1973)
estimates of the negative price of risk of F V IX are consistent with a risk-based story, and our
estimates are highly statistically significant with conventional asymptotic distribution theory
that is designed to be robust to conditional heteroskedasticity. However, since we cannot con-
vincingly rule out a Peso problem explanation, our -1% per annum cross-sectional estimate of
the price of risk of aggregate volatility must be interpreted with caution.



      II. Pricing Idiosyncratic Volatility in the Cross-Section
The previous section examines how systematic volatility risk affects cross-sectional average re-
turns by focusing on portfolios of stocks sorted by their sensitivities to innovations in aggregate
volatility. In this section, we investigate a second set of assets sorted by idiosyncratic volatility
defined relative to the FF-3 model. If market volatility risk is a missing component of systematic
risk, standard models of systematic risk, such as the CAPM or the FF-3 model, should mis-price
portfolios sorted by idiosyncratic volatility because these models do not include factor loadings
measuring exposure to market volatility risk.


A. Estimating Idiosyncratic Volatility
                            A.1. Definition of Idiosyncratic Volatility

Given the failure of the CAPM to explain cross-sectional returns and the ubiquity of the FF-3
model in empirical financial applications, we concentrate on idiosyncratic volatility measured


                                                 21
relative to the FF-3 model:

                 rti = αi + βM
                             i             i             i             i
                               KT M KTt + βSM B SM Bt + βHM L HM Lt + εt .                        (8)

                                  p
We define idiosyncratic risk as    var(εit ) in equation (8). When we refer to idiosyncratic volatil-
ity, we mean idiosyncratic volatility relative to the FF-3 model. We also consider sorting port-
folios on total volatility, without using any control for systematic risk.


                                      A.2. A Trading Strategy

To examine trading strategies based on idiosyncratic volatility, we describe portfolio formation
strategies based on an estimation period of L months, a waiting period of M months, and a
holding period of N months. We describe an L/M/N strategy as follows. At month t, we
compute idiosyncratic volatilities from the regression (8) on daily data over an L month period
from month t − L − M to month t − M . At time t, we construct value-weighted portfolios based
on these idiosyncratic volatilities and hold these portfolios for N months. We concentrate most
of our analysis on the 1/0/1 strategy, in which we simply sort stocks into quintile portfolios
based on their level of idiosyncratic volatility computed using daily returns over the past month,
and we hold these value-weighted portfolios for 1 month. The portfolios are rebalanced each
month. We also examine the robustness of our results to various choices of L, M and N .
   The construction of the L/M/N portfolios for L > 1 and N > 1 follows Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993), except our portfolios are value-weighted. For example, to construct the 12/1/12
quintile portfolios, each month we construct a value-weighted portfolio based on idiosyncratic
volatility computed from daily data over the 12 months of returns ending one month prior to the
formation date. Similarly, we form a value-weighted portfolio based on 12 months of returns
ending two months prior, three months prior, and so on up to 12 months prior. Each of these
portfolios is value-weighted. We then take the simple average of these twelve portfolios. Hence,
each quintile portfolio changes 1/12th of its composition each month, where each 1/12th part of
the portfolio consists of a value-weighted portfolio. The first (fifth) quintile portfolio consists of
1/12th of the lowest value-weighted (highest) idiosyncratic stocks from one month ago, 1/12th
of the value-weighted lowest (highest) idiosyncratic stocks two months ago, etc.




                                                  22
B. Patterns in Average Returns for Idiosyncratic Volatility
Table VI reports average returns of portfolios sorted on total volatility, with no controls for
systematic risk, in Panel A and of portfolios sorted on idiosyncratic volatility in Panel B.12 We
use a 1/0/1 strategy in both cases. Panel A shows that average returns increase from 1.06%
per month going from quintile 1 (low total volatility stocks) to 1.22% per month for quintile
3. Then, average returns drop precipitously. Quintile 5, which contains stocks with the highest
total volatility, has an average total return of only 0.09% per month. The FF-3 alpha, reported
in the last column, for quintile 5 is -1.16% per month, which is highly statistically significant.
The difference in the FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1 is -1.19% per month, with
a robust t-statistic of -5.92.


                                  [TABLE VI ABOUT HERE]


    We obtain similar patterns in Panel B, where the portfolios are sorted on idiosyncratic
volatility. The difference in raw average returns between quintile portfolios 5 and 1 is -1.06%
per month. The FF-3 model is clearly unable to price these portfolios since the difference in the
FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1 is -1.31% per month, with a t-statistic of -7.00.
The size and book-to-market ratios of the quintile portfolios sorted by idiosyncratic volatility
also display distinct patterns. Stocks with low (high) idiosyncratic volatility are generally large
(small) stocks with low (high) book-to-market ratios. The risk adjustment of the FF-3 model
predicts that quintile 5 stocks should have high, not low, average returns.
    The findings in Table VI are provocative, but there are several concerns raised by the anoma-
lously low returns of quintile 5. For example, although quintile 5 contains 20% of the stocks
sorted by idiosyncratic volatility, quintile 5 is only a small proportion of the value of the mar-
ket (only 1.9% on average). Are these patterns repeated if we only consider large stocks, or
only stocks traded on the NYSE? The next section examines these questions. We also examine
whether the phenomena persist if we control for a large number of cross-sectional effects that
the literature has identified either as potential risk factors or anomalies. In particular, we con-
trol for size, book-to-market, leverage, liquidity, volume, turnover, bid-ask spreads, coskewness,
dispersion in analysts’ forecasts, and momentum effects.




                                                23
C. Controlling for Various Cross-Sectional Effects
Table VII examines the robustness of our results with the 1/0/1 idiosyncratic volatility port-
folio formation strategy to various cross-sectional risk factors. The table reports FF-3 alphas,
the difference in FF-3 alphas between the quintile portfolios with the highest and lowest id-
iosyncratic volatilities, together with t-statistics to test their statistical significance.13 All the
portfolios formed on idiosyncratic volatility remain value-weighted.


                                  [TABLE VII ABOUT HERE]


                                  C.1. Using Only NYSE Stocks

We examine the interaction of the idiosyncratic volatility effect with firm size in two ways.
First, we rank stocks based on idiosyncratic volatility using only NYSE stocks. Excluding
NASDAQ and AMEX has little effect on our results. The highest quintile of idiosyncratic
volatility stocks has a FF-3 alpha of -0.60% per month. The 5-1 difference in FF-3 alphas is
still large in magnitude, at -0.66% per month, with a t-statistic of -4.85. While restricting the
universe of stocks to only the NYSE mitigates the concern that the idiosyncratic volatility effect
is concentrated among small stocks, it does not completely remove this concern because the
NYSE universe still contains small stocks.


                                     C.2. Controlling for Size

Our second examination of the interaction of idiosyncratic volatility and size uses all firms. We
control for size by first forming quintile portfolios ranked on market capitalization. Then, within
each size quintile, we sort stocks into quintile portfolios ranked on idiosyncratic volatility. Thus,
within each size quintile, quintile 5 contains the stocks with the highest idiosyncratic volatility.
   The second panel of Table VII shows that in each size quintile, the highest idiosyncratic
volatility quintile has a dramatically lower FF-3 alpha than the other quintiles. The effect is
not most pronounced among the smallest stocks. Rather, quintiles 2-4 have the largest 5-1
differences in FF-3 alphas, at -1.91%, -1.61% and -0.86% per month, respectively. The average
market capitalization of quintiles 2-4 is, on average, 21% of the market. The t-statistics of these
alphas are all above 4.5 in absolute magnitude. In contrast, the 5-1 alphas for the smallest and
largest quintiles are actually statistically insignificant at the 5% level. Hence, it is not small
stocks that are driving these results.


                                                 24
   The row labelled ‘Controlling for Size’ averages across the five size quintiles to produce
quintile portfolios with dispersion in idiosyncratic volatility, but which contain all sizes of firms.
After controlling for size, the 5-1 difference in FF-3 alphas is still -1.04% per month. Thus,
market capitalization does not explain the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks.
   In the remainder of Table VII, we repeat the explicit double-sort characteristic controls,
replacing size with other stock characteristics. We first form portfolios based on a particular
characteristic, then we sort on idiosyncratic volatility, and finally we average across the charac-
teristic portfolios to create portfolios that have dispersion in idiosyncratic volatility but contain
all aspects of the characteristic.


                           C.3. Controlling for Book-to-Market Ratios

It is generally thought that high book-to-market firms have high average returns. Thus, in order
for the book-to-market effect to be an explanation of the idiosyncratic volatility effect, the high
idiosyncratic volatility portfolios must be primarily composed of growth stocks that have lower
average returns than value stocks. The row labelled ‘Controlling for Book-to-Market’ shows
that this is not the case. When we control for book-to-market ratios, stocks with the lowest
idiosyncratic volatility have high FF-3 alphas, and the 5-1 difference in FF-3 alphas is -0.80%
per month, with a t-statistic of -2.90.


                                     C.4. Controlling for Leverage

Leverage increases expected equity returns, holding asset volatility and asset expected returns
constant. Asset volatility also prevents firms from increasing leverage. Hence, firms with high
idiosyncratic volatility could have high asset volatility but relatively low equity returns because
of low leverage. The next line of Table VII shows that leverage cannot be an explanation of the
idiosyncratic volatility effect. We measure leverage as the ratio of total book value of assets to
book value of equity. After controlling for leverage, the difference between the 5-1 alphas is
-1.23% per month, with a t-statistic of -7.61.


                                C.5. Controlling for Liquidity Risk

Pástor and Stambaugh (2003) argue that liquidity is a systematic risk. If liquidity is to ex-
plain the idiosyncratic volatility effect, high idiosyncratic volatility stocks must have low liq-
uidity betas, giving them low returns. We check this explanation by using the historical Pástor-
Stambaugh liquidity betas to measure exposure to liquidity risk. Controlling for liquidity does

                                                  25
not remove the low average returns of high idiosyncratic volatility stocks. The 5-1 difference in
FF-3 alphas remains large at -1.08% per month, with a t-statistic of -7.98.


                                   C.6. Controlling for Volume

Gervais, Kaniel and Mingelgrin (2001) find that stocks with higher volume have higher returns.
Perhaps stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility are merely stocks with low trading volume?
When we control for trading volume over the past month, the 5-1 difference in alphas is -1.22%
per month, with a t-statistic of -8.04. Hence, the low returns on high idiosyncratic volatility
stocks are robust to controlling for volume effects.


                                  C.7. Controlling for Turnover

Our next control is turnover, measured as trading volume divided by the total number of shares
outstanding over the previous month. Turnover is a noisy proxy for liquidity. Table VII shows
that the low alphas on high idiosyncratic volatility stocks are robust to controlling for turnover.
The 5-1 difference in FF-3 alphas is -1.19% per month, and it is highly significant with a t-
statistic of -8.04. Examination of the individual turnover quintiles (not reported) indicates that
the 5-1 differences in alphas are most pronounced in the quintile portfolio with the highest, not
the lowest, turnover.


                              C.8. Controlling for Bid-Ask Spreads

An alternative liquidity control is the bid-ask spread, which we measure as the average daily
bid-ask spread over the previous month for each stock. In order for bid-ask spreads to be an
explanation, high idiosyncratic volatility stocks must have low bid-ask spreads, and correspond-
ing low returns. Controlling for bid-ask spreads does little to remove the effect. The FF-3 alpha
of the highest idiosyncratic volatility portfolio is -1.26%, while the 5-1 difference in alphas is
-1.19% and remains highly statistically significant with a t-statistic of -6.95.


                             C.9. Controlling for Coskewness Risk

Harvey and Siddique (2000) find that stocks with more negative coskewness have higher re-
turns. Stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility may have positive coskewness, giving them low
returns. Computing coskewness following Harvey and Siddique (2000), we find that exposure




                                                26
to coskewness risk is not an explanation. The FF-3 alpha for the 5-1 portfolio is -1.38% per
month, with a t-statistic of -5.02.


                     C.10. Controlling for Dispersion in Analysts’ Forecasts

Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002) provide evidence that stocks with higher dispersion in
analysts’ earnings forecasts have lower average returns than stocks with low dispersion of ana-
lysts’ forecasts. They argue that dispersion in analysts’ forecasts measures differences of opin-
ion among investors. Miller (1977) shows that if there are large differences in stock valuations
and short sale constraints, equity prices tend to reflect the view of the more optimistic agents,
which leads to low future returns for stocks with large dispersion in analysts’ forecasts.
   If stocks with high dispersion in analysts’ forecasts tend to be more volatile stocks, then
we may be finding a similar anomaly to Diether, Malloy and Scherbina (2002). Over Diether,
Malloy and Scherbina’s sample period, 1983-2000, we test this hypothesis by performing a
characteristic control for the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts. We take the quintile portfolios of
stocks sorted on increasing dispersion of analysts’ forecasts (Table VI of Diether, Malloy and
Scherbina (2002, p2128)) and within each quintile sort stocks on idiosyncratic volatility. Note
that this universe of stocks contains mostly large firms, where the idiosyncratic volatility effect
is weaker, because multiple analysts usually do not make forecasts for small firms.
   The last two lines of Table VII present the results for averaging the idiosyncratic volatility
portfolios across the forecast dispersion quintiles. The 5-1 difference in alphas is still -0.39%
per month, with a robust t-statistic of -2.09. While the shorter sample period may reduce power,
the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts reduces the non-controlled 5-1 alpha considerably. How-
ever, dispersion in analysts’ forecasts cannot account for all of the low returns to stocks with
high idiosyncratic volatility.14


D. A Detailed Look at Momentum
Hong, Lim and Stein (2000) argue that the momentum effect documented by Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993) is asymmetric and has a stronger negative effect on declining stocks than a pos-
itive effect on rising stocks. A potential explanation behind the idiosyncratic volatility results
is that stocks with very low returns have very high volatility. Of course, stocks that are past
winners also have very high volatility, but loser stocks could be over-represented in the high
idiosyncratic volatility quintile.



                                                27
   In Table VIII, we perform a series of robustness tests of the idiosyncratic volatility effect to
this possible momentum explanation. In Panel A, we perform 5×5 characteristic sorts first over
past returns, and then over idiosyncratic volatility. We average over the momentum quintiles to
produce quintile portfolios sorted by idiosyncratic risk that control for past returns. We control
for momentum over the previous one month, 6 months, and 12 months. Table VIII shows that
momentum is not driving the results. Controlling for returns over the past month does not
remove the very low FF-3 alpha of quintile 5 (-0.59% per month), and the 5-1 difference in
alphas is still -0.66% per month, which is statistically significant at the 1% level. When we
control for past 6-month returns, the FF-3 alpha of the 5-1 portfolio increases in magnitude
to -1.10% per month. For past 12-month returns, the 5-1 alpha is even larger in magnitude at
-1.22% per month. All these differences are highly statistically significant.


                                  [TABLE VIII ABOUT HERE]


   In Panel B, we closely examine the individual 5 × 5 FF-3 alphas of the quintile portfolios
sorted on past 12-month returns and idiosyncratic volatility. Note that if we average these
portfolios across the past 12-month quintile portfolios, and then compute alphas, we obtain the
alphas in the row labelled ‘Past 12-months’ in Panel A of Table VIII. This more detailed view of
the interaction between momentum and idiosyncratic volatility reveals several interesting facts.
   First, the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility are most pronounced for loser stocks.
The 5-1 differences in alphas range from -2.25% per month for the loser stocks, to -0.48% per
month for the winner stocks. Second, the tendency for the momentum effect to be concentrated
more among loser, rather than winner, stocks cannot account for all of the low returns to high
idiosyncratic volatility stocks. The idiosyncratic volatility effect appears significantly in every
past return quintile. Hence, stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility earn low average returns,
no matter if these stocks are losers or winners.
   Finally, the momentum effect itself is also asymmetric across the idiosyncratic volatility
quintiles. In the first two idiosyncratic volatility quintiles, the alphas of losers (winners) are
roughly symmetrical. For example, for stocks with the lowest idiosyncratic volatilities, the
loser (winner) alpha is -0.41% (0.45%). In the second idiosyncratic volatility quintile, the loser
(winner) alpha is -0.83% (0.85%). However, as idiosyncratic volatility becomes very high, the
momentum effect becomes highly skewed towards extremely low returns on stocks with high
idiosyncratic volatility. Hence, one way to improve the returns to a momentum strategy is to
short past losers with high idiosyncratic volatility.

                                                 28
E. Is it Exposure to Aggregate Volatility Risk?
A possible explanation for the large negative returns of high idiosyncratic volatility stocks is
that stocks with large idiosyncratic volatilities have large exposure to movements in aggregate
volatility. We examine this possibility in Table IX. The first row of Panel A reports the results
of quintile sorts on idiosyncratic volatility, controlling for β∆V IX . This is done by first sorting
on β∆V IX and then on idiosyncratic volatility, and then averaging across the β∆V IX quintiles.
We motivate using past β∆V IX as a control for aggregate volatility risk because we have shown
that stocks with past high β∆V IX loadings have high future exposure to the F V IX mimicking
volatility factor.


                                  [TABLE IX ABOUT HERE]


    Panel A of Table IX shows that after controlling for aggregate volatility exposure, the 5-1
alpha is -1.19% per month, almost unchanged from the 5-1 quintile idiosyncratic volatility FF-3
alpha of -1.31% in Table VI with no control for systematic volatility exposure. Hence, it seems
that β∆V IX accounts for very little of the low average returns of high idiosyncratic volatility
stocks. Panel B of Table IX reports ex-post F V IX factor loadings of the 5 × 5 β∆V IX and
idiosyncratic volatility portfolios, where we compute the post-formation F V IX factor loadings
using equation (6). We cannot interpret the alphas from this regression, because F V IX is not a
tradeable factor, but the F V IX factor loadings give us a picture of how exposure to aggregate
volatility risk may account for the spreads in average returns on the idiosyncratic volatility
sorted portfolios.
    Panel B shows that in the first three β∆V IX quintiles, we obtain almost monotonically in-
creasing F V IX factor loadings that start with large negative ex-post βF V IX loadings for low
idiosyncratic volatility portfolios and end with large positive ex-post βF V IX loadings. How-
ever, for the two highest past β∆V IX quintiles, the F V IX factor loadings have absolutely no
explanatory power. In summary, exposure to aggregate volatility partially explains the puzzling
low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks, but only for stocks with very negative and
low past loadings to aggregate volatility innovations.


F. Robustness to Different Formation and Holding Periods
If risk cannot explain the low returns to high idiosyncratic volatility stocks, are there other ex-
planations? To help disentangle various stories, Table X reports FF-3 alphas of other L/M/N

                                                 29
strategies described in Section A. First, we examine possible contemporaneous measurement
errors in the 1/0/1 strategy by setting M = 1. Allowing for a 1-month lag between the mea-
surement of volatility and the formation of the portfolio ensures that the portfolios are formed
only with information definitely available at time t. The top row of Table X shows that the 5-1
FF-3 alpha on the 1/1/1 strategy is -0.82% per month, with a t-statistic of -4.63.


                                   [TABLE X ABOUT HERE]


   A possible behavioral explanation for our results is that higher idiosyncratic volatility does
earn higher returns over longer horizons than one month, but short-term over-reaction forces
returns to be low in the first month. If we hold high idiosyncratic volatility stocks for a long
horizon (N = 12 months), we might see a positive relation between past idiosyncratic volatility
and future average returns. The second row of Table X shows that this is not the case. For the
1/1/12 strategy, we still see very low FF-3 alphas for quintile 5, and the 5-1 difference in alphas
is still -0.67% per month, which is highly significant.
   By restricting the formation period to L = 1 month, our previous results may just be captur-
ing various short-term events that affect idiosyncratic volatility. For example, the portfolio of
stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility may be largely composed of stocks that have just made,
or are just about to make, earnings announcements. To ensure that we are not capturing specific
short-term corporate events, we extend our formation period to L = 12 months. The third row
of Table X reports FF-3 alphas for a 12/1/1 strategy. Using one entire year of daily data to
compute idiosyncratic volatility does not remove the anomalous high idiosyncratic volatility-
low average return pattern: the 5-1 difference in alphas is -1.12% per month. Similarly, the
patterns are robust for the 12/1/12 strategy, which has a 5-1 alpha of -0.77% per month.


G. Subsample Analysis
Table XI investigates the robustness of the low returns to stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility
over different subsamples. First, the effect is observed in every decade from the 1960’s to the
1990’s. The largest difference in alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1 occurs during the
1980’s, with a FF-3 alpha of -2.23% per month, and we observe the lowest magnitude of the
FF-3 alpha of the 5-1 portfolio during the 1970’s, where the FF-3 alpha is -0.77% per month.
In every decade, the effect is highly statistically significant.


                                                 30
                                  [TABLE XI ABOUT HERE]

    A possible explanation for the idiosyncratic volatility effect may be asymmetry of return dis-
tributions across business cycles. Volatility is asymmetric (and larger with downward moves),
so stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility may have normal average returns during expansion-
ary markets, and their low returns may mainly occur during bear market periods, or recessions.
We may have observed too many recessions in the sample relative to what agents expected ex-
ante. We check this hypothesis by examining the returns of high idiosyncratic volatility stocks
conditioning on NBER expansions and recessions. During NBER expansions (recessions), the
FF-3 alpha of the 5-1 portfolio is -1.25% (-1.79%). Both the expansion and recession differ-
ences in FF-3 alphas are significant at the 1% level. There are more negative returns to high
idiosyncratic volatility stocks during recessions, but the fact that the t-statistic in NBER expan-
sions is -6.55 shows that the low returns from high idiosyncratic volatility also thrives during
expansions.
    A final possibility is that the idiosyncratic volatility effect is concentrated during the most
volatile periods in the market. To test for this possibility, we compute FF-3 alphas of the dif-
ference between quintile portfolios 5 and 1 conditioning on periods with the lowest or highest
20% of absolute moves of the market return. These are ex-post periods of low or high market
volatility. During stable (volatile) periods, the difference in the FF-3 alphas of the fifth and
first quintile portfolios is -1.71% (-0.89%) per month. Both the differences in alphas during
stable and volatile periods are significant at the 5% level. The most negative returns of the high
idiosyncratic volatility strategy are earned during periods when the market is stable. Hence, the
idiosyncratic volatility effect is remarkably robust across different subsamples.


                                     III. Conclusion
Multifactor models of risk predict that aggregate volatility should be a cross-sectional risk fac-
tor. Past research in option pricing has found a negative price of risk for systematic volatility.
Consistent with this intuition, we find that stocks with high past exposure to innovations in
aggregate market volatility earn low future average returns. We use changes in the V IX in-
dex constructed by the Chicago Board Options Exchange to proxy for innovations in aggregate
volatility.
    To find the component of market volatility innovations that is reflected in equity returns, we
construct a factor to mimic innovations in market volatility following Breeden, Gibbons and

                                                31
Litzenberger (1989) and Lamont (2001). We first form portfolios on the basis of their past sen-
sitivity to first differences in the V IX index. Then, we project innovations in V IX onto these
portfolios to produce a factor that mimics aggregate volatility risk, which we term F V IX. This
portfolio of basis assets is maximally correlated with the realized aggregate volatility innova-
tions. Portfolios constructed by ranking on past betas to first differences in V IX also exhibit
strong patterns in post-formation F V IX factor loadings. In particular, the ex-post increasing
patterns in F V IX factor loadings correspond to decreasing Fama-French (1993) alphas over
the same period that the alphas are computed.
   We estimate a cross-sectional price of volatility risk of approximately -1% per annum, and
this estimate is robust to controlling for size, value, momentum and liquidity effects. Hence, the
decreasing average returns to stocks with high past sensitivities to changes in V IX is consistent
with the cross-section of returns pricing aggregate volatility risk with a negative sign. However,
despite the statistical significance of the negative volatility risk premium, its small size and
our relatively small sample mean that we cannot rule out a potential Peso problem explanation.
Since the F V IX portfolio does well during periods of market distress, adding another volatility
spike like October 1987 or August 1998 to our sample would change the sign of the price of
risk of F V IX from negative to positive. Nevertheless, our estimate of a negative price of
risk of aggregate volatility is consistent with a multi-factor model or Intertemporal CAPM.
In these settings, aggregate volatility risk is priced with a negative sign because risk-averse
agents reduce current consumption to increase precautionary savings in the presence of higher
uncertainty about future market returns. Our results are also consistent with the estimates of a
negative price of risk for aggregate volatility estimated by many option pricing studies.
   We also examine the returns of a set of test assets that are sorted by idiosyncratic volatility
relative to the Fama-French (1993) model. We uncover a very robust result. Stocks with high
idiosyncratic volatility have abysmally low average returns. In particular, the quintile portfolio
of stocks with the highest idiosyncratic volatility earns total returns of just -0.02% per month
in our sample. These low average returns to stocks with high idiosyncratic volatility cannot be
explained by exposures to size, book-to-market, leverage, liquidity, volume, turnover, bid-ask
spreads, coskewness, and dispersion in analysts’ forecasts characteristics. The effect also per-
sists in bull and bear markets, NBER recessions and expansions, volatile and stable periods, and
it is robust to considering different formation and holding periods as long as one year. Although
we argue that aggregate volatility is a new cross-sectional, systematic factor, exposure to ag-
gregate volatility risk accounts for very little of the anomalous low returns of stocks with high


                                                32
idiosyncratic volatility. Hence, the cross-sectional expected return patterns found by sorting on
idiosyncratic volatility present something of a puzzle.




                                               33
                                       References
Alizadeh, Sassan, Michael Brandt, and Franxis X. Diebold, 2002, Range-based estimation of
  stochastic volatility models, Journal of Finance 57, 1047-1091.

Andersen, Torben G., Tim Bollerslev, and Francis X. Diebold, 2003, Some like it smooth, and
  some like it rough: Untangling continuous and jump components in measuring, modeling,
  and forecasting asset return volatility, Working paper, Duke University.

Bakshi, Gurdip, Charles Cao and Zhiwu Chen, 2000, Do call prices and the underlying stock
  always move in the same direction? Review of Financial Studies 13, 549-584.

Bakshi, Gurdip, and Nikunj Kapadia, 2003, Delta-hedged gains and the negative market
  volatility risk premium, Review of Financial Studies 16, 2, 527-566.

Bali, Turan G., Nusret Cakici, Xuemin Yan, and Zhe Zhang, 2004, Does idiosyncratic risk
  really matter? forthcoming Journal of Finance.

Barberis, Nicholas, and Ming Huang, 2001, Mental accounting, loss aversion, and individual
  stock returns, Journal of Finance 56, 4, 1247-1292.

Bates, David, 2000, Post-’87 crash fears in the S&P500 futures option market, Journal of
  Econometrics 94, 181-238.

Bates, David, 2001, The market for crash risk, Working paper, University of Iowa.

Benzoni, Luca, 2002, Pricing options under stochastic volatility: An empirical investigation,
  Working paper, University of Minnesota.

Black, Fisher, Michael Jensen, and Myron S. Scholes, 1972, The capital asset pricing model:
  Some empirical tests, in Michael Jensen, ed.: Studies in the Theory of Capital Markets
  (Praeger, New York, NY).

Black, Fisher, and Myron S. Scholes, 1973, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,
  Journal of Political Economy 81, 637-659.

Breeden, Douglas T., 1979, An intertemporal asset pricing model with stochastic consumption
  and investment opportunities, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 265-296.




                                              34
Breeden, Douglas T., Michael R. Gibbons, and Robert H. Litzenberger, 1989, Empirical tests
  of the consumption-oriented CAPM, Journal of Finance 44, 231-262.

Brown, David P., and Miguel A. Ferreira, 2003, The information in the idiosyncratic volatility
  of small firms, Working paper, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Buraschi, Andrea, and Jens Jackwerth, 2001, The price of a smile: Hedging and spanning in
  option markets, Review of Financial Studies 14, 495-527.

Campbell, John Y., 1993, Intertemporal asset pricing without consumption data, American
  Economic Review 83, 487-512.

Campbell, John Y., 1996, Understanding risk and return, Journal of Political Economy 104,
  298-345.

Campbell, John Y., and Ludger Hentschel, 1992, No news is good news: An asymmetric
  model of changing volatility in stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 31, 281-318.

Campbell, John Y., Martin Lettau, Burton G. Malkiel, and Yexiao Xu, 2001, Have individual
  stocks become more volatile? An empirical exploration of idiosyncratic risk, Journal of
  Finance 56, 1, 1-44.

Carr, Peter, and Liuren Wu, 2003, Variance risk premia, Working paper, Baruch College.

Chacko, George, and Luis M. Viceira, 2003, Dynamic consumption and portfolio choice with
  stochastic volatility in incomplete markets, Working paper, Harvard University.

Chen, Joseph, 2002, Intertemporal CAPM and the cross-section of stock returns, Working
  paper, University of Southern California.

Chernov, Mikhail, and Eric Ghysels, 2002, Towards a unified approach to the joint estimation
  of objective and risk neutral measures for the purpose of options valuation, Journal of
  Financial Economics 56, 407-458.

Coval, Joshua and Tyler Shumway, 2001, Expected option returns, Journal of Finance 56,
  983-1009.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997, Measuring mutual
  fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks, Journal of Finance 52, 1035-1058.


                                              35
Diether, Karl B., Christopher J. Malloy, and Anna Scherbina, 2002, Differences of opinion and
  the cross section of stock returns, Journal of Finance 57, 2113-2141.

Eraker, Bjorn, Michael Johannes, and Nicholas Polson, 2003, The impact of jumps in volatility
  and returns, Journal of Finance 58, 1269-1300.

Fama, Eugene F., and James D. MacBeth, 1973, Risk, return, and equilibrium: Empirical tests,
  Journal of Political Economy 71, 607-636.

French, Kenneth R., G. William Schwert, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 1987, Expected stock
  returns and volatility, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 3-29.

Gabaix, Xavier, Parameswaran Gopikrishnan, Vasiliki Plerou and H. Eugene Stanley, 2003, A
  theory of power law distributions in financial market fluctuations, Nature 423, 267-70.

Gervais, Simon, Ron Kaniel, and Daniel H. Mingelgrin, 2001, The high-volume return
  premium, Journal of Finance 56, 877-919.

Gibbons, Michael R., Steven A. Ross, and Jay Shanken, 1989, A test of the efficiency of a
  given portfolio, Econometrica 57, 1121-1152.

Glosten, Laurence R., Ravi Jagannathan, and David E. Runkle, 1993, On the relation between
  the expected value and the volatility of the nominal excess return on stocks, Journal of
  Finance 48, 5, 1779-1801.

Goyal, Amit, and Pedro Santa-Clara, 2003, Idiosyncratic Risk Matters! Journal of Finance 58,
  975-1007.

Guo, Hui, and Robert F. Whitelaw, 2003, Uncovering the risk-return relation in the stock
  market, Working paper, NYU.

Hansen, Lars P., and Scott F. Richard, 1987, The role of conditioning information in deducing
  testable restrictions implied by dynamic asset pricing models, Econometrica 55, 587-614.

Harvey, Campbell R., and Akhtar Siddique, 2000, Conditional skewness in asset pricing tests,
  Journal of Finance 55, 1263-1295.

Heston, Steven L., 1993, A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with
  applications to bond and currency options, Review of Financial Studies 6, 327-343.


                                              36
Hodrick, Robert J., and Xiaoyan Zhang, 2001, Evaluating the specification errors of asset
  pricing models, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 327-376.

Hong, Harrison, Terence Lim, and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, Bad news travels slowly: Size,
  analyst coverage, and the profitability Of momentum strategies,” Journal of Finance 55,
  265-295.

Jackwerth, Jens, and Mark Rubinstein, 1996, Recovering probability distributions from option
  prices, Journal of Finance 51, 1611-1631.

Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The conditional CAPM and the cross-section of
  expected returns, Journal of Finance 51, 3-53.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling
  losers: Implications for stock market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-92.

Jones, Christopher S., 2003, Dynamics of stochastic volatility: Evidence from underlying and
  options markets, Journal of Econometrics 116, 181-224.

Jones, Charles M., 2003, A century of stock market liquidity and trading costs, Working paper,
  Columbia University.

Jones, Charles M., and Matthew Rhodes-Kropf, 2003, The price of diversifiable risk in venture
  capital and private equity, Working paper, Columbia University.

Lamont, Owen A., 2001, Economic tracking portfolios, Journal of Econometrics 105, 161-184.

Lehmann, Bruce N., 1990, Residual risk revisited, Journal of Econometrics 45, 71-97.

Lintner, John, 1965, Security prices, risk and maximal gains from diversification, Journal of
  Finance 20, 6, 587-615.

Liu, Jun, 2001, Dynamic portfolio choice and risk aversion, Working paper, UCLA.

Liu, Jun, and Jun Pan, 2003, Dynamic derivative strategies, Journal of Financial Economics
  69, 401-430.

Longstaff, Francis A., 1989, Temporal aggregation and the continuous-time capital asset
  pricing model, Journal of Finance 44, 871-887.



                                              37
Malkiel, Burton G., and Yexiao Xu, 2002, Idiosyncratic risk and security returns, Working
  paper, University of Texas at Dallas.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital asset pricing model, Econometrica 41,
  867-887.

Merton, Robert C., 1987, Presidential address: A simple model of capital market equilibrium
  with incomplete information, Journal of Finance 42, 483-510.

Miller, Edward M., 1977, Risk, uncertainty and divergence of opinion, Journal of Finance 32,
  1151-1168.

Newey, Whitney K., and Kenneth D. West, 1987, A simple positive-definite heteroskedasticity
  and autocorrelation consistent covariance matrix, Econometrica 55, 703-708.

Pan, Jun, 2002, The jump-risk premia implicit in options: Evidence from an integrated
  time-series study, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 3-50.

Pástor, Ľuboš, and Robert F. Stambaugh, 2003, Liquidity risk and expected stock returns,
  Journal of Political Economy 111, 642-685.

Ross, Steven, 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of Economic Theory
  13, 341-360.

Tinic, Seha M., and Richard R. West, 1986, Risk, return and equilibrium: A revisit, Journal of
  Political Economy 94, 126-147.

Vayanos, Dimitri, 2003, Flight to quality, flight to liquidity, and the pricing of risk, working
  paper, MIT.

Whaley, R., 2000, The investor fear gauge, Journal of Portfolio Management 26, 12-17.

Xu, Yexiao, and Burton G. Malkiel, 2003, Investigating the behavior of idiosyncratic volatility,
  Journal of Business 76, 613-644.




                                                38
                                             Notes


   1
       See, among others, Jackwerth and Rubinstein (1996), Bakshi, Cao and Chen (2000), Cher-
nov and Ghysels (2000), Burashi and Jackwerth (2001), Coval and Shumway (2001), Benzoni
(2002), Jones (2003), Pan (2002), Bakshi and Kapadia (2003), Eraker, Johannes and Polson
(2003), and Carr and Wu (2003).

   2
       Bates (2001) and Vayanos (2004) provide recent structural models whose reduced form
factor structures have a negative risk premium for volatility risk.

   3
       Recent studies examining total or idiosyncratic volatility focus on the average level of
firm-level volatility. For example, Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel and Xu (2001), and Xu and
Malkiel (2003) document that idiosyncratic volatility has increased over time. Brown and Fer-
reira (2003) and Goyal and Santa-Clara (2003) argue that idiosyncratic volatility has positive
predictive power for excess market returns, but this is disputed by Bali, Cakici, Yan and Zhang
(2004).

   4
       While an I-CAPM implies joint time-series as well as cross-sectional predictability, we do
not examine time-series predictability of asset returns by systematic volatility. Time-varying
volatility risk generates intertemporal hedging demands in partial equilibrium asset allocation
problems. In a partial equilibrium setting, Liu (2001) and Chacko and Viceira (2003) examine
how volatility risk affects the portfolio allocation of stocks and risk-free assets, while Liu and
Pan (2003) show how investors can optimally exploit the variation in volatility with options.
Guo and Whitelaw (2003) examine the intertemporal components of time-varying systematic
volatility in a Campbell (1993 and 1996) equilibrium I-CAPM.

   5
       In previous versions of this paper, we also considered sample volatility, following Schwert
and Stambaugh (1987); a range-based estimate, following Alizadeh, Brandt and Diebold (2002);
and a high-frequency estimator of volatility from Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003).
Using these measures to proxy for innovations in aggregate volatility produces little spread in


                                                39
cross-sectional average returns. These tables are available upon request.

   6
       On September 22, 2003, the CBOE implemented a new formula and methodology to con-
struct its volatility index. The new index is based on the S&P500 (rather than the S&P100) and
takes into account a broader range of strike prices rather than using only at-the-money option
contracts. The CBOE now uses V IX to refer to this new index. We use the old index (de-
noted by the ticker V XO). We do not use the new index because it has been constructed by
back-filling only to 1990, whereas the V XO is available in real-time from 1986. The CBOE
continues to make both volatility indices available. The correlation between the new and the old
CBOE volatility series is 98% from 1990-2000, but the series that we use has a slightly broader
range.

   7
       Our results are unaffected if we use the six Fama-French (1993) 3 × 2 portfolios sorted on
size and book-to-market as the base assets. These results are available upon request.

   8
       The ST R returns are available from January 1986 to December 1995, because it is con-
structed from the Berkeley Option Database, which has reliable data only from the late 1980’s
and ends in 1995.

   9
       The pre-formation betas and the post-formation betas are computed using different criteria
(∆V IX and F V IX, respectively). However, Table I shows that the pre-formation βF V IX
loadings are almost identical to the pre-formation β∆V IX loadings.

  10
       When we compute ex-post betas using the monthly change in V IX, ∆m V IX, using a
4-factor model similar to equation (6) (except using ∆m V IX in place of F V IX), there is less
dispersion in the post-formation ∆m V IX betas, ranging from -2.46 for portfolio 1 to 0.76 to
portfolio 5, compared to the ex-post βF V IX loadings.

  11
       In these exercises, we estimate the AR coefficients only using all data up to time t to
compute the innovation for t + 1, so that no forward-looking information is used. We initially
estimate the AR models using one year of daily data. However, the optimal BIC lag length is



                                                40
chosen using the whole sample.

   12
        If we compute idiosyncratic volatility relative to the CAPM, we obtain almost identical
results to Panel B of Table VI. Each quintile portfolio of idiosyncratic volatility relative to
the CAPM has a correlation of above 99% with its corresponding quintile counterpart when
idiosyncratic volatility is computed relative to the FF-3 model.

   13
        We emphasize that the difference in mean raw returns between quintile 5 and 1 portfolios
is very similar to the difference in the FF-3 alphas, but we focus on FF-3 alphas as they control
for the standard set of systematic factors.

   14
        We can also reverse the question and ask if the low average returns of stocks with high
dispersion of analysts’ forecasts are due to the low returns on stocks with high idiosyncratic
volatility by first sorting stocks on idiosyncratic volatility and then by forecast dispersion. Con-
trolling for idiosyncratic volatility, the FF-3 alpha for the quintile portfolio that is long stocks
with the highest forecast dispersion and short stocks in the quintile portfolio with the lowest
forecast dispersion, is -0.36% per month, which is insignificant at the 5% level (the robust
t-statistic is -1.47).




                                                41
                                   Table I: Portfolios Sorted by Exposure to Aggregate Volatility Shocks


                                                                                                          Factor Loadings

                                                                                                                    Next Month         Full Sample
                            Std    % Mkt                   CAPM      FF-3      Pre-Formation     Pre-Formation     Post-Formation     Post-Formation
       Rank     Mean        Dev    Share   Size    B/M     Alpha     Alpha        β∆V IX            βF V IX            β∆V IX             βF V IX

       1         1.64       5.53   9.4%    3.70    0.89      0.27     0.30          -2.09             -2.00             -0.033             -5.06
                                                           [1.66]    [1.77]                                                               [-4.06]
       2         1.39       4.43   28.7%   4.77    0.73      0.18     0.09          -0.46             -0.42             -0.014             -2.72
                                                           [1.82]    [1.18]                                                               [-2.64]
       3         1.36       4.40   30.4%   4.77    0.76      0.13     0.08          0.03              0.08              0.005              -1.55
                                                           [1.32]    [1.00]                                                               [-2.86]
       4         1.21       4.79   24.0%   4.76    0.73     -0.08     -0.06         0.54              0.62              0.015               3.62
                                                           [-0.87]   [-0.65]                                                              [4.53]
       5         0.60       6.55   7.4%    3.73    0.89     -0.88     -0.53         2.18              2.31              0.018               8.07
                                                           [-3.42]   [-2.88]                                                              [5.32]




42
       5-1       -1.04                                      -1.15     -0.83
                [-3.90]                                    [-3.54]   [-2.93]

       Joint test p-value                                   0.01      0.03                                                                  0.00


     We form value-weighted quintile portfolios every month by regressing excess individual stock returns on ∆V IX, controlling for the M KT
     factor, as in equation (3), using daily data over the previous month. Stocks are sorted into quintiles based on the coefficient β∆V IX from lowest
     (quintile 1) to highest (quintile 5). The statistics in the columns labelled Mean and Std Dev are measured in monthly percentage terms and apply
     to total, not excess, simple returns. Size reports the average log market capitalization for firms within the portfolio and B/M reports the average
     book-to-market ratio. The row ‘5-1’ refers to the difference in monthly returns between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. The Alpha columns report
     Jensen’s alpha with respect to the CAPM or the Fama-French (1993) three-factor model. The pre-formation betas refer to the value-weighted
     β∆V IX or βF V IX within each quintile portfolio at the start of the month. We report the pre-formation β∆V IX and βF V IX averaged across the
     whole sample. The second last column reports the β∆V IX loading computed over the next month with daily data. The column reports the next
     month β∆V IX loadings averaged across months. The last column reports ex-post βF V IX factor loadings over the whole sample, where F V IX is
     the factor mimicking aggregate volatility risk. To correspond with the Fama-French alphas, we compute the ex-post betas by running a four-factor
     regression with the three Fama-French factors together with the F V IX factor that mimics aggregate volatility risk, following the regression in
     equation (6). The row labelled ‘Joint test p-value’ reports a Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) test for the alphas equal to zero, and a robust joint
     test that the factor loadings are equal to zero. Robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are reported in square brackets. The sample period is from
     January 1986 to December 2000.
                                  Table II: Factor Correlations

                                       Panel A: Daily Correlation

                         ∆V IX

             F V IX        0.91

                                     Panel B: Monthly Correlations

                         F V IX     ∆m V IX     M KT     SM B       HM L    UMD      LIQ

             ∆m V IX       0.70       1.00      -0.58     -0.18      0.22   -0.11    -0.33
             F V IX        1.00       0.70      -0.66     -0.14      0.26   -0.25    -0.40
             ST R          0.75       0.83      -0.39     -0.39      0.08   -0.26    -0.59

The table reports correlations of first differences in V IX, F V IX, and ST R with various factors. The
variable ∆V IX (∆m V IX) represents the daily (monthly) change in the V IX index, and F V IX is the
mimicking aggregate volatility risk factor. The factor ST R is constructed by Coval and Shumway (2001)
from the returns of zero-beta straddle positions. The factors M KT , SM B, HM L are the Fama and French
(1993) factors, the momentum factor U M D is constructed by Kenneth French, and LIQ is the Pástor and
Stambaugh (2003) liquidity factor. The sample period is January 1986 to December 2000, except for corre-
lations involving ST R, which are computed over the sample period January 1986 to December 1995.




                                                  43
             Table III: Characteristic Controls for Portfolios Sorted on β∆V IX


                                                                Excluding Small,
                                           All Firms             Growth Firms

                              Rank      Mean     Std Dev         Mean     Std Dev

                              1          0.32      2.11           0.36      1.90
                              2          0.04      1.25           0.02      0.94
                              3          0.04      0.94           0.05      0.89
                              4         -0.11      1.04          -0.10      1.02
                              5         -0.58      3.39          -0.29      2.17

                              5-1       -0.90                    -0.64
                                      [-3.59]                  [-3.75]


The table reports the means and standard deviations of the excess returns on the β∆V IX quintile portfolios
characteristic-matched by size and book-to-market ratios. Each month, each stock is matched with one of the
Fama and French (1993) 25 size and book-to-market portfolios according to its size and book-to-market char-
acteristics. The table reports value-weighted simple returns in excess of the characteristic-matched returns.
The columns labelled ‘Excluding Small, Growth Firms’ exclude the Fama-French portfolio containing the
smallest stocks and the firms with the lowest book-to-market ratios. The row ‘5-1’ refers to the difference in
monthly returns between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. The p-values of joint tests for all alphas equal to zero are
less than 1% for the panel of all firms and for the panel excluding small, growth firms. Robust Newey-West
(1987) t-statistics are reported in square brackets. The sample period is from January 1986 to December
2000.




                                                       44
Table IV: Portfolios Sorted on β∆V IX Controlling for Liquidity, Volume and Momentum


                                           CAPM      FF-3       Pre-Formation   Post-Formation
          Rank     Mean        Std Dev     Alpha     Alpha     β∆V IX Loading   βF V IX Loading

                                       Panel A: Controlling for Liquidity

          1         1.57        5.47         0.21      0.19         -1.89            -1.87
                                            [1.31]    [1.34]                        [-1.65]
          2         1.48        4.48         0.27      0.15         -0.43            -2.70
                                            [2.25]    [1.68]                        [-2.78]
          3         1.40        4.54         0.15      0.09         0.03             -1.34
                                            [1.59]    [0.97]                        [-1.90]
          4         1.30        4.74         0.02     -0.02         0.49              0.49
                                            [0.21]   [-0.17]                         [0.54]
          5         0.89        5.84        -0.52     -0.36         1.96              5.38
                                           [-2.87]   [-2.09]                         [4.26]

          5-1      -0.68                    -0.73     -0.55
                  [-3.04]                  [-2.99]   [-2.15]

          Joint test p-value                 0.04     0.01                           0.00

                                         Panel B: Controlling for Volume

          1         1.10        4.73        -0.11     -0.13         -2.08            -3.12
                                           [-0.58]   [-1.34]                        [-3.17]
          2         1.18        4.01         0.08     -0.08         -0.47            -3.39
                                            [0.46]   [-0.92]                        [-4.19]
          3         1.18        3.78         0.10     -0.04         0.04             -2.84
                                            [0.66]   [-0.50]                        [-4.84]
          4         0.98        4.18        -0.17     -0.23         0.55              0.14
                                           [-1.06]    [2.16]                         [0.24]
          5         0.38        5.31        -0.90     -0.71         2.17              4.29
                                           [-3.86]   [-4.84]                         [5.07]

          5-1      -0.72                    -0.79     -0.58
                  [-3.49]                  [-3.22]   [-3.03]

          Joint test p-value                 0.00     0.00                           0.00




                                                       45
                                            Table IV– Continued


                                           CAPM      FF-3       Pre-Formation      Post-Formation
            Rank     Mean        Std Dev   Alpha     Alpha     β∆V IX Loading      βF V IX Loading

                                 Panel C: Controlling for Past 12-Month Returns

            1         1.25        5.55      -0.11     -0.17         -2.03                0.39
                                           [-0.64]   [-1.08]                            [0.28]
            2         1.19        4.87      -0.08     -0.19         -0.49                0.82
                                           [-0.57]   [-1.54]                            [0.68]
            3         1.28        4.76       0.02     -0.08          0.03                0.97
                                            [0.15]   [-0.73]                            [0.89]
            4         1.06        4.88      -0.22     -0.27          0.56                4.86
                                           [-1.64]   [-2.26]                            [5.50]
            5         0.36        5.87      -1.05     -0.90          2.11                7.17
                                           [-5.01]   [-4.72]                            [5.50]

            5-1      -0.89                  -0.93     -0.74
                    [-4.72]                [-4.00]   [-3.42]

            Joint test p-value              0.00      0.00                               0.00

In Panel A, we first sort stocks into five quintiles based on their historical liquidity beta, following Pástor
and Stambaugh (2003). Then, within each quintile, we sort stocks based on their β∆V IX loadings into
five portfolios. All portfolios are rebalanced monthly and are value-weighted. The five portfolios sorted
on β∆V IX are then averaged over each of the five liquidity beta portfolios. Hence, they are β∆V IX quintile
portfolios controlling for liquidity. In Panels B and C, the same approach is used except we control for average
trading volume (in dollars) over the past month and past 12-month returns, respectively. The statistics in the
columns labelled Mean and Std Dev are measured in monthly percentage terms and apply to total, not excess,
simple returns. The table also reports alphas from CAPM and Fama-French (1993) regressions. The row
‘5-1’ refers to the difference in monthly returns between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. The pre-formation betas
refer to the value-weighted β∆V IX within each quintile portfolio at the start of the month. We report the pre-
formation β∆V IX averaged across the whole sample. The last column reports ex-post βF V IX factor loadings
over the whole sample, where F V IX is the factor mimicking aggregate volatility risk. To correspond with
the Fama-French alphas, we compute the ex-post betas by running a four-factor regression with the three
Fama-French factors together with the F V IX factor, following the regression in equation (6). The row
labelled ‘Joint test p-value’ reports a Gibbons, Ross and Shanken (1989) test that the alphas equal to zero,
and a robust joint test that the factor loadings are equal to zero. Robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics are
reported in square brackets. The sample period is from January 1986 to December 2000.




                                                      46
                         Table V: Estimating the Price of Volatility Risk


                              Panel A: Fama-MacBeth (1973) Factor Premiums

                                                I          II          III         IV

                              Constant       -0.145      -0.527      -0.202      -0.247
                                             [-0.23]     [-0.88]     [-0.31]     [-0.36]
                              M KT            0.977       1.276       1.034       1.042
                                              [1.11]      [1.47]      [1.13]     [1.13]
                              F V IX         -0.080                  -0.082      -0.071
                                             [-2.49]                 [-2.39]     [-2.02]
                              ST R                       -0.194
                                                         [-2.32]
                              SM B           -0.638      -0.246      -0.608      -0.699
                                             [-1.24]     [-0.59]     [-1.13]     [-1.25]
                              HM L           -0.590      -0.247      -0.533      -0.232
                                             [-0.95]     [-0.40]     [-0.82]     [-0.34]
                              UMD                                     0.827       0.612
                                                                      [0.83]      [0.59]
                              LIQ                                                -0.021
                                                                                 [-1.00]

                              Adj R2          0.67        0.56        0.65        0.79



                                 Panel B: Ex-Post Factor Loadings on F V IX


                                                            Pre-ranking on β∆V IX
                                               1 low         2        3         4             5

                   Pre-ranking     Low 1        -1.57       -5.89        -3.83      -3.35     -1.03
                   on βM KT                    [-0.46]     [-3.23]     [-1.93]    [-1.99]   [-0.45]
                                         2      -3.49       -4.47       -4.01      -2.00     -0.54
                                               [-1.67]     [-3.18]     [-3.11]    [-1.66]   [-0.31]
                                         3      -5.74       -3.49       -2.56      -0.95      3.72
                                               [-3.16]     [-2.84]     [-2.21]    [-0.78]    [2.30]
                                         4      -5.80       -1.41       -0.34       3.39      6.66
                                               [-4.13]     [-1.00]     [-0.29]     [2.69]    [3.85]
                                   High 5       -3.69       -0.57         3.52      7.81     11.70
                                               [-2.05]     [-0.45]      [1.76]     [3.32]    [3.13]

Panel A reports the Fama-MacBeth (1973) factor premiums on 25 portfolios sorted first on βM KT and then
on β∆V IX . M KT is the excess return on the market portfolio, F V IX is the mimicking factor for aggregate
volatility innovations, ST R is Coval and Shumway’s (2001) zero-beta straddle return, SM B and HM L
are the Fama-French (1993) size and value factors, U M D is the momentum factor constructed by Kenneth
French, and LIQ is the aggregate liquidity measure from Pástor and Stambaugh (2003). In Panel B, we report
ex-post factor loadings on F V IX, from the regression specification I (Fama-French model plus F V IX).
Robust t-statistics that account for the errors-in-variables for the first-stage estimation in the factor loadings
are reported in square brackets. The sample period is from January 1986 to December 2000, except for the
Fama-MacBeth regressions with ST R, which are from January 1986 to December 1995.

                                                          47
                             Table VI: Portfolios Sorted by Volatility


                                       Std    % Mkt                     CAPM        FF-3
                    Rank     Mean      Dev     Share     Size   B/M     Alpha       Alpha

                                 Panel A: Portfolios Sorted by Total Volatility

                    1         1.06     3.71    41.7%     4.66   0.88      0.14         0.03
                                                                         [1.84]      [0.53]
                    2         1.15     4.48    33.7%     4.70   0.81      0.13         0.08
                                                                         [2.14]      [1.41]
                    3         1.22     5.63    15.5%     4.10   0.82      0.07         0.12
                                                                         [0.72]      [1.55]
                    4         0.99     7.15     6.7%     3.47   0.86     -0.28        -0.17
                                                                        [-1.73]     [-1.42]
                    5         0.09     8.30     2.4%     2.57   1.08     -1.21        -1.16
                                                                        [-5.07]     [-6.85]
                    5-1      -0.97                                       -1.35        -1.19
                            [-2.86]                                     [-4.62]     [-5.92]

                    Panel B: Portfolios Sorted by Idiosyncratic Volatility Relative to FF-3

                    1         1.04     3.83    53.5%     4.86   0.85      0.11         0.04
                                                                         [1.57]      [0.99]
                    2         1.16     4.74    27.4%     4.72   0.80      0.11         0.09
                                                                         [1.98]      [1.51]
                    3         1.20     5.85    11.9%     4.07   0.82      0.04         0.08
                                                                         [0.37]      [1.04]
                    4         0.87     7.13     5.2%     3.42   0.87     -0.38        -0.32
                                                                        [-2.32]     [-3.15]
                    5        -0.02     8.16     1.9%     2.52   1.10     -1.27        -1.27
                                                                        [-5.09]     [-7.68]
                    5-1      -1.06                                       -1.38        -1.31
                            [-3.10]                                     [-4.56]     [-7.00]

We form value-weighted quintile portfolios every month by sorting stocks based on total volatility and id-
iosyncratic volatility relative to the Fama-French (1993) model. Portfolios are formed every month, based on
volatility computed using daily data over the previous month. Portfolio 1 (5) is the portfolio of stocks with
the lowest (highest) volatilities. The statistics in the columns labelled Mean and Std Dev are measured in
monthly percentage terms and apply to total, not excess, simple returns. Size reports the average log market
capitalization for firms within the portfolio and B/M reports the average book-to-market ratio. The row ‘5-1’
refers to the difference in monthly returns between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. The Alpha columns report
Jensen’s alpha with respect to the CAPM or Fama-French (1993) three-factor model. Robust Newey-West
(1987) t-statistics are reported in square brackets. Robust joint tests for the alphas equal to zero are all less
than 1% for all cases. The sample period is July 1963 to December 2000.




                                                       48
          Table VII: Alphas of Portfolios Sorted on Idiosyncratic Volatility


                                                Ranking on Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                            1 Low     2         3         4       5 High       5-1

NYSE Stocks Only                             0.06      0.04      0.02      -0.04     -0.60     -0.66
                                            [1.20]    [0.75]    [0.30]    [-0.40]   [-5.14]   [-4.85]

Size Quintiles                    Small 1    0.11      0.26       0.31      0.06     -0.43     -0.55
                                            [0.72]    [1.56]    [1.76]    [0.29]    [-1.54]   [-1.84]
                                       2     0.19      0.20      -0.07     -0.65     -1.73     -1.91
                                            [1.49]    [1.74]    [-0.67]   [-5.19]   [-8.14]   [-7.69]
                                       3     0.12      0.21       0.03     -0.27     -1.49     -1.61
                                            [1.23]    [2.40]    [0.38]    [-3.36]   [-10.1]   [-7.65]
                                       4     0.03      0.22       0.17     -0.03     -0.82     -0.86
                                            [0.37]    [2.57]    [2.47]    [-0.45]   [-6.61]   [-4.63]
                                  Large 5    0.09      0.04       0.03      0.14     -0.17     -0.26
                                            [1.62]    [0.72]    [0.51]    [1.84]    [-1.40]   [-1.74]

Controlling for Size                         0.11      0.18      0.09      -0.15     -0.93     -1.04
                                            [1.30]    [2.49]    [1.35]    [-1.99]   [-6.81]   [-5.69]

Controlling for Book-to-Market               0.61      0.69      0.71      0.50      -0.19     -0.80
                                            [3.02]    [2.80]    [2.49]    [1.47]    [-0.48]   [-2.90]

Controlling for Leverage                     0.11      0.11      0.08      -0.24     -1.12     -1.23
                                            [2.48]    [2.20]    [1.19]    [-2.45]   [-7.81]   [-7.61]

Controlling for Liquidity                    0.08      0.09      -0.01     -0.16     -1.01     -1.08
                                            [1.71]    [1.53]    [-0.09]   [-1.62]   [-8.61]   [-7.98]

Controlling for Volume                       -0.03     0.02      -0.01     -0.39     -1.25     -1.22
                                            [-0.49]   [0.39]    [-0.32]   [-7.11]   [-10.9]   [-8.04]

Controlling for Turnover                     0.11      0.03      -0.11     -0.49     -1.34     -1.46
                                            [2.49]    [0.58]    [-1.79    [-6.27]   [-11.0]   [-10.7]

Controlling for Bid-Ask Spreads              -0.07     -0.01     -0.09     -0.49     -1.26     -1.19
                                            [-1.21]   [-0.18]   [-1.14]   [-5.36]   [-9.13]   [-6.95]

Controlling for Coskewness                   -0.02     -0.00     0.01      -0.37     -1.40     -1.38
                                            [-0.32]   [-0.02]   [0.08]    [-2.30]   [-6.07]   [-5.02]

Controlling for Dispersion                   0.12      -0.07     0.11      0.01      -0.27     -0.39
in Analysts’ Forecasts                      [1.57]    [-0.76]   [1.12]    [0.09]    [-1.76]   [-2.09]




                                               49
Note to Table VII
The table reports Fama and French (1993) alphas, with robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics in square brack-
ets. All the strategies are 1/0/1 strategies for idiosyncratic volatility computed relative to FF-3, but control
for various effects. The column ’5-1’ refers to the difference in FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio
1. In the panel labelled ’NYSE Stocks Only’, we sort stocks into quintile portfolios based on their idiosyn-
cratic volatility, relative to the FF-3 model, using only NYSE stocks. We use daily data over the previous
month and rebalance monthly. In the panel labelled ’Size Quintiles,’ each month we first sort stocks into
five quintiles on the basis of size. Then, within each size quintile, we sort stocks into five portfolios sorted
by idiosyncratic volatility. In the panels controlling for size, liquidity volume and momentum, we perform
a double sort. Each month, we first sort stocks based on the first characteristic (size, book-to-market, lever-
age, liquidity, volume, turnover, bid-ask spreads, or dispersion of analysts’ forecasts) and then, within each
quintile we sort stocks based on idiosyncratic volatility, relative to the FF-3 model. The five idiosyncratic
volatility portfolios are then averaged over each of the five characteristic portfolios. Hence, they represent
idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolios controlling for the characteristic. Liquidity represents the Pástor
and Stambaugh (2003) historical liquidity beta, leverage is defined as the ratio of total book value of assets to
book value of equity, volume represents average dollar volume over the previous month, turnover represents
volume divided by the total number of shares outstanding over the past month, and the bid-ask spread control
represents the average daily bid-ask spread over the previous month. The coskewness measure is computed
following Harvey and Siddique (2000) and the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts is computed by Diether,
Malloy and Scherbina (2002). The sample period is July 1963 to December 2000 for all controls with the
exceptions of liquidity (February 1968 to December 2000), the dispersion of analysts’ forecasts (February
1983 to December 2000), and the control for aggregate volatility risk (January 1986 to December 2000). All
portfolios are value-weighted.




                                                      50
Table VIII: Alphas of Portfolios Sorted on Idiosyncratic Volatility Controlling for Past
                                       Returns

                                         Ranking on Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                     1 Low     2         3         4       5 High         5-1

                                     Panel A: Controlling for Momentum

                 Past 1-month         0.07      0.08       0.09      -0.05     -0.59      -0.66
                                     [0.43]    [0.94]     [1.26]    [-0.47]   [-3.60]    [-2.71]

                 Past 6-months        -0.01     -0.12      -0.28     -0.45     -1.11      -1.10
                                     [-0.20]   [-1.86]    [-3.60]   [-5.20]   [-9.35]    [-7.18]

                 Past 12-months       0.01      -0.05      -0.28     -0.64     -1.21      -1.22
                                     [0.15]    [-0.76]    [-3.56]   [-6.95]   [-11.5]    [-9.20]

                                       Panel B: Past 12-Month Quintiles

                        Losers 1      -0.41     -0.83      -1.44     -2.11     -2.66      -2.25
                                     [-1.94]   [-3.90]    [-6.32]   [-9.40]   [-10.6]    [-7.95]
                                 2    -0.08     -0.24      -0.64     -1.09     -1.70      -1.62
                                     [-0.49]   [-1.58]    [-4.40]   [-6.46]   [-8.90]    [-7.00]
                                 3    -0.06     -0.11      -0.26     -0.48     -1.03      -0.97
                                     [-0.52]   [-1.16]    [-2.15]   [-3.49]   [-7.93]    [-5.85]
                                 4     0.15      0.07       0.23     -0.03     -0.65      -0.80
                                      [1.57]   [0.65]     [2.27]    [-0.29]   [-4.76]    [-4.89]
                       Winners 5       0.45      0.85       0.71      0.52     -0.03      -0.48
                                      [3.52]   [5.44]     [3.97]    [2.63]    [-0.13]    [-2.01]


The table reports Fama and French (1993) alphas, with robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics in square brack-
ets. All the strategies are 1/0/1 strategies, but control for past returns. The column ‘5-1’ refers to the dif-
ference in FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. In the first three rows labelled ‘Past 1-month’
to ‘Past 12-months,’ we control for the effect of momentum. We first sort all stocks on the basis of past
returns, over the appropriate formation period, into quintiles. Then, within each momentum quintile, we sort
stocks into five portfolios sorted by idiosyncratic volatility, relative to the FF-3 model. The five idiosyncratic
volatility portfolios are then averaged over each of the five characteristic portfolios. Hence, they represent
idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolios controlling for momentum. The second part of the panel lists the
FF-3 alphas of idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolios within each of the past 12-month return quintiles.
All portfolios are value-weighted. The sample period is July 1963 to December 2000.




                                                         51
Table IX: The Idiosyncratic Volatility Effect Controlling for Aggregate Volatility Risk


                                                     Ranking on Idiosyncratic Volatility
                                                 1 Low     2         3         4       5 High         5-1

                                             Panel A: FF-3 Alphas

      Controlling for Exposure to                 0.05       0.01      -0.14     -0.49     -1.14     -1.19
      Aggregate Volatility Risk                  [0.83]     [0.09]    [-1.14]   [-3.08]   [-5.00]   [-4.72]

                                       Panel B: F V IX Factor Loadings

      β∆V IX Quintiles                Low 1      -6.40        -1.98     -0.55      8.80    7.51
                                                [-3.82]     [-0.78]   [-0.23]    [2.16]   [2.31]
                                            2    -2.66        -3.21      0.06     -3.04    5.37
                                                [-2.27]     [-2.06]    [0.05]   [-2.00]   [1.80]
                                            3    -6.51        -2.74     -1.93     -0.31    7.25
                                                [-4.50]     [-2.41]   [-1.14]   [-0.29]   [3.37]
                                            4     5.65         3.73      3.50      1.33    8.22
                                                 [2.31]      [2.08]    [2.83]    [0.87]   [3.97]
                                      High 5      7.53         2.46      8.60      7.53    5.79
                                                 [5.16]      [1.16]    [3.72]    [2.53]   [1.65]


We control for exposure to aggregate volatility using the β∆V IX loading at the beginning of the month,
computed using daily data over the previous month, following equation (3). We first sort all stocks on the
basis of β∆V IX into quintiles. Then, within each β∆V IX quintile, we sort stocks into five portfolios sorted
by idiosyncratic volatility, relative to the FF-3 model. In Panel A, we report FF-3 alphas of these portfolios.
We average the five idiosyncratic volatility portfolios over each of the five β∆V IX portfolios. Hence, these
portfolios represent idiosyncratic volatility quintile portfolios controlling for exposure to aggregate volatility
risk. The column ‘5-1’ refers to the difference in FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. In Panel B,
we report ex-post F V IX factor loadings from a regression of each of the 25 β∆V IX × idiosyncratic volatility
portfolios onto the Fama-French (1993) model augmented with F V IX as in equation (6). Robust Newey-
West (1987) t-statistics are reported in square brackets. All portfolios are value-weighted. The sample period
is from January 1986 to December 2000.




                                                       52
     Table X: Quintile Portfolios of Idiosyncratic Volatility for L/M/N Strategies


                                     Ranking on Idiosyncratic Volatility
                     Strategy    1 low     2        3         4       5 high        5-1

                     1/1/1        0.06     0.04      0.09      -0.18     -0.82     -0.88
                                 [1.47]   [0.77]    [1.15]    [-1.78]   [-4.88]   [-4.63]

                     1/1/12       0.03     0.02      -0.02     -0.17     -0.64     -0.67
                                 [0.91]   [0.43]    [-0.37]   [-1.79]   [-5.27]   [-4.71]

                     12/1/1       0.04     0.08      -0.01     -0.29     -1.08     -1.12
                                 [1.15]   [1.32]    [-0.08]   [-2.02]   [-5.36]   [-5.13]

                     12/1/12      0.04     0.04      -0.02     -0.35     -0.73     -0.77
                                 [1.10]   [0.54]    [-0.23]   [-2.80]   [-4.71]   [-4.34]


The table reports Fama and French (1993) alphas, with robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics in square brack-
ets. The column ‘5-1’ refers to the difference in FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. We rank
stocks into quintile portfolios of idiosyncratic volatility, relative to FF-3, using L/M/N strategies. At month
t, we compute idiosyncratic volatilities from the regression (8) on daily data over an L month period from
months t − L − M to month t − M . At time t, we construct value-weighted portfolios based on these idiosyn-
cratic volatilities and hold these portfolios for N months, following Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), except our
portfolios are value-weighted. The sample period is July 1963 to December 2000.




                                                     53
        Table XI: The Idiosyncratic Volatility Effect over Different Subsamples


                                            Ranking on Idiosyncratic Volatility
              Subperiod                1 low      2         3         4       5 high       5-1

              Jul 1963 – Dec 1970       0.06      0.03      0.09      -0.36     -0.94     -1.00
                                       [1.23]    [0.42]    [0.73]    [-2.18]   [-5.81]   [-5.62]

              Jan 1971 – Dec 1980       -0.24     0.32      0.19      0.03      -1.02     -0.77
                                       [-2.53]   [3.20]    [1.55]    [0.21]    [-5.80]   [-3.14]

              Jan 1981 – Dec 1990       0.15      0.08      -0.16     -0.66     -2.08     -2.23
                                       [2.14]    [1.07]    [-1.25]   [-4.82]   [-10.1]   [-9.39]

              Jan 1991 – Dec 2000       0.16      -0.01     0.14      -0.48     -1.39     -1.55
                                       [1.34]    [-0.08]   [0.77]    [-2.41]   [-3.31]   [-3.19]

              NBER Expansions           0.06      0.02      0.08      -0.33     -1.19     -1.25
                                       [1.26]    [0.25]    [1.01]    [-3.18]   [-7.07]   [-6.55]

              NBER Recessions           -0.10     0.64      -0.01     -0.34     -1.88     -1.79
                                       [-0.65]   [3.58]    [-0.04]   [-1.32]   [-3.32]   [-2.63]

              Stable Periods            0.05      -0.02     -0.11     -0.62     -1.66     -1.71
                                       [0.44]    [-0.25]   [-1.07]   [-4.06]   [-6.56]   [-4.75]

              Volatile Periods          -0.04     0.24      0.32      0.18      -0.93     -0.89
                                       [-0.29]   [1.69]    [2.32]    [0.55]    [-2.40]   [-2.02]


The table reports Fama and French (1993) alphas, with robust Newey-West (1987) t-statistics in square brack-
ets. The column ‘5-1’ refers to the difference in FF-3 alphas between portfolio 5 and portfolio 1. We rank
stocks into quintile portfolios of idiosyncratic volatility, relative to FF-3, using the 1/0/1 strategy and ex-
amine robustness over different sample periods. The stable and volatile periods refer to the months with the
lowest and highest 20% absolute value of the market return, respectively. The full sample period is July 1963
to December 2000.




                                                     54
   1


 0.9


 0.8


 0.7


 0.6


 0.5


 0.4


 0.3


 0.2


 0.1


  0
  1986          1988         1990         1992           1994        1996         1998         2000


                                       Figure 1: Plot of V IX.

The figure shows the V IX index plotted at a daily frequency. The sample period is January 1986 to December
2000.




                                                    55
