                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ESTIMATING REAL PRODUCTION AND
                         EXPENDITURES ACROSS NATIONS:
                A PROPOSAL FOR IMPROVING THE PENN WORLD TABLES

                                           Robert C. Feenstra
                                             Alan Heston
                                           Marcel P. Timmer
                                             Haiyan Deng

                                         Working Paper 10866
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10866


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




We thank Bettina Aten, Brian Easton, Erwin Diewert, Peter Neary, Prasada Rao, Marshall Reinsdorf, Bart
van Ark and seminar participants at Dartmouth College, the NBER, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
and the IARIW meeting in Cork, Ireland for helpful comments, along with Edwin Stuivenwold and Gerard
Ypma for exceptional research assistance. Financial support was provided by the National Science
Foundation. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Robert C. Feenstra, Alan Heston, Marcel P. Timmer, and Haiyan Deng. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Estimating Real Production and Expenditures Across Nations: A Proposal for Improving the
Penn World Tables
Robert C. Feenstra, Alan Heston, Marcel P. Timmer, and Haiyan Deng
NBER Working Paper No. 10866
October 2004
JEL No. F41, O47

                                            ABSTRACT

In this paper we propose a new approach to international comparisons of real GDP measured from

the output-side. The traditional Geary-Khamis system to measure real GDP from the expenditure-

side is modified to include differences in the terms of trade between countries. It is shown that this

system has a strictly positive solution under mild assumptions. On the basis of a set of domestic final

output, import and export prices and values for 14 European countries and the U.S. it is shown that

differences between real GDP measured from the expenditure and output-side can be substantial,

especially for small open economies.

Robert C. Feenstra                                     Marcel P. Timmer
Department of Economics                                Faculty of Economics
University of California                               University of Gronigen
Davis, CA 95616                                        P.O. Box 800
and NBER                                               9700 AV Gronigen
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu                                 The Netherlands
                                                       m.p.timmer@eco.rug.nl
Alan Heston
Department of Economics                                Haiyan Deng
University of Pennsylvania                             The Conference Board
Philadelphia, PA 19104                                 845 Third Avenue
aheston@econ.upenn.edu                                 New York, NY 10022
                                                       haiyan.deng@conference-board.org
                                                       1


1. Introduction

         From its inception, the Penn World Tables (PWT), building on the International

Comparisons Program (ICP) of the United Nations, has sought to compare the standard of living

of individuals in different countries. That is, the term “real GDP per capita” as reported in the

PWT is intended to represent the ability to purchase goods and services by a representative agent

in the economy. The same is true of benchmark comparisons as published by the United

Nations, Eurostat or OECD. But this expenditure-side interpretation of real GDP is quite

different from the uses to which benchmark ICP and PWT data are frequently applied, such as in

the “millions” of growth regressions (Sala-i-Martin, 1997), where “real GDP” is intended to

reflect the production-side of the economy.1

         The goal of this paper is to carefully distinguish the production or output-side measure of
                                 o                                                                 e
real GDP, denoted real GDP , from the expenditure-side measure, denoted real GDP . Real

     o                                                                                   e
GDP reflects the production possibilities of an economy, whereas real GDP measures real

expenditures which includes an adjustment for the trade balance.2 The reason these concepts

were not distinguished in the ICP and PWT is that these projects treat the net foreign balance in

an unsatisfactory way. While there may have been some data justifications for that treatment in

benchmark studies of the 1970s, this is no longer the case. The treatment of exports and imports
                                                                                                         e
proposed in this paper will not only remove the ambiguity presently surrounding real GDP and

          o
real GDP in the ICP and PWT, but provides a rich new international measure, namely the

difference between them. Essentially, these two concepts differ by the terms of trade in the

economy, i.e. the prices at which goods are exported and imported.

1
   There are many other applications where expenditure-side real GDP is used when output-side real GDP is really
needed. Recent examples are Bernard and Jones (1996), Jones and Hall (1999) and Acemoglu and Ventura (2002).
2
  Note that we do not deal with differences in nominal GDP which arise when measured from either the expenditure,
                                                         2


        In the first section of the paper we provide a brief background on how the ambiguous

treatment of foreign trade arose during the development of the various benchmark studies and the

extensions in PWT. In section 2, the distinction between real GDP on the output-side and

expenditure-side is set out conceptually, followed by a discussion of how they can be separately

measured in time series data. In order to incorporate these concepts into the PWT, however, we

need to have a cross-country measure of their difference.
                                                                                                                 o
        To achieve this, we propose a measure of the purchasing power parity for outputs (PPP )

                                   e
rather than expenditures (PPP ). Currently the cornerstone of the ICP and PWT is the PPP for

                            e                                                                         e
final expenditures (PPP ), used to deflate nominal national income to obtain real GDP . This is

                                                                                                          o
described in Section 3. If instead we want to deflate nominal GDP to obtain real GDP , then we

                   o
need to use PPP , which incorporates prices for exports and imports including both final goods

                                                                  o
and intermediate inputs. In section 4 we show how PPP can be computed using the Geary

(1958)-Khamis (1970,1972) (GK) system, and further broken down into separate PPP’s for final

expenditures, exports and imports. It should be emphasized that by working at the level of entire

economies, rather than sectors, some of the difficulties with measuring output-based PPP’s are

avoided. In particular, we find that while the international prices of intermediate inputs (from

trade statistics) are used, the corresponding domestic prices of intermediates are not needed at

all. In this sense, our use of trade data provides a short cut to obtain output-based deflators for

the entire economy.3


income or output side. In the remainder of the paper we assume that nominal GDP is given.
3
   The International Comparisons of Output and Productivity (ICOP) project at the University of Groningen
constructs real GDP by sector from the output side using the industry-of-origin approach. This requires comparison
of sectoral output prices across countries (see van Ark and Timmer, 2004, for example). Sectoral real output can be
aggregated to obtain real output GDP , but his has only been done for a limited number of countries so far. The
short-cut proposed here, which uses international rather than domestic prices of intermediates, is much easier to
implement for a larger set of countries.
                                                  3


       In section 5, we provide an empirical application of our techniques. The data used for

this illustration are from the 1996 and 1999 OECD benchmark comparison and trade data for 14

European countries plus the United States. It would be desirable to apply the methods to other

benchmark comparisons and to time series as in PWT, but that is future work. It seems to us

very useful to gain some quantitative insight into the importance of this change in method at an

early stage so that if it is not second order effect, then international organizations can begin

considering its adaptation.
                                  o                                       e
       It turns out that real GDP differs significantly from real GDP for a number of European

countries. For example, Portugal and Greece face terms of trade that are below the average for
                                            e                     o
countries in our sample, so that real GDP is less than real GDP , by 4% or more in 1996 and

                                                                      e                    o
1999. Ireland also has a low terms of trade in 1996, with real GDP less than real GDP , but its

export PPP grows rapidly over 1996-99 which substantially narrows the gap between these two
                                  e
GDP measures. Since real GDP is close to that reported by the OECD, we are finding that

countries with low terms of trade have higher real GDP when estimated from the output-side

than currently reported: these countries are more productive than the existing cross-country real

GDP figures suggest. This applies especially to Portugal, Greece, and Ireland, and to a lesser

extent to Austria, Belgium, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain. Our results suggest that the

difference between real GDP measured from the expenditure and output side diminishes when

countries become richer, and their terms of trade improve. Germany and the U.K. are prominent

examples of the reverse pattern, whereby they have higher than average terms of trade and
                   e                    o
therefore real GDP exceeds real GDP . Directions for further research are given in section 6,

and include: extending the empirical results to more countries and years; correcting for the use of

unit-values for exports and imports; and theoretical extensions to our results.
                                                       4


2. Present Practice

        When the International Comparison Program began in 1968 there was some experience

with purchasing power comparisons, including the expenditure side efforts of Gilbert and Kravis

(1954) for the OEEC, and several bilateral comparisons with the USSR for the Comecon

countries, and the study of Paige and Bombach (1959).4 Paige and Bombach carried out a

comparison from the output side between the U.S. and the U.K. in which they encountered a

number of difficulties, one of which was the need for double deflation for purposes of comparing

value-added across sectors. That was a formidable task at the time and has become easier only to

the extent that data are more available. Further Paige and Bombach realized that to make full

comparisons it was necessary to collect prices on both final and intermediate products.

Comparisons from the expenditure side appeared to require much less in the way of price

collection. Thus when the United Nations International Comparisons Project began in 1968 it

endorsed comparisons from both the output and expenditure sides, but recognized that it would

be easier to carry out expenditure side comparisons.

        While the expenditure side comparison does appear much easier than output side of

national accounts, this is in part because the net foreign balance was treated in an ad hoc fashion.

In benchmark comparisons the practice in Eurostat and the OECD has been to value the net

foreign balance at exchange rates. Unfortunately, use of the exchange rate of one country, a

practice in the EU, is not base-country invariant. The present practice in PWT is to value the net

foreign balance at the PPP for domestic absorption, which is simple and is base country

invariant. In many discussions over the years, it was generally recognized that the appropriate

way to value trade would be at export and import prices. But certainly in the early years of the


4
 Still earlier work had been carried out by Colin Clark (1940) who prepared PPP and real GDP comparisons for a
wide variety of countries which he was to expand and improve in a 1957 edition.
                                                  5


ICP this did not appear feasible from the standpoint of available data.

       What was not really appreciated in these discussions is that valuing exports and imports

at comparable prices was the only way to accurately compare the real output across countries, a

central point of this paper. And once a comparison is made of real GDP on the output-side, it is

possible to compare it to real GDP on the expenditure-side across countries. This difference

turns out to not only be of analytic interest, but also to be a very revealing indicator of the extent

to which the terms of trade differentially impact countries within any group like the OECD.

       The distinction between real GDP on the output and expenditure-side can be illustrated

by a simple diagram in a two-good economy, shown in Figure 1. We suppose that the

production possibilities frontier shifts out due to technological change. At unchanged prices,

production would increase from point A to point B. Suppose, however, that the relative price of

good 1 falls due to its increased supply, so that the new prices are shown by the slope of the line

P3P3. Production now occurs at B' rather than B. We have drawn the case where the budget

lines P1P1 and P3P3 are both tangent to an indifference curve U, at points C and D, indicating

that the utility of the representative consumer is unchanged.

       In the case we have illustrated, the production points A and B' lie on the same ray from

the origin so that the relative outputs of the two goods are unchanged. This means that any index

of real output would be identical, and would simply equal 0B'/0A > 1, which is the proportional
                                                            o
increase in both outputs. This is the increase in real GDP as measured on the output-side.

       Now suppose we pose a different question, and ask what has happened to the welfare of

the representative consumer, with indifference curve shown by U in Figure 1. An exact measure
                                   e
of consumer welfare, or real GDP measured on the expenditure-side, would be unchanged since

the consumer has the same utility at the two prices. This occurs because there has been a fall in
                                                         6

                                                                      e
the price of the exportable good 1. The change in real GDP could be measured by the change in

nominal expenditure deflated by an exact consumer price index, constructed with the same prices
              o
as real GDP but using consumption quantities rather than production quantities in the index.

                                                                           e                 o
This illustrates the most important difference between real GDP and real GDP , i.e. the use of

consumption quantities rather than production quantities in the index. The difference between

these is exports and imports, of course, but for production quantities we also need to include the

imports and exports of all intermediate inputs, as well as their prices. These data are not

currently used by the ICP, which restricts its attention to final goods.

        This distinction between real GDP on the expenditure and output-side is recognized by

the United Nations 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA). The former is called real Gross

Domestic Income (GDI), while the latter is real GDP. One definition5 of real GDI is:


                  Real GDI = (Nominal GDP)/(Domestic absorption price index),                             (1)

as compared to,

                  Real GDP = (Nominal GDP)/(GDP price index).                                             (2)


Nominal GDP, of course, is domestic absorption (C+I+G) adjusted for the trade balance (X–M).

The “domestic absorption price index” in (1) is constructed over the components of (C+I+G).

By excluding export and import prices from this price index, changes in the terms of trade

(which affect nominal GDP) are then reflected in real GDI, as demonstrated by Diewert and

Morrison (1986). An improvement in the terms of trade, for example, would cause real GDI to

grow faster than real GDP. Kohli (2004) has shown that this pattern holds for Switzerland, due


5
   See http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/introduction.asp , paragraph 16.154. The other definitions of real GDI
depend on the deflator used for (X-M). Other than the domestic absorption price index, we might use the import
price index, export price index, or an average of these, as recommended by Geary; see Neary (1997).
                                                           7


to its terms of trade improvement. We shall avoid the term “real GDI,” because it is suggestive

of the income-approach to measuring GDP (through adding up the earnings of factors) which we
                                            e
do not use. Instead, we use real GDP to reflect the expenditure-side concept like (1). This is

essentially the same as “real expenditure”, except that by using nominal GDP rather than

nominal expenditures in the numerator of (1) we are adjusting for the net foreign balance.

         Now we come to the key question motivating this paper: which concept does the PWT
                                                                 o
use as “real GDP” – the output-side measure real GDP , or the expenditure-side measure real

     e                                                                                    e
GDP ? It turns out that the answer is unclear: the ICP constructs real GDP in benchmark

years, but then to interpolate between these years, the PWT must reconcile these changes in real
     e
GDP with the national accounts data reports on countries real GDP growth. Since national

                                                           o
accounts real GDP growth is closer to real GDP , which is being compared to benchmark

                          e
estimates of real GDP , the distinction between these becomes lost in the reconciliation.6 In

                                                       e                                      o
other words, the differences between real GDP (using ICP data) and real GDP (using national

accounts data) is eliminated, and the year-to-year growth of real GDP from the national accounts

is used to impute real GDP in the PWT for all years in-between the benchmark years. The fact
                                            e              o
that the distinction between real GDP and GDP is not clearly made is a limitation of previous

versions of the PWT that future revisions intend to improve upon. 7



6
   Real GDP in the national accounts always includes a measure of terms of trade losses or gains, although the
deflator used might differ (see previous footnote). The process of reconciling the initial PWT estimates (in
benchmark years) and the national accounts data for each country is described in Summers and Heston (1991, pp.
339-341).
7
   For example the title of the Phase III report of the ICP was World Product and Income (Kravis, Heston and
Summers, 1982). This clearly implied a treatment of GDP converted at PPPs of countries as interchangeable with
what is termed output and expenditure in this paper. Further the provision of output per worker figures in PWT,
though provided because users were taking per capita real GDP as a labor productivity measure, clearly implies that
the real GDP number is an output measure.
                                                    8


3. Measurement of real GDP on the Expenditure Side

       Suppose there are i =1,…,M final goods, such as the categories of goods currently

collected by the ICP, of which the first M0 are non-traded. These final goods may also be used

as intermediate inputs, and there are another i =M+1,…,M+N goods that are exclusively

intermediate inputs; for convenience we treat these all as traded internationally. To treat

domestic demand, trade and production in a consistent framework, an input-output analysis must

be used. In this framework the fundamental equality is between total demand and total supply of

each good. For each country j = 1,…,C, denote final demand by qij, intermediate demand by zij,

output by yij, exports by xij and imports by mij, for i = 1,…,M+N. We assume that all of these

quantities are nonnegative, but many can be zero: in particular, the intermediate inputs i =

M+1,…,M+N have qij = 0, and the non-traded goods = 1,…,M0 have xij = mij = 0. Total demand

in country j is given by qij + xij + zij, and total supply by yij + mij. Hence the equality between

demand and supply is:

                               qij + xij + zij = yij + mij , i = 1,…,M+N.                     (3)

Re-arranging terms, we obtain:
                                q ij + x ij − m ij = y ij − z ij , i = 1,…,M+N.               (4)


where we refer to yij – zij as “net output” of each good, i.e. gross output minus intermediate

demand.

       Multiplying by prices and summing over goods i = 1,…,M+N, nominal GDP can be

measured either from the expenditure side (left-hand side of (4)) or from the production side

(right-hand side), where the units are the national currency. We presume that for a particular

product, the prices of exports and imports can differ from domestic output and consumption.

Such price differences always occur in practice, which is why we incorporate them here, without
                                                                  9


considering why the price differences arise. We distinguish the prices pij > 0 for domestic output

and consumption, used to multiply qij, i = 1,…,M+N, from those for exports and imports, p ijx > 0


and p ijm > 0 respectively.8 Consistent with the System of National Accounts (SNA), the export

prices are measured net of tariffs and freight, including any subsidy to the buyer but not to the

seller, i.e. as the f.o.b. (freight on board) price in the exporting country.9 Likewise, the import

prices are also measured net of tariffs.10

                                                                                     M+ N                                   M+ N
         With these conventions for p ijm and pijx , let X j = ∑i =M                             p ijx x ij and M j = ∑i= M           p ijm m ij
                                                                                          0 +1                                 0 +1



denote the value of exports and imports at tariff-free prices, so that nominal GDP measured on

the expenditure side is:

                                                         M
                             Nominal GDPje ≡            ∑ p ijq ij + (Xj – Mj) .                                                   (5)
                                                        i =1


Using (4), we can re-write (5) as:

          M                             M+ N                                                M+N
          ∑ p ijq ij + (Xj – Mj) = ∑ p ij [( y ij − z ij ) − (x ij − m ij )] + ∑ ( p ijx x ij − p ijm m ij )
          i =1                          i =1                                              i = M 0 +1


                                        M+ N                           M+N
                                    =    ∑ p ij ( y ij − z ij )   +     ∑ [( p ij − p ijm )m ij − (p ij − p ijx )x ij ] ,          (6)
                                         i =1                         i = M 0 +1




where the first line is obtained by using qij = (yij – zij) – (xij – mij) for the final goods i=1,…,M,

whereas the intermediates have qij = 0, so that [(yij – zij) – (xij – mij)] = 0 for i=M+1,…,M+N.


8
    In principle we should also distinguish producer from consumer prices, which can differ due to taxes and retail
margins, but do not incorporate that distinction here.
9
    See http://unstats.un.org/unsd/sna1993/introduction.asp, paragraphs 6.235, 6.237 and 15.35.
10
     The SNA also recommends that import prices are also measured by the f.o.b. prices, though when this is not
possible, then c.i.f. (cost, insurance, and freight) import prices can be used instead. We will use the convention that
if the importing country hires the freight services of another country, then we use the c.i.f. import prices (importing
both the good and the freight services), but if it uses its own carriers then the f.o.b. prices are used instead (since the
freight charges are a part of domestic GDP).
                                                                   10


Then the second line follows because xij = mij = 0 for the non-traded goods i=1,…,M0. We can

interpret ( p ij − p ijm ) as import tariffs (subsidies if negative), and ( p ij − p ijx ) as exports subsidies

(taxes if negative). So the final summation on the second line is interpreted as import revenue

                                                                                               M+ N
less export subsidies.11 Adding this to the value of net output                             ∑i=1      p ij ( y ij − z ij ) as in (6) gives

us nominal GDP measured on the production or output side: 12


                                                  M+ N                        M+N
                    Nominal GDPjo =               ∑ p ij ( y ij − z ij ) +     ∑ [( p ij − p ijm )m ij − (p ij − p ijx )x ij ] ,       (7)
                                                  i =1                       i = M 0 +1



which clearly equals nominal GDP measured on the expenditure side, from (6).

          The real counterpart to GDP measured on the expenditure-side in the PWT is obtained by

using data for many countries, and computing average “reference price” for goods according to

the Geary-Khamis (GK) system. The reference prices π ei for final goods and the purchasing

power parities PPPje for each country are obtained from the simultaneous equations:

                                     C                              C
                              π ei = ∑ ( p ij / PPPje )q ij        ∑ q ij       ,         i =1,…,M,                                    (8)
                                     j=1                           j=1
and,
                                           M              M
                              PPPje = ∑ p ijq ij / ∑ π ei q ij ,                          j =1,…,C.                                    (9)
                                           i =1          i =1




In (8), the nominal prices pij of final goods are deflated by the PPP exchange rate, and then

averaged across countries. The exchange rates are obtained from (9), as the ratio of nominal to

real final expenditure, where real expenditure is evaluated using the reference prices.


11
     If the country is using its own transportation services for imports, so f.o.b. export prices are used for                     p ijm , then
what we are calling tariff revenue includes the transportation services, which are a part of GDP.
12
   The SNA makes it clear that when measuring the trade balance in (5) at exporter prices, then tariffs less export
                                                                                                       e          o
subsidies need to be added to the value of net output as in (6) and (7) to obtain equality between GDP and GDP .
                                                                11


        The system (8)-(9) are M+C equations, but are linearly dependent: by re-arranging (8)

and summing over final goods, or by re-arranging (9) and summing over countries, we obtain:

                                   M      C               M      C
                                   ∑ ∑          π ei q ij = ∑    ∑ p ijq ij / PPPje        ,              (10)
                                   i =1   j=1             i =1   j=1



so that world real expenditure at the reference prices πi equals the sum of countries’ expenditures

deflated by the PPP exchange rates. This is the key aggregation property that the GK system is

designed to satisfy. Because of this property, the system (8)-(9) has M+C–1 independent

equations to determine M+C unknowns, so a normalization must be chosen. We will use the

normalization that world real expenditure equals the sum of countries’ expenditures converted to

dollars using the nominal exchange rates.13 Letting Ej denote the local currency price of US$ in

each country j, this normalization is:

                                   M      C                            M      C
                                   ∑ ∑          p ijq ij / PPPje = ∑          ∑ p ijq ij / E j   .        (11)
                                   i =1   j=1                          i =1   j=1




                                                      ∑ j=1 q ij > 0 , ensures that there is a positive solution
                                                          N
The fact that q ij ≥ 0 in (8)-(9), along with


for π ei and PPPje (Prasada Rao, 1971, Diewert, 1999). Then a normalization like (11) ensures

that the solution in unique.

        Subtracting from real expenditure the trade balance deflated by the PPP exchange rate,
                                                                                                     e
we obtain what is called real GDP in the PWT, and what we shall call real GDP :

                                                         M
                                  Real GDPje ≡           ∑ π ei q ij + (Xj – Mj)/ PPPje .                 (12)
                                                         i =1




13
  Notice that this normalization differs from the one made in PWT 6.1 where the PPP for U.S. GDP was set as the
numeraire. Actually, the procedure proposed here is equivalent to setting the PPP for ‘world’ GDP to unity.
                                                         12


The idea of adjusting for the trade balance (evaluated at expenditure prices) is that we are

interested in the purchasing power of the economy without borrowing from or lending to the

future, i.e. using current resources. We can regard (Xj – Mj) as an income transfer which is

deflated by the PPP for domestic final goods, before evaluating real GDP on the expenditure

side. This suggests an alternative normalization to PPPje to that shown in (11), namely:


                 M C                                          M C
                 ∑ ∑ [p ijq ij + ( X j − M j )] / PPPje = ∑ ∑ [p ijq ij + (X j − M j )] / E j .    (13)
                 i =1 j=1                                 i =1 j=1


                                                     e
In (13) we are specifying that world real GDP equals world nominal GDP, where the latter is

evaluated at the nominal exchange rates Ej. This normalization will be used for measured real
     e
GDP in the remainder of the paper.


4. Measurement of Real GDP on the Output Side

         In order to construct the output-side real GDP, it is necessary to deflate the net domestic

output of goods, i.e. (yij – zij) rather than final consumption of goods qij, i.e. using (7) rather than

(5). In general, it is quite difficult to construct “reference prices” for all goods (final plus

intermediate) across a range of countries, as needed for this type of calculation. This is the task

that the International Comparisons of Output and Productivity (ICOP) project at the University

of Groningen has undertaken for specific sectors and countries (see van Ark and Timmer, 2001),

and it would be a Herculean task to do the same for the entire economies of multiple countries.

As an alternative, we shall examine whether the data for final goods (already collected by the

ICP and used by the PWT), combined with the additional data for exports and imports, are
                                                                                 o
enough to give us a measure of output-side real GDP, called real GDP .
                                                                       13

                                              o                                                        o
        We start with nominal GDP defined in (7). Define real GDP as the summation of real

net output, exports and imports:

                                M+ N                               M+N
           Real GDPjo ≡         ∑ π io ( y ij − z ij )    +        ∑ [( π io − π im )m ij − ( π io − π ix )x ij ] .         (14)
                                i =1                           i = M 0 +1


Notice that on the right of (14) we include hypothetical tariff revenue less export subsidies

measured at the reference prices π io , π ix and π im , for net output, exports and imports,

respectively. Consider the augmented-GK system to construct these reference prices:


                          C                              C
                  π io = ∑ ( p ij / PPPjo )q ij      ∑ q ij ,                            i =1,…,M,                          (15)
                         j=1                         j=1


                          C                              C
                  π ix = ∑ ( p ijx / PPPjo ) x ij    ∑ x ij           ,                  i =M0+1,…,M+N,                     (16)
                          j=1                            j=1


                           C                                 C
                  π im = ∑ ( p ijm / PPPjo )m ij             ∑ m ij         ,            i =M0+1,…,M+N,                     (17)
                          j=1                                j=1


and,
                                                    Nominal GDPio
                                       PPP jo =                                     , j =1,…,C.                             (18)
                                                         Real GDPio


        In (15) we construct reference domestic prices for the final goods, and in (16) and (17) we

construct reference prices for exports and imports. These are used to construct real GDPjo in (14),

and purchasing-power-parity PPPjo is the ratio of nominal to real GDPjo . In order for these

definitions to make sense, we make the following assumption, already alluded to above:


Assumption 1
                                                                                               M+ N                   M+N
                                                                            ∑i=1 q ij > 0, ∑i= M +1 x ij > 0, ∑i=M +1 m ij > 0.
                                                                                M
Quantities are non-negative, q ij , x ij , m ij ≥ 0 , with
                                                                                                   0                    0
                                                                     14

        As it is written, however, the system (15)-(18) is incomplete because we have not yet

specified the domestic reference prices of the intermediate inputs, i.e. π io for i=M+1,…,M+N.

These prices appear in real GDPjo in (14). But fortunately, real GDPjo can be re-written to

exclude these domestic reference prices for intermediate inputs:

                               M+ N                              M+N
             Real GDPjo =       ∑ π io ( y ij − z ij ) +         ∑ [( π io − π im )m ij − ( π io − π ix )x ij ]
                                i =1                          i = M 0 +1

                               M                  M+N
                           =   ∑ π ioq ij + ∑ ( π ix x ij − π im m ij )          ,                                    (14’)
                               i =1             i = M 0 +1



which follows from (14) and (4), using (yij – zij) = qij for the non-traded final goods i=1,…,M0,

while the intermediate inputs have qij = 0 so that (yij – zij) = (xij – mij) for i=M+1,…,M+N.

Therefore, to compute real GDPjo we do not need the domestic reference prices π io at all for the

intermediate inputs! Also, the second line of (14’) makes it clear that real GDPio is evaluated

using reference prices π ix and π im for traded goods that do not include any import tariffs or

subsidies to exporters. Using (14’), we can re-write PPPjo in (18) as,

                                                             Nominal GDPjo
                           PPP jo      =                           M+ N
                                                                                                  , j =1,…,C.         (19)
                                           ∑i=1 π io q ij + ∑i=M +1 (π ix x ij − π im m ij )
                                              M
                                                                           0




        The system (15)-(17) and (19) has the same number of equations as unknowns. It can be

confirmed that the equations are linearly dependent, in the sense that summing (15)-(17) or

alternatively (19), we obtain:


         C   ⎛M            M+ N                              ⎞      C   ⎛M                           ⎞
        ∑ ⎜⎜ ∑ π io q ij + ∑ (π ix x ij − π im m ij ) ⎟⎟ = ∑ ⎜⎜ ∑ p ijq ij + (X j − M j ) ⎟⎟ / PPPjo              .   (20)
        j=1 ⎝ i =1        i = M 0 +1                         ⎠     j=1 ⎝ i =1                        ⎠
                                                        15

Thus, one normalization is needed, and we will specify that world real GDP deflated by the

output-based PPPjo equals world GDP evaluated with the nominal exchange rates.


                M C                                            M C
                ∑ ∑ [pijq ij + ( X j − M j )] / PPPjo = ∑ ∑ [p ijq ij + ( X j − M j )] / E j   .   (21)
                i =1 j=1                                     i =1 j=1



From the normalizations in (13) and (21), world real GDP evaluated on the expenditure-side will

equal world real GDP evaluated on the output-side.

       Summing up, we have shown that the augmented-GK system (15)-(17), (19) and (21) can

be used to obtain a cross-country measure of the GDP price deflator from the output-side, which

is PPPjo . We have therefore achieved our goal of demonstrating that final goods data, in

conjunction with export or import data, can be used to construct real GDP o on the output side.

However, it remains to be shown that this system has a solution. This task is complicated by the

fact that real GDPjo , appearing in (14’) and the denominator of (19), is not guaranteed to be

positive for all possible reference prices. This can be ruled out by some additional assumptions,

as follows.

       First, define the budget shares for each final, export and import goods as:


                                  θ ijv ≡ p ijv v ij / Nominal GDPj , v = q, x, m,                 (22)


where i=1,…,M for v = q; i= M0+1,…,M+N for v = x, m; and j=1,…,C. Notice that these

budget shares are measured relative to nominal GDP. In addition, define the market shares for

each good as:
                                                         C
                                           µ ijv ≡ v ij / ∑ v ik ,      v = q, x, m,               (23)
                                                        k =1
                                                       16

where i=1,…,M for v = q; and i=M0+1,…,M+N for v = x, m. The market shares are measured

relative to the world quantity of final demand, exports or imports for each good. Denote the

column vectors of budget and market shares by θ vj and µ vj for v = q, x, m and country j. Then

our second assumption is:


Assumption 2
For all countries j, k = 1,…,C, we have: w jk ≡ θqj ' µ qk + θ xj ' µ xk − θ mj ' µ m
                                                                                    k > 0.




        Clearly, this assumption limits the size of the import shares θ ijm and µ ijm . It is appropriate


                                                                      ∑k=1 w jk = 1 .
                                                                         C
to think of wjk as “weights” because it is readily shown that                           While is it easy to

construct examples where Assumption 2 is violated for some countries j and k, it is also true that

for “reasonable” values of the import budget and market shares, Assumption 2 can hold. (In fact,

it will hold for the U.S. and European countries in our sample). Given this, we have:


Theorem

Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the system (15)-(17) and (19) has a strictly positive solution for
π oi , π ix , π im , real GDPjo and PPPjo .


        It is worth emphasizing that Assumption 2 is a sufficient condition to obtain this result,

but is not necessary. In particular, we show in the Appendix that the vector of real GDPjo across

countries is a row eigenvector of the matrix W = [wij], corresponding to an eigenvalue of unity.

Under Assumption 2, this is the Frobenius root of W and its corresponding eigenvector is strictly

positive, so that real GDPjo is strictly positive along with PPPjo and all the references prices, as

stated in the Theorem. However, it is quite possible to obtain a strictly positive eigenvector and
                                                          17


therefore a positive solution for real GDPjo even without having all the elements of W positive,

and in this sense, Assumption 2 is sufficient but not necessary.

       By rewriting real GDPjo , it is possible to give a clear interpretation about the difference

between it and real GDPje . Notice that real GDPjo in (14’) can be decomposed as:

       Real GDPjo =

         ⎛ ∑M π io q ij ⎞ M               ⎛ ∑M + N π ix x ij ⎞       ⎛ ∑M + N π im m ij ⎞
         ⎜              ⎟                 ⎜ i = M 0 +1       ⎟       ⎜ i= M 0 +1         ⎟
       =
         ⎜
            i =1
                        ⎟ ∑    p ijq ij + ⎜ M + N            ⎟ X j + ⎜  M+N              ⎟⎟M j .      (24)
         ⎝ ∑i =1 ij ij ⎠                  ⎝ ∑i =M 0 +1 ij ij ⎠       ⎝ ∑i = M 0 +1 ij ij ⎠
            M
                 p q      i =1            ⎜            p x
                                                           x ⎟       ⎜            p m
                                                                                      m


W can define the three ratios appearing in (24) as the inverse of the PPP’s for final expenditure,

exports and imports:

                  ⎛ ∑M p ijq ij ⎞          ⎛ ∑M + N p ijx x ij ⎞       ⎛ ∑M          p m m ij ⎞⎟
        PPPjq   ≡ ⎜  i =1       ⎟      x   ⎜   i = M 0 +1
                                  , PPPj ≡ ⎜ M + N x ⎟ , PPPj ≡ ⎜ M⎟ m ⎜   i = M 0 +1 ij
                  ⎜ ∑M π o q ⎟                                                                 ⎟⎟ .   (25)
                  ⎝ i=1   i  ij ⎠
                                           ⎜ ∑
                                           ⎝ i= M 0 +1
                                                          π i x ij
                                                                   ⎟
                                                                   ⎠
                                                                       ⎜ ∑
                                                                       ⎝ i= M0 +1
                                                                                     π m
                                                                                       i m ij   ⎠


       Comparing (12) and (24), it is immediate that the difference between real GDPje and real

GDPjo is due to the deflation of final expenditure, exports and imports:



       Real GDPje – Real GDPjo

            ⎛ PPPjq      ⎞⎛ ∑M p ijq ij ⎞ ⎛ PPP jx     ⎞⎛ X j ⎞ ⎛ PPP jm        ⎞⎛ M j ⎞
          = ⎜        − 1 ⎟⎜ i =1        ⎟+⎜        − 1 ⎟⎜        ⎟−⎜        − 1 ⎟⎜        ⎟.          (26)
            ⎜ PPP je     ⎟⎜ PPP q ⎟ ⎜ PPPje            ⎟⎜ PPP jx ⎟ ⎜ PPP je     ⎟⎜ PPP jm ⎟
            ⎝            ⎠⎝      j      ⎠ ⎝            ⎠⎝        ⎠ ⎝            ⎠⎝        ⎠


We could hope that PPPje and PPPjq are similar, since they are both computed from final

expenditures, but with different reference prices. If these two deflators for final expenditure

were equal, then either PPPjx > PPPje or PPPjm < PPPje is needed to have real GDPje exceed
                                                  18


real GDPjo , and both inequalities holding is sufficient for this. To interpret these conditions, it is

useful to first convert export and import prices to U.S. dollars using the nominal exchange rate.

Then having export prices above their reference level and import prices below their reference

level will contribute towards real GDPje exceeding real GDPjo . For example, proximity to

markets that allow for higher export prices would work in this direction, but being distant from

markets leading to high import prices would work in the opposite direction, raising PPPjm and

tending to make real GDPje less than real GDPjo .

       We conclude this section with two warnings. First, the difference between our cross-

country measure of real GDPje and real GDPjo does not measure the gains from trade as

compared to autarky. Second, it should also not be interpreted as the cost of protection in a

country. Instead, the difference between real GDPje and real GDPjo is a measure of the gains

from trade from having export or import prices that differ from their reference prices π ix and

π im . Since π ix and π im are themselves averages of countries’ actual export and import prices, it

is impossible for all countries to be gaining (or losing) relative to these averages. What we can

expect to find is that some countries – with higher-than-average exports prices or low import

prices – will gain in the sense that real GDPje exceeds real GDPjo , whereas other countries will

have real GDPje less than real GDPjo due to low export prices or high import prices.

       The fact that the difference between real GDPje and real GDPjo does not measure the

costs of protection in a country can be seen from a simple example. Suppose that the reference

price vectors for final goods are equal, π ei = π io , and furthermore, the traded goods reference
                                                     19


prices are proportional to observed prices in country j, π ix = π im ∝ p ijx = p ijm , at which trade is

balanced. The example we have in mind is where the domestic reference prices π ei = π io reflect

average import tariffs applied by most countries, but the international reference prices π ix = π im

reflect tariff-free prices. Since trade is balanced at the international reference prices, it is

immediate that real GDPje in (12) equals real GDPjo in (14’), both of which measure the value of

production or consumption at domestic reference prices.

        This situation is illustrated in Figure 2 for the case where country j has a tariff on good 2,

with production at A and consumption at B. The world relative price of good 1 is shown by the

slope by the line P1AC, while the domestic relative price is shown by the slopes of P2P2 and P3P3.

Suppose initially that country j’s tariff on good 2 is also applied by all other countries, so the

domestic reference prices are proportional to domestic prices, π ei = π io ∝ p ij . Then real GDPje

equal to real GDPjo would both be measured by the budget line P3P3, which takes domestic

revenue of P2P2 and adds the tariff revenue. Alternatively, suppose that countries other than j are

engaged in free trade, so domestic reference prices π ei = π io equal international reference prices

π ix = π im , while only country j has the tariff on good 2. In that case real GDPje equals real

GDPjo again, and would both be measured by the budget line P1AC, which is the value of

production or consumption at world prices.
                                                      e                       o
         We see from this example that real GDP can equal real GDP even when country j’s

tariffs range from positive (low gains from trade) to zero (highest gains) to negative (possible

losses from trade if subsidies are high enough). This means that observed differences between
          e                o
real GDP and real GDP cannot be interpreted as either gains from trade or the costs of
                                                   20

                                                        e                o
protection. The reason for that is that both real GDP and real GDP are “fixed weight” indexes,

where the quantities do not respond at all to the reference prices. In contrast, Neary (2004) has

developed a theoretical PPP index on the expenditure-side whose weights reflect optimal

consumer purchases in response to reference prices. For example, with reference prices given by

the slope of P1AC in Figure 2, then optimal consumption would be at D, and real expenditure to

achieve utility Uj would be given by the budget line P4D. It seems possible that a theoretical PPP

index on the output-side could also be developed, so that optimal output would occur at B, and

real output would be measured by the budget line P5B. In this case, real output exceeds real

expenditure, and the difference between them reflects the cost of protection. Extending our

definitions of PPP and real GDP on the output-side to allow quantities to respond to reference

prices, as Neary (2004) does for the consumer, would potentially provide a measure of the costs

of protection, but is beyond the scope of this paper. Instead, we turn next to an empirical

application of our results.


5. Application to Europe and the U.S.

        To illustrate our formulas, we use a dataset for trade in 1996 and 1999 for 14 European

countries and the United States. The source for the European data is the Prodcom dataset of

Eurostat. This database contains specific product data classified according the 8-digit

PRODCOM product list.14 Using the value and quantity, we constructed unit-values for exports

and imports. There are 4,560 products in total, but for many of these the unit-values are not

available or they are not traded by the European nations. As a check on the unit-values, we

corrected some obvious errors in the units of quantity and then removed outliers. Outliers were



14
 The headings of the PRODCOM list are derived from the Harmonized System or the Combined Nomenclature,
which thus enables comparisons to be made between production statistics and foreign trade statistics.
                                                         21

defined as those unit-values which are greater than twice or less than half as much as the

European average unit-value.15 The resulting cleaned dataset has 3,240 products in 1999, with

an average of about 1,900 products exported by each country and 2,350 products imported.

Another 200 agricultural products were added from FAO trade data.

         For the United States, export and imports for 1996 and 1999 are available on the

Harmonized System (HS) basis, as described in Feenstra, Romalis and Schott (2002). Using a

concordance between the 8-digit Prodcom codes and the 6-digit Harmonized System (HS)

classification, we converted the U.S. export and import data to the Prodcom codes. On the

export side in 1999, 47% of merchandise exports corresponded to a Prodcom code in the cleaned

European dataset (the remaining trade was not exported by Europe or did not have adequate unit-

values there). Some of these products had differing units of measurement in the U.S. and

Europe, so correcting for these we ended up with 42% of U.S. exports, where the unit-values in

the U.S. and Europe could be compared. For imports in 1999, 55% of merchandise imports

corresponded to a Prodcom code in the cleaned European dataset, and after correcting for

different units of measurement, we obtained 49% of U.S. imports. The United States exports

somewhat more products than the average European country in this dataset, and imports about

the same number of products.16

         For PPPje we make use of the parities for about 200 expenditure categories provided by

the OECD , in 1996 and 1999. Specifically, we compute the “expenditure price levels” for each

country, defined as:


15
    We also experimented with the looser criterion that outliers have unit-values which are greater than five times or
less than one-fifth as much as the European average. Using this looser criterion did not have much impact on the
countries PPPo or real GDPo, except for the case of Ireland, as discussed in note 19.
16
    We also excluded U.S. products where the unit-value for exports or imports was greater than twice or less than
one-half the average European unit-value. Excluding these products for the U.S. has a very small effect on the
PPP’s for any of the countries.
                                                          22

                                                   M                   M
                          PLej ≡ PPPje / E j = ∑ ( p ij / E j )q ij / ∑ π ei q ij ,                     (27)
                                                   i =1                i =1


where Ej denotes the local currency price of US$ in each country j. Unlike the PPP’s, the price

levels are unit free, and indicate how the nominal prices in each country (converted to dollars

with the nominal exchange rate) compare to the reference prices (also in dollars). These price

levels are reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table 1 for 1996 and 1999. Note that between these

two years there was a depreciation of all European currencies against the dollar, except for the

British pound, as reported in column (3). This change let to a substantial fall in the price levels

for European countries when converted to US$, or (pij/Ej) in (27). This reflects the well-known

observation that domestic prices do not change as rapidly as nominal exchange rates.17

        In columns (4) and (5) of Table 1 we report the relative output price level PLoj for 1996

and 1999, computed as the output-based PPPs divided by the nominal exchange rate, or

PPPjo / E j . Note that the normalization used in these columns is identical to that in columns (1)

and (2), i.e. the value of real GDP among the 15 countries equals the nominal value of GDP in

US$. As can be shown from (13) and (21), this means that a weighted average of the price levels

sums to unity. The variance in output price levels are slightly greater than that in expenditure

price levels. As to be expected, output and expenditure price levels are close for big countries

such as the U.S., U.K. and France. But in small open economies like the Netherlands and Ireland,

differences are bigger.

        In Tables 2 and 3 output price levels are decomposed for the years 1996 and 1999,

respectively. They are decomposed into price levels for final goods, exports and imports, that is:



17
  The results are close to those found when using PWT 6.1 data, see Appendix Table 1. Differences are caused by
the fact that PPPs in PWT are based on a much larger set of countries, including non-OECD, than used here.
                                                           23

                                                 M                     M
                        PLqj ≡ PPPjq / E j = ∑ (p ij / E j )q ij / ∑ π io q ij ,                 (28)
                                                i =1                   i =1

                                                     M                        M
                        PLxj ≡ PPPjx / E j =       ∑ ( pij / E j )x ij / ∑ π ix x ij ,           (29)
                                                i = M 0 +1                 i =1

                                                       M                          M
                        PLmj ≡ PPPjm / E j =           ∑ (p ij / E j )m ij / ∑ π im m ij   .     (30)
                                                  i = M 0 +1                  i =1



These price levels are reported in columns (1) to (3) The ratio of PLxj / PLmj is reported as the terms

of trade for each country in column (4):

                                 TOTj ≡ PLxj / PLmj , j = 1,…,N.                                 (31)

                                                           e             o
Finally, in columns (5)-(7) we report real GDP , real GDP , and nominal GDP measured in US$

for each year.

       A number of observations can be made. First, the output price levels for final goods in

column (1) appear to be very close to the expenditure price levels given in Table 1, which is

encouraging. It indicates that the use of a different set of reference prices for final goods does

not influence the estimation of a PPP for final goods: PPPjq is almost equal to PPP je . The

choice for output prices for final goods π iq or expenditure prices π ie , where the former is

influenced indirectly by exports and imports via the simultaneous system (15)-(19) but the latter

is not, is inconsequential.

       Second, export price levels are highly correlated with the price levels of final goods,

although the variance is much less. In 1996, the highest relative export price levels could be

found in Sweden and Germany, while the lowest in Greece, Portugal and Spain. A similar pattern

exists in 1999, except that now relative export prices in the U.S. are the highest of all. The latter

finding is indicative of a lack of price response by U.S. exporters to the strengthening of the US$
                                                        24

vis-à-vis the European currencies over the period from 1996 to 1999. Apart from exchange

rates, other factors play an important role in explaining differences in export prices faced by

various countries. It is well known that under imperfect competition, exporters can and do

charge different prices in various destination markets (Knetter 1989, 1993). Such market

segmentation can arise in response to changes in nominal exchange rates, or trade policies of the

importer. In addition, it is becoming recognized that countries differ systematically in their

qualities and bundles of export goods (Schott, 2004). This would also create differences in the

relative unit-value of their exports. We would hope that the differences in export prices level

shown in Table 2 and 3 are driven primarily by actual price rather than quality differences across

countries, but have no way to control for this in our data (other than deleting outliers). We return

to this topic in section 6, where we discuss directions for further research.

         Import price levels of countries shown in Table 2 and 3 are much closer to each other

than either export or final goods prices – the standard deviation of import price levels are about

one-half that for exports, and nearly one-third of that for final goods. This might be related to

the fact that import baskets are much more similar across countries than export baskets. Dividing

the export and import price level, we obtain the terms of trade for each country. These are

especially low for countries like Greece, Portugal and Spain, indicating that their export PPPs are

lower than their import PPPs, in contrast to Germany, U.K. and the U.S. who have the reverse

pattern of high export PPPs. Generally, countries with higher per-capita GDP have higher terms

of trade, as shown in Figure 3 where we graph the terms of trade in 1996 and 1999 against real
     o
GDP in 1996.18


18
    Corresponding to the depreciation of their currencies, a number of European countries have a fall in their terms
of trade between 1996 and 1999. This can be explained by export prices (in domestic currency) that were rising less
than import prices, due to incomplete pass-through of exchange rates. This pattern does not hold for all countries,
however.
                                                              25

          The pattern shown in Figure 3, whereby countries with higher per-capita GDP have
                                                                               o                      e
higher terms of trade, carries over the to comparison of real GDP and real GDP . As shown in

                                                      e                   o
Figure 4, wealthier countries have real GDP exceeding GDP , due to their high terms of trade.

This pattern can also be seen from comparing columns (5) and (6) of Table 2 and 3. Portugal
                                      e                                            o
and Greece both have real GDP levels that are lower than real GDP , by at least 4% in 1996

                                                                                       e
and 1999. Ireland also had a low terms of trade in 1996, with real GDP nearly 9% below real

      o
GDP , but its rapid growth in the export PPP narrowed the gap between these two GDP

measures by 1999.19 Austria (in 1999), Belgium, the Netherlands (in 1999) and Spain are other
                                                  e                                           o
examples of countries in which real GDP is at least 2% lower than real GDP . Germany and the

U.K. are prominent examples of the reverse pattern with real output GDP bigger than real

expenditure GDP, due to relative advantageous terms of trade.

          In general, one can say that countries with lower levels of GDP per capita (evaluated at

either expenditure or output prices), also have disadvantageous terms of trade and hence higher

differences between real GDP measured from the expenditure and output side. Stated another

way, countries with lower level of GDP per capita are more productive when measured in terms
              o                   e                       e
of real GDP than real GDP (since real GDP reflects both productivity and terms of trade).

These findings have clear implications for much of the cross-country regression literature based

on GDP measures at international prices from the PWT. For example, in the convergence



19                                                                                                e            o
    The change in the terms of trade for Ireland, and the reduction in its gap between real GDP and real GDP , is
sensitive to the outliers that are omitted from the dataset. We have excluded unit-values of export and imports that
are more than twice or less than one-half the European average. If instead we use the looser criterion that unit-value
are excluded if they are more than five times or less than one-fifth the European average, then the terms of trade
improvement for Ireland becomes so large that it is implausible: the terms of trade improvement overwhelms the
                  e                         o
rise in real GDP , and means that real GDP actually falls between 1996 and 1999. For this reason, we do not
accept the results for Ireland obtained with the looser criterion for outliers in the trade unit-values.
                                                 26

literature changes in GDP per capita are regressed on initial levels of GDP per capita. A standard

result is that the conditional rate of convergence is about 2% per year. However, our results

suggest that this rate might be overestimated. Cross-country differences in GDP per capita levels

are less when measuring real GDP from the output side than from the expenditure side, as can be

seen from the standard deviations reported in Tables 2 and 3. It is the former which is the right

concept for convergence analysis, while the latter concept is actually being used in exercises

based on PWT data.

       In addition, our results suggest that the difference between real GDP measured from the

expenditure and output side diminishes when countries become richer, as terms of trade are

improving. This finding lends little support to the model by Acemoglu and Ventura (2002) in

which convergence is being driven by declining export prices for countries that grow faster.

They claim that specialization and trade introduce de facto diminishing returns: countries that

accumulate capital faster than average experience a worsening of the terms of trade, depressing

rates of return to capital and discouraging further accumulation. In contrast, our results suggest

that countries which grow faster often enjoy improved terms of trade, hence international trade

might be a driver of divergence in the world income distribution. However, before any

conclusive statement can be made on this issue our approach need to be applied to a larger set of

countries and a longer time period. This is one area for further research, as discussed in the next

section.


6. Conclusions and Directions for Further Research

       In this paper, it has been shown that there is a fundamental difference between real GDP

measured from the output side or from the expenditure side in international comparisons. The

difference between the two concepts is in the treatment of the terms of trade. Real GDP from the
                                                 27

expenditure side represents the ability to purchase goods and services while real GDP from the

output-side measures the production possibilities of the economy. It is the latter concept of real

GDP which is of interest to many studies of growth and convergence in the world economy.

However, available data from the OECD or the Penn World Tables is based on a mix of cross-

country expenditure-side measures of real GDP for benchmark years with national growth rates

of real GDP based on output-side measures.

         In this paper a clear-cut distinction between the two measures is made. It is shown that

real GDP from the output-side can be measured using an augmented-Geary-Khamis system of

international comparisons. The augmented-GK system includes reference price and PPPs not

only for domestic final goods, but also for export and imports. It is shown that this expanded

system has a strictly positive solution under mild assumptions. An application of the extended

GK-system to 14 European countries and the U.S. shows that the quantitative differences

between real GDP measured from the output- or expenditure-side are not of a second order. Real
     e                         o
GDP can overstate real GDP by as much as 9%, and the difference is especially large in small

and open economies. It also appears that this difference diminishes when countries become

richer, as terms of trade are higher in more advanced countries.

         These findings can have serious implications for studies on growth and divergence in the

world economy which currently are based on measures of GDP from the expenditure-side, but

conceptually refer to measures of GDP from the output-side. However, before any conclusive

statement can be made on this issue our approach need to be applied to a larger set of countries

and a longer time period, which will be one topic of further research. Using international trade

data from the United Nations which covers the period from 1962 to 2000, and a much wider set

of countries, more will be known about the differences in the effects of terms of trade between
                                                     28

countries and over time. Our goal for future research is to implement the approach in this paper

to provide reliable measures of real GDP both from the output-side and expenditure-side in the

new benchmark version of the Penn World Tables.

       To achieve goal, we will need to address the problem of unit-values in exports and

imports. It is impossible to avoid using these unit-values as measures of price (since no dataset

exists for comparing actual trade prices across countries), but we should at least attempt to

correct the unit-values for differences in quality across countries. To this end, we believe that a

statistical approach will be required, and propose to adapt the “country-product-dummy” (CPD)

methodology. Originally due to Summers (1973), the CPD methodology is a regression of prices

on dummy variables for the product ( π i ) and the country ( PPPj ):

                       ln p ij = ln π i + ln PPPj + ε ij ,   i=1,…,M+N, j=1,…,C.             (32)

where ε ij is a random error. Using different weights in this regression, we can obtain various

formula for the reference prices πi (Diewert, 2002, Prasada Rao, 2004). This regression

methodology can be viewed as an alternative to the GK system to obtain reference prices.

       When the prices appearing in (32) are import or export unit-values, we can consider

expanding the CPD method to control for quality differences. For example, if theory predicts

that skilled-labor abundant countries produce high-quality goods, then labor endowment could be

included in (32) as controls, with “true” prices measured as the predicted prices not including the

impact of labor endowments. More generally, any variable affecting quality could be included in

(32) as a control. This is analogous to conventional hedonic regressions, where the contribution

of observed characteristics is subtracted from prices to obtain “quality-adjusted” prices. Ideally,

we want to use such “quality-adjusted” prices to measure export and imports PPPs across

countries, and therefore obtain real GDP on the output-side.
                                                        29

          A final area for future research, mentioned in section 4, is to provide a firmer theoretical

basis for the alternative measures of real GDP proposed here. Neary (2004) has shown how the

GK system on the expenditure side can be reformulated to allow the consumer to optimally

choose new quantities at the reference prices.20 In that way, he obtains PPPs that equal the ratio

of consumer expenditure functions – at observed and reference prices. These expenditure-side

PPPs can be interpreted as true cost-of-living indexes. Likewise, we would like to obtain an

economic interpretation of the output-side real GDP proposed here, by allowing firms to respond

to the reference prices. The output-side PPP would then reflect the value of production at two

prices vectors, holding the production possibilities fixed. We expect that a comparison of such

theoretical measures of expenditure and output-side real GDP would allow us to infer not only

the impact of terms of trade, but also the costs of protection and other distortions, leading to

differences between a country’s production possibilities and consumer well-being.




20
     Prasada Rao and Salazer-Carillo (1988) propose a similar extension of the GK system.
                                                30


References

Acemoglu, Daron and Jaume Ventura, 2002, “The World Income Distribution,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 117, May, 659-694.
Bernard, Andrew and Charles Jones, 1996, “Comparing Apples to Oranges: Productivity
       Convergence and Measurement Across Industries and Countries,” American Economic
       Review, December, 86, 1216-1238.
Clark, Colin, 1940, The Conditions of Economic Progress. London: Macmillan.
Diewert, W. Erwin, 1999, Axiomatic and Economic Approaches to International Comparisons,”
       in Alan Heston and Robert E. Lipsey, eds., International And Interarea Comparisons of
       Income, Output and Prices, Studies in Income and Wealth vol. 61, Chicago: Univ. of
       Chicago and NBER, 13-87.
Diewert, W. Erwin and Catherine J. Morrison, 1986, “Adjusting Outputs and Productivity
       Indexes for Changes in the Terms of Trade,” Economic Journal, 96, 659-679.
Diewert, Erwin, 2002, “Weighted Country Product Dummy Variable Regressions and Index
       Number Formula,” Discussion Paper no. 02-15, University of British Columbia.
Feenstra, Robert, John Romalis and Peter Schott, 2002, “U.S. Imports, Exports and Tariff Data,
       1989-2001,” NBER Working Paper no. 9387.
Geary, R.C., 1958, “A Note on the Comparison of Exchange Rates and Purchasing Powers
       Between Countries,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, series A, 121, 97-99.
Gilbert, Milton and Irving B. Kravis, 1954, An International Comparison of National Products
       and the Purchasing Power of Currencies: A Study of the United States, The United
       Kingdom, France, Germany and Italy. Paris: OEEC.
Jones, Charles I. and Robert E. Hall, 1999, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output Per Worker Than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(1), 83-116.
Khamis, S., 1970, “Properties and Condition for the Existence of a New Class of Index
       Numbers,” Sankhya, series B, 32, 81-98.
Khamis, S., 1972, “A new system of index numbers for national and international purposes,”
       Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, series A, 135.
Knetter, Michael M., 1989, “Price Discrimination by U.S. and German Exports,” American
       Economic Review, 79(1), March, 198-210.
                                               31


Knetter, Michael M., 1993, “International Comparisons of Pricing-to-Market Behavior,”
       American Economic Review, 83(3), June, 473-486.
Kohli, Ulrich R., 2004, “Real GDP, Real Domestic Income, and Terms-of-Trade Changes,”
       Journal of International Economics, 62(1), January, 83-106.
Kravis, Irving, Alan Heston and Robert Summers, 1982, World Product and Income. Baltimore:
       John Hopkins University Press.
Neary, Peter, 1997, “R.C. Geary's contributions to economic theory,” in D. Conniffe (ed.): Roy
       Geary, 1896-1983: Irish Statistician, Dublin: Oak Tree Press and ESRI, 93-118.
Neary, Peter, 2004, “True Multilateral Indexes for International Comparisons of Real Incomes,”
       University College Dublin, American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Paige, D. and G. Bombach, 1959, A Comparison of National Output and Productivity in the
       United Kingdom and the United States. Paris: OEEC.
Prasada Rao, D.S., 1971, “Existence and Uniqueness of a New Class of Index Numbers,”
       Sankhya, series B, 33, 341-354.
Prasada Rao, D.S., 1976, “Existence and Uniqueness of a System of Consistent Index Numbers,”
       Economic Review, 27(2), 212-218.
Prasada Rao, D.S. and J. Salazer-Carillo, 1988, “A General Equilibrium Approach to the
       Construction of Multilateral Index Numbers,” in J. Salazer-Carillo and D.S. Prasada Rao,
       eds., World Comparison of Incomes, Prices and Product. Amsterdam: North-Holland,
       19-37.
Prasada Rao, D.S., 2004, “The Country-Product-Dummy Method: A Stochastic Approach to the
       Computation fo Purchasing Power Parities in the ICP,” presented at the SSHRC
       conference on Index Numbers and Productivity Measurement, Jun 30 – July 4, 2004,
       Vancouver, Canada.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier X., 1997, “I Just Ran Two Million Regressions,” American Economic
       Review, Papers and Proceedings, May, 178-183.
Schott, Peter, 2004, “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International
       Trade,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 119(2), 647-678.
Summers, Robert and Alan Heston, 1991, “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
       International Comparisons, 1950-1988,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 327-368.
                                             32


Summers, Robert, 1973, “International Comparisons with Incomplete Data,” Review of Income
       and Wealth, 29(1), 1-16.
van Ark, Bart and Marcel Timmer, 2001, “PPPs and International Productivity Comparisons:
       Bottlenecks and New Directions,” paper for joint OECD-World Bank seminar on
       Purchasing Power Parities, 30 January – 2 February 2001, Washington, D.C.
                                                                              33


Appendix

Proof of Theorem:

Denoting nominal GDPj by Gj and real GDPjo by R oj , j = 1,…,C, we can substitute PPPjo =

R oj / G j in (15)-(17) to obtain the reference prices,

                                          C                  C
                                 πoi = ∑ R ojθqij            ∑ q ij ,                         i =1,…,M,        (A1)
                                          j=1                j=1

                                          C                   C
                                 π ix = ∑ R oj θijx          ∑ x ij       ,                   i =M0+1,…,M+N,   (A2)
                                          j=1                 j=1

                                           C                      C
                                 π im = ∑ R oj θijm           ∑ m ij          ,               i =M0+1,…,M+N,   (A3)
                                          j=1                  j=1


where we are making use of the definitions of budget shares in (22). Also using the market shares

in (23), real GDPjo can be computed from (14’) as,

                             M                   M+N
                     R ok = ∑ π oi q ik +         ∑ (π ix x ik − π im m ik )
                            i =1                i = M 0 +1
                           C M                           C        M+N
                        = ∑ ∑ R oj θqijµ qik + ∑                   ∑ R oj (θijx µ ikx − θijm µ ikm )           (A4)
                           j=1 i =1                      j=1 i = M 0 +1


                                      (                                            )
                            C
                        = ∑ R oj θqj ' µ qk + θ xj ' µ xk − θ mj ' µ m
                                                                     k .
                           j=1


Define wjk as the term in parentheses in the last line of (A4), W = [wjk] as the corresponding CxC

                 o
matrix, and R as the row vector ( R 1o ,..., R Co ) . Then (A4) can be re-written as:

                                                              o               o
                                                             R W=R ,                                           (A5)

             o
so that the R is a row eigenvector of the matrix W.

        It is readily checked that each row of W sums to unity: summing wjk over k = 1,…,C,

the market shares µ qk , µ xk and µ m
                                    k each sum to a column vector (1,…,1)', while post-multiplying
                                                   34

                                                          M+ N
                                             ∑i=1 θqij + ∑i= M +1 (θijx − θijm ) =1 for each j = 1,…,C, by
                                               M
the budget shares by this vector we obtain
                                                             0



definition of the budget shares in (22). Since W is strictly positive by Assumption 2, from the

Frobenius theorem it has a positive eigenvalue that lies in-between the minimum and maximum

of its row sums, and the associated row or column eigenvector is strictly positive. Since the row
                                                                             o
sums are all unity, then the Frobenius eigenvalue also equals one, and R is the strictly positive

row eigenvector corresponding to that eigenvalue. Using this in (15)-(18) we obtain strictly

positive solutions for PPPjo and the reference prices.           QED
                                          35



q2

P1
         C                 P2
P3
                 D


                                               U


                                     B'

                      A                            P3
                                               B

     0                          P1                 P2         q1
                     Figure 1



q2
             D
P3

                       C
P2
                                                   Uj


                                                        P3


                                     A


                                                   B     P2


     0                                     P4 P1 P5           q1
                     Figure 2
                                                       36




                                               Figure 3: Terms of Trade
                        110
 Terms of trade



                        100

                                                                                         TOT96
                                                                                         TOT99
                         90



                         80
                             10,000   15,000      20,000    25,000   30,000    35,000
                                          Real output-side GDP, 1996



                                  Figure 4: Difference between expenditure and
                                                 output-side GDP
                        3
Percentage Difference




                        0


                        -3                                                                1996
                                                                                          1999
                        -6


                        -9
                        10,000        15,000      20,000    25,000    30,000    35,000
                                          Real output-side GDP, 1996
                                               37


                     Table 1: Price Levels (PPP/nominal exchange rate)


                           Expenditure        Deprecia-         Output
                           Price Levels        tion of        Price Levels
                                              Currency

                           1996     1999       1996-99      1996       1999
                            (1)      (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)

          Austria         118.5     103.3       -19.8       117.5     99.8
          Belgium         106.9     98.7        -20.1       103.4      94.2
          Denmark         129.2     117.9       -18.5       129.4     114.9
          Finland         116.5     107.0       -19.4       114.4     104.9
          France          117.2     105.1       -18.5       117.2     103.9
          Germany         121.0     105.1       -19.8       122.8     106.7
          Greece           79.2      73.0       -23.9        75.4      69.7
          Ireland          95.9     101.1       -16.7        87.6      98.1
          Italy            93.0      86.1       -16.3        91.6      84.2
          Netherlands     106.7      95.2       -20.4       104.3      91.2
          Portugal         67.8     64.7        -19.8        63.1      60.0
          Spain            86.6     80.5        -20.9        84.5      78.3
          Sweden          132.3     116.0       -20.9       131.6     116.8
          U.K              94.0     108.7        3.6         94.3     110.7
          U.S.             94.1     101.1        0.0        94.7      102.0
          Stan. Dev.       18.7      15.2                    20.1      16.4


Notes:

Columns (1) and (2) are normalized so that the real value of GDP across countries equals the

nominal value of GDP in US$.

Column (3) from IMF, International Finance Statistics

Columns (4) and (5) have the same normalization as columns (1) and (2).
                                                  38


                                                   e                 o
              Table 2: Price Levels, Real GDP and Real GDP per-capita, 1996


                                                                          e         o
                     Output-side                            Real GDP and GDP per-capita
                  Price Levels, 1996
               Final       Exports   Imports     Terms of   Real         Real     Diff   Nominal
               Goods                              Trade         e            o    (%)     $GDP
                                                            GDP          GDP
                (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)          (6)     (7)      (8)

Austria        118.2       113.4         115.3     98.4     23,984       24,246   -1.1   28,621
Belgium        106.7       100.9         105.3    95.8      24,637       25,479   -3.3   26,485
Denmark        129.0       113.5         110.2    103.0     26,788       26,829   -0.2   34,755
Finland        116.2       105.9         108.6     97.5     21,314       21,618   -1.4   24,884
France         117.0       106.1         104.7    101.4     21,996       21,835    0.7   25,962
Germany        120.8       115.3         108.4    106.4     23,651       23,291    1.5   28,785
Greece          79.0        81.0          99.5     81.4     14,857       15,598   -4.8   11,871
Ireland         95.7        90.2         102.8     87.7     21,071       23,117   -8.8   20,330
Italy           92.7        96.6         104.1     92.8     22,912       23,135   -1.0   21,480
Netherlands    106.5       101.9         105.8     96.3     23,307       23,678   -1.6   25,034
Portugal        67.6        85.5         104.0     82.2     16,014       17,227   -7.0   10,978
Spain           86.3        86.6          95.3    90.9      17,712       18,114   -2.2   15,526
Sweden         132.0       118.1         116.5    101.3     23,048       23,043    0.0   30,613
U.K             93.8       100.6          98.5    102.1     21,515       21,358    0.7   20,249
U.S.            94.1       100.6          94.1    106.9     31,476       31,379    0.3   29,442
Stan. Dev.      18.7        11.5           6.5      8.0      4,102        3,867    3.0    18.7


Notes:

Columns (1)-(3) decompose the price level taken from Table 1, column (6).

Column (4) equals (2)/(3).

Columns (5) and (6) are computed according to equations (12) and (14’), respectively.

Column (7) equals [(5)-(6)]/(5).

Column (8) reports nominal GDP per capita converted to US$ with the nominal exchange rate.
                       e             o
The sums of real GDP , real GDP and nominal $GDP across countries are identical, by choice
of normalization.
                                                  39

                                                   e                o
              Table 3: Price Levels, Real GDP and Real GDP per-capita, 1999


                                                                         e         o
                     Output-side                            Real GDP and GDP per-capita
                  Price Levels, 1999
               Final       Exports   Imports     Terms of   Real        Real     Diff   Nominal
               Goods                              Trade         e           o    (%)     $GDP
                                                            GDP         GDP
                (1)          (2)          (3)      (4)       (5)         (6)     (7)      (8)

Austria        103.2       100.7         108.5    92.8      25,147      26,039   -3.4   25,976
Belgium        98.4        94.5          100.2    94.3      24,930      26,110   -4.5   24,606
Denmark        117.5        98.4         101.7     96.7     27,604      28,305   -2.5   32,534
Finland        106.7        99.2         102.9     96.4     23,472      23,942   -2.0   25,113
France         104.8        94.7          97.3     97.4     22,846      23,107   -1.1   24,004
Germany        104.8       107.0         100.7    106.3     24,435      24,068    1.5   25,689
Greece          72.9        73.0          87.3     83.6     16,369      17,138   -4.5   11,942
Ireland        100.9       107.0         112.8     94.9     25,217      25,993   -3.0   25,498
Italy           85.9        87.4          96.0    91.1      23,780      24,324   -2.2   20,485
Netherlands     94.9        89.9          96.0    93.6      26,503      27,648   -4.1   25,218
Portugal       64.6        79.4          96.2     82.5      18,000      19,399   -7.2   11,645
Spain           80.4       79.6           87.7    90.7      18,894      19,425   -2.7   15,207
Sweden         115.7       107.7         104.0    103.5     24,447      24,285    0.7   28,367
U.K            108.4       103.1          96.6    106.7     22,607      22,194    1.9   24,577
U.S.           101.1       107.7          99.2    108.6     33,574      33,280    0.9   33,951
Stan. Dev.      15.2        11.3           6.7      7.8     4,128       3,983     2.6   6,488


Notes:

Columns (1)-(3) decompose the price level taken from Table 1, column (6).

Column (4) equals (2)/(3).

Columns (5) and (6) are computed according to equations (12) and (14’), respectively.

Column (7) equals [(5)-(6)]/(5).

Column (8) reports nominal GDP per capita converted to US$ with the nominal exchange rate.
                       e             o
The sums of real GDP , real GDP and nominal $GDP across countries are identical, by choice
of normalization.
                                              40


  Appendix Table 1: Alternative Expenditure Price Levels (PPP/nominal exchange rate)

                                    Expenditure            Expenditure
                                     Price Levels          Price Levels,
                                   based on OECD        based on PWT data
                                         data
                                   1996       1999        1996       1999

                Austria             118.5      103.3     122.9       107.6
                Belgium             106.9      98.7      115.4       102.4
                Denmark             129.2      117.9     132.4       121.6
                Finland             116.5      107.0     117.0       107.4
                France              117.2      105.1     118.2       104.3
                Germany             121.0      105.1     126.2       109.7
                Greece               79.2       73.0      85.3        80.1
                Ireland              95.9      101.1      99.9       101.8
                Italy                93.0       86.1      96.1        90.1
                Netherlands         106.7       95.2     113.4       101.9
                Portugal             67.8      64.7      76.7         70.2
                Spain                86.6      80.5       91.5        82.7
                Sweden              132.3      116.0     130.0       115.6
                U.K                  94.0      108.7      92.3       105.0
                U.S.                 94.1      101.1      91.6        99.1
                Stan. Dev.           18.7       15.2      17.7        13.8


Notes:

Columns (1) and (2) are based on OECD data as described in the main text and normalized so
that the real value of GDP across countries equals the nominal value of GDP in US$. These are
also reported in Table 1.

Columns (3) and (4) are alternative expenditure price levels based on PWT 6.1 data, and have the
same normalization as columns (1) and (2).
