NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LENGTH OF SERVICE, TERMINATIONS AND THE NATURE
OF THE E?YIPLOYMENT RELATIONSHIP

Katharine G. Abraham
James L. Medoff

Working Paper No. 1086

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge MA 02138

March 1983

We are grateful to Henry Farber for consultations concerning the
maximum likelihood estimates presented in the paper. Steven Bloom
and Martin Van Denburgh gave invaluable assistance in carrying out
the research to be discussed. We also owe thanks to Joyce Yearwood
and Theresa Donovan for their careful preparation of the
manuscript. This study has been supported by the National Science
Foundation (Grant SES 82—08—539) and the National Bureau of
Economic Research. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #1086
March 1983

Length of Service, Terminations and the
Nature of the Employment Relationship

ABSTRACT

This paper presents new survey evidence that relative protection
against job loss grows with length of service, independent of their

net value to the firm. This protection makes good sense given that
at most companies employees appear to earn less than their value marginal
product in the early part of their tenure and more than their value
marginal product in the latter part; without job protection policies
for senior employees, the firm would have an incentive to terminate
them when their "spot" earnings went above their "spot" value marginal

product. In particular, we find that a very large percentage (over 95
percent) of hourly union members outside of agriculture and construction
are

covered by protective policies for senior workers and, that a

somewhat smaller, but still substantial, percentage (about 85 percent)
of comparable nonunion hourlies also have some protection against job
loss in their senior years. The potential reasons for these findings
are briefly discussed.

Katherine G. Abraham
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E52-453D
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139

James L. Medoff
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 115

(617) 253—2661

(617) 495—4209

Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138

Over the course of the past several years, there has been a growing

consensus among economists that wages grow more rapidly with company service

than does productivity. Substantial empirical evidence supporting this
proposition has been amassed and theorists have begun to develop coherent
explanations for the deferral of compensation from early to late in the

worklife.—' Clearly, employees should not be willing to accept wage
schemes under which they are paid less than their current contribution early
in the workilfe and promised more than their current contribution later in
the worklife unless they have some assurance of job security;— under

this sort of wage scheme, an employee who is prematurely terminated may lose

compensation to which he or she is in some sense entitled. Given the
existence of a substantial deferred—payment component in senior workers'

wages, It Is thus logical to ask the following questions: What guarantee do
senior workers have that they will not be Involuntarily separated from their

jobs? How does the strength of this guarantee vary across settings?
The responses to a mail questionnaire which we recently sent to a
large sample of U.S. firms have provided useful data for answering the above

questions. Based on our survey results, we reach two central conclusions.
First, for a large majority of both union and nonunion employees, protection

against job loss grows with seniority. Reasonable estimates are that over
80 percent of nonunion employees and almost 100 percent of union employees
are employed in settings where senior employees are favored substantially in
reduction in force decisions, so that junior employees are laid off instead

of senior employees considered to be worth less on net to the firm. Second,
the relative risk of senior employees losing their jobs is substantially

smaller in union settings than in comparable nonunion settings, even when
written provisions making seniority the most important factor in layoff
decisions are found at both.

Section I of the paper describes the collection of the survey data

on which our conclusions are based. The survey results appear in the next
two sections of the paper, with information on written layoff provisions

presented in Section II and our central results on actual layoff practice

presented in Section III. The paper's concluding section deals with the
interpretation and implications of our findings.

I. Collection of the Data

We sent our survey to 1,025 randomly selected nonagricultural,

nonconstruction firms from the 1981 edition of Standard and Poor's Register
and 250 randomly selected manufacturing firms from a 1980 News Front listing

of approximately 3,000 publicly held manufacturing corporations. Firms
based outside the U.S. were excluded from both samples. Standard and Poor's
generally lists companies with 50 plus employees and $1,000,000 plus in

sales in their Register. What fraction of total U.S. nonagricultural,

nonconstruction employment do these companies represent? Tabulations based
on the Nay 1979 Current Population Survey show that 56 percent of those

whose primary employment was in the nonagricultural, nonconstruction private
sector said they worked for companies with 100 plus employees and 70 percent

said they worked for companies with 25 plus employees. Data from the ES—202
program indicate that unemployment insurance reporting units with 50 or more
employees account for 64 percent of total covered private sector employment
outside agriculture and construction; since firms may contain more than one
unemployment insurance reporting unit, firms with 50 or more employees

—2—

should account for some larger fraction of covered employment in the

relevant sectors. A conservative guess would be that the Standard and
Poor's listing contains firms accounting for perhaps two—thirds of total

U.S. nonagricultural, nonconstruction employment. We chose to oversample
manufacturing by adding companies from the News Front list because of the
very large fraction of the economy—wide variation in employment which occurs
in this sector.

Whenever possible, we mailed our survey to that individual at each
firm who appeared to be in charge of personnel matters (e.g., the Executive
Vice—President for Personnel, the Personnel Director or the Industrial

Relations Vice—President). In cases where no such individual's name could
be obtained, the letter was sent to the Chief Executive Officer of the

corporation. If no response was received from a firm within six weeks after
our first request was mailed, a second request was sent to the original

contact. Altogether, we received 429 responses from firms in the Standard
and Poor's sample (a response rate of 42 percent) and 113 responses from

firms in the News Front sample (a response rate of 45 percent). Because of
various data problems, there were in both cases somewhat fewer usable
responses.

A question at the start of the survey form asked how many exempt
employees (most likely managers and/or professionals), nonexempt salaried
employees and hourly employees were affected by the respondent's personnel
decisions; all subsequent answers refer to the largest of these subordinate

groups. One of the later questionnaire items inquired whether a majority of
those in the relevant group were covered by a collective bargaining

agreement. In the analysis which follows, we look separately at three

response categories: union hourly employees; nonunion hourly employees; and
3/
nonunion salaried employees (nonexempt and exempt combined).—

—3—

Much previous work on the role played by seniority in layoff

decisions has focused on collective bargaining agreement provisions. We
asked whether either a collective bargaining agreement or a written policy
dealing explicitly with the role of seniority in permanent layoff decisions

covered the group of employees referred to by each respondent. Where we
were told that such an agreement or policy did exist, we asked whether the
relevant language stated that seniority should be the single most important
factor in determining who would be laid off in the event of a permanent

workforce reduction.
Our primary objective was to learn more about actual practice

concerning the role of seniority in permanent layoff decisions. Those
respondents who had witnessed a reduction in force which affected the
relevant work group were asked the following question:
In the event of a workforce reduction, are senior employees
permanently laid off in place of junior employees?

L7 Yes, If it is believed that the junior employee will be
worth more on net to the company than the senior
employee.

II Yes, if it is believed that the junior employee will
be worth sIgnIfIcantly more on net to the company than
the senior employee.

/T No, never.
This question produces the most important information in our data set. The
responses indicate the strength of the favoritism afforded senior employees
when permanent layoffs occur.
In addition to the above information pertaining to permanent layoff
policies and practices, we also asked our survey respondents to tell us the

following: number of people employed by the firm (used in in units as a
firm size measure); information on products produced by the firm (used to
construct industry dummies); and the respondent's address (used to create
region dummies).

—4—

[I. Written Layoff Provisions Covering Various Groups

As stated above, our questionnaire asked about written layoff

provisions covering both nonunion and union employee groups. The Bureau of
Labor Statistics has published data on the prevalence and characteristics of
layoff provisions contained in major collective bargaining agreements;

however, to the best of our knowledge, there exist no similar data on layoff
provisions contained in written policies covering nonunion employees.

Table 1 summarizes the relevant raw responses from our Standard and

Poor's firms. Almost a quarter of nonunion hourly groups (24 percent) are
covered by written layoff provisions which specify the role of seniority in

permanent layoff decisions. Interestingly, where such written provisions
covering nonunion hourly groups exist, a relatively large fraction (68

percent) state that seniority should be the most important factor in

deciding which employees to let go. Taken together, the above figures imply
that approximately 16 percent of nonunion hourly employee groups are covered
by written provisions which specify that seniority should be the most

important factor in permanent layoff decisions. Separate tabulations
indicate that, among nonunion hourly employee groups, those at larger firms
are more likely to be covered by this sort of provision, a result which

holds up even when industry and region are controlled for. We return to
this finding below. The nonunion salaried responses indicate that only a
tiny fraction of those employee groups (under 3 percent) are covered by
written last—in--first—out layoff provisions.

How does unionization affect the probability that the rules
governing seniority's role in cutbacks will be spelled out in writing?
Fully 92 percent of the responses for hourly union employees (versus 24
percent for hourly nonunion employees) indicated the presence of written

—5—

Table 1: Data from Standard and Poor's Sample on Contract and Written
Policy Provisions Governing Permanent Layoffs

Houriy
Union

Employee Type
Salaried
Jourly

Nonunion

Nonunion

Proportion for which contract
or

written policy specifies role
of seniority in permanant layoff
decisions

.921

.239

Given a contract or written policy
which specifies seniority's role,
proportion for which relevant language
states seniority to be most important
factor in permanent layoff decisions

.844

.684

.429

Proportion for which language in
a contract or written policy states
seniority to be most important factor
in permanent layoff decisions.'

.777

.164

.03C

139

159

1l

Number of observations on which
above proportions based

The figures in this row are equal to the product of the figures in the
two rows above.

—6—

provisions dealing with the role of seniority in permanent layoff

decisions. Of such provisions covering hourly union employees, 84 percent
(versus 68 percent for hourly nonunion employees) stipulated that seniority

should be the most important factor in layoff decisions. Overall, the above
proportions imply that 78 percent of union hourly groups (versus 16 percent

of nonunion hourly groups) are covered by written provisions which make
seniority the most important factor in permanent layoff decisions.
The raw figures presented in Table 1 could potentially be

misleading insofar as the responses we received from firms on our Standard
and Poor's list were not randomly distributed with respect to firm size and
industry (as reported in the Register listings for the firms we surveyed).

Large firms were more likely to return our questionnaire than small firms.
Firms in the mining, manufacturing, transportation, communications,
utilities, or trade sectors were more likely to provide answers pertaining
to hourly employees than were firms in the service, finance, insurance or
real estate sectors; the opposite was true for answers pertaining to

salaried employees. In addition, it would arguably be preferable to
estimate the proportion of employment to which a given statement applied
rather than the proportion of employee groups to which the same statement

applied. These considerations lead us to develop two sets of weighted
figures. The first set of weights corrected for response rate variation
across nine firm size/industry cells; the second set yielded estimates of

employment proportions rather than employee group proportions. These
weightings did not change any of our qualitative conclusions.
A further concern is that the figures presented in Table 1 might be
misleading if the respondent firms differed systematically in unobservable

ways from the nonrespondent firms. Obviously, we have no direct information
on the answers that nonrespondents would have given to our survey

—7—

questions. However, we do have answers both from firms that responded to
our original mailing and from firms that responded only after we sent them a

followup mailing. Comparison of early versus late responders provides a
seemingly reasonable test of whether our estimated proportions should be
considered suspect because of likely nonresponse bias. We divided the
sample used in Table I into early responders and late responders, then

recalculated the raw proportions presented there separately for the two

groups. The only noteworthy difference is that early nonunion hourly
respondents were significantly more likely than late nonunion hourly
respondents to report the existence of a written policy governing the use of

seniority in permanent layoff decisions (.283 versus .135). This gap does
not appear to be attributable to differences in the firm size, industry
and/or region characteristics of the two groups. Thus, the Table 1 figures
for the nonunion hourly population must be treated with some caution.
Partial confirmation that the figures presented in Table 1 are
reasonable can be garnered from Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) data on

major collective bargaining agreement provisions. The most recent relevant
BLS data are for 1970—1971. They indicate that 95 percent of major
collective bargaining agreements outside of construction contain some type

of layoff provision. Examination of a sample of those contracts containing
layoff provisions showed seniority to be the "sole" or "primary" factor in
determining layoff rights for 74 percent of the contracts in the sample,
exclusive of those contracts in which the issue was "subject to local

negotiations,"' Combining the relevant fractions, the BLS data imply
that just over 70 percent of union hourly employee groups are covered by
layoff provisions which specify that seniority should be the most important
factor in permanent layoff decisions; the comparable figure derived from our
Standard and Poor's responses was 78 percent,

—8—

III. Practice Concerning the Role of Seniority in Actual Layoff Decisions

Ultimately we would like to know not only what written policies or
collective bargaining agreements say about the role of seniority in
permanent layoff decisions but also how much weight seniority actually

receives when a reduction in force occurs. In this section, we first
discuss the strengths and weaknesses of the survey data we have collected

for exploring actual layoff practice. Our next step Is to look at the
overall pattern of responses to our question concerning how permanent layoff

decisions are made. We then proceed to a more careful examination of the
various factors which we expect to influence the weight given to seniority
in reduction—in—force situations, giving particular consideration to union
versus nonunion differences.

Pros and Cons of Using Survey Data to Explore Layoff Practice
There are several reasons for our belief that the survey data on
layoff practice we have collected can provide a better overall picture of
the role played by seniority in firms' permanent layoff decisions than any
feasible analysis of actual layoff rates.

Suppose that we could obtain detailed personnel records for a large

number of firms that had carried out reductions In force. These records
could be used to calculate firm—specific permanent layoff rates for

employees with varying amounts of seniority. Unfortunately, a lower layoff
rate among senior employees at any particular firm could result either from
those employees having greater expected net worth or from their receiving

favored treatment. Thus, this layoff rate information would have to be
supplemented with information on individuals' expected net worth to their

firms before one could be certain of its interpretation. Our questionnaire

—9—

asks whether senior employees are favored in permanent layoff decisions
rather than whether layoff rates are lower among senior employees. The

responses obtained thus should shed light on an issue that layoff rate data
alone could never help us with.
In actual fact, firm—specific layoff rates for workers with

different amounts of seniority would be exceedingly difficult to obtain.
Longitudinal micro data sets like the National

Longitudinal Survey (NLS) and

the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) are possible sources of

information on permanent layoff rates. There are at least two serious
problems with using these data for the purpose at hand, in addition to that

discussed above. First, the unit of observation is the individual, not the
firm. To see how this might cause problems, suppose that union sector
layoffs typically occurred at sites with mostly long—service employees but

that nonunion sector layoffs typically occurred at sites with mostly

recently—hired employees. In this situation, even if senior union employees
at any given site are relatively less likely to be laid off than would be
true without a union, the aggregate data might show less decline in the

layoff rate with length of service in the union sector than in the nonunion

sector. This sort of problem can only be avoided through the use of firm
level, rather than individual level, data. A second problem with both the
NLS

and

the PSID is that the sample sizes are relatively small.

For

example, the PSID offers usable observations on permanent layoff experience
over the 1974—1975 period for only 70 private sector nonagricultural,

nonconstruction union blue collar workers with 2O—plus years of company

service and for only 43 comparable nonunion workers. These may sound like
reasonably large numbers; however, even during the 1974—1975 recession the
annual permanent layoff rate for individuals with 20 plus years of company

—10—

service was probably no more than 5 percent, so that much larger numbers
would be needed to reliably detect even large proportional differences
between the union and the nonunion rates.

The survey data on layoff practice analyzed in this section of the
paper have the advantages of pertaining directly to the question of whether

senior employees are favored in permanent layoff decisions and of providing

a relatively large number of firm—level observations. Perhaps the most
serious shortcoming of the data is that each observation represents only one
person's assessment of how layoff decisions at his or her firm are made.
Ideally, one would like to collect information on of the layoff decision
process at each firm from people at all levels of the corporate hierarchy,

including those at lower levels as well as those at the top level. Another
potential weakness of the data is that our respondents might not be wholly

candid concerning seniority's role in permanent layoff decisions. While
this possibility cannot be ruled out, we see no good reason for our
respondents to mislead us, particularly since they were assured that their

responses would be kept strictly confidential. On balance, we would argue
that our data represent the best available source of information for
exploring the role played by length of service in reductions in force.

The Pattern of Actual Layoff Practice
Table 2 summarizes the raw responses concerning actual layoff

practice received from our Standard and Poor's firms. A substantial
majority of the answers pertaining to nonunion hourly groups indicate that
senior employees enjoy considerable protection against being permanently
laid off, meaning either that a senior employee would never be let go ahead
of a junior employee (42 percent of all responses) or that this would occur

—11—

only if the junior employee was considered to be worth significantly more to

the firm on net (44 percent of all responses). Even among the responses
pertaining to nonunion salaried groups, 24 percent indicate that a senior
employee would never be let go ahead of a junior employee and 57 percent

indicate that this would occur only if the junior employee was considered to
be worth significantly more to the firm on net.
How does the layoff protection afforded senior union employees

compare to that afforded senior nonunion employees? Comparing the relevant
figures for union hourly and for nonunion hourly employee groups, 97 percent
of the union respondents versus 86 percent of the nonunion respondents
reported substantial protection for senior employees and 84 percent of the
union respondents versus 42 percent of the nonunion respondents reported
that a senior employee would never be let go in place of a junior employee.

Thus, layoff protection for senior union employees seems to be both more
prevalent and stronger than that for senior nonunion employees in broadly
similar jobs.

We also calculated two sets of weighted proportions like the raw

proportions just discussed. The first set of weights corrected for response
rate variation across nine firm size/industry cells and the second set

yielded estimates of ent proportions rather than employee group
proportions. None of the weighted proportions differs appreciably from the
comparable raw proportions.

To determine whether we ought to be concerned about possible
nonresponse bias in the figures presented in Table 2, we again divided the
observations into those received from early responders and those received
from late responders, then prepared separate tabulations for the two

groups. There were no significant differences between the two sets of
numbers.

Table 2: Data from Standard and Poor's Sample on Actual Practice Concerning
the Role of Seniority in Permanent Layoff DecisiOflS'

Hourly
Union

Employee Type
Salaried
Hourly
Nonunion
Nonunion

Proportion reporting that senior
employee never let go ahead of
junior employee

.836

.423

.238

Proportion reporting that senior
employee let go if junior employee
believed to be worth significantly
more on net

.137

.437

.571

Proportion reporting that senior
employee let go if junior employee
believed to be worth more on net

.027

.141

.190

73

71

21

Number of observations on which
above proportions based

a! only respondents who had witnessed permanent layoffs were asked what
practice was followed in deciding which employees to let go.

-13-

Modelling the Analysis of Factors Affecting Actual Layoff Practice
What underlies the union/nonunion differences in layoff practice

just noted? Given similarly-worded written policy statements governing the
role of seniority during reductions in force, are the actual layoff

practices followed in union and nonunion settings also similar? In
econometric terms, answering these questions requires that we explain the
variation in a trichotomous dependent variable which captures senior
employees' vulnerability to being involuntarily terminated ahead of junior

employees during a reduction in force. This can be modelled using an
ordered probit. Assume that there exists some unobserved continuous
variable, y, which measures senior employees' relative vulnerability to

layoff. We do not observe y directly but do have some Information about y.
Specifically, it can be assumed that if the y value for a particular group
is below some threshold c1, our survey respondents will say that a senior
employee would never be let go before a junior employee; that if y is
between c1 and some higher threshold level c2, respondents will say that
a senior employee would be let go before a junior employee only if the
junior employee was worth significantly more on net to the company; and that

if yis above c2, respondents will say that a senior employee would be let
go before a junior employee if the junior employee was worth more on net to

the company. Let the latent variable y be a function of various X's
including union status and the terms of written layoff provisions:

(1) y=X+c
where y represents the unobserved continuous measure of senior employees'
vulnerability to permanent layoff, the X's are Independent variables, the
's are parameters,

is an error term, and I indexes observations. If the

—14—

C's are normally distributed, the probability of a respondent Indicating
that a senior employee would never be involuntarily terminated before a
junior employee is equal to:

1

c—XE
exp (—z /2) dz

I

the probability of a respondent indicating that only a senior employee who

was worth significantly less on net than a junior employee would be let go
first is equal to:
1

/

(3) _____

1 exp

2

(—z /2) dz

and the probability of a respondent indicating that a senior employee would
be permanently laid off before a junior employee who was worth more on net
is equal to:

1

C)
r2Tr

2
I exp(—z/2)dz,

c -XE

Standard maximum likelihood methods can be used to estimate c1, c2 and

theE 's. Given the way the model has been set up, a positive coefficient
implies greater senior employee vulnerability to being involuntarily
terminated.

Factors Affecting Senior Employees' Relative Vulnerability to

Permanent Layoff
The models presented in Table 3A were estimated using the ordered

probit technique just described. We included responses from firms In our
News Front sample In estimating these equations. Since the various

-15--

potentially relevant factors are likely to have a different impact on
permanent layoff decisions affecting salaried employees, we included only
union hourly and nonunion hourly observations in the sample used to fit
these models.

Column (1) presents the coefficient estimates obtained for a model
which included a union dummy plus firm size, industry and region variables.
The union hourly dummy assumes a large, statistically significant positive

coefficient. Thus, controlling for size of firm, industry and region does
not alter the conclusion which emerged from the simple cross—tabulations in
Table 2, that senior union hourly employees are relatively less vulnerable

to permanent layoff than senior nonunion hourly employees. The coefficient
estimates from model (1) can be used to predict the probability that union
and nonunion respondents with otherwise average characteristics for

nonagricultural, nonconstruction blue collar workers (as derived from the
May 1979 CPS) would give each of the three possible answers to the question
we asked about the role of seniority in actual layoff decisions; these

probabilities are reported in Table 3B. Union respondents are almost twice
as likely as similar nonunion respondents to say that a senior employee
would never be permanently laid off in place of a junior employee (.773
versus .410); union respondents are 6.5 times less likely than similar
nonunion respondents to say that a senior employee would be permanently laid
off if it was believed that a junior employee would be worth more on net
(.025 versus .162).

While the result just documented is interesting in itself, it also

raises some further questions. In particular, we wondered whether union and
nonunion employee groups covered by similarly—worded written layoff policies
would in fact be treated similarly when workforce reductions occurred.
Column (2) reports on the results of estimating an ordered probit equation

—16—

Table 3A: Factors Affecting Actual Practice Concerning the Role of
Seniority in Permanent Layoff DeclsionSW
Coefficient estimates
from ordered probit
equations in which
three dependent
variable categories
reflect senior
employees'
vulnerability to
permanent layoff

Mean
[Standard
Deviation]
.512

Union hourly group
(yes = 1)

[.5011

Written layoff provision
specifying seniority
key factor in permanent
layoff decisions (yes = 1)

.527
[.501]

Other written layoff provision
(yes = 1)

.138
[.346]

Ln (number persons employed)

6.239

Services, finance, insurance
and real estate (yes = 1)

Northeast (yes

South (yes =

1)

West (yes = 1)

1)

1)

.113
[.318]

(2)

—.977

—.588
(.240)

(.190)

—.981

.270

(.391)

(.045)

(.058)

—.074

—.338
(.383)

(.513)

.393

.268

(.449)

.350
[.478]

—.412

—.330

(.221)

(.251)

.167
[.374]

.182

.157
(.254)

.128

(.255)

—.082
(.322)

—.101

—.200

—.197

(.357)

(.391)

1.013
(.335)

39.0
d.f.

.045

—.008

(.446)

.044
[.206]

[.335]

c1

203)

(.287)

[1.8281

Trade, transportation, communications and utilities (yes =

(N =
(1)

7

(.337)

1.126
(.385)

65.3
9

!These estimates are based on data from both the Standard and Poor's and
the Newsfront samples. Only respondents who had witnessed permanent layoffs
were asked what practice was followed in deciding which employees to let go.
—17—

(2)

Factors Affecting Actual Practice Concerning the

.265 (.140)

Other layoff provision

.491 (.056)

.241 (.019)

.473 (.054)

.416 (.03)

.108 (.004)

.349 (.039)

.428 (.049)

.202 (.013)

Senior employee let
go if junior employ—
ee believed to be
worth significantly
more on net

in Table 3A and
employment
from the May 1979 CPS. The figures in
parentheses are asymptotic
standard errors. These equal f'V f, where f is a k x 1 vector
the derivatives with
containing
respect to the
estimated parameters of the probability of being in the
specified category and V is the k x k information matrix.

.244 (.144)

.026 (.038)

.168 (.075)

.100 (.107)

.006 (.008)

.060 (.072)

.162 (.066)

.025 (.021)

Senior employee let go if
junior employee believed to
be worth more on net

IThese probabilities were calculated using the coefficient estimates from the models
reported
average blue collar
characteristics

.733 (.025)

Layoff provision with seniority key

seniority's role

No layoff provision specifying
.360 (.059)

.484 (.072)

Other layoff provision

Nonunion:

.887 (.006)

.590 (.044)

.410 (.050)

.773 (.014)

Senior employee never
let go ahead of
junior employee

Implied probability of response from unit with average firm
size, industry
and region characteristics for all blue collar
employment

Layoff provision with seniority key

seniority's role

No layoff provision specifying

Union:

Model

Nonunion

Union

Model (1)

Table 3B:

Role of Seniority in Permanent Layoff Decisions

which includes

a union hourly dummy plus a dummy variable which equals one

if there is a written layoff provision specifying that seniority

should be

the most Important factor in permanent layoff decisions and a second dummy
variable which equals one if there is some other written layoff provision,

in addition to firm size, industry, and region controls. Two things about
the parameter estimates obtained are of particular interest.
The first noteworthy fact is that, not surprisingly, written
provisions which specify that seniority should be the most Important factor
in layoff decisions are associated with a substantial reduction In senior

employees' relative vulnerability to losing their jobs. As can be seen by
looking at Table 3B, coverage by a last—in—first—out layoff provision

increases the probability of a "senior employee never let go before a junior
employee" response by .297 for a union group with otherwise average

characteristics (from .590 to .887) and by .373 for a comparable nonunion

group (from .360 to .733). The corresponding reductions in the probability
of a "senior employee let go If junior employee believed to be worth more on
net" response are .054 for a union group with sample average characteristics
(from .060 to .006) and .142 for a nonunion group with sample average

characteristics (from .168 to .026)..' Written layoff provisions which do
not specify that seniority should be the key factor in layoff decisions have
no statistically significant estimated effect on senior employees'
vulnerability to losing their jobs.

The second noteworthy fact is that unionism per se still seems to
matter even after the above—described written layoff provision variables are

introduced. The union hourly dummy coefficient in the column (2) equation
is strongly significant. On average, unionization is associated with a .189
increase in the probability of a "senior employee never let go before a
junior employee" response (from .543 to .732) and with a .066 decrease in

—19—

the probability of a "senior employee let go if junior or employee believed
to be worth more on net" response (from .103 to .037). These effects are
roughly 50 percent as large as the corresponding effects derived from the

model which included no layoff provision controls, meaning that differences
in the existence and nature of written

layoff provisions covering union

versus nonunion groups can account for perhaps half of the reduction in
senior employees' vulnerability to layoff that is associated with union
status.

The Table 3 models do not

directly address the question of which

senior nonunion hourly employees enjoy the greatest protection against being

permanently laid off. We estimated a second set of models like those in
Table 3 using only nonunion hourly observation.

Since nonunion hourly

employee groups at larger firms are significantly more likely to be covered
by written provisions specifying a key role for seniority in permanent
layoff decisions, we expected that the in of employment variable in the
model patterned after that in column (1) would assume a significant negative

coefficient, This coefficient was in fact close to zero and statistically
insignificant. One way to state these results is that large and small
employers of nonunion hourly employees differ more in form than in substance

with regard to layoff decisions affecting long—service workers.
Are the results presented in Table 3 apt to be contaminated by

nonresponse bias? The appropriate x2

tests

show that neither adding a

dummy variable which captures whether an observation represents a late
responder nor adding a full set of interaction terms to the ordered probit
equations contributes to the models' explanatory

power.

We were also concerned about the possible existence of a somewhat
different type of bias that has not been mentioned until this point, One

might argue that what we should be interested in knowing is the distribution

—20—

across all employers of practice with regard to the role played by seniority
in the event a permanent layoff occurs; what we actually observe is the

distribution of relevant practice across the set of employers such that

respondents there have witnessed reductions in force. These two
distributions may differ. One might expect that firms which avoid layoffs
as a matter of policy might also place greater emphasis on seniority in the

event that a layoff does occur. There is no satisfactory method of dealing
with this problem. However, we did experiment with estimating a censored
ordered probit model. Censoring takes place because we only observe layoff
practice at those firms where our respondents have witnessed reductions in
force; we specified a probit equation containing the ln of firm size,

industry dummies and region dummies to describe this censoring process. We
then reestimated each of our ordered probit equations simultaneously with
this censoring equation using maximum likelihood methods, allowing for some

correlation rho between the relevant errors. Unfortunately, we were unable

to achieve usable estimates.' At this point, the best we can do is note
that the censoring of our data is a potential concern.

IV. Concluding Thoughts

The results just reported indicate that over 80 percent of private
sector nonagricultural, nonconstruction employment is located in settings

where senior workers enjoy substantial protection against losing their

jobs. One would expect at least a credible promise of this sort of
protection to accompany wage policies which pay workers less than their
value marginal product early in their tenure and more than their value

marginal product late in their tenure. Nonetheless, it might be asked what
actually motivates firms to adhere to a practice of favoring senior

—21—

employees when cutbacks affecting their nonunion workforce occur, given that
there would appear to be a short—run incentive to terminate senior employees
Instead of junior employees expected to be worth more on net to the firm.
Someone unacquainted with U.S. law might suppose that senior

nonunion workers were guaranteed some legal protection against losing their

jobs. In fact, senior nonunion workers have virtually no legal recourse If
they are laid off before their juniors. Ignoring situations in which a
termination has been predicated on a consideration expressly made unlawful
by statute (e.g., sex, race, religion, national origin, age, union

organizational activity, or protected concerted activity), nonunion
employment relationships are generally "terminable at will," regardless of

an employee's length of service. Even written company manuals stating that
layoffs will occur In inverse order of years of service have not generally
been viewed by the courts as enforceable contracts, because employers have
the right to alter this "policy" at any time.Z.1 Nevertheless, It appears
that practices favoring senior workers do go hand in hand with stated

policies to that effect; our survey responses indicate that nonunion firms
with Inverse—seniority layoff policies are second only to union firms with
such provisions In their collective bargaining contracts when It comes to
actually protecting senior workers' jobs.

Other possible motivations for nonunion firms to protect the jobs
of senior workers where current pay is above current contribution Include:

avoiding unionization; maintaining the morale of the current workforce so
that short—term efficiency is not Impaired; and preserving the firm's

reputation as a fair employer so that prospective new hires are not deterred

from joining the firm's workforce. Information concerning the relative
importance of these three potential motlvators would greatly enhance our
understanding of the issue at hand.

—22—

While a significant number of senior hourly nonunion workers are
protected against some forms of job loss, senior hourly union workers are

both more often protected and better protected. As mentioned above, we
estimate that almost 100 percent of private sector hourly union workers
outside of agriculture and construction receive job loss protection,

compared to about 85 percent of such nonunion workers; further, we estimate
that over 80 percent of these hourly union workers were covered by plans
which would "never" result in the involuntary termination of a senior
employee in place of a junior employee, whereas only about 40 percent of

such hourly nonunion workers were so securely protected. Why do union
members receive better protection than comparable nonunion workers?

One reason for expecting senior workers to be more favored in
layoff decisions in union than in nonunion settings is that the collective
bargaining process very likely leads to older workers' preferences receiving
greater weight than they otherwise would.1 Unionism also adds two

enforcement mechanisms: the law and the union itself. As discussed above,
nonunion workers are generally not protected by law from losing their jobs
in place of more junior employees; union members' contracts are enforceable

in court and so have added weight. In addition, the union itself can
monitor employer actions to ensure employer compliance with seniority rules;
in a nonunion setting, most workers will probably not have much power to

make sure the employer is keeping his word. And, in the most desperate
situations, the union can organize work interruptions, giving it a powerful
bargaining tool in the establishment, preservation, and carrying out of
seniority provisions.

Our result that senior unionized workers enjoy relatively greater
protection against job loss than comparable senior nonunion workers may help
with the resolution of a puzzle that has disturbed diverse analysts.
Numberous studies of the impact of trade unionism have concluded that length
—23—

of service raises union wages less than nonunion wages, which suggests that
senior workers benefit less from unionism than do junior workers. This
result is puzzling because, as just stated, it is generally supposed that
senior workers' preferences carry greater weight in union settings. Recent

research suggests that the solution to this paradox may be found in a
demonstration that, whereas wages rise less rapidly with seniority under
unionism, the expected value of total compensation rises more rapidly.2!
One of the most important benefits increasing the slope of the
union—service! expected—economic—rewards profile is the greater job
protection provided under unionism.
Thus far in this paper we have presented evidence that senior

unionized workers enjoy greater protection against permanent layoff
vis—a—vis junior unionized workers than do senior nonunion workers vis—a—vjs

junior nonunion workers. Is it also true that senior unionized workers are
less vulnerable to losing their jobs than senior nonunion workers? To put
the issue somewhat differently, we have shown that unionism reduces senior
workers' relative vulnerability to permanent layoff; is it also true that

unionism reduces senior workers' absolute vulnerability? This might not be
the case if the presence of a union increased the

overall permanent layoff

rate sufficiently to outweigh the fact that senior union workers are lower

on the list of those to be let go. Back—of—the—envelope

calculations based

on our survey data suggest that senior union workers have a much lower
probability of being permanently laid off than do senior nonunion

workers.' Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn have recently reported on the
1971—1972 permanent layoff experience of those included in the NLS male
panels; their results are supportive of the belief that, among older
(presumably more senior) men, coverage by a collective bargaining agreement
11/ Other evidence
is associated with a lower permanent layoff rate.—
on

—24—

union policies during downturns is consistent with these findings. While
during mild recessions, unions favor the use of temporary layoffs to
maintain high wage rates, as downturns begin to threaten the jobs of senior
employees, unions become more willing to discuss wage cuts, reopening of

contracts, and changes in work rules and policies. This change in union
behavior can be seen by studying the 1974—1975 and current recessions.-'

To summarize, we have found that even though senior nonunion
workers are often protected against job loss in place of more junior
workers, unionism raises the incidence and strength of such protection.

While both implicit and explicit contracts may exist, they appear to have

significantly different consequences for senior workers. Job rights appear
to grow with seniority to a much greater extent under collective bargaining.

—25—

FOOTNOTES

1/ For a summary of empirical evidence pertaining to the deferral of
compensation from early to late in the workilfe, see F1edcff and Abraham

[1981]. Theoretical work related to the question of why sucn deferred
compensation schemes might be adopted includes Becker and Stigler
[1974], Salop and Salop [1976], Viscusi [1978], Lazear [1979], Harris
and Hoinstrom [1981], and Iannrides and ?issarides [1982].

2/ In principle, a policy of awarding appropriate severance pay it.

event

the

of a termination could accomplish the same end as a policy rf

assuring senior employees' job security. We have seer. no gno evidence
that many workers are in fact covered by severance pay plans which serve

this purpose. As of 1978, only 37 percent of the major contract
workforce was covered by severance pay provisions. Tabulaticns based or.
the 1974 Employer Expenditures for Employee Compensation survey
(described in ij.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics [l976] indicate that 2
percent of union production employees and only 3 percent of nonunior.

production employees worked in establishments where the employer made
contributions to a severance pay or supplemental unemployment benefit

fund during l972 Even where severance pay plans exist, it is not at
all clear that the formulas used for determining the level of benefits
appropriately compensate laid off employees for the stream of deferred

wages they lose. In addition, at least in the union sector, it appears
that severance pay provisions most often accompany rather than replace

provisions which protect senior employees against being laid off. See
Medoff and Abraham [1981] for a discussion of why one would not expect
severance pay plans to be the preferred mechanism for protecting senior
employees' deferred earnings.

—26—

3/ There were a very small number of responses pertaining to unionized
salaried employees which were excluded from the sample we used f or

analysis.

4/ These data are reported in U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics [1972].
5/ The probability changes for the union group do not equal those for the
nonunion group because the ordered probit Is a nonlinear model; that is,
the changes in the probabilities of being in the various categories

produced by a given change in X depend upon the initial level of

X3.

6/ When we allowed rho to vary freely, it approached one rapidly but the
likelihood function failed to converge. We then looked at a series of
constrained models, with rho set equal to 0.0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8 and

1.0 in turn. The model with rho equal to one produced the best fit.
However, it is unclear what this means.

7/ A number of recent state court decisions have begun to modify the
"employment at will" doctrine using the theory of employees having
"implied contracts" with their employers, but these jurisdictions are

still very much in the minority. See Bureau of National Affairs [1982]
for an up—to—date discussion of legal developments in this area.

8/ See Freeman and Medoff [forthcoming]. Giving greater weight to senior
workers' preferences may or may not be socially desirable; this point is
developed in an interesting paper by Kuhn [1982].

9/ See Freeman and Medoff [forthcoming].
10/ In our survey data, 61 percent of union hourly respondents and 52
percent of nonunion hourly respondents said they had witnessed workforce
reductions; the average portion of the relevant work group affected was
14 percent for the union hourlies and 12 percent for the nonunion

hourlies. Thus, a reasonable, if crude, estimate Is that over the
relevant reference period 9 percent of union hourly workers and 6

percent of nonunion hourly workers were permanently laid off. How many
of these could conceivably have been senior employees? Only 16 percent

—27—

of our union hourly respondents said that senior employees might

sometimes be let go ahead of junior employees; 58 percent of our

nonunion hourly respondents said this might sometimes happen. Thus,
among union employees layoffs involving roughly 1 percent of the
workforce might have affected senior workers, whereas among nonunion
employees layoffs involving roughly 3 percent of the workforce might
have affected senior workers.
11/ See Blau and Kahn [1981].

12/ See Medoff [1979] for an examination of the impact of collective
bargaining on temporary layoffs which analyzes data from the 1974—75

downturn. For discussions of collective bargaining during the current
recession, see Dunlop [1982] and Mitchell [1982].

—28—

REFERENCES

Becker, Gary

S. and George J. Stigler, "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance and
Compensation of Enforcers," Journal of Legal Studies, 3, No. 1 (1974),
1—18.

Blau, Francine and Lawrence N. Kahn, "The Exit—Voice Tradeoff in the Labor
Market: Some Additional Evidence," mimeographed, January 1981.

Bureau of National Affairs, The Employment—At—Will Issue, Washington: The
Bureau of National Affairs, Inc., 1982.
Dunlop, John T., "Wage Moderation in 1982 —— Temporary or Lasting?"
mimeographed, May 1982.
Freeman, Richard B. and James L. Medoff, What Do Unions Do?, New York:
Basic Books, forthcoming.

Harris, Milton and Bengt Holmstrom, "Ability, Performance and Wage
Dynamics," mimeographed, April 1981.

Institute for Social Research, A Panel Study of Income Dynamics: Study
Design, Procedures, Available Data, Ann Arbor, Michigan: The University
of Michigan, 1972.
Institute for Social Research, The 1977 Quality of Employment Survey:
Descriptive Statistics, with Comparison Data from the 1969—70 and the
1972—73 Surveys, Ann Arbor, Michigan: The University of Michigan, 1979.

loannides, Yannis M. and Christopher A. Pissarides, "Wages and Employment
with Firm—Specific Seniority," mimeographed, 1982.
Kuhn, Peter, "Compensation Deferral and Employer Malfeasance in Union and
Nonunion Firms," mimeographed, March 1982.
Lazear, Edward P., "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?" Journal of Political
Economy, LXXXVII, No. 6 (December 1979), 1261—84.
Medoff, James L., "Layoffs and Alternatives Under Trade Unionism in U.S.
Manufacturing," Anerican Economic Review, LXIX, No. 3 (June 1979),
380—95.
Medoff, James L., and Katharine G. Abraham, "Involuntary Terminations Under
Explicit and Implicit Employment Contracts," mimeographed, January 1981.
Mitchell, Daniel J.B., "Recent Union Contract Concessions," mimeographed,
April 1982.
Salop, Joanne and Steven Salop, "Self—Selection and Turnover in the Labor
Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics, XC, No. 4 (November 1976),
619—27.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Major Collective Bargaining Agreements:
Layoff, Recall and Worksharing Procedures, Bulletin No. 1425—13,
Washington: Government Printing Office, 1972.

—29—

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, BLS Handbook of Methods, Bulletin No. 1910,
Washington: Government Printing Office, 1976.
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Characteristics of Major Collective
Bargaining Agreements, Bulletin No. 2065, Washington: Government
Printing Office, 1980.
Viscusi, W. Kip, "Self—Selection, Learning—Induced Quits, and the Optimal
Wage Structure," mimeographed, 1978.

—30—

