                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                AUTOPSY ON AN EMPIRE:
                          UNDERSTANDING MORTALITY IN RUSSIA
                             AND THE FORMER SOVIET UNION

                                           Elizabeth Brainerd
                                            David M. Cutler

                                         Working Paper 10868
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10868


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




David Cutler is grateful to the National Institutes on Aging for research support. Elizabeth Brainerd’s
research for this paper was supported in part through Grant Number S-LMAQM-00-H-0146 provided by the
United States Department of State and administered by the William Davidson Institute, University of
Michigan. David Cutler’s research is supported by the National Institutes on Aging. The opinions, findings
and conclusions or recommendations expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily
reflect those of any of the sponsoring organizations. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s)
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2004 by Elizabeth Brainerd and David M. Cutler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Theoretical Foundation of Buffer Stock Saving
Elizabeth Brainerd and David M. Cutler
NBER Working Paper No. 10868
October 2004
JEL No. I1, P0

                                            ABSTRACT

Male life expectancy at birth fell by over six years in Russia between 1989 and 1994. Many other

countries of the former Soviet Union saw similar declines, and female life expectancy fell as well.

Using cross-country and Russian household survey data, we assess six possible explanations for this

upsurge in mortality. Most find little support in the data: the deterioration of the health care system,

changes in diet and obesity, and material deprivation fail to explain the increase in mortality rates.

The two factors that do appear to be important are alcohol consumption, especially as it relates to

external causes of death (homicide, suicide, and accidents) and stress associated with a poor outlook

for the future. However, a large residual remains to be explained.

Elizabeth Brainerd
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 01267
elizabeth.brainerd@williams.edu

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@harvard.edu
       The 1990s were a decade of turmoil for the formerly socialist countries. Besides the

political, economic and social upheavals endured by these populations, many of these countries

also experienced a demographic disaster in the form of sharply rising death rates. In Russia,

male life expectancy at birth fell from 64.2 years in 1989 to 57.6 years in 1994, a decline of 6.6

years in just half a decade. Female life expectancy at birth fell by 3.3 years over the same time

period. To put this in perspective, it took the past 30 years for the United States to increase life

expectancy by this much. Russia’s life expectancy today ranks 122nd in the world, at the same

level as North Korea and Guyana.

       The mortality crisis is not limited to Russia. Across the western countries of the former

Soviet Union – the countries which we term ‘the mortality belt’ and which range from Estonia in

the north to Ukraine in the south – there have been significant declines in male life expectancy at

birth, ranging from 3.3 years (Belarus) to nearly 5 years in Estonia and Latvia (see Figure 1).

Life expectancy for women fell substantially as well.

       But not all countries fared this poorly. The countries which directly border this ‘mortality

belt’ and which also experienced a severe economic shock in the 1990s – Poland, the Czech and

Slovak Republics, Hungary, and Romania – recorded negligible increases in mortality rates

during their transition from communism, and since the mid-1990s many of these countries have

enjoyed the fastest increases in life expectancy recorded in their recent history.

       Understanding why mortality in Russia and many of its neighboring countries increased

so rapidly is a central research and policy question. Analysts of the Russian experience, for

example, describe the mortality profile as the most puzzling aspect of the Russian transition

(Shleifer and Treisman 2003). A number of theories have been put forward about the mortality

crisis: the breakdown of the medical care system (Ellman 1994); increased alcohol consumption


                                                  2
(Leon et al. 1997); a reduction in material living standards, as reflected in diet and nutrition

(Field 1995); increased stress from the economic transition (Shapiro 1995; Cornia and Paniccià

2000); and a reduced outlook for the future (Watson 1995).

       Some progress on understanding the mortality crisis has been made by researchers.

Epidemiologists have studied Russian mortality data at the national level to decompose changes

in death rates by cause of death and age group (Leon et al. 1997; Shkolnikov et al. 2001a) and

have interviewed relatives of deceased men to identify characteristics associated with an

increased probability of dying (Shkolnikov et al. 2001b). Medical researchers have examined the

prevalence of biological risk factors for cardiovascular disease in Russia and other countries of

the former Soviet Union (Kristenson et al. 1997; Puska et al. 1993; Stegmayr et al. 2000), and

have studied the course of epidemic diseases across Russia and the response of the health system

to these epidemics (Vitek et al. 1999; Kalichman et al. 2000).

       Using these findings and our own analysis of cross-country and Russian survey data, we

discuss and analyze possible causes of the mortality crisis in the former Soviet Union, as well as

the equally puzzling dramatic improvement in mortality rates in the late 1990s in most countries.

       We begin by describing the overall trends in death rates in the region, providing an

overview of changes in mortality by region, age and cause. Russia is not unique: other former

Soviet countries experienced changes in mortality remarkably similar to those of Russia during

the transition period. Moreover, virtually every country in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet

Union experienced at least a short-term increase in death rates among certain demographic

groups. But Russia is different in that the mortality crisis is particularly acute among prime age

men – not the elderly or infants, the groups most commonly thought to be at risk because of

economic change.


                                                  3
       We next explore the possible causes of the dramatic swings in mortality across the region,

focusing on six broad factors: changes in the health care system; traditional risk factors such as

obesity and smoking; increased alcohol consumption; changes in the composition of the diet;

material deprivation; and levels of stress and changing expectations about the future. Several

factors are easy to dispose of. Although the medical system in the former Soviet Union

deteriorated significantly, we find no evidence that this deterioration played a major role in the

demographic disaster. Nor is smoking, obesity, or undernutrition the problem.

       In the end, our results point to two factors as being most important, alcohol, especially as

it relates to external causes of death (homicide, suicide, and accidents) and stress associated with

a poor outlook for the future. We find that these two factors are of roughly equal importance in

accounting for the dramatic increase in mortality in Russia – though we caution that there is still

a large residual to be explained.



I.     Mortality trends in the Former Soviet Union

       We start off by examining mortality trends in Russia and the former Soviet Union. The

obvious question that arises in any analysis of the former Soviet Union is data quality. Many

statistics about the former Soviet bloc are not reliable. Demographic data are believed to be an

exception, however: registration of vital events is nearly complete, and the coding of broad

categories of death is reasonably accurate (Anderson and Silver 1997; Shkolnikov et al. 1997;

Shkolnikov et al. 1999; Shkolnikov et al. 2002). As a result, there is widespread agreement

among demographers and epidemiologists that the fluctuations in mortality rates we describe are




                                                 4
real and do not reflect a radical change in the vital registration system.1

        Figure 2 illustrates the erratic changes in life expectancy experienced in most countries of

the former Soviet Union in recent years, in contrast to the slowly evolving changes in life

expectancy recorded in the United States and other industrialized countries. The top panel

(Figure 2a) shows life expectancy for the mortality belt countries.2 By the early 1960s life

expectancy in the Soviet Union had nearly reached that of the United States – within 3 years.

Mortality failed to improve over the next decade, however, and a large East-West life expectancy

gap emerged. By 1980, the difference in life expectancy was nearly 8 years.

        The post-1984 period is marked by large swings in life expectancy. There was a striking

improvement in mortality during Gorbachev’s anti-alcohol campaign (1985-1987), when life

expectancy increased nearly three years.

        From there, however, the situation deteriorated dramatically. The deterioration began in

earnest in 1990 and lasted until the mid-1990s, coincident with the period of greatest economic,

political, and social instability in most countries. The 6 year reduction in male life expectancy at

birth in Russia between 1989 and 1994 is almost unprecedented in its speed and scope, though it

was nearly matched by the declines in life expectancy in many of Russia’s western neighbors.

Over the same period, male life expectancy fell by 4.6 years in Estonia, 4.5 years in Latvia, 4.2

years in Lithuania, and 3.7 and 3.3 years, respectively, in Ukraine and Belarus.


        1
         Despite the generally high quality of the demographic data in the region, however, it should be
noted that the mortality data are less reliable in some countries of Central Asia and the Caucuses.
Inconsistencies in the reporting of deaths at the oldest ages have been reported in some countries, and
Georgia implemented a fee for death registration in the early 1990s, which likely led to underreporting of
deaths (Badurashvili et al. 2001). Data for these countries should be interpreted with caution.
        2
          Figure 2a omits Latvia to reduce clutter; the level and change in male life expectancy in Latvia
is nearly identical to that of Estonia. Male and female life expectancy for all transition countries are
shown in Appendix Figure 1. All data prior to 1991 are for the Soviet republics individually rather than
for the USSR as a whole.

                                                     5
        After 1994, the situation began to improve. Between 1994 and 1998, life expectancy in

Russia increased by over 3 years. Most of the gains were eroded, however, following Russia’s

1998 financial crisis; male life expectancy has fallen continually from peak of 61.3 years in 1998

to only 58.5 years in 2002.

        Figure 2b shows mortality in the Central Asian republics. Life expectancy fell in these

countries as well, but the declines were neither as dramatic nor long-lasting as in the western

former Soviet Union. Kazakhstan registered the largest decline in life expectancy in this group,

with male life expectancy at birth falling by five years between 1989 and 1996; the smallest

decline in this region occurred in Uzbekistan, where male life expectancy fell by 1.6 years

between 1990 and 1994.3 Among the three Caucuses countries – Armenia, Azerbaijan, and

Georgia – declines in life expectancy ranged from 1.6 years (Armenia) to 4.2 years (Azerbaijan)

in the early 1990s.

        Remarkably, despite substantial declines in per capita income, rising unemployment, and

a wide range of reform experiences, none of the East European countries experienced a

prolonged decline in life expectancy in the 1990s, and some did not see any material setback

(Figure 2c). The most successful economic reformers – the Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary,

and Slovenia – registered near-continual increases in life expectancy since the start of their

reforms. This differs not only with the neighboring ‘mortality belt’ countries, but also with the

experience of the previous three decades, in which life expectancy stagnated in a pattern similar

to that of the Soviet Union. Life expectancy fell in Bulgaria and Romania, but these declines are

small relative to those that occurred in the western region of the former Soviet Union.


        3
          Tajikistan is omitted from the analysis in this paper due to the civil war that plagued the country
in the early 1990s, and which led to a decline in male life expectancy from 66 to 56 years between 1992
and 1993. The quality of the demographic data in Tajikistan is also considered to be relatively poor.

                                                      6
        In the Appendix, we show similar figures for female life expectancy at birth. The

patterns are very similar, although the magnitude of the changes is smaller.

        Changes in mortality are clearly related to the economic health of the country. Figure 3

shows the relation in more detail: we relate the log change in age-standardized male mortality

between 1989 and 1994 to the log change in real per capita GDP over the same time period.4

The two are highly related (the correlation coefficient is -.60). Countries like Ukraine with poor

economic growth had very large increases in mortality. Poland, the Czech Republic, and

Slovenia are on the opposite end. Even in the context of this relationship, however, Russia is an

outlier: mortality increased more than could be expected given the change in reported GDP, and

the mortality increase is even more extreme if the decline in Russia’s GDP is substantially

overstated as is likely to be the case (Shleifer and Treisman 2003). The relationship between

mortality change and GDP growth is less true over the subsequent years of the 1990s, as the

second panel in Figure 3 details. The correlation between mortality change in the 1994 to 2000

period and economic growth over the same period is only -.13. All told, over the entire 1989 to

2000 era, the correlation between reported mortality changes and GDP growth is -.55.

        The strong correlation between mortality change and economic growth begs a more

detailed analysis. What are the economic mechanisms that underlie the strong link between

economic growth and health? Why did the relationship get weaker over time? Any why is

Russia still such an outlier? These are the questions we proceed to examine.



        Deaths by Age, Cause, and Socioeconomic Status

        4
          There are substantial issues involved in measuring output changes across countries (Shleifer and
Treisman 2003). It would be better to use a measure other than official GDP, but we do not have the data
for all countries to do this. For several countries GDP data are missing for 1989, so Figure 3 uses 1990
data instead. Georgia, Bosnia-Herzegovina, FYR Macedonia, and Serbia are omitted due to missing data.

                                                    7
        As a start in understanding why mortality rose so rapidly, we present some more

disaggregated information on mortality in Russia; trends for the other mortality belt countries are

reported in the Appendix, and look similar. We look at the period from 1989 to 1994, the years

of the largest increase in death rates. Figure 4 shows changes in mortality rates by age, separately

for men and women. There has been a dramatic increase in prime age mortality in Russia. The

death rate for men aged 35-44 rose by 74 percent between 1989 and 1994. Similar increases

were seen throughout the other working ages. The pattern for women is similar, but the

magnitudes are smaller – mortality for 35-44 year old women rose by 59 percent over the period.

        The Russian elderly of the 1990s had very difficult lives. Born in a period spanning civil

war and revolution (1917-1921), the famines and purges of the 1930s, and the hardships of

World War II, it is possible that these catastrophic events impacted the future mortality of these

generations. Indeed, a substantial public health literature focuses on the impact of early life

events on late life mortality – either in utero (Barker, 1992) or in childhood (Kermack et al.,

2001). But the increase in mortality in the 1990s does not seem related to this factor. Mortality

among men aged 65-74 rose by only 25 percent between 1989 and 1994; for men aged 75-84,

mortality rates increased by 14 percent. For elderly women, mortality rates rose by 18 and 15

percent, respectively, in the 65-74 and 75-84 age groups. Indeed, the age group with the largest

increase in mortality was born in about 1950, after World War II and the worst of the hardships

of the Stalin era.

        Figure 5 shows data on cause of death, again differentially for men and women. Each bar

in the chart is the share of total increase in mortality accounted for by that cause between 1989

and 1994. For example, the first bar shows that 42 percent of the increase in male mortality was

the result of greater mortality from cardiovascular disease; within this category, 21 percent of the


                                                 8
total increase in male mortality (½ of the cardiovascular disease total) was due to the increase in

deaths due to ischaemic heart disease. Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in

Russia, as in the United States, so the importance of this change is not surprising. Still, the

magnitude of the increase in such a short period of time is unusual. We typically think of

cardiovascular disease as a long-term process responding to life events building up over many

years or decades; the Russian data suggest otherwise. Given the importance of cardiovascular

disease in accounting for the mortality crisis, we examine this factor extensively in our empirical

work.

        Second in importance is external causes of death. The most important items in this

category are accidental alcohol poisoning, unspecified violent deaths, homicide and suicide. A

well-hidden secret of the Soviet Union was the extremely high death rate due to external causes.

In 1989, for example, the standardized death rate due to external causes among men in Russia

was over three times the European Union average (200.3 deaths per 100,000 population versus

62.9 deaths per 100,000), and for women the rate was twice as high.

        Deaths due to external causes rose dramatically in Russia in the early 1990s, virtually

doubling for both men and women. These changes account for one-fifth (women) to one-third

(men) of the total increase in deaths between 1989 and 1994. Both suicide and homicide are

important across the region; by the mid-1990s Lithuania had achieved the dubious distinction of

having the highest male suicide rate in the world. We return to this cause, especially as it relates

to alcohol, at a later point.

        While many causes of death have increased, others fell. In all countries of Eastern

Europe and the former Soviet Union, infant and child mortality rates declined throughout the

1990s; indeed, without these declines the fall in life expectancy in the ‘mortality belt’ would


                                                  9
have been even more dramatic. Infants and the elderly are typically the most vulnerable groups

in the population. In countries facing economic shocks, mortality often increases in these ages

the most (Cutler et al. 2002). As in so many other ways, however, the countries of the former

Soviet Union are different.

        Official data do not differentiate deaths by socioeconomic status (nor do they in the

United States), but other evidence suggests that mortality rates increased the most among lower

socioeconomic groups. For example, Shkolnikov et al. (1998) and Plavinski et al. (2003) note

that men with low levels of education were disproportionately affected by the increase in

mortality. Data from the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (described below) support this

observation. Over the period 1995 - 2001, the average annual mortality rate of people aged 30-

55 was 0.74 percent. The mortality rate ranged from 1.86 percent of those with primary

education to 0.23 percent of those with higher education, reflecting a strong educational gradient

in mortality (Table 1).



        Sources of Data

        In the next sections, we assess different explanations for these patterns in mortality. We

use two sources of data. The first is national data from the 23 countries of the former Soviet

Union and Eastern Europe. The mortality data are from the WHO Mortality database and

national statistical yearbooks.5 We report regression results for mortality among prime-age men

(ages 25-64), since this is the group where the mortality crisis is most acute. We have also

examined mortality rates for women of the same ages. The results are similar so we do not report

them.


        5
            See www.euro.who.int/hfadb. We use the January 2004 data.

                                                  10
       As with any aggregate regression, it is difficult, if not impossible, to control for all the

other causes affecting mortality rates. This is particularly true in a setting like that of the former

Soviet Union, where economic and social changes were large and data quality is often poor. To

isolate the theories we consider more concretely, we consider cause-specific mortality in addition

to total mortality. We group mortality into three broad causes: cardiovascular disease, external

causes of death (homicide, suicide, and accidental death), and all other.

       Economic and social variables from the same countries are from the WHO Health for All

Database (2004), the World Bank (2003), the EBRD Transition Report (2003) and the

TransMONEE database (2003). We discuss specific data series as appropriate below.

       The second source of data is panel data from the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey

(RLMS). The RLMS is a nationally representative panel survey from 1994 - 2002.6 The sample

comprises roughly 4,000 households and 11,000 individuals in each round. The RLMS contains

extensive information on income, health status, employment, and demographic characteristics of

individuals and families, as well as on individual behavior such as smoking and drinking.

       For families where there is at least one member surviving, the survey asks if anyone died

during the time period. We are thus able to identify deaths among the vast majority of multiple-

person households (about 85 percent of the population is in multiple-person households). Our

analysis of mortality in subsequent sections in based on these multiple-person households.7




       6
         There is an earlier panel component from 1992 to 1994, but we do not use this because
of the shortness of the panel and concern about data quality in that period. A detailed description
of the sampling design and implementation of the RLMS is available at the RLMS website at
http://www.cpc.unc.edu/rlms.
       7
         We stack each round of the survey so that each regression uses all rounds of the survey
and includes multiple observations on individuals. Standard errors are clustered by individual to
correct for these multiple observations.

                                                  11
Trends in mortality in the RLMS match trends from the aggregate data, although the level of

mortality in the RLMS is 10 - 20 percent lower than the national data.

       In our longitudinal data, we control for a number of individual characteristics: age,

education, income,8 year of survey, and region of the country. We also control for past medical

events such as whether the person ever had a heart attack, was diabetic, or had a stroke.



II.    Suspect 1: The Acute Medical Care System

       We start with the most obvious suspect: perhaps the economic changes substantially

disrupted the medical care system in a way that made medical treatment less effective.9 One of

the Soviet Union’s most remarkable achievements was the development of a universal health

care system that extended across the country and provided health care even in the remotest areas

of the northern and eastern territories. The system provided the population with a wide range of

medical services and was particularly successful in reducing deaths due to infectious diseases and

deaths in infancy. The only medical expenditures paid for out-of-pocket were those for

(subsidized) prescription drugs and for small nominal payments made to hospital staff to ensure




       8
          The income control perhaps warrants some comment. In the cross-country data, we do
not control for GDP, since we are interested in the total effect of the variables we examine on
mortality, not the partial effect controlling for economic conditions. One could make the same
argument about income in the micro data. We include the income control, however, to pick up
the person’s relative position in society. As noted above, relative position is strongly indicative
of mortality, for reasons that may go beyond the specific theories we consider. In practice, our
results are relatively similar if we include or omit the control for income. For example, the
alcohol consumption measure is statistically significant at less than the 5 percent level with
nearly identical coefficients whether or not the income control is included in the regression.
       9
           The medical care explanation has been suggested by Ellman (1994).

                                                 12
better care. Significant payments to doctors (on the order of one- to two-months' average wage)

were reported but were relatively uncommon.10

       An obvious candidate to explain the upsurge in mortality in the former Soviet Union is

thus a collapse of the health care system during the transition, resulting from the disintegration of

the USSR and the tremendous budgetary pressures of the early 1990s that led to drastic cutbacks

in health care financing in many countries and a vast increase in out-of-pocket expenditures for

patients. Indeed, the health system seems to have deteriorated since the collapse of the Soviet

Union. For example, there are reports that many hospitals and clinics in the former Soviet Union

have opened fee-paying services to compensate for funding shortfalls. Data from the Russian

Longitudinal Monitoring Survey indicate a dramatic increase in the number of patients paying for

care in Russia and in the price of that care: in 1992 only 6.2 percent of individuals hospitalized

in the month prior to the survey reported that they paid money for medical care or treatment

while in the hospital; of those that paid, the median payment amounted to 34 percent of the

median monthly per capita income. By 1998, 45 percent of respondents indicated that they had

paid for medical care while in the hospital, and the payment exceeded two-thirds of the median

monthly per capita income (Table 2). Anecdotal evidence indicates that, while modern drugs are

prescribed for conditions such as cardiovascular disease, many patients cannot afford to purchase




  10
     That is not to say that the system worked entirely well. The fundamental nature of central
planning hampered the effectiveness of the health care system in many areas. The development
of the health care system reflected the overall growth strategy of the country, emphasizing
quantity of care – growth in indicators such as doctors and hospital beds per capita – rather than
quality of care; central planners also set quantitative targets for the number of beds occupied and
the number of procedures performed in hospitals (Twigg 1998). Further, there were waits for
medical care, as for everything else in the Soviet Union. Knaus (1981) and Ryan (1989) describe
the Soviet health care system in the 1970s and 1980s.

                                                 13
them (Reiss et al. 1996). Funding difficulties may also have led to a decrease in the capacity and

effectiveness of the health care system itself.

        Medical care might affect mortality through several channels. Some medical care is

preventive: anti-hypertension medication reduces the probability of a stroke or heart attack, for

example. Other care is curative, for example high-tech treatment of people who have had an

adverse event. We consider the acute care setting first, and then return to preventive care.

        To assess the importance of changes in acute care in explaining the mortality crisis, one

would ideally like to identify whether the increase in death rates was due to an increase in cases

(e.g., an increase in the number of heart attacks, strokes, etc.), or to an increase in the fatality

rate; the latter would suggest a particularly large role for declining health care services in the

mortality crisis.

        Although data are limited, evidence suggests that the fatality rate changed little during the

1990s. For example, an extensive study of stroke incidence and mortality in Novosibirsk

(located in western Siberia) and northern Sweden between 1987 and 1994 found that while the

case fatality rate was significantly higher in Novosibirsk (28-43 percent) than in Sweden (12-21

percent), case fatality rates remained unchanged over the period in Novosibirsk; the substantial

increase in stroke mortality in Novosibirsk was due to an increase in attacks rather than to higher

fatality rates (Stegmayr et al. 2000). Indeed, medical care for some types of illnesses apparently

improved in Russia in the 1990s: the recent decline in childhood leukemia deaths, for example,

is attributed to improvements in care (Shkolnikov et al. 1999).

        To examine this hypothesis further, we employ data from Russia and the other countries

of the former Soviet Union and relate changes in prime-age male mortality to the change in the

maternal mortality rate (death during childbirth). Since maternal mortality is almost entirely


                                                   14
preventable through medical intervention, the change in the maternal mortality rate is a good

measure of the collapse of the medical care system (CITE). The maternal mortality rate did not

change appreciably in Russia over the 1990s, rising from 49.0 deaths per 100,000 live births in

1989 to 53.3 deaths in 1995, then falling to 39.7 deaths by 2000.11 This suggests that the capacity

of the basic health care system remained essentially unchanged.

       Using the maternal mortality rate as a proxy for the state of the health care system, the

first column of Table 3 reports the relation between log changes in prime age male mortality and

log changes in maternal mortality between 1989 and 2000. Our sample consists of the 22

countries of the former Soviet bloc for which data are reliable. There is little relation between

maternal mortality and male mortality. Indeed, adult male mortality actually fell in countries

where maternal mortality rose, though not statistically significantly.

       We considered other measures of the medical care system as well, focusing more directly

on the availability of medical care resources. The second column relates the change in male

mortality to the change in public and private medical spending. Medical spending will change

with both demand and supply, but our hope is that the massive changes in the structure of society

in most former Soviet bloc countries make the supply changes more important over this time

period.12 The results are similar; more spending does not lower mortality. Indeed the coefficient

on public health expenditures is positively related to the male prime-age death rate, indicating

that reverse causality may be an issue. In any case, there is little evidence to support the




       11
         Note that the maternal mortality in rate is high compared with that of the U.S., where
the maternal mortality rate in 2000 was 9.8 per 100,000 live births.
       12
          We have also experimented with direct quantity measures, including the number of
hospital beds per capita and the number of doctors per capita, with similar results.

                                                 15
hypothesis that a breakdown in the acute health care system is a primary cause of the mortality

crisis.

          The situation with preventive medications is more difficult to assess. The Russian

Longitudinal Monitoring Survey indicates whether the person takes any medication, but not the

type of medication. Still, use of any medication did not decline in Russia. In both 1993 and

2000, about 38 percent of Russian adults reported taking any medication. As noted below, this is

consistent with evidence that traditional risk factors for cardiovascular disease did not change.



III.      Suspect 2: Traditional Risk Factors for Cardiovascular Disease

          The finding that the case fatality rate for cardiovascular disease did not increase indicates

that there was an increase in the incidence of serious cardiovascular disease. One thus moves

naturally to risk factors for cardiovascular illness. Five traditional risk factors for cardiovascular

disease have been identified in the (western) literature: hypertension or high blood pressure, high

cholesterol, diabetes, obesity, and smoking.



          Obesity

          The RLMS collects data on BMI, which we examine over the time period.13 Figure 6

shows trends in the share of the population who are overweight or obese in Russia over the 1993

- 2000 period for prime-age adults.14 From 1993 to 2000, obesity increased slightly for both men


          13
          In addition to its direct importance, obesity is related to high blood pressure, high
cholesterol, and diabetes.
          14
          The categories in Figure 6 are based on the following WHO definitions: overweight if
Body Mass Index (weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared) is greater than 25
and less than 29.9; obese if BMI is 30 or higher. Data from the Russian Longitudinal Mortality
Survey suggest that mortality begins to increase after BMI reaches 31 for men (see Table 4).

                                                   16
and women, apparently due to a shift from the ‘overweight’ category into obesity.15 At the same

time, the RLMS also indicates little change in the share of people who are underweight over the

period, suggesting that diminished ability to purchase the calories required for adequate nutrition

is not the explanation for the mortality crisis.16

        The RLMS data allow one to estimate the relation between weight and mortality in

Russia. The first column of Table 4 reports odds ratios for death among men in the RLMS

data.17,18 There is a U-shaped relation between BMI and mortality risk, as is found in western

countries as well. But the very slight change in obesity predicts only minor changes in mortality

risk: the BMI change over the 1990s predicts an increase in mortality rates of only .02 percent,

suggesting that obesity can be ruled out as a primary cause of the mortality crisis.



        Tobacco




        15
         Note that the level of obesity among Russian men is much lower than that in the United
States: in 2000, 12 percent of Russian men age 25-64 were obese, compared with 25 percent of
U.S. men in 2001 (Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2003). For women, 28.5 percent of
Russian women were obese compared with 24.7 percent of U.S. women.
        16
         Other studies have corroborated the finding that overall nutritional status in Russia is
remarkably resilient to the extreme fluctuations in household income that families have
experienced in the last decade (Dore, Adair and Popkin 2003; Thomas and Stillman 2004).
        17
         The Appendix reports similar regressions for women. The findings are qualitatively
and quantitatively similar.
        18
         The interpretation of odds ratios is as follows: for a dummy variable such as “poor
health” in Table 4, an odds ratio of 1.91 indicates that the odds of dying are 91 percent greater
when the individual is in poor health than if not. For continuous variables, such as the odds ratio
of 1.06 on age, the odds of dying increase by 6 percent for each yearly increase in age.

                                                     17
       Smoking is associated with higher rates of cardiovascular disease, along with many

cancers.19 Russians men smoke much more than European men – the ratio is about 2 to 1.

Russian women smoke less than their European counterparts, despite the higher rate of

circulatory disease deaths. However, while high levels of smoking among men may partly

explain the high level of cardiovascular mortality in Russia, changes in smoking rates seem

unlikely to explain the sharp increase in cardiovascular mortality rates in the early 1990s. Use of

tobacco products did not increase greatly in Russia over the 1990s.20 As Figure 7 shows, the

share of adult males who report smoking cigarettes every day was flat at about 60 percent, and

the share of women who smoke increased only moderately.21 We thus attach little importance to

the smoking explanation.



       Hypertension, High Cholesterol, and Diabetes

       Data on other cardiovascular disease risk factors in countries of the former Soviet Union

are difficult to obtain. Even in western countries, precise data on the prevalence of elevated risk



       19
         Data from the Russian Longitudinal Mortality Survey, reported in Tables 4 and
Appendix Table 1, confirm this finding: smoking increases the odds of dying by 60 percent for
men and by nearly 3 times for women compared with non-smokers. A study of death certificates
in Udmurtia (in the Urals) also confirmed that higher rates of smoking significantly increase the
odds of dying from cardiovascular disease (Shkolnikov et al. 2001b).
       20
          Smoking-related deaths almost certainly evolve over the long periods of time; the
western literature suggests a 20 to 25 year lag between smoking trends and mortality (???). But
lung cancer death rates in Russia have fallen sharply since the early 1990s, suggesting the
cardiovascular disease mortality increase is not a result of a long-term response to smoking
trends (Shkolnikov et al. 1999).
       21
          The Novosibirsk study reached similar conclusions. Smoking rates among Novosibirsk
men are far higher than those of Swedish men (56 percent versus 21 percent daily smokers,
respectively), but this rate remained stable over time. Among women, the smoking rate in
Novosibirsk doubled, from 3 percent to 6 percent, but remained much lower than the Swedish
level of 28 percent (Stegmayr et al. 2000).

                                                18
are sparse, since most people with moderately elevated risk are asymptomatic, and thus may not

make their way into the medical system. Still, the evidence that we have suggests that these

traditional risk factors did not change materially, and indeed that they are no higher in Russia and

the Baltics than in western populations. For example, the Novosibirsk stroke study found not

only that many stroke risk factors were lower in the Novosibirsk population than in the Swedish

population, but that these risk factors remained stable or even improved in the Novosibirsk

population over the period (Stegmayr et al. 2000).22 Epidemiological studies of cardiovascular

risk factors in the Baltic countries also find few differences in traditional risk factors between

these and western populations, as well as mildly favorable trends in these risk factors throughout

the 1990s (Kristenson et al. 1997; Volozh et al. 2002; Domarkiené 1993).



        Summary

        The surprising finding from these data is that traditional risk factors explain relatively

little of the increase in mortality in Russia. This leads us, as it has others, to consider non-

traditional risk factors for mortality.



IV.     Suspect 3: Alcohol

        The risk factor that has drawn the most attention in possibly explaining Russia’s mortality

crisis is alcohol. Alcohol consumption can affect mortality in many ways. Alcohol is a direct



        22
         For example, total cholesterol levels were lower in the Novosibirsk population than in
Sweden, and while these levels declined in both populations over the period, the decline in
Novosibirsk exceeded that in Sweden. There is a higher prevalence of hypertension among the
Russian population than the Swedish population, but again this prevalence decreased in
Novosibirsk significantly from 1987 through 1994 (while stroke attack incidence in Novosibirsk
increased by more than 50 percent over these years).

                                                  19
cause of many accidental deaths. In addition, some recent evidence suggests that heavy alcohol

consumption – especially binge drinking – could have lead to increased cardiovascular disease

mortality.

       Alcohol consumption is slightly lower in Russia than in Europe,23 but the composition of

alcohol consumed differs markedly. Compared to their European counterparts, Russians

consume a great deal more alcohol in the form of spirits rather than as beer or wine (Figure 8). In

addition, alcohol consumption in Russia is much more likely to be ‘binge drinking’ than in

Europe – 120 grams or more of hard alcohol per occasion.24 While moderate alcohol may be

good for health, binge drinking could well be harmful.

       Figure 9 shows the trend in annual consumption of alcohol (in liters of pure alcohol per

year) from two sources: the official data from the WHO, and tabulations from the RLMS.25 The

WHO data have the advantage of being present for all countries, but they have a potentially

major drawback in being based on official alcohol sales. Many former Soviet countries

experienced a flood of imports in the early 1990s, and these imports are believed to be omitted

from the official measure of alcohol consumption.26 Alcohol consumption in the RLMS may


       23
        For example, according to the WHO data, per capita consumption of pure alcohol in
Russia was 10.8 liters per capita, compared with 11.1 liters per capita in the European Union in
2000.
       24
          This definition is based on the epidemiological literature (Malyutina et al. 2001;
Malyutina et al. 2002). We also defined a second binge drinking measure based on 160 or more
grams of alcohol per day; the results were nearly identical to those reported here and are omitted
for brevity.
       25
         The RLMS asks individuals whether they drank in the last 30 days, and if so, how many
grams of various types of alcohol they usually consumed in a day. Total alcohol consumption is
obtained by converting grams of beer, wine, vodka etc. into grams of pure alcohol based on the
alcohol content of each.
       26
       Russia’s official measure of alcohol consumption does include estimates of unrecorded
consumption. In addition, alcohol consumption data on Kazakhstan appear to be substantially in

                                                20
also be underestimated if individuals fail to report their alcohol consumption completely. For

comparison purposes, the graph also shows the prime age male death rate.

       Both surveys show a substantial increase in alcohol consumption in the early 1990s – on

the order of 25 - 30 percent between 1992 and 1994. The increase in alcohol consumption in the

early 1990s is consistent with a substantial reduction in price: the relative price of alcohol fell by

58 percent between December 1990 and December 1994. Using the WHO data, the change in

alcohol consumption and the price of alcohol between 1990 and 1994 implies a price elasticity of

demand for alcohol of -.36, which seems plausible. Increased alcohol consumption may also be

related to the increased political and economic uncertainty in Russia in the early 1990s as the

transition to a market economy began in earnest. Both surveys also show a reduction in alcohol

consumption between 1994 and 1996; this corresponds to a relative increase in alcohol prices.

       The RLMS and WHO data show a different trend after 1996, with alcohol consumption

decreasing substantially in the RLMS until 1998 and then increasing thereafter. The WHO data

show a smooth increase over most of the period. Over the entire 1992 - 2000 time period,

alcohol consumption increased in Russia by between 27 percent (using the RLMS data) and 63

percent (using the WHO data).

       The RLMS data in particular track closely the changes in the male standardized death rate

over time: alcohol consumption increased, and so did mortality. The Appendix shows alcohol

consumption for other Soviet bloc countries. Alcohol consumption increased significantly in

some of the ‘mortality belt’ countries in the early 1990s – in particular, in Lithuania, Moldova

and Russia – while it changed little or declined in the countries of Central and Southern Europe.

This too is suggestive of an alcohol-based explanation for the mortality crisis.



error, so we omit that country from this part of the analysis.

                                                 21
        Alcohol and Violent Deaths

        One clear case where alcohol may affect mortality is through violent death. Accidental

alcohol poisoning represents 7 percent of the increase in male mortality between 1989 and 1994,

and 6 percent of the increase in female mortality. In addition, alcohol may play some role in

other violent deaths as well, either by instigating murder or suicide, or as a disguised cause of

them.

        The cross-country data help shed light on the importance of alcohol in death from

external causes. The first column of Table 5 shows the relation between changes in alcohol

consumption and changes in death from external causes. The coefficient on alcohol consumption

is positive, but not statistically significant. Still, the coefficient is large; the 45 percent increase

in alcohol consumption in Russia between 1989 and 2000 (using the WHO data) is predicted to

account for 34 percent of the increase in all external causes of death.27

        For 2000 - 2002 the RLMS also provides information on causes of death; we exploit

these data to investigate the relation between alcohol consumption and accidental deaths.

Because the sample size and number of deaths over this period is limited, we restrict the analysis

to men only. The first three columns of Table 6 report logistic models for the probability of

accidental death in the RLMS. Alcohol consumption is positively and significantly related to

accidental deaths, as shown in column (1). As column (2) shows, this is particularly related to

binge drinking. Men who binge drink are nearly four times more likely to die of accidental

deaths than are people who do not drink. Comparing the coefficients from the RLMS regressions


        27
         This figure is calculated by multiplying the coefficient on alcohol consumption by the
log change in alcohol consumption in Russia over this period (.432 x .450 = .194), and dividing
by the log change in external cause mortality in Russia (.194/.565 = .34). The contributions of
other factors to the increase in death rates in Russia based on the cross-country regressions,
discussed below, are calculated similarly.

                                                   22
with those of the cross-country regressions, the former indicate that the increase in alcohol

consumption in Russia between 1989 and 2000 (as measured by the WHO data) accounts for

approximately 8 percent of the increase in accidental deaths among prime-age men during this

period; the latter indicates that alcohol consumption accounts for 34 percent of the increase in

accidental deaths.28



         Alcohol and Cardiovascular Disease

         While studies show that moderate alcohol consumption has favorable effects on health,

some evidence suggests that binge drinking may be harmful to cardiovascular health. McKee

and Britton (1998) review the epidemiological literature on the relationship between alcohol

consumption and cardiovascular mortality and conclude that there is a physiological mechanism

for a relationship between alcohol consumption, particularly binge drinking, and increased risk of

death due to cardiovascular disease.29 Arrhythmias and heart attacks seem particularly related to

binge drinking. A small case-control study of adult male deaths in Udmurtia confirmed that

cardiovascular deaths are strongly associated with heavy drinking (Shkolnikov et al. 2001b).

Further, the number of cardiovascular deaths among men in Russia in 1993 - 1995 was

significantly higher on Saturdays, Sundays, and Mondays than on other days of the week, which

the authors argue is likely due to increased alcohol consumption on weekends (Chenet et al.

1998).


         28
          Because the coefficients on the logistic regressions are not directly comparable with
those of the cross-country regressions, we re-estimate the RLMS regressions as linear probability
models in order to calculate the contribution of each coefficient to the probability of dying.
         29
          This mechanism operates through the increased risk of thrombosis and hemorrhagic
stroke which result from excessive alcohol consumption, as well as through the reduced
protective actions of HDL (“good”) cholesterol which occur with heavy drinking.

                                                23
        Other researchers, however, have disputed the claim that Russia’s high cardiovascular

mortality is due to excessive alcohol consumption. Bobak and Marmot (1999) point out that the

similar relative increase in mortality among men and women in Russia is inconsistent with an

alcohol-based explanation, since Russian women drink far less than Russian men. A similar

conclusion comes from looking across regions of the former Soviet Union. Among the former

Soviet bloc countries are Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, both Muslim countries where reported

alcohol consumption is low, particularly consumption of spirits: per capita consumption of

spirits was .02 and .01 liters of pure alcohol, respectively, in Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan in

2000, and total alcohol consumption was one-tenth the Russian level. Still, cardiovascular

disease mortality in these countries rose by 23 and 25 percent respectively between 1989 and

1994.

        Bobak and Marmot also show that the alcohol effect would have to be much greater to

explain the increase in cardiovascular disease mortality: not only would the prevalence of heavy

drinking have had to have increased from 20 to 50 percent of the population, but the harmful

effects of alcohol consumption (i.e. the relative risk) would have had to have more than doubled

as well, which seems implausible.

        In addition, a study of men aged 25-64 living in Novosibirsk who were followed between

1985 and 1994 found a higher risk of cardiovascular disease death in a small group of frequent

heavy drinkers, but not among binge drinkers (Malyutina et al. 2002). Since frequent heavy

drinkers – defined as drinking at least 120 gram of ethanol per occasion at least three times per

week – make up only 5 percent of all drinkers and 4 percent of all Russian men, this study

concluded that alcohol is unlikely to provide the sole explanation for the increase in mortality in

Russia; the authors estimate that even if the rates of frequent heavy drinking are five times higher


                                                 24
than estimated based on surveys, it is still the case that alcohol consumption can explain at most

8 percent of deaths from cardiovascular disease. Finally, the authors of a study of cholesterol

levels in St. Petersburg argue that the substantial decline in HDL (“good”) cholesterol levels

observed among the population in the 1990s contradicts an alcohol-based explanation for the

Russian mortality, since regular consumption of alcohol raises the level of HDL cholesterol

(Plavinski et al. 1999).

        Both our cross-country and longitudinal data provide evidence on the link between

alcohol consumption and cardiovascular disease mortality. The second column of Table 5 shows

the impact of alcohol consumption on cardiovascular deaths using the cross-country sample. The

coefficient is positive, but not statistically significant (p value = .122). The magnitude is

relatively large, however. An increase in alcohol consumption like that seen in Russia would

increase cardiovascular disease mortality by 10 percent.

        The micro data from the RLMS (Table 6) suggest no impact of alcohol consumption on

cardiovascular mortality, even from binge drinking. The coefficient on alcohol consumption

suggests a slight protective effect of drinking for cardiovascular health, but is not statistically

significant.



        Total Effect

        The total effect of alcohol consumption on mortality in the international data is shown in

Table 3. In the cross-country data, alcohol consumption has a positive, statistically significant

effect on total mortality. The coefficient is large: it implies that the increase in alcohol

consumption in Russia explains about 25 percent of the increase in mortality in Russia between

1989 and 2000.


                                                  25
       The RLMS data also suggests an effect of alcohol consumption on mortality. The second

column of Table 4 adds a measure of alcohol consumption to the regression in the first column.

Alcohol is positively and statistically significantly associated with mortality.30 Using the

coefficient on alcohol consumption from a linear probability estimate of this model, an increase

in alcohol of the magnitude seen in Russia over 1989 - 2000 is predicted to increase mortality by

12.6 percent, or 22.3 percent of the total increase in mortality. The estimates from the micro and

macro data are thus consistent:31 in total, about one-quarter of the increase in Russia stems from

the increase in alcohol consumption over the 1990s.



V.     Suspect 4: The Composition of the Diet

       While weight has fluctuated little in Russia over the course of the transition, Russian

households have responded to the income shocks by shifting the composition of their diets

towards cheaper foods. This dietary shift may be one of the causes of the increase (and

subsequent decrease) in cardiovascular mortality among the population.

The Russian diet has long been low in fruit and vegetable content, due to the difficulty of

growing such foods in the Russian climate and the priority placed by the country’s leadership,

beginning with Khrushchev, on increasing the consumption of meat and dairy products. As a

result, research has shown that severe antioxidant deficiencies exist in some Russian




       30
          In other results (not shown), we have divided alcohol into different types. Vodka and
samogon (homemade alcohol) seem to be most harmful to health, while wine consumption
appears to be protective.
       31
         In the micro data, there does not seem to be a particular harm from binge drinking,
although the measurement of binge drinking may be somewhat problematic.

                                                 26
populations.32 Although fruits and vegetables became much more widely available in Russia as

market reforms were implemented in the early 1990s, consumption of these goods remained

extremely low in comparison with western countries and declined sharply during the first half of

the decade: average per capita consumption of vegetables in Russia fell from 85 kilograms per

year in 1990 (75 percent of the US level) to 71 kilograms in 1994 (Figure 10). Consumption

increased as incomes stabilized after 1994, then fell sharply again following the 1998 financial

crisis. As is evident from Figure 10, the changes in vegetable consumption closely track the

erratic changes in male life expectancy in Russia.

       Meat consumption is also much lower in Russia than in the west, and was declining over

the time period, from 60 percent of the US level in 1990 to 40 percent in 1997. Meat may have a

positive or negative effect on health, especially the fatty meats commonly consumed in Russia.

       While research on the impact of diet on health is not complete, some research suggests

that the composition of the diet may be an important risk factor for cardiovascular disease.

Ginter (1995, 1997) argues that antioxidant deficiency, stemming from the low level of fruit and

vegetable consumption in the former Soviet Union, may play an important role in the

development of cardiovascular disease, in particular that such a deficiency may interact with

other conditions in society (such as pollution, alcohol consumption, and smoking) to promote

cardiovascular disease development.    At least two recent studies suggest that these dietary


imbalances may translate into heightened risk for cardiovascular disease in the former Soviet

population. A study of 50-year old Lithuanian and Swedish men conducted in 1993-1994


       32
          For example a 1992 study found that 93 percent of men living in Karelia, Russia had
severe vitamin C deficiency, as compared with 2 percent of Finnish men in a neighboring region
(Matilainen et al. 1996).


                                                27
showed that plasma concentrations of antioxidant vitamins were lower in the Lithuanian men

than Swedish men, and that the Lithuanian men had a strikingly reduced resistance of LDL

(“bad”) cholesterol to oxidation. The authors argue that antioxidant deficiency likely contributes

to the much higher mortality rates from coronary heart disease among Lithuanian men compared

with Swedish men (Kristenson et al. 1997). A separate study of St. Petersburg residents showed

a dramatic increase in the number of men with dangerously low levels of HDL cholesterol in the

1990s: in 1986-1988 6 percent of St. Petersburg men age 40 to 49 had low levels of HDL

cholesterol; by 1995-1997 36.4 percent of men in this age group had low levels of HDL

cholesterol. The decline in HDL cholesterol levels was similar across all men in the 20 to 69 age

group, and for women as well (Plavinski et al. 1999).

       Dietary change may also be one of the few factors that can explain (in part) the widely

divergent patterns of mortality across Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Several

studies attribute the dramatic decrease in cardiovascular mortality in Eastern Europe to the

changes in diet that occurred following price liberalization (Bobak et al. 1997; Poledne and

Škodová 2000; Witold et al. 1998). In many countries, the prices of meat and dairy products

were heavily subsidized, and the availability of fruits and vegetables was limited. Price

liberalization, the removal of subsidies, and an increase in food imports led to a dramatic

reduction in the relative price of fruits and vegetables, and a significant increase in their

consumption. Combined with the relative increase in the price of meat and dairy products, these




                                                  28
changes led to a substantial improvement in the ratio of vegetable to animal fats consumed

among these populations.33

        We examine the importance of the dietary change hypothesis using the international data.

The WHO Health for All database estimates average fruit and vegetable availability per person

per year (in kilograms). For many countries in the former Soviet Union, these data are available

only beginning in 1992, so the change for some countries is over the 1992 - 2000 period. Both

the levels and changes in fruit and vegetable consumption differ markedly across countries and

over time: In Russia, for example, average fruit and vegetable consumption fell from 121 to 105

kilograms per capita between 1992 and 1994, then rose to 114 kilograms by 1998; in contrast, in

Slovenia the average consumption rose from 117 to 188 kilograms per capita between 1992 and

1998.

        The results are presented in the fourth column of Table 3. The coefficient on fruit and

vegetable consumption is negative as expected, but is statistically significant at only the 16

percent level. Even taken at face value, however, the impact of changes in the composition of

the diet is small. Fruit and vegetable consumption in Russia fell by less than 4 percent over the

entire time period. The implied change in mortality is less than 3 percent of the change in overall

prime-age male mortality between 1992 and 2000.

        As with alcohol consumption, we are interested in how fruit and vegetable consumption

affects particular causes of death. Table 5 shows that increased fruit and vegetable consumption

is statistically significantly negatively associated with cardiovascular disease mortality, as the

        33
         For example, in the Czech Republic, the average per capita consumption of butter fell
from 9.4 kg in 1989 to 5.4 kg in 1992 (Bobak et al. 1997), while consumption of fruit and
vegetables increased from 68 to 87 kg between 1989 and 1997 (Poledne and Skodova 2000). In
Poland, consumption of animal fat fell from 101 to 77 grams per day between 1989 and 1994,
while consumption of vegetable fat increased from 28 to 40 grams per day (Sekula et al. 1997).


                                                 29
theory suggests. Still, the coefficient implies that changes in fruit and vegetable consumption

explain only 2 percent of the increase in cardiovascular mortality among Russian men over this

period.

          While fruit and vegetable consumption cannot explain the increase in Russian mortality

over the entire time period, it might well be a factor in the initial effect of transition. Over the

1992-94 period, the decline in fruit and vegetable consumption in Russia can explain 28 percent

of the increase in cardiovascular disease mortality. And as noted above, the change in diet is a

distinguishing factor between Russia and Eastern Europe. If fruit and vegetable consumption in

Russia had mirrored that in Slovenia between 1992 and 2000, our regressions suggest that

Russian mortality would have fallen by nearly 10 percent over the 1990s, narrowing the prime-

age male mortality gap with eastern Europe by nearly 50 percent.34

          Unfortunately, we cannot examine the dietary composition theory using the RLMS data.

While the RLMS asks respondents to provide detailed information on the type and quantity of

food consumed in the previous 24 hours, these data have not yet been released for public use.

On the basis of the aggregate data, we conclude that changes in the composition of the diet

cannot explain the absolute increases in mortality in Russia, but helps explain some of the

divergence with other eastern European countries.



VI. Suspect 5: Material Deprivation

          34
         While dietary change may gradually affect health, the evidence described above for
Eastern Europe suggests that the effects of decreased fat consumption and increased fruit and
vegetable consumption may lead to a rapid decline in cardiovascular disease (Zatonski et al.
1998; Poledne and Skodova 2000). This is also consistent with the rapid decline in
cardiovascular disease mortality in German-occupied Norway during World War II, coincident
with the dramatic enforced decline in meat and dairy consumption in the country during those
years (Zatonski et al. 1998).


                                                  30
       The transition from communism led to a significant devaluation of human capital. In

Russia, for example, the wages of men with 30 or more years of work experience actually fell

below the wages of new entrants to the work force (Brainerd 1998). Coupled with this is a very

weak government safety net – weaker in Russia than in many other mortality belt countries.

Russia, for example, lacks a national means-tested benefit program for families living below the

poverty line. One hypothesis for increased mortality is thus that severe economic hardship

increased, and this led to increased mortality (Lynch et al., 2000).

       We noted above that the share of the Russian population that is underweight did not

change over the time period, but this is only one measure of material deprivation. It may be, for

example, that people kept up caloric intake but cut back on energy in winter or did more manual

labor at home. Our RLMS data allow us to examine the effect of additional aspects of material

deprivation on mortality. The fifth column of Table 4 includes various measures of hardship in

the mortality regressions – whether the family is in poverty or extreme poverty;35 whether the

family received subsidies for fuel; whether the family had to sell goods to obtain money for food;

and the share of total household expenditures on food. All of these variables are statistically

insignificant in these regressions and many of the coefficients are small in magnitude. These

results thus suggest that material deprivation is unlikely to explain the upsurge in mortality in

Russia and the other former Soviet republics.



VII. Suspect 6: The Stress of Transition


       35
         The poverty measure is based on the official Russian poverty measure, which in turn
uses a representative subsistence food basket and a food to total expenditure multiplier to
determine the poverty line. A household is in extreme poverty if its income is less than half of
the poverty line.


                                                 31
       Before 1989, Russians lived in a country that provided complete economic security:

unemployment was virtually unknown, pensions were guaranteed and provided an adequate

standard of living, and macroeconomic instability had never affected the average citizen. The

economic reforms implemented in 1992 created an upheaval in the country that, while beneficial

in many ways, changed the life course of virtually every citizen in the country. For the first time,

the average Russian confronted a completely unpredictable future.

       Unpredictability is an example of a psychosocial factor that may influence health. The

link between stress and health is the most explored factor. ‘Stress’ arises when an individual

perceives a discrepancy between the demands of a situation and the physical or psychological

capacity to respond to those demands (Shapiro 1995). A high level of stress is related to the

development of cardiovascular disease – even independent of its effect on dietary and lifestyle

factors -- although the physiological mechanisms for the link between stress and cardiovascular

disease remain unclear (Labarthe 1998; Sapolsky, 1998).

       Other psychosocial factors may affect health as well. Greater despair or hopelessness

among middle-aged men is associated with higher risk of heart disease and heart attack, as well

as earlier onset of artery disease, even controlling for risk factors such as alcohol consumption

and smoking (Everson et al. 1997).36 People who have more social support are similarly likely

to have improved outcomes over those with less support (Berkman et al., 1992).

       A number of indicators suggest increased psychosocial problems in the former Soviet

Union, especially Russia. As noted above, suicide rates rose dramatically in the early years of

transition, particularly among middle-aged men. By 1994, in fact, the suicide rate for Russian


       36
          Increased stress may also induce behavior with adverse health consequences, such as
reckless driving and increased alcohol consumption. These effects are captured in our previous
analysis.

                                                 32
men aged 50-54 was over six times higher than that in the U.S. (139 and 22.5 deaths per 100,000

population, respectively). In contrast, suicide rates remained constant or fell in Eastern Europe;

in Hungary, for example – a country with one of the highest suicide rates in the region

historically – the suicide rate for men aged 25-64 fell from 84.4 per 100,000 population in 1989

to 65.0 in 1995.

        Russians also tend to have more negative expectations about the future than do their East

European counterparts. The Central and East European Barometer (CEEB) program has

conducted surveys of Russia and Eastern European countries beginning in the early 1990s and

ending in 1996. Among the questions asked is one about expectations of future financial

circumstances: “Over the next twelve months, do you expect that the financial situation of your

household will: (1) get a lot better; (2) get a little better; (3) stay the same; (4) get a little worse;

(5) get a lot worse.” The average in Russia is nearly 3.5, among the highest on the list and far

more pessimistic than the more successful East European countries such as the Czech Republic

and Slovenia (Figure 11).

        Cross section data also suggest that expectations about the future may play a role in

mortality increases. Figure 12 shows that prime-age people are the most pessimistic age group in

Russia, even more so than the elderly.

        To examine the role of psychosocial factors in explaining health in Russia, we relate

mortality rates across countries to suicide rates. Figure 13 shows the relation between changes in

suicide and overall mortality (less death from suicide), and Table 3 shows the regression. The

male suicide rate is positively and significantly correlated with the change in the overall death

rate. The coefficient is reasonably large; this proxy for stress explains nearly one-quarter of the




                                                   33
increase in mortality in Russia over the time period.37 As Table 5 shows, suicide is significantly

correlated with other external causes of death,38 but not cardiovascular disease mortality.

       Understanding which factors lie behind this relation is more difficult, since we can only

test some theories. As noted above, diminished expectations about the future is one possible

mechanism. Figure 14 shows some tendency for countries with a worsening of expectations

about the future to have worse outcomes, though this relationship is not statistically significant

for all-cause mortality (Table 3). Poor expectations is a somewhat more significant predictor of

death from external causes (Table 5; p-value=.11).

       The RLMS data show a similar relation. The RLMS asks people: “Do you think that in

the next twelve months your family will live better than today, or worse?” Answers range from

“much better (=1)” to “much worse (=5).” We define an indicator of positive expectations which

is equal to one if the individual answered 1 or 2 (“will live somewhat better”) to this question.

The sixth column of Table 4 shows that the odds of dying are 30 percent lower for men who have

positive expectations about the future (the coefficient is significant at the 11.3 percent level); for

women the odds of dying are 50 percent lower (reported in the Appendix table). Note that this

effect is found controlling for income; this is not a finding that the poor are more likely to die

than the rich, rather that those with lower expectations are in worse health, even given their

income.




        37
          Suicide is a part of total mortality, but the impact here is substantially greater than just
the direct effect. The direct effect is about 4.5 percent of the mortality increase for men and 1
percent for women, as shown in Figure 5.
       38
         Note that the dependent variable in this regression is calculated as death rate due to
external causes minus the death rate due to suicide, so that the relationship between suicide and
external causes of death is not a mechanical one.

                                                  34
       While the data show clearly that expectations are important for health, the regressions are

also clear that changes in outlook for the future cannot be the whole explanation for the increase

in mortality in Russia. Figure 15 shows the trend in expectations in Russia using the CEEB data

through 1996, and similar data from the RLMS from 1994 to 2002. There was surprisingly little

change in future expectations in the early years of transition in Russia. Expectations improved

slightly through 1993, and then returned to their prior level. Expectations got worse in the

financial crisis of 1998, but after that, expectations improved substantially. This is at the same

time that mortality rates in Russia were increasing; in particular, male life expectancy at birth fell

from 61.3 years in 1998 to 58.5 years by 2002. Thus, the time series of the change in

expectations about the future does not match the time series of the change in mortality. 39

       Psychosocial distress may be related not to average expectations about the future, but to

the fear of very bad outcomes. Uncertainty associated with the possibility of becoming very poor

may create stress sufficient to result in harm to health. To test this hypothesis, we use data on the

change in the minimum wage as a percentage of the average wage across countries (for the

country-level regressions) and across Russia’s regions (for the individual data). We choose the

minimum wage as our measure of poor outcomes for several reasons. Besides its direct effect on

wages, many countries use the minimum wage as a base for setting the level of other social

benefits such as child care allowances and student stipends. And while other measures of

government support such as the level of unemployment benefits or government spending on

social benefits may be preferable, consistent measures of these variables across countries or

across Russia’s regions are not available.



       39
          There might, of course, be a lagged effect of expectations on health, but our data are not
refined enough to permit such an analysis.

                                                 35
        Minimum wages have changed dramatically in many transition countries over the 1990s.

For example, the minimum wage in the Soviet Union was 30 - 35 percent of the average wage in

the late 1980s; it fell to less than 6 percent of the average wage in Russia by 2000. Moreover,

throughout much of the 1990s the minimum wage in Russia was far below the ‘subsistence

minimum’ calculated by the government for determining poverty rates. For example, in 1996 the

minimum wage was 75,900 rubles per month, while the average subsistence minimum (which

varies by region and demographic group) was approximately 375,000 rubles per month. In

contrast, many of the East European countries maintained a relatively high minimum wage

throughout the 1990s, for example exceeding 34 percent in Poland and 42 percent in Hungary in

2001.

        Table 3 shows that the log change in the minimum wage as a share of the average wage is

negatively and significantly related to the change in mortality for all causes. It is also strongly

negatively related to the increase in cardiovascular disease deaths (Table 5). The coefficient on

minimum wages in the ‘all causes’ regression indicates that the reduction in the minimum wage

can explain 34 percent of the increase in deaths in Russia over the 1989 -2000 period.

        The last column of Table 4 shows analogous regressions using the RLMS micro data.

The minimum wage is statistically insignificant in the RLMS regressions for ‘all causes’, but,

consistent with the cross-country evidence, is statistically significant at the 7.8 percent level for

cardiovascular disease deaths and is insignificant for external cause deaths (Table 6). The

coefficient on the minimum wage for cardiovascular disease deaths is large; in linear probability

form, the change in the minimum wage can explain 98 percent of the increase in male

cardiovascular disease deaths in Russia, or roughly 40 percent of the increase in all male deaths

in the country.


                                                  36
       Recall that the minimum wage is not a proxy for poor individual circumstances. Direct

measures of material deprivation such as poverty and having enough food do not predict

mortality. Rather, mortality appears to be associated with the prospect of suffering a substantial

reduction in income, and hence living standards.

       Both our micro and macro data thus show clear impacts of psychosocial factors on

mortality. Our estimate is that psychosocial factors as a whole explain about one-quarter of the

increase in Russia over the 1990s. In looking at particular causes, the data are most consistent

with the idea that the tattering of the social safety net combined with great economic dislocation

have led to significant stress, and attendant poor outcomes. The exact mechanism linking these

factors, however, remains to be explored.



VIII. Conclusions

       Our analysis of mortality in Russia and other countries of the former Soviet Union leads

us to highlight two significant causes of the mortality crisis. The first cause is increased alcohol

consumption. Our results in the cross-country and micro data are fairly consistent; in each case,

about a quarter of the increase in mortality in Russia is due to increased alcohol use. Much of

this alcohol use is a reflection of the lower price of alcohol over time, though factors such as the

loosening of the Gorbachev-era restrictions on alcohol availability almost certainly played a role

as well. Increased stress from the transition to a market economy also seems to play a role in

Russia’s mortality crisis. The second factor is psychosocial stress, likely brought on by the

substantial changes in the economic environment and a material reduction in the social safety net.

We have a range of estimates of the impact of psychosocial distress on mortality, but a best guess

is perhaps that it can explain one quarter of the increase in mortality.


                                                 37
       Other theories find little support in our data. We find no evidence that a reduction in the

effectiveness of the medical care system is related to increased mortality. Nor do we find

evidence that a change in the composition of the diet is related to increases in Russian mortality,

though more favorable dietary changes in Eastern Europe seem to explain some of the good

demographic news enjoyed by those countries.

       The major remaining question is how to explain the approximately half of the mortality

reduction that is unaccounted for by the factors we identify. It is, of course, possible that the

factors we identify are the right ones, and that the uncertainty encompasses the full mortality

change. Alternatively, there may be factors beyond what we have considered that are important

in the Russian mortality crisis. Analysis of such factors will have to await the future.




                                                 38
                                          References

Anderson, Barbara A. and Brian D. Silver, “Issues of Data Quality in Assessing Mortality Trends
      and Levels in the New Independent States,” in J.-L. Bobadilla, C. Costello and F.
      Mitchell, eds., Premature Death in the New Independent States (National Academy
      Press, Washington, D.C., 1997), 120-55.

Badurashvili, I., M. McKee, G. Tsuladze, F. Mesle, J. Vallin and V. Shkolnikov, “Where There
      Are No Data: What Has Happened to Life Expectancy in Georgia Since 1990?” 2001.
      Public Health. 115, pp. 394-400.

Barker, David J.P., Fetal and Infant Origins of Adult Disease, London: BMJ Books, 1992.

Berman LF, Leo-Summers L, and Horwitz RI, “Emotional Support and Survival After
      Myocardial Infarction: A Prospective, Population-Based Study of the Elderly,” Annals of
      Internal Medicine, 1992, 117(12): 1003-1009.

Bobak, Martin, Zdenka Skodova, Zbvnek Pisa, Rudolf Poledne, Michael Marmot, “Political
       changes and trends in cardiovascular risk factors in the Czech Republic, 1985 - 1992,”
       Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 1997, 51: 272 - 277.

Bobak, Martin and Michael Marmot, “Alcohol and Mortality in Russia: Is It Different Than
       Elsewhere?” Annals of Epidemiology, Vol. 9, No. 6 (August 1999): 335 - 338.

Brainerd, Elizabeth, “Winners and Losers in Russia’s Economic Transition,” American
       Economic Review Vol. 88 no. 5 (December 1998), 1094 - 1116.

Chenet, Laurent; David Leon; Martin McKee; Serguei Vassin, “Deaths from Alcohol and
       Violence in Moscow: Socio-economic Determinants,” European Journal of Population
       14, 1998, 19-37.

Cornia, Giovanni Andrea and Renato Paniccià, “The Transition Mortality Crisis: Evidence,
       Interpretation and Policy Responses,” in Cornia, Giovanni Andrea and Renato Paniccià,
       eds., The Mortality Crisis in Transitional Economies (Oxford, UK: Oxford University
       Press, 2000), 3-37.

Cutler, David M. et al., “Financial Crisis, Health Outcomes and Ageing: Mexico in the 1980s
        and 1990s,” Journal of Public Economics, May 2002, 84(2): 279 - 303.

Domarkiené, Stanislava et al., “Trends in main cardiovascular risk factors among middle-aged
     Kaunas population between 1983 and 2002,” Medicina (2003), Vol. 39, no. 12, 1193 -
     1199.

Dore, Anna R., Linda S. Adair and Barry M. Popkin, “Low Income Russian Families Adopt
       Effective Behavioral Strategies to Maintain Dietary Stability in Times of Economic
       Crisis,” Journal of Nutrition 2003, 133: 3469 - 75.

                                               39
Ellman, Michael, “The Increase in Death and Disease Under ‘Katastroika’”, Cambridge Journal
      of Economics, August 1994, 18 (4): 329 - 355.

Everson, Susan A., George A. Kaplan, Debbie E. Goldberg, Riitta Salonen and Jukka T. Salonen,
      “Hopelessness and 4-Year Progression of Carotid Atherosclerosis: The Kuopio Ischemic
      Heart Disease Risk Factor Study,” Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology
      1997, 17: 1490 - 1495.

Field, Mark G. “The Health Crisis in the Former Soviet Union: A Report from the ‘Post-War’
       Zone,” Social Science and Medicine 41:11 (1995), 1469 - 1478.

Flanagan, Robert J. “Wage Structures in the Transition of the Czech Economy,” International
       Monetary Fund Staff Papers, December 1995, 42(4), 836-54.

Ginter, Emil, “High Cardiovascular Mortality in Postcommunist Countries: Participation of
        Oxidative Stress?” International Journal of Vit Nutr Res 1996, 66: 183-189.

Ginter, Emil, “Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Eastern Europe,” Nutrition, 1998, 14 (5):
        452-457.

Kermack W, McKendrick A, McKinley P. Death rates in Great Britain and Sweden. Some
      general regularities and their significance. International Journal of Epidemiology
      2001;30:678-683

Knaus, William A., Inside Russian Medicine (New York: Everest House, 1981).

Kristenson, Margareta; Zieden, Bo; Kucinskiene, Zita et al, “Antioxidant State and Mortality
       from Coronary Heart Disease in Lithuanian and Swedish Men: Concomitant Cross
       Sectional Study of Men Aged 50,” British Medical Journal 1997, 314: 629-??.

Labarthe, Darwin R., Epidemiology and Prevention of Cardiovascular Diseases: A Global
       Challenge (Aspen: Gaithersburg, MD, 1998).

Leon, David A.; Laurent Chenet; Vladimir M. Shkolnikov et al, “Huge Variation in Russian
       Mortality Rates 1984-94: Artefact, Alcohol, or What?” The Lancet 1997, 350: 383-388.

Lynch, JW, Davey Smith, G, Kaplan GA and House, JS, “Income Inequality and Mortality:
       Importance to Health of Individual Income, Psychosocial Environment, or Material
       Conditions,” British Medical Journal 2000, 320: 1200 - 1204.

Matilainen, T., E. Vartiainen, P. Puska, G. Alfthan, S. Pokusajeva, N. Moisejeva and M. Uhanov,
       “Plasma Ascorbic Acid Concentrations in the Republic of Karelia, Russia and in North
       Karelia, Finland,” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition (1996), 50, 115-120.




                                               40
Malyutina, Sofia, Martin Bobak, Svetlana Kurilovitch, Eva Ryizova, Yuri Nikitin and Michael
      Marmot, “Alcohol Consumption and Binge Drinking in Novosibirsk, Russia, 1985-95,”
      Addiction, vol. 96, no. 7 (July 2001), 987-995.

Malyutina, Sofia, Martin Bobak, Svetlana Kurilovitch, Valery Gafarov, Galina Simonova, Yuri
       Nikitin, and Michael Marmot, “Relation between heavy and binge drinking and all-cause
       and cardiovascular mortality in Novosibirsk, Russia: a prospective cohort study,” The
       Lancet, Vol. 360 (Nov. 9, 2002), 1448 - 1454.

McKee, M. and Annie Britton, “The Positive Relationship Between Alcohol and Heart Disease
     in Eastern Europe: Potential Physiological Mechanisms,” Journal of the Royal Society of
     Medicine, Vol. 91 (August 1998), pp. 402 - 407.

Plavinski, S.L.; Plavinskaya, S. I.; Richter, V. et al, “The Total and HDL-Cholesterol Levels in
       Populations of St. Petersburg (Russia) and Leipzig (Germany),” Nutr Metab Cardiovasc
       Dis 1999 9: 184-191.

Plavinski, S. L., Plavinskaya, S. I., and A. N. Klimov, “Social factors and increase in mortality in
       Russia in the 1990s: prospective cohort study,” British Medical Journal 326 (June 2003),
       1240 - 1242.

Poledne, R. and Z. Škodová, “Changes in nutrition, cholesterol concentration, and cardiovascular
       disease mortality in the Czech population in the past decade,” Nutrition 2000, 16: 785 -
       786.

Puska, Pekka; Matilainen, Tiina; Jousilahti, Pekka et al, “Cardiovascular Risk Factors in the
       Republic of Karelia, Russia, and in North Karelia, Finland,” International Journal of
       Epidemiology, 1993, 22 (6): 1048-1055.

Reiss, James Arthur, Nathan Every, and W. Douglas Weaver, “A comparison of the treatment of
        acute myocardial infarction between St. Petersburg, Russia and Seattle, Washington,”
        International Journal of Cardiology 53 (1996), 29 - 36.

Ryan, Michael, Doctors and the State in the Soviet Union (London: Macmillan, 1989).

Rutkowski, Jan, “High Skills Pay Off: The Changing Wage Structure During Economic
      Transition in Poland,” Economics of Transition, May 1996, 4(1): 89-111.

Sapolsky, Robert M., Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers, New York: W.H. Freeman and Company,
       1998.

Sekukla, Wlodzimierz, Katarina Babinska and Stefka Petrova, “Nutrition Policies in Central and
       Eastern Europe,” Nutrition Reviews November 1997: (II) S58 - S73.




                                                41
Shapiro, Judith, “The Russian Mortality Crisis and Its Causes,” in Anders Aslund, editor,
       Russian Economic Reform in Jeopardy? (London and New York: Pinter Publishers,
       1995), 149 - 178.

Shkolnikov, Vladimir M., David A. Leon, Sergey Adamets, Eugeniy Andreev, and Alexander
       Deev, “Educational Level and Adult Mortality in Russia: An Analysis of Routine Data
       1979 to 1994,” Social Science and Medicine 47 (3), 1998, 357-369.

Shkolnikov Vladimir M., Martin McKee, David A. Leon, and Laurent Chenet, “Why is the Death
       Rate from Lung Cancer Falling in the Russian Federation?” European Journal of
       Epidemiology 1999 (March),15(3):203-6.

Shkolnikov, Vladimir; Martin McKee; and David A. Leon, “Changes in Life Expectancy in
       Russia in the Mid-1990s,” The Lancet 357, March 24, 2001, pp. 917-921.

Shkolnikov, Vladimir; France Meslé; and David A. Leon, “Premature Circulatory Disease
       Mortality in Russia in Light of Population- and Individual-Level Disease,” in Weidner,
       G., Kopp S.M., and Kristenson, M., editors, Heart Disease: Environment, Stress and
       Gender (NATO Science Series, Series I: Life and Behavioural Sciences, 2001).

Shkolnikov, V.M., M. McKee, V. V. Chervyakov, and N. A. Kyrianov, “Is the Link Between
       Alcohol and Cardiovascular Death Among Young Russian Men Attributable to
       Misclassification of Acute Alcohol Intoxication? Evidence from the City of Izhevsk,”
       Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 2002, 56: 171-175.

Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Treisman, “A Normal Country,” NBER Working Paper 10057,
        October 2003.

Stegmayr, Birgitta; Tatyana Vinogradova; Malyutina, Sofia; Peltonen, Markku; Nikitin, Yuri;
      Asplund, Kjell, “Widening Gap of Stroke Between East and West: Eight-Year Trends in
      Occurrence and Risk Factors in Russia and Sweden,” Stroke January 2000, 2-8.

Thomas, Duncan and Steven Stillman, “The Effect of Economic Crises on Nutritional Status:
     Evidence from Russia,” unpublished manuscript, 2004.

Twigg, Judyth L., “Balancing the State and the Market: Russia’s Adoption of Obligatory
       Medical Insurance,” Europe-Asia Studies Vol. 50 (4), 1998, 583-602.

Watson, Peggy "Explaining Rising Mortality Among Men in Eastern Europe," Social Science
      and Medicine 41:7 (1995), 923 - 934.

Zatonski, Witold A., Anthony J. McMichael and John W. Powles, “Ecological study of reasons
       for sharp decline in mortality from ischaemic heart disease in Poland since 1991,” British
       Medical Journal Vol. 316, 4 April 1998, 1047 - 1051.




                                               42
Figure 1. Change in Male Life Expectancy at Birth, 1989 -1994,
           Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union




                              43
Figure 2a. Trends in male life expectancy at birth, western former Soviet Union,
                                   1958 - 2001




       Figure 2b. Trends in male life expectancy at birth, Central Asia,
                                 1960 - 2001




                                       44
Figure 2c. Trends in male life expectancy at birth, Eastern Europe, 1960 - 2001




                                      45
Figure 3. Correlation between log change in male standardized death rate
                 and log change in real GDP per capita




                                  46
Figure 4. Log change in death rate by age group, Russia, 1989 - 1994



   Men                                                                 Women




                                47
Figure 5. Contribution to change in mortality by cause, all ages, Russia, 1989 - 1994

                                       MEN




                                         48
WOMEN




 49
Figure 6. Trends in Overweight and Obesity, Age 25 - 64, RLMS data




          Figure 7. Trends in Smoking Rates, RLMS data




                               50
Figure 8. Composition of Alcohol Consumption, Russia
               and the European Union, 2000
   (liters of pure alcohol consumed per capita, age 15+)




Figure 9. Alcohol Consumption and Male Standardized
           Death Rate (Age 25-64) in Russia




                          51
Figure 10. Per Capita Vegetable Consumption (Kilograms Per Year) and Male Life
                     Expectancy at Birth, Russia 1990 - 2000




           Figure 11. CEEB Expectations Measure By Country, 1992




                                     52
Figure 12. RLMS Expectations Measure By Age

                   Men




                  Women




                    53
Figure 13. Correlation Between Changes in the Male Standardized
                 Death Rate and the Suicide Rate




Figure 14. Correlation Between Changes in the Male Standardized
              Death Rate and Future Expectations




                              54
Figure 15. Expectations Measures, Russian Men Age 25-64




                          55
                          Table 1. Deaths by Level of Education,
                    Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, 1995 - 2002


                                              Age 18 and over                   Age 30 - 55

Percentage died                                        1.58%                       0.74%

       With primary education                          5.14                        1.86
       With incomplete secondary education             1.79                        1.00
       With vocational education                       1.35                        0.82
       With secondary education                        0.82                        0.82
       With specialized secondary education            0.70                        0.35
       With higher education                           1.01                        0.23




                   Table 2. Trends in Payments for Medical Care in Russia
                  Sample: Individuals who were Hospitalized in the Last 30 Days



                                   1992       1993            1994    1995      1996       1998
 Percent that paid money for        6.2        9.6            13.9    16.1      24.2       45.4
 medical care or treatment


 Total amount paid, rubles         2,280      12,500      57,000     100,000   170,000    300,000
 (median)


 As % of median monthly per         34.2       29.1           40.7    36.6      44.2       66.7
 capita income


       Source: Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, Rounds 1, 3, 5, 6, 7 and 8.




                                               56
     Table 3. Cross-country Analysis of Factors Leading to Increased Mortality, 1989 - 2000
      Dependent variable: log change in standardized mortality rate, all causes, men age 25 - 64



Independent Variables                 (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)      (7)
(log changes)
Medical System
 Maternal mortality rate            -.059
                                    (.068)
 Public medical spending                      .087
                                             (.070)
 Private medical spending                     .016
                                             (.021)
Alcohol Consumption*                                  .243*
                                                      (.133)
Fruit and Vegetable                                            -.178
Consumption*                                                   (.121)
Expectations and stress
 Male suicide rate                                                       .274*
                                                                         (.138)
 Survey expectations**                                                             .452
                                                                                  (.483)
 Minimum wage/average wage                                                                 -.098*
                                                                                           (.051)
N                                     22       22       22       23       23       17        18
R2                                   .036     .112     .135     .095     .287      .082     .133
Note: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
* Change between 1992 and 2000 for most countries.
** Change between 1991/1992 and 1996 for most countries.




                                                 57
               Table 4. Logistic Regressions for Men Age 18 and Over Dying in the
                      Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, 1994-2002
                  [dependent variable: dummy variable for whether the person died]

Independent           (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)
variable
Age                 1.06***    1.06***    1.06***      1.06***    1.06***    1.06***    1.06***
                    (12.3)     (12.4)     (12.3)       (12.3)     (12.7)     (12.0)     (12.4)
Log(income per       -.903*     -.902*     -.905*       -.904*    -.920       -.906*     -.906*
capita)             (1.75)     (1.77)     (1.70)       (1.73)     (1.40)     (1.70)     (1.68)
Poor health          2.26***    2.27***    2.25***      2.25***    2.31***    2.26***    2.27***
(1=yes)             (6.34)     (6.39)     (6.26)       (6.28)     (6.47)     (6.35)     (6.34)
BMI                 -.729***   -.729***   -.729***     -.729***   -.732***   -.729***   -.728***
                    (3.66)     (3.63)     (3.64)       (3.66)     (3.65)     (3.62)     (3.64)
BMI squared        1.005***     1.01***    1.01***      1.01***    1.01***    1.01***    1.01***
                   (3.38)      (3.35)     (3.35)       (3.38)     (3.39)     (3.32)     (3.36)
Ever had a heart     1.50**     1.51**     1.50**       1.50**     1.53**     1.52**     1.51**
attack              (2.31)     (2.34)     (2.30)       (2.29)     (2.39)     (2.37)     (2.36)
Diabetic            1.76***    1.77***    1.76***      1.76***    1.79***    1.78***     1.77**
                    (2.44)     (2.48)     (2.45)       (2.42)     (2.52)     (2.49)     (2.48)
Ever had a          1.79***    1.81***    1.80***      1.79***    1.83***    1.80***    1.82***
stroke              (2.68)     (2.74)     (2.70)       (2.67)     (2.78)     (2.72)     (2.74)
Smoker               1.60***    1.57***    1.60***      1.61***    1.56***    1.56***    1.57***
                    (3.80)     (3.62)     (3.72)       (3.77)     (3.53)     (3.59)     (3.62)
Alcohol                –       1.001**    1.001**          –      1.001**    1.001**    1.001**
consumption                    (2.25)     (2.44)                  (2.16)     (2.22)     (2.25)
Binge drinker          –          –        -.908        -.972        –          –          –
                                           (0.80)       (0.24)
Positive               –          –          –            –          –        -.706        –
expectations                                                                  (1.59)
In poverty or          –          –          –            –         1.10        –          –
extreme poverty                                                    (0.59)
Received fuel          –          –          –            –        -0.974       –          –
subsidies                                                          (0.06)
Sold goods for         –          –          –            –         1.19        –          –
food                                                               (0.69)
% expenditures         –          –          –            –         1.15        –          –
on food                                                            (0.48)



                                                  58
Min. wage as %          –            –             –              –       –            –          1.01
of average wage                                                                                  (0.38)

No. died               432          432           432            432     432          432         432
N                    17092        17092          17092          17092   17092        17092       17092
Pseudo R2             .163         .165           .165           .163    .165         .165        .165

Coefficients are reported as odds ratios. Z-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated using
the Huber/White method and are corrected for individual clustering. All regressions include controls for
marital status, education level, year of the survey, and large region (North, Central, Volga, North
Caucuses, Urals, West Siberia, East Siberia, Moscow/St. Petersburg). A binge drinker is defined as
someone who reports their ‘usual’ alcohol consumption in the last 30 days as 120 grams or more of hard
alcohol per day.

*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level or less.
** Statistically significant at the 5percent level or less.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level or less.




                                                         59
  Table 5. Analysis of Cross Country Mortality, by Cause, 1989 - 2000
Dependent variable: log change in standardized mortality rate, men age 25 - 64

Independent Variables          External       Cardiovascular      All Other
(log changes):                 Causes            Disease           Causes
Alcohol consumption*             .432              .221             .177*
                                (.379)            (.137)            (.093)
N                                 22                22               22
R2                               .084             .079               .107



Fruit and Vegetable             -.145            -.277**            -.171
Consumption*                    (.304)            (.123)            (.137)
N                                 23                23               22
R2                               .008              .095              .090



Expectations and stress
 Male suicide rate**           .590***             .229             .230*
                                (.187)            (.156)            (.113)
N                                 23                23               23
R2                               .354              .125              .281



 Survey expectations***          .886              .338              .355
                                (.525)            (.605)            (.430)
N                                 17                17               17
R2                               .121              .031              .070



    Minimum wage/               -.013            -.184***           -.061*
      average wage              (.098)            (.059)            (.034)
N                                 18                18               18
R2                               .001              .261              .109




                                        60
Note: Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses.
* Change between 1992 and 2000 for most countries.
** For the external causes regression, the dependent variable is the mortality
rate for all causes minus the suicide mortality rate.
***Change between 1991/1992 and 1996 for most countries.




                                      61
                Table 6. Logistic Regressions for Men Age 18 and Over Dying in the
                 Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, By Cause, 2000-2002

DV:                              Accidental Deaths                                 CVD Deaths
                       (1)        (2)         (3)           (4)       (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)
Age                   1.02        1.02        1.02          1.02    1.08***    1.08***     1.08***     1.08***
                     (1.48)      (1.47)      (1.42)        (1.61)   (5.48)     (5.55)      (5.54)      (5.59)
Log(income per       -.629**    -.611*      -.611*      -.613**       1.24       1.25        1.24        1.18
capita)              (2.35)     (2.41)      (2.34)       (2.31)      (0.81)     (0.81)      (0.80)      (0.64)
Poor health           -.320       -.376      -.383         -.322      1.39       1.44        1.43        1.45
(1=yes)              (1.49)      (1.32)      (1.21)        (1.50)    (0.83)     (0.93)      (0.93)      (0.91)
BMI                  -.849       -.869       -.846         -.851     -.576      -.581       -.578       -.589
                     (0.43)      (0.38)      (0.46)        (0.43)    (1.57)     (1.50)      (1.51)      (1.48)
BMI squared           1.00        1.00        1.00          1.00      1.01       1.01        1.01        1.01
                     (0.33)      (0.29)      (0.38)        (0.33)    (1.49)     (1.43)      (1.42)      (1.40)
Ever had a heart       –           –           –             –        1.13       1.14        1.15        1.07
attack                                                               (0.23)     (0.27)      (0.27)      (0.13)
Diabetic               –           –           –             –      4.96***    5.04***     5.11***     4.86***
                                                                    (3.18)     (3.20)      (3.24)      (3.10)
Ever had a stroke      –           –           –             –        1.75       1.74        1.76        1.66
                                                                     (0.81)     (0.81)      (0.81)      (0.74)
Smoker                2.34        1.91        1.96          2.29    2.28**     2.22**        2.17*     2.27**
                     (1.60)      (1.27)      (1.35)        (1.56)   (2.10)     (1.95)       (1.90)     (2.06)
Alcohol             1.004**    1.003***        –       1.004***      -.997      -.996         –         -.997
consumption         (3.71)     (2.73)                   (3.74)       (0.85)     (0.93)                  (0.80)
Binge drinker          –         3.76**    4.62***           –         –         1.24        1.09         –
                                (2.32)     (2.69)                               (0.56)      (0.23)
Min. wage as %         –           –           –            -0.88      –          –           –         -.783*
of average wage                                            (0.88)                                       (1.77)

No. died               25          25          25           25        49          49          49          49
N                     5862       5862        5862          5862      5465        5566        5566       5465
Pseudo R2             .128        .149       .134          .130      .212        .210        .211        .219

 Coefficients are reported as odds ratios. Z-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated using
 the Huber/White method and are corrected for individual clustering. All regressions include controls for
 marital status, education level, year of the survey, and large region (North, Central, Volga, North
 Caucuses, Urals, West Siberia, East Siberia, Moscow/St. Petersburg). A binge drinker is defined as
 someone who reports their ‘usual’ alcohol consumption in the last 30 days as 120 grams or more of hard
 alcohol per day.
 *** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level or less.


                                                      62
** Statistically significant at the 5percent level or less.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level or less




                                                       63
Appendix Figure 1. Male and Female Life Expectancy at Birth, All Transition Countries

                                 A. Baltic Republics
        Men                                                          Women




                           B. Western Former Soviet Union
        Men                                                          Women




                                         64
      C. Central Asian Republics
Men                                Women




            D. Caucuses
Men                                Women




                 65
      E. Central Europe
Men                        Women




      F. Southern Europe
Men                        Women




             66
      G. Former Yugoslavia

Men                          Women




              67
Appendix Figure 2. Per Capita Alcohol Consumption, Selected Countries, Official Measure

          A. Baltic Republics                           B. European Former Soviet Union




          C. Central Europe                                    D. Southern Europe and Slovenia
      Appendix Table 1. Logistic Regressions for Women Age 18 and Over Dying in the
                    Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey, 1994-2002
               [dependent variable: dummy variable for whether the person died]

Independent              (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)           (5)           (6)
variable
Age                   1.09***        1.09***        1.09***       1.09***        1.09***      1.09***
                     (12.5)         (12.4)         (12.3)        (12.4)         (12.3)       (12.4)
Log(income per        -.842**        -.842**       -.843**        -.843**       -.845**       -.847**
capita)               (2.44)         (2.44)        (2.43)         (2.43)        (2.37)        (2.34)
Poor health            1.91***       1.91***        1.88***       1.88***        1.89***       1.92***
(1=yes)               (3.75)        (3.75)         (3.67)        (3.67)         (3.71)        (3.77)
BMI                   -.942***      -.942***       -.942***       -.942***      -.941***      -.943***
                      (3.87)        (3.87)         (3.89)         (3.89)        (3.89)        (3.82)
BMI squared           1.00***        1.00***       1.00***        1.00***       1.00***       1.00***
                      (3.20)         (3.20)        (3.21)         (3.21)        (3.24)        (3.15)
Ever had a heart       1.14           1.14           1.12          1.13           1.12         1.14
attack                (0.46)         (0.46)         (0.42)        (0.42)         (0.40)       (0.47)
Diabetic               1.30           1.30          1.29           1.29          1.29          1.30
                      (1.20)         (1.20)        (1.16)         (1.16)        (1.18)        (1.20)
Ever had a stroke      2.18***       2.18***        2.16***       2.16***        2.21***       2.18***
                      (2.99)        (2.99)         (2.96)        (2.96)         (3.04)        (2.99)
Smoker                 2.87***       2.85***        3.17***       3.19***        2.94***       2.65***
                      (3.29)        (3.28)         (3.43)        (3.45)         (3.41)        (3.05)
Alcohol                   –           1.001        1.002**           –            1.001        1.001
consumption                          (0.46)         (2.29)                       (0.53)       (0.26)
Binge drinker             –             –           -.509*         -.541            –            –
                                                    (1.71)         (1.58)
Positive                  –             –              –             –           -.491**
expectations                                                                     (1.98)
Unemployed in             –             –              –             –              –          2.01
previous period                                                                               (1.60)
On unpaid leave           –             –              –             –              –          1.76
in prev. period                                                                               (0.93)

No. died                 308           308            308           308            308          308

N                      21091          21091         21091          21091         21091         21091
Pseudo R2               .283           .283          .284           .284          .285          .284

Coefficients are reported as odds ratios. Z-statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are calculated using
the Huber/White method and are corrected for individual clustering. All regressions include controls for
marital status, education level, year of the survey, and large region (North, Central, Volga, North
Caucuses, Urals, West Siberia, East Siberia, Moscow/St. Petersburg). A binge drinker is defined as
someone who reports their ‘usual’ alcohol consumption in the last 30 days as 120 grams or more of hard
alcohol per day.

*** Statistically significant at the 1 percent level or less.
** Statistically significant at the 5percent level or less.
* Statistically significant at the 10 percent level or less.
