NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE UNSUSTAINABLE US CURRENT ACCOUNT POSITION REVISITED
Maurice Obstfeld
Kenneth Rogoff
Working Paper 10869
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10869
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

Prepared for the July 12-13, 2004 NBER preconference on “G-7 Current Account Imbalances: Sustainability
and Adjustment.” We thank Eyal Dvir for skillful assistance, conference participants and Joseph Gagnon
for helpful comments. All errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2004 by Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoff. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Unsustainable US Current Account Position Revisited
Maurice Obstfeld and Kenneth Rogoff
NBER Working Paper No. 10869
October 2004
JEL No. F21, F32, F36, F41
ABSTRACT
We show that the when one takes into account the global equilibrium ramifications of an unwinding
of the US current account deficit, currently estimated at 5.4% of GDP, the potential collapse of the
dollar becomes considerably larger--more than 50% larger--than our previous estimates (Obstfeld
and Rogoff 2000a). That global capital markets may have deepened (as emphasized by US Federal
Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan) does not affect significantly the extent of dollar decline in the
wake of global current account adjustment. Rather, the dollar adjustment to global current account
rebalancing depends more centrally on the level of goods-market integration. Whereas the dollar's
decline may be benign as in the 1980s, we argue that the current conjuncture more closely parallels
the early 1970s, when the Bretton Woods system collapsed. Finally, we use our model to dispel some
common misconceptions about what kinds of shifts are needed to help close the US current account
imbalance. Faster growth abroad helps only if it is relatively concentrated in nontradable goods;
faster productivity growth in foreign tradable goods is more likely to exacerbate the US adjustment
problem.
Maurice Obstfeld
Department of Economics
University of California, Berkeley
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
obstfeld@econ.berkeley.edu
Kenneth Rogoff
Economics Department
Harvard University
Littauer Center 232
Cambridge, MA 02138-3001
krogoff@harvard.edu

Four years ago, we published a paper (Obstfeld and Rogoff 2000a) arguing that the United States current account deficit—then running at 4.4% of
GDP—was on an unsustainable trajectory over the medium term, and that
its inevitable reversal would precipitate a change in the real exchange rate
of 12 to 14% if the rebalancing were gradual, but with significant potential
overshooting if the change were precipitous. Though the idea that global
imbalances might spark a sharp decline in the dollar was greeted with considerable skepticism at the time, the view has since become quite conventional.
Indeed, when Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan gave a speech in
November 2003 arguing that the US current account would most likely resolve itself in quite a benign manner, his once conventional view was greeted
as contrarian.'
In addition to updating the earlier calculations, this paper extends our
previous analytical framework in some important dimensions, including taking into account general equilibrium considerations resulting from the United
States' large size in the global economy. We also generalize our model to
incorporate terms of trade changes (to the relative price of exports and imports), in addition to the relative price of traded and nontraded goods. These
analytical changes point to a steeper dollar decline, with the general equilibrium considerations being particularly significant.
Under most reasonable scenarios, the rise in relative United States saving
required to close up the current account deficit implies a negative demand
shock for US-produced nontraded goods. The same forces, however, imply a positive demand shock for foreign nontraded goods, and this general
equilibrium effect turns out to imply an even larger change—more than 50%
larger—in the real dollar exchange rate than in our earlier partial equilibrium calculation. Overall, taking into consideration current data, as well as
our improved analytical framework, we conclude that the US current account
poses a larger potential decline in the dollar than we had earlier speculated.
Moreover, we now believe that some of the potential rebalancing shocks are
considerably more adverse than one might have imagined in 2000 (in view
of the increased long-term security costs that the United States now faces as
well as its open-ended government budget deficits). Thus, our overall take is
'See Greenspan (2004).
1

that the United States current account problem poses much more significant
risks today than it did when we first raised the issue four years ago.2
The general equilibrium perspective of this paper also offers helpful insights into what sorts of traumas the US and foreign economies might experience, depending on the nature of the shocks that lead to global current

account rebalancing. For example, a common perception is that a global
rebalancing in demand risks setting off a dollar depreciation that might be
catastrophic for Europe and Japan. But as the model makes clear, this is
not necessarily the case. It is true that a dollar depreciation will likely shift
demand towards United States exports and away from exports in the rest of
the world, although this effect is mitigated to the extent there is home bias
in consumers' preferences over tradables. However, ceteris paribus, global
rebalancing of demand will give a large boost to foreign nontraded goods
industries relative to United States nontraded goods industries, and this has
to be taken into account in assessing the overall impact of the dollar depreciation. Another widespread belief in the policy literature is that a pickup
in foreign productivity growth rates, relative to United States rates, should
lead to a closing of global imbalances. Our analytical framework shows that
would only be the case if the relative productivity jump were in nontradable
goods production, rather than tradable goods production where generalized
productivity gains usually first show up. Therefore, contrary to conventional
wisdom, as the global recovery rebalances towards growth in Europe and
Japan, the US current account deficit could actually become larger rather
than smaller, at least initially.
In the first section of the paper we review some basic statistics on the size
and current trajectory of the United States current account deficit, the coun-

try's net international investment position, and the dollar's real exchange
rate. Compared to similar charts and tables in our 2000 paper, we find
that the US current account position has worsened somewhat, whereas the
trade-weighted dollar has moved very little (appreciating until February 2002,

and unwinding that appreciation since). The path of US net international
indebtedness has been somewhat different from that of cumulated current
accounts, in part due to the rate-of-return effect highlighted by Gourinchas
2For another early examination of US external deficit sustainability, see Mann (1999).

2

and Rey (2004): that US current account deficits historically predict high
future dollar returns on US foreign assets compared to US foreign liabilities.3
As Tille (2003, 2004) has observed, the composition of US foreign assets and
liabilities—with US assets only partly linked to the dollar and liabilities almost entirely dollar-denominated—implies that a depreciation of the dollar

helps strengthen the US net foreign asset position.4 In the United States,
however, the bond-market rally associated with the onset of recession in 2001

worked to increase net foreign debt, an effect that will play out in reverse
if long-term dollar interest rates rise relative to foreign rates. 'While these
considerations are important for determining the timing of the United States
current account's ultimate reversal, they turn out not to be very important
(as we shall see) in determining the ultimate requisite fall in the dollar whenever global current accounts finally close up. The reason is that the main
impact on the dollar comes from a global rebalancing of demand, rather than
any change in the transfer necessitated by interest payments on global net
debt positions.
A few further points merit mention, both by way of introduction to the
present analysis and clarification of our earlier paper. First, our framework
should not be thought of as asking the question: "How much depreciation
of the dollar is needed to rebalance the current account?" Though wildly
popular, this view is misguided. In fact, most empirical and theoretical models (including ours) suggest that even very large autonomous exchange rate
movements will not go far toward closing a current account gap of the magnitude presently observed in the case of the United States. The lion's share
of the adjustment has to come from saving and productivity shocks that help
equilibrate global net saving levels, and that imply dollar change largely as a
by-product (though our model of course implies simultaneous determination
of exchange rates and current accounts). In particular, although we allow
the terms of international trade to respond to current account adjustment,
the relative price of imports and exports is only one element underlying the
In general, the rate of return on US foreign assets has exceeded that on US foreign
liabilities; see Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2003).
4Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001) have attempted to adjust for such asset-price changes
in constructing their series of countries' foreign assets and liabilities. See also Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti (2004).

3

overall real exchange rate response, and not the dominant element from a
quantitative viewpoint.
Second, it is important to note that our model assumes that labor and
capital cannot move freely across sectors in the short run. To the extent
factors are mobile, domestically as well as internationally, and to the extent
that the closing of the current account gap plays out slowly over time (al• lowing factors of production more time to relocate), the real exchange rate
effects of global rebalancing will be smaller than we calculate here. A related
issue that we leave aside is the possibility of change in the range of goods

produced and exported by the United States. Although that effect realistically is absent in the short run, over the longer run it might soften the terms
of trade effects of various economic disturbances.
Third, the sanguine view that capital markets are deep and the US current
account can easily close up without great pain ignores the adjustment mechanism highlighted here, which depends more on goods-market than capital-

market integration. The US current account may amount to "only" 5% of
total US production, but it is likely 20% or more of US traded goods production (at least according to the calibration suggested by Obstfeld and Rogoff

Our view is consistent with the empirical findings of Edwards
(2004). His survey of current account reversals in emerging markets finds
an economy's level of trade to be the major factor in determining the size
of the requisite exchange rate adjustment, with larger traded-goods sectors
implying a smaller currency adjustment on average. Calvo, Izquierdo, and
Talvi (2003), who adopt a framework nearly identical to that of Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2000a), arrive at a similar conclusion. Parenthetically, we note that
most studies of current account reversals (including IMF 2002) focus mainly
on experiences in small open economies. But as our model shows, the fact
the United States is a large economy considerably levers up the potential
[2000a]).

effects.

Finally, we caution the reader that while our analysis points to a large
potential move in the dollar—at least 20% in our baseline long-term calculation and, if the adjustment takes place quickly so that exchange rate
pass-through is incomplete, the move could top 40%—it does not necessarily

follow that the adjustment will be painful. As we previously noted, the
4

end of the 1980s witnessed a 40% decline in the trade weighted dollar as the
Reagan-era current account deficit closed up. Yet, the change was arguably
relatively benign (though some would say that Japan's macroeconomic responses to the sharp appreciation of the yen helped plant the seeds of its later
prolonged slump). However, it may ultimately turn out that the early-1970s
dollar collapse accompanying the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system
is a closer parallel. Then, as now, the United States was facing open-ended
security costs, rising energy prices, twin deficits, and the need to rebalance
monetary policy.5

1 The Trajectory of the US Current Account:
Stylized Facts
Figure 1 shows the trajectory of the United States current account as a
percentage of GDP since 1970. As is evident from the chart, the recent
spate of large deficits exceeds even those of the Reagan era. Indeed, in
recorded history, the US current account never appears to have been larger
than the 5.1% experienced in 2003, much less the 5.4% projected by the
IMF for 2004. Even in the late nineteenth century, when the US was still
an emerging market, its deficit never exceeded 4% of GDP according to
Obstfeld and Taylor (2004). Figure 2 shows the net foreign asset position of
the United States, also as a percentage of GDP. The reader should recognize
that this series is intended to encompass all type of assets, including stocks,
bonds, bank loans, and direct foreign investment. Uncertainty about the
US net foreign asset position is high, however, because it is difficult firmly
to ascertain capital gains and losses on US positions abroad, not to mention
5Though there is no official Bretton Woods system today, some have argued (Dooley
et al., 2004a, b) that the current Asian exchange rate pegs constitute a Bretton Woods
II system. Perhaps, but that analysis applies more readily to China than Japan, which
accounts for a much bigger share of global current account surpluses. Even for China,
current evidence suggests that more market-based interest rates and exchange rates are
going to be needed to achieve stability. If, instead, the yuan's dollar exchange rate remains
inflexible as China further integrates into global trade and finance, the yuan will become
increasingly vulnerable to speculative attack.
5

foreign positions in the United States. But the latest end-2003 figure of 23%
is close to the all-time high level that the United States is estimated to have
reached in 1894, when assets located in the US accounted for a much smaller
share of the global wealth portfolio. Figure 3, which updates a similar figure
from our 2000 paper, shows the likely trajectory of the US net foreign asset
position, assuming continuing external deficits of 5% of GDP and continuing
3.5% GDP growth. (We note that IMF 2004 predicts a 2005 US deficit of
5.1% of GDP.) The graph also shows various benchmarks reached by other,
much smaller, countries, in many cases prior to major debt problems. We do
not anticipate the United States having a Latin-style debt crisis, of course,
but these benchmarks are nevertheless informative. We note that our figure
does not allow for any exchange rate depreciation which—assuming foreign
citizens did not receive compensation in the form of higher nominal interest
payments on dollar assets—would slow down the rate of debt accumutation
along the lines emphasized by Tille (2003) and by Gourinchas and Rey (2004).
Figure 4 shows the US Federal Reserve's "broad" real dollar exchangerate index, which measures the real value of the trade weighted dollar against

a comprehensive group of US trading partners. As we asserted in the introduction, the index has moved relatively little since we presented our 2000
paper. Although the nexus of current accounts and exchange rates has
changed only slightly over the past four years, however, other key factors
have changed dramatically.
Figure 5 highlights the dramatic changes witnessed in the fiscal positions

of the major economies. The swing in the United States fiscal position
has been particularly dramatic, from near balance in 2000 to a situation
today where the consolidated government deficit roughly matches the size
of the current account deficit. That fact is highlighted in figure 6, which
breaks down the US current account deficit trajectory into the component
attributable (in an accounting sense) to the excess of private investment over
private saving, and the component attributable to government dissaving.
One change not indicated in this diagram is the changing composition of the
private net saving ratio. From the mid 1990s until the end of 1999, the US
current account deficit was largely a reflection of exceptionally high levels of
investment. Starting in 2000, but especially by 2001, investment collapsed.
6

Private saving also collapsed, however, so there was no net improvement in
the current account prior to the recent swelling of the fiscal deficit.
Finally, figure 7 illustrates another important change, the rising level of
Asian central bank reserves (most of which are held in dollars). At the end of
2003, foreigners owned 37% of all US Treasuries. Netting out the Treasuries

held by the US Social Security Trust administration and by the Federal
Reserve System, the remaining Treasuries held privately are of roughly the
same order of magnitude as foreign central bank reserves. These reserves are
held mostly by Asia (though Russia, Mexico, and Brazil are also significant),
and held mostly in dollars. Indeed, during late 2003 and early 2004, foreign
central bank acquisition of Treasuries nearly equaled the entire US current
account deficit.
We acknowledge that these data do not necessarily imply any immediate
end to the sequence of high US current account deficits. It is possible that
they will go on for an extended further period as the world adjusts to more
globalized security markets, with foreign agents having a rising preference
for holding United States assets. We do not believe, however, that this is
the most likely scenario, particularly given that the composition of foreign
flows into the United States remains weighted toward bonds rather than
equity, and particularly now that the twin deficits problem of the 1980s has
resurfaced. One likely shock that might reverse the US current account is
a rise in US private saving—perhaps due to a slowdown or collapse in real
estate appreciation. Another possibility is a fall in saving rates in Asia, which
is particularly likely in Japan given its aging population and the lower saving
rates of younger cohorts. A combination of faster traded goods productivity
growth in the United States or nontraded goods productivity growth in the
rest of world, and some consolidation of the US government budget deficit
would all help tilt the US current account back toward balance.

In the next section of the paper, we turn to an update of our earlier
model that aims to ask what a change in the US current account might do to
global demand and exchange rates. We note that the model is calibrated on a
version of our "six puzzles" paper (Obstfeld and Rogoff 2000b) that attempts
to be consistent with observed levels of OECD capital market integration and
saving-investment imbalances. Less technically oriented readers may choose
7

to skip directly to section 3.

2 The Model
The model here is a two-country extension of the small-country endowment
model presented in Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000a), in which one can flexibly

calibrate the relative size of the two countries. We go beyond our earlier
model by differentiating between home and foreign produced tradables, in
addition to our earlier distinction between tradable and nontradable goods.
We further extend our previous analysis by exploring more deeply the alternative shocks that might drive the ultimate closing of the US current account
gap.
Otherwise, the model is similar in spirit to our earlier paper on this topic.

We draw the reader's attention to two features: First, by assuming that endowrnents are given exogenously for the various types of outputs, we are
implicitly assuming that capital and labor are not mobile between sectors in
the short run. To the extent global imbalances only close slowly over long
periods (admittedly not the most likely case based on experience), then factor mobility across sectors will mute any real exchange rate effects (Obstfeld
and Rogoff 1996). Second, our main analysis assumes that nominal prices
are completely flexible. That assumption—in contrast to our assumption
on factor mobility—leads one to sharply understate the likely real exchange
rate effects of a current account reversal. As we discuss later, with nominal
rigidities and imperfect pass-through from exchange rates to prices, the exchange rate will need to move much more than in our baseline case in order
to maintain employment stability.
The Home consumption index depends on Home and Foreign tradables,
as well as domestic nontradables. (Think of the United States and the rest
of the world as the two countries.) It is written in the nested form

c= [c+(i-c]
1

9—1

1

8

O•1

where CN represents nontradables consumption and CT is an index given by

1 llT

1

CT—

aC +(1—a)CF'

where CH is the home consumption of Home-produced tradables., and CF
is home consumption of Foreign-produced tradables. Foreign has a paral-

lel index, but with a weight a (a > on consumption of its own export
good. This assumption of "mirror symmetric" rather than identical tradables
baskets generates a home consumption bias within the category of tradable
goods.6

The values of the two parameters 9 and i

critical in our analysis.
Parameter 9 is the (constant) elasticity of substitution between tradable and
nontradable goods. Parameter is the (constant) elasticity of substitution
between domestically-produced and imported tradables. The two parameters are important because they underlie the magnitudes of price responses
to quantity adjustments. Lower substitution elasticities imply that sharper
price changes are needed to accommodate a given change in quantities consumed.
The Home consumer price index (CPI) corresponding to the preceding
consumption index C, measured in units of Home currency, depends on the
prices of tradables and nontradables. It is given by
are

P = {PT + (1where PN is the Home-currency price of nontradables and PT, the price index

for tradables, depends on the local prices of Home and Foreign-produced
tradables, P11 and PF, according to the formula
PT =

[aP + (1— a)P] .

In Foreign there are an isomorphic nominal CPI and index of tradables prices,
but with the latter attaching the weight a> to Foreign exportable goods.
These exact price indexes are central in defining the real exchange rate.
6Warnock (2003) also takes this approach.

9

To start, we assume the law of one price for tradables. Thus PF =
and P = PH/S, where e is the Home-currency price of Foreign currency—
the nominal exchange rate. (In general we will mark Foreign nominal prices
with asterisks.) The terms of trade are
F
D

*

F

r EH
D*

and the real exchange rate is

q=--.
Note that because of the home bias in consumption of tradables, purchasing
power parity does not hold for the differing preferred baskets of tradables in
each country, even if the law of one price holds for individual tradable goods.

That is, PT SP. Indeed, the ratio eP/PT is given by

eP [ar'+(1-a)}
[a+(1 — a)r1fl]T'

PT

while the real exchange rate is
—
q—

For a>

+ (1 - 7)(p*/p*)l-9]th

[+

PT

(1 —

-, the measured real exchange rate depends positively on the terms

of trade (that is, dq/d'r > 0).
Because the assumed utility functions imply constant elasticity of demand
for each of the endowment goods, we can conclude that the global market
for the home produced good clears when
YH = cry

()

()°c+ (1- a)'y (')

()°c*,

where YH is home's endowment of its tradable good. There is a correspond-

ing market-clearing condition for the foreign tradable supply, YF. For Home
nontradables we have

YN=(1_Y)()C,
10

and, of course, there is again a corresponding Foreign condition.
Let us abstract from the underlying determinants of domestic and foreign
saving and consumption. Thus, we take as given C and C*, along with the
endowments YH, YF, YN, and Y. Then the preceding market-equilibrium
conditions allow us to solve for relative prices. For example, we can rewrite
the equilibrium condition for the home export's market as
PH
YH=a(_)
PT

/PH/E\ *

qT+(1—a) * ) CT

implying that the price indices must be governed by
PHYH = a

()

1-71

PTCT + (1 — a)

()

1-71

EPC.

(1)

Residually, we can calculate Home's current account surplus CA, measured
in Home currency, as

CA=PHYH+iF-PTCT,
where F is net Home foreign assets (in Home currency units). For Foreign,
the corresponding relationship is
SCA* = 5PYF

- iF -

= -CA.

As a first pass to understanding the exchange rate impact of global current
account rebalancing, we begin by solving analytically for the effects of shocks

that make CA = 0. (If there is no production effect, such shocks are best
thought of as shocks to relative Home and Foreign demand. When we
move later to consider supply shocks, we will allow relative outputs to move
in eq. (1) and its
simultaneously.) Substituting for PTCT and
Foreign-tradable analog, one gets
PHYH = a (P )l_71 (PHYH + iF — CA)+(1—a)

()
()

1-71

PFYF = (1—a)

(P )l_71

+ iF — CA)+a
11

— iF + CA),
(2)
(PFYF — iF +

CA),

for tradables. while, for the nontradables markets, one can show that
PNYN =

PTCT =
7
(pj)l°
1;

=

1 —

'7

1

(P)G (PHYH+ iF — CA), (3)

()
\ TI

(5YF — iF + CA).

(4)

Of the preceding conditions, three are independent, allowing solution for
the terms of trade 'r, , , and hence the real exchange rate, q. Notice the
presence of a transfer effect in the equations above. Unless a = , the stock
of net foreign assets influences equilibrium relative prices. It will be most
helpful to rewrite the equations in terms of ratios to nominal tradable GDPs
(PHYH and PFYF), the ratios of nontradable to tradable supplies, and the
relative sizes of the two countries' tradables sectors. Let ca = CA/ (PHYH)
and f = F/ (PHYH). Let UT = YH/YF , °N = YN/YH, and a = Y/YF.

Finally, let x = PN/PT and xt = PJ/P.

Then we can write the three

independent eqs. (2)—(4) as

1=

(1 + if — ca)+(1—a)

a[ + (1

[a'n +(1 — a)]

(

— if +

ca)

(5)

aN=Hx0[a+(1_a)r]n(1+if_ca),
and

cr =

(1

7) (x*)0 [a + (1- a)r')] (i -

i-f + ca).

The real exchange rate q is given by

q=

[ar'1 + (1 — a)]T

['7+ (1 —
1

[a + (1 — a)r'_1]T

['7+ (1 —

With these analytical results in hand, we now proceed to study the
model's quantitative implications.
12

3 The Exchange Rate Impacts of Rebalancing Global Current Accounts
One can potentially do a number of alternative experiments within the preceding framework. For example, as already discussed, just letting CA go to
zero gives a pure relative demand-driven current account reduction ( that
is, rebalancing of current accounts because US aggregate demand falls while
foreign aggregate demand rises). And, as we have also already alluded, one
can simulate any accompanying effects of a relative productivity shocks by
varying Home and Foreign relative output at the same time as we let the
current account go to zero.
Other exercises include trying to simulate the effects of a rise in US government war expenditures. To parametrize that exercise, we need to ask
how military spending is allocated between tradables. and nontradables, as
well as between Home and Foreign. We are assuming that international debt
is denominated in dollars, but that assumption is easily relaxed. Finally, we
can vary the relative size of the US economy within the global economy.
In our calibration we assume that PHYH/(PHYH + PNYN) c 0.25, so that
a deficit-to-tradables ratio of CA/PHYH = —0.2 approximates the current

external deficit of the United States. We take net US foreign assets (in
dollars), F, divided by the dollar value of traded goods output, PHYH , to be
—0.8, and assume a nominal interest rate of 0.05 per year. Also, under the
assumption that, YH/YF 0.22, the dollar value of tradables produced by
the US is close to a quarter of global dollar sales of tradables. We take ii =2
or 3, 'y 0.25 and a = 0.7 For the most part, this calibration is broadly
consistent with the one that we deduced in Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000b),
where we argued that realistic trade costs (here, a large share of nontraded
goods in consumption) can explain the degree of international capital-market
integration that we actually observe among the OECD countries. We have
taken the international trade elasticity 'i to be quite a bit lower than the value
6 assumed in Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000b), however, both because
short-run trade elasticities are smaller and because estimates based on micro
data are quite a bit larger than those estimated to apply to aggregated US
trade flows (Gagnon 2003). Our calibration also requires an assumption

of =

13

about the elasticity of substitution in consumption between tradables. and
nontradables, 8. In our 2000a paper, we argued that a unit elasticity was a
reasonable base case, and that the empirical literature would support even a
lower estimate. Since it will turn out that the exchange rate change is larger
the smaller 8, and since we want to include a conservative benchmark, we
allow for 0 as large as 2, in order to see how a higher elasticity of intranational

substitution (that is, between tradables and nontradables) might moderate
the exchange rate effects.7
In table 1, we ask what happens if the US accounts for roughly a quarter of
world GDP and a relative demand shock suddenly closes its current account
deficit from 5% of GDP to full balance. (Suppose, for example, that an end
to the housing boom in the United States reduces consumption there, while
improving growth expectations lead to higher consumption levels in Europe,
Japan, and China.) In our first (low-elasticity) case of 0 = 1, = 2, the real
exchange rate needs to move by about 34% (computed as a log difference),
more than twice the effect we found in our earlier small-country model with
flexible prices. (Our favored estimate, which allows for nominal rigidities
and incomplete pass-through in the short run, is going to be higher still, see

i

below.). Why is the effect so large? One part of it comes from the fact
that we are now allowing for terms of trade changes, which reinforce the
effects of the relative price of nontraded goods on the real exchange rate.
(The shift in the locus of global demand away from the United States leads
to a relative drop in demand for US traded goods because US citizens are
assumed to have a relative preference for US-produced tradables. Thus the
US terms of trade fall by about 7%.) Some of the difference comes from
the fact that whereas the US current account was 4.4% of GDP in 2000,
it is over 5% today, so closing up the gap leads to a bigger exchange rate
7The only technical issue in the simulation below comes in solving eq. (5), which we
write as

i—a
1
1=a—(1+if—ca)+(1—a) a(z—a)+(1—a)2 (\——if+ca
Given T, this is a quadratic equation in z. One can solve for z using the quadratic formula,
then extract the implicit solution for a r using z = [a + (1 — a)r'fl], then substitute the
i- back into the quadratic, solve again for z, and iterate until convergence is achieved.

14

movement. But a final key difference arises because we are now allowing
for general equilibrium effects. In the United States, the elimination of the
current account deficit implies roughly a 20% fall in the demand for traded•
goods in the United States (since the current account deficit is 5% of GDP,
while traded goods production accounts for about 25% of GDP). Thus, the
relative price of nontraded goods needs to fall by 20% when the elasticity of
intranational substitution is 1. But now, we must also take into account the
fact that abroad, the price of nontraded goods must rise in parallel to the
effect in the United States. If the two regions are assumed roughly equal in
size, then in our general equilibrium model, the real exchange rate change

must be twice that in the partial equilibrium model. If the US were to
account for only 1/4 of global traded output—so that a US current account
deficit of 5% of GDP corresponded to a foreign current account surplus of
1.67% of foreign GDP—the effect would be roughly 33% larger instead of
double. With higher elasticities all around, for example, as in the last row of
table 1, where 0 = 2 and i = 3, the terms of trade fall by only 3.9% whereas
real dollar depreciation is 14.7%.
We emphasize that in a quantitative decomposition of the overall real exchange rate response, substitution between US-produced and foreign traded
goods is less important empirically than substitution between traded and
nontraded goods. With nontraded output constituting roughly 75% of GDP,
restoration of balanced trade requires a big overall shift in the consumption
of nontradables relative to the consumption of both imported and exported
goods. The terms of trade effect would dominate only if the elasticity of
substitution between traded and nontraded goods were much higher than
that between imports and exports, which does not appear to be the case
empirically.

Table 2 asks what happens if the shock that closes up current accounts
is associated with a large relative rise (20%) in US productivity in tradables
This will, of course, mute the real exchange rate effect: higher production
of tradables allows the US to cut its current account deficit without a correspondingly large cut in consumption. In our base case, 0 = 1, = 2, the
dollar depreciates in real terms by only 25.5% as compared with the 33.6%
in table 1, but remember, this is in the face of a huge increase in traded
15

goods production that depresses our terms of trade by 14.6%. The effect is
approximately linear, so for more realistic values of the productivity shock
(e.g., LYH/YH = 0.02), the effect would be to reduce the exchange rate
movement implied by full current account adjustment by only a couple of
percent, or even less. For higher elasticities, both the terms of trade decline
and the real dollar depreciation are smaller.
It may seem anomalous to the reader that it takes a rise in relative US
productivity in tradables to dampen the exchange rate effect of a reduction in
the US deficit; however, this is perfectly logical. Policy analysts frequently
argue that a rise in relative productivity in the rest of the world will mute
the exchange-rate impact of global current account rebalancing. But this
is correct only if the foreign productivity rise is concentrated in the nontradables sector—for example, if foreign retailing productivity levels start to
catch up to those of the United States, which has experienced a retailing
productivity boom over the past 20 years. Indeed, according to our model,
the US nontraded-goods productivity boom could help explain the widening
of the US current account deficit. We will explore the issue in a follow-up
paper.8

Table 3 allows the real dollar depreciation to reduce the real value of the
US net foreign debt, in line with Tille's (2004) estimates of US foreign assets
and liabilities denominated in foreign currencies. As hinted above, the effect
on the extent of depreciation is not large, even when the reduction in net
foreign debt is substantial. (This is only to be expected, as debt reduction
cannot be significant when the exchange rate change is small.) For example,
in the first row of Table 3, the net foreign debt of the US is reduced from 0.8
of tradables output to only 0.15 of nominal tradables output, yet the degree
of real dollar depreciation is still 28.4% (as compared with 33.6% in table 1)
and the fall in the terms of trade is 6.0% (as compared with 7.1% in table
1). For higher elasticities, the debt reduction is smaller, as is the effect on
the ultimate equilibrium relative-price changes.9
8For foreign productivity growth in tradables to promote real dollar appreciation, we
would need an implausible combination of higher home consumption bias in tradables, a
larger overall consumption share of tradables, and lower trade elasticities.
9These simulations assume that the monetary authority stabilizes the CPI, as explained
below.

16

A final exercise, reported in table 4, assumes that the closing of the
deficit is accompanied by a shift to permanently higher military and security
expenditures, for example, due to an open-ended commitment of American
force in Iraq. Nordhaus's (2002) estimates suggest that roughly 3% of US
tradables would be required annually for this purpose. We assume that all
the resources used are tradables, drawn roughly half out of US tradables and
half out of foreign tradables. In the low-elasticity case, 0 = 1 and i = 2, both
depreciation and the terms of trade decline are greater than in table 1, but
not hugely so: a 36.1 versus 33.6% depreciation and a 7.3 versus 7.1% terms
of trade decline. The differential effects are smaller at higher elasticities, as
expected.
Some readers will be more interested in understanding what happens to
the nominal exchange rate as opposed to the real exchange rate. To make
this translation, we must, of course, make an assumption about monetary
policy. The simplest assumption is that central banks target CPI inflation
rates in which case, under flexible prices, L log 4f = L log q.
All of the above assumes flexible prices and complete pass-through from
exchange rates to final goods prices. While we do not explore price rigidities and imperfect pass-through explicitly in this paper, we can draw some
preliminary conclusions from the results of our earlier small-country model.
If pass-through from exchange rates to prices is 50% (as we assumed in our
2000 paper), the requisite change in the exchange rate will have to be roughly
double the ones calculated in the tables, assuming that central banks target
overall inflation and allow the exchange rate to move to maintain full employment in the nontraded goods sector. See figure 8. In fact, newer estimates
suggest that for the United States, pass-through is less than 50% after one
year, and 25% in the short run, (see Campa and Goldberg 2002), in which
case the immediate overshooting would be twice as large. Because the passthrough following a very large exchange-rate change probably is higher, we
might take 50% as a conservative estimate to use for the medium-term passthrough to import prices.

17

4 Parallels with the 1970s
Given our analysis, why then do some, such as Greenspan (2004), argue that
a decline in the United States current account deficit is likely to be benign?
Greenspan points to the fact that capital markets are becoming increasingly
integrated, and cites reductions in home bias in equities, the secular waning
of the Feldstein-Horioka puzzle, and other factors considered in our 2000b
paper on the six major puzzles in international macroeconomics, as well as

in our 2000a paper. But our calibration here is totally consistent with the
current degree of integration of capital markets, and indeed is consistent
with the calibration of our earlier paper. What matters for the exchange
rate effect here is not the depth of international capital markets, but the
costs of adjusting to lower tradables consumption in the goods markets. If
the nontraded sector accounts for 75% of GDP, this is fully consistent with
what we observe in capital markets.
The real question is not whether there needs to be a big exchange rate
adjustment when the US current account closes up. For most plausible
shocks leading to global rebalancing, this is a given. The real question is how
drastic the economy-wide effects are likely to be. This is an open question.
We agree with Greenspan's (2004) argument that some markets are becoming
more flexible, and that this should allow the world economy to absorb the

blow better than it might have otherwise. But whereas US markets may
have achieved an impressive degree of flexibility, Europe (and to a lesser
extent Japan) certainly has not. The rest of the world is not going to have
an easy time adjusting to a massive dollar depreciation. It is also the case
that world derivatives markets have exponentially expanded in comparison
with even ten years ago. With little reliable data on counterparty risk, there
has to be concern that a massive dollar movement could lead to significant
financial problems that are going to be difficult to foresee before they unfold
(e.g., along the lines of the collapse of Long Term Capital Management in
1998).

Of course, the optimists can point to the dollar's relatively benign fall in
the late 1980s (though arguably it was a critical trigger in the events leading

up to Japan's collapse in the 1990s). But perhaps the greatest concern is
18

that today's environment has more parallels to the dollar collapse of the 1970s
than to the 1980s. We intend to address this analogy in future research. For
now, however, we note some broad similarities. During the years 1971-72
(in the run-up to the November 1972 election), the United States ran large

budget deficits, had soft monetary policy, and faced open-ended security
costs. Back then it was Vietnam; today it is Iraq and homeland security,
the combined costs of which could easily match the cumulative 12% of GNP

that the Vietnam War cost or the 15% of GNP that financed the Korean
War (see Nordhaus 2002). There were twin deficits (albeit smaller in the
1970s than they are today), and energy prices were a major factor (although
the 1974 oil price hike was much greater, when measured in real terms, than
anything seen yet in 2004.) The year 1973 saw a breakdown of the Bretton
Woods fixed exchange rate system (mainly involving European countries),
but today there is a quasi-fixed exchange rate system with Asia.

Broadly speaking, one has to be concerned that if the United States
current account closes up under a backdrop more like the 1970s than the
1980s, the outcome may be much more severe than it seemed to be during
the 1980s dollar descent.

5 Conclusions
In the paper, we have generalized our discussion in Obstfeld and Rogoff
(2000a) to take account of general equilibrium effects and terms of trade
changes. We find that looking at the rebalancing of the United States
current account in a global model, rather than a partial equilibrium model
as in our earlier analysis, points to a much larger requisite change in the longrun real dollar exchange rate than we had previously estimated. Although a
number of factors may mitigate (a higher elasticity of substitution between

tradables and nontradables than in our baseline, and a greater degree of
factor mobility across sectors), it still seems quite conservative to suppose
that the trade weighted dollar needs to depreciate at least another 20% as
the current account rebalances, with a large potential overshoot in the event
of a rapid reversal causing the trade-weighted dollar to fall by 40% or more.
19

Although the terms of trade play a quantitatively significant role, and
also have consequences for aggregate national welfare and income distribution, the magnitude of their impact on the real exchange rate is dominated
by the relative-price change we emphasized in our 2000a paper, that between

traded goods in general and nontraded goods. In this paper, however, the
real exchange rate calculations fully incorporate the effects of the parallel
relative price changes in foreign countries. The dominant role of the relative nontraded-goods price is linked to the very large production shares of
nontradables in modern industrial economies.
Our discussion has not touched explicitly on issues of capital-market integration, and instead has focused on the relative price movements needed
to preserve goods-market equilibrium in the face of a current-account adjustment. The extent of capital-market integration would enter the market
primarily through the rate of interest that the US must pay foreigners on
its external obligations. Even if the US can greatly expand its foreign debts
without triggering a sharp rise in its cost of foreign finance, our analysis
implies that when US current account adjustment comes, the exchange rate
effects may be massive. Unless gross debts rise further or the US external
borrowing rate rises sharply, however, the reduction in the current account
itself will still be the dominant factor altering international relative prices.
Of course, as we noted above, it is difficult to say with certainty when the
US current account adjustment will commence or whether it will be gradual
or abrupt. With lower integration in the world capital markets, abrupt current account adjustment, sooner rather than later, is more likely. If greater
financial integration allows bigger and more protracted US deficits, however,

the ultimate relative price adjustments will have to be more extreme. In
other words, further deepening of global capital markets may postpone the
day of reckoning. But as long as nontraded goods account for the lion's
share of US output, a sharp contraction in net imports—a significant closing
of the US current account—will lead to a large exchange rate adjustment
under most plausible scenarios. That adjustment will be sharper the longer
is the initial rope that global capital markets offer to the United States.

20

References
[1] Calvo, Guillermo A., Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi, "Sudden
Stops, the Real Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina's
Lessons," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9829,
July 2003.

[2] Campa, José Manuel and Linda S. Goldberg, "Exchange Rate PassThrough into Import Prices: A Macro or Micro Phenomenon?" National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8934, May 2002.

[3] Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, "An Essay
on the Revived Bretton Woods System," National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 9971, September 2003.

[4] Dooley, Michael, David Folkerts-Landau, and Peter Garber, "The Revived Bretton Woods System: The Effects of Periphery Intervention and
Reserve Management on Interest Rates and Exchange Rates in Center Countries," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
10332, March 2004.

[5] Edwards, Sebastian, "Thirty Years of Current Account Imbalances, Current Account Reversals, and Sudden Stops," IMF Staff Papers 51 (Special Issue, 2004), pp. 1-49.

[6] Gagnon, Joseph E., "Productive Capacity, Product Varieties, and the
Elasticities Approach to the Trade Balance," International Finance Discussion Papers 781, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
October 2003.
[7] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey, "International Financial Adjustment," niimeo, University of California, Berkeley and Princeton University, July 2004.

[8] Greenspan, Alan, "The Evolving U.S. Payments Imbalance and Its Impact on Europe and the Rest of the World," Cato Journal 24 (SpringSummer 2004), pp. 1-11.
21

[9] International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, April 2002,
Washington DC.

[10] International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, September
2004, Washington DC.

[11] Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, "The External Wealth
of Nations: Measures of Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and
Developing Nations," Journal of International Economics 55 (December
2001), pp. 263-94.
[12] Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, "International Financial
Integration," IMF Staff Papers 50 (Special Issue, 2003), pp. 82-113.
[13] Lane, Philip R. and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, "Financial Globalization
and Exchange Rates," mimeo, Trinity College, Dublin and IMF, June
2004.

[14] Mann, Catherine, Is the U.S. Trade Deficit Sustainable? Washington,
D.C.: Institute for International Economics, 1999.
[15] Nordhaus, William, "War with Iraq: Costs, Consequences, and Alternatives," chapter 3, American Academy of Arts and Sciences Occasional
Paper, December 2002.

[16] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, Foundations of International
Macroeconomics, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
[17] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, "Perspectives on OECD Capital Market Integration: Implications for U.S. Current Account Adjustment," in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Global Economic Integration: Opportunities and Challenges, March 2000a, pp. 169-208.

[18] Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, "The Six Major Puzzles in
International Macroeconomics: Is There a Common Cause?" in Ben
Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual
OOO, Cambridge, MA: IV11T Press, 2000b.

22

[19] Obstfeld, Maurice and Alan M. Taylor, Global Capital Markets: Integration, Crisis, and Growth, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2004.

[20] Tille, Cedric, "The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on U.S. Foreign
Debt," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Current Issues in Economics

and Finance 9 (January 2003).
[21] Tille, Cedric, "Financial Integration and the Wealth Effect of Exchange
Rate Fluctuations," mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August
2004.

[22] Warnock, Francis E., "Exchange Rate Dynamics and the Welfare Effects
of Monetary Policy in a Two-Country Model with Home-Product Bias,"
Journal of International Money and Finance 22 (June 2003), pp. 343-63.

23

Table 1: Effect of Return to CA Balance, Outputs Constant
Value of 0

Value of r

Fall in Terms of Trade

Real Currency Depreciation

o=1

=2

7.1 percent

33.6 percent

o=1

=3

3.9 percent

25.4 percent

o=2

=2

7.1 percent

19.8 percent

o =2

r =3

3.9 percent

14.7 percent

Table 2: Effect of Return to CA Balance, 20 Percent Rise in Home Tradables Output
Value of 0

Value of r

Fall in Terms of Trade

Real Currency Depreciation

o=1

TI = 2

14.6 percent

25.5 percent

o=1

TI = 3

8.7 percent

15.2 percent

o =2

i =2

14.6 percent

16.7 percent

0 =2

r =3

8.7 percent

9.8 percent

Table 3: Effect of Return to CA Balance, Allowing Exchange Rate to Revalue NFA
Value of 0

Value of r

Fall in Terms of Trade

Real Currency Depreciation

o=1

rj = 2

6.0 percent

28.4 percent

o=1

=3

3.4 percent

22.1 percent

o =2

r =2

6.4 percent

18.0 percent

o =2

r =3

3.6 percent

13.6 percent

Table 4: Effect of Return to CA Balance, with Permanent Rise in Military Spending
Value of 0

Value of r

Fall in Terms of Trade

Real Currency Depreciation

0 =1

i =2

7.3percent

36.1 percent

o =1

r =3

3.9percent

27.8percent

0 =2

i =2

7.3 percent

21.2 percent

0=2

11 = 3

3.9 percent

16.0 percent

:1)

2004*
2002
2000
1998

CNI

1996

N

1994

'I• •

1992
1990
1988

C

0
0

1986
1984
1982

1980
1978

U

1976

rf)

.

1974

1972
1970
•

•

•

S

I

•
I

S

I

•
I

d9 O lUGOJOd

S

InI

S

I

.
0

a)

0

2002
2000
1998
1996
1994
1992
1990

h

1988
1986
1984
1982
1980
1978
1976
IC)

0

IC)

0

IC)
I

0

IC)

I

I

da O 1UG3JGcI

0

c\J
I

IC)
I

0110

0.20

0.30

0.40

0.50

0.60

0.70

0.80

I

I

I

I

I

Hypothetical U.S.
Debt Trajectory

Ireland 1983

1999 2004 2009 2014 2019 2024 2029 2034

Brazil 1980

U.S. 2007
Norway 1977
Argentina 2001
Mexico 1980
U.S. 2003

U.S. 1894

Australia 1996
Finland 1994
Sweden 1994

(Net forei'n debt to GDP)

Projected U.S. Net Foreign Debt

Fig. 3: Up the Debt Ladder?

U

04 Mar
02 Oct
01 May

99 Dec

.

98 Jul

I
C)

95 Sep

97 Feb

94 Apr

Co

-L

CD

a)

92 Nov
91

II

Jun

90 Jan
CD

88 Aug

a)
a)

0
>c

87 Mar
85 Oct

CD

m aa)
CD

84 May

0a)

82 Dec

-'
-I 0
a)

81 Jul

w

0
D

80 Feb

Cl)

77 Apr

78 Sep

75 Nov

74 Jun
CD

C)
N)
L

-

CD

C)

C)

C

CD

C)

-

CD

73 Jan
C)
N)

Index) (Broad Rate Exchange Real

CD

-8

-6

-4

2

0

2

4
I

Canada

p

France Germany Euro
Area
Kingdom
-

United

IIiTi

I

LI

(% GDP)

United
States

Fiscal Balances in Major Economies
II '99'O1 U '02'03 '04."05

Fig. 5:

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

80

82

84

86

88

90 92

94

96

98

00

02

04

U.S. Current Account Balance and Saving-Investment
6

U

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

900
$ b//ion)

Japan

(U.S.

China

NIEs

ASEAN4

End-97 H End-Ol H Latest

India

H

Fig 7: Foreign Exchange Reserves

F'

Figure 8: Anatomy of a Crash
Landing for the Dollar Revisited

Many factors could push US current
account back towards historical
norms: Euro-zone and Asian
nontraded productivity takes off, US
housing market crashes, private
saving continues to decline in Japan

Whatever the cause, suppose that
the US current account suddenly
moves into balance from the current
5.4% of GDP deficit.

In the short run, "traded" goods
consumption in the US drops sharply.
Foreigners must raise their traded
goods consumption 1/3 as much.

Price of traded goods relative to nontraded
goods in US must, conservatively, rise in
proportion if large-scale unemployment in
the nontraded goods sector is to be
avoided. Reverse effect abroad, but about
1/3 as big.

At 23% net external
debt/GDP, US is nearing
1894 high of 26%.

Feldstein-Horioka
puzzle implies that the
large persistent US
current account deficit is
unusual.

Home bias in trade
puzzle implies that the
effective share of
nontraded goods in GDP
is very high (>75%).
Sudden fall in imports
has a strong effect on
the demand for
nontraded goods.
Requisite rise in relative
price of tradables depends
on substitution elasticities
of traded and nontraded
goods in consumption and
production. (For short mn,
baseline assumes 1 for
consumption, 0 for
production.)

"I,

If all goods prices are flexible,
dollar must depreciate to maintain
overall CPI price stability and full
employment in nontradables. Traded
goods prices rise, nontraded goods
prices fall.

stability.

_________________

BUT
Exchange rate "pass-through" to
import prices is at most 50% in short
term. To get the necessary
adjustment in internal US prices for
traded goods relative to nontraded
goods, again to maintain full
employment in nontraded sector,
exchange rate must depreciate twice
as much.

Assuming Fed allows
— whatever exchange rate
adjustment is necessary
to maintain full
employment and price

Purchasing power parity
puzzle: Pass-through of
exchange rates to import
prices is very slow,
perhaps 50% after one
year at the importer
level, less than 10% at
the consumer level.

assuming the
* Again
Fed is willing to
tolerate any exchange
rate movement to
maintain price stability.

