                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ACQUIRING CONTROL IN EMERGING MARKETS:
                         EVIDENCE FROM THE STOCK MARKET

                                             Anusha Chari
                                            Paige P. Ouimet
                                             Linda L. Tesar

                                         Working Paper 10872
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10872


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




The authors thank Andrew Bernard, Michael Dooley, Atif Mian, Arturo Bris, Peter Henry, Luigi Zingales
and seminar participants at Berkeley, Dartmouth, Princeton, IFM-NBER Summer Institute, EFA Meeting-
Maastricht, the 9th Mitsui Life Emerging Markets Symposium, and the Department of Economics and the
Finance Group at the University of Michigan for helpful comments and suggestions. Chari thanks the Mitsui
Life Financial Research Center for financial support. Chari and Tesar acknowledge a grant from the Center
for International Business Education at the University of Michigan. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Anusha Chari, Paige P. Ouimet, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Acquiring Control in Emerging Markets: Evidence from the Stock Market
Anusha Chari, Paige P. Ouimet, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 10872
October 2004
JEL No. F3, G3

                                           ABSTRACT

When firms from developed markets acquire firms in emerging markets, market-capitalization-

weighted monthly joint returns show a statistically significant increase of 1.8%. Panel data

estimations suggest that the value gains from cross-border M&A transactions stem from the transfer

of majority control from emerging-market targets to developed market acquirers – joint returns range

from 5.8% to 7.8% when majority control is acquired. Announcement returns for acquirer and target

firms estimate the distribution of gains and show a statistically significant increase of 2.4% and

6.9%, respectively. The evidence suggests that the stock market anticipates significant value creation

from cross-border transactions that involve emerging-market targets leading to substantial gains for

shareholders of both acquirer and target firms.

Anusha Chari
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
achari@umich.edu

Paige P. Ouimet
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
pshelby@umich.edu

Linda L. Tesar
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu
1. Introduction

       Cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A) in emerging markets surged during

the 1990s. From 1991 through 2000 cross-border M&As accounted for 61% of foreign

direct investment (FDI) in Latin America and 48% in East Asia, up from 10% and 4% in

the 1980s (Figure 1).

       Before the surge in cross-border M&A, FDI in emerging markets consisted

primarily of green-field investments. Cross-border M&A and green-field investments are

conceptually quite different.    By definition, green-field investments create value by

bringing new investment in physical assets to the recipient country. In contrast, cross-

border M&As involve the foreign purchase of existing assets, which may not necessarily

increase productive capacity (Froot, 1991).

       Alternatively, cross-border M&A transactions may create value by allowing firms

to vertically integrate lines of production across borders and through positive externalities

such as transfers of technology and skills between firms (Andrade, Mitchell, and

Stafford, 2001). M&A transactions will also create value if they provide acquirers with

access to target markets or lower the cost of capital for target firms (Caves 1996).

       Do cross-border mergers and acquisitions create surplus value in emerging

markets? This paper uses the stock market to provide an answer. When a cross-border

M&A transaction takes place, there are two parties to consider—a developed-market

acquirer and an emerging-market target.         On the date that a cross-border M&A

transaction is announced, changes in acquirer- and target-firm stock prices reveal

information about (i) the potential wealth creation from the transaction, and (ii) the

distribution of the gains and losses from the transaction to the acquirer and target firms.




                                                                                              2
        We use the Securities Data Corporation (SDC) Thompson’s International Mergers

and Acquisitions database to identify merger and acquisition events in emerging markets

over the period 1988-2003.       Stock price information is taken from Datastream and

Bloomberg. Changes in market-weighted joint returns for acquirers and targets serve as a

summary statistic for value creation through cross-border M&A activity. Changes in

acquirer- and target-firm stock prices provide an estimate of the value gains or losses to

their respective shareholders.

        At first blush, our results suggest that cross-border M&A transactions lead to a

creation of surplus value. Panel data estimations suggest that market-capitalization-

weighted joint returns for targets and acquirers show a statistically significant increase of

1.8% when a cross-border M&A transaction is announced. Joint-return increases are

robust to the inclusion of controls for country, time, industrial diversification, method of

payment effects, as well as acquirer- and target-firm characteristics such as size and

liquidity.

        Moving beyond the basic issue of measuring the creation of surplus value, lies the

more fundamental question of why firms would be worth more under foreign rather than

domestic control (Kindleberger, 1969).        A key feature of the cross-border M&A

transactions in our data is the acquisition of majority control by developed market

acquirers. For instance, 628 out 842 acquirers in the sample did not own any shares in

the target before the cross-border M&A announcement, but moved to majority or full

ownership following the announcement. For 153 transactions where the acquirer had a

minority interest in the target, 31 resulted in a transfer of majority control or full

ownership following the transaction.        The pattern of shifting majority control is

consistent with the evidence that when foreign ownership restrictions are removed in an


                                                                                           3
emerging market like Mexico, affiliates of US multinationals move to majority or full

foreign ownership (Perez-Gonzalez, 2004).

       Acquiring majority control can be important particularly in situations where it is

difficult to write or enforce complete contracts (Coase, 1937; Alchian, Crawford, and

Klein, 1978; Grossman and Hart, 1986; Williamson, 1979). Problems of ineffective

monitoring and incomplete contracting are especially important in emerging markets

(Antras, 2003; Dyck and Zingales, 2004; La Porta, Lopez de Silanes, Shleifer, and,

Vishny 1998).     By acquiring majority control, developed-market acquirers in effect

extend the boundaries of the firm across borders to include the emerging-market targets.

In a setting with weak property rights, acquiring majority control may create the

necessary incentives to transfer technology and capital to the target firms.

       Panel data estimations in this paper verify that the stock market anticipates

significant gains when the acquirer gains majority control of the target. Joint returns in

the announcement window are significantly higher when a developed market acquirer

gains majority control of an emerging market target ranging from 5.8%-7.8% in

alternative specifications. The result is consistent with studies that examine the effects of

FDI and conclude that FDI results in improvements in productivity (Aitkin and Harrison,

1999) and that the productivity gains resulting from FDI are concentrated in plants where

multinational firms acquire majority or full ownership (Perez-Gonzalez, 2004).

       Next, we turn to the distribution of gains. Following the Williams Act (1968),

studies based on US data suggest that a lion’s share of the combined gains from domestic

M&A transactions accrue to target-firm shareholders leaving little or no gains for the

shareholders of the acquiring firms (Jensen and Ruback, 1983; Brickley, Jarrell, and

Netter, 1988; Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford, 2001). The estimations in this paper show


                                                                                           4
that developed-market acquirers experience a statistically significant gain of 2.4% when

they announce M&A transactions in emerging markets. On average, monthly returns for

target firms are also positive when a cross-border M&A transaction is announced—and

equal 6.8% on a market-adjusted basis. Put another way, the announcement returns

translate to a median market capitalization gain of $117 million and $3.12 million for the

shareholders of acquirer and target firms, respectively.        Distinct from domestic

transactions, the distribution of gains appears to shift in favor of developed-market

acquirers in emerging-market transactions.

       Would the acquirers in our sample gain from the acquisition of control in M&A

transactions regardless of the geographic location of the target? Or, are the gains

particular to the emerging-market context? To test whether majority control matters

outright or only in situations where institutions are poor, the announcement returns for

developed-market acquirers are compared between developed- and emerging-market

M&A transactions. The estimates suggest that when an acquisition of a target located in

the developed markets in our sample, such as, Canada, Europe, Japan, Hong Kong,

Singapore, and the United States is announced, acquiring majority control does not lead

to an increase in acquirer returns. In contrast, when majority control of an emerging-

market target is announced, acquirer returns show a statistically significant increase of

5.8% to 12.9% in alternative specifications.    Moreover, the effect of acquiring control

appears more important in R&D-intensive industries where the transfer of proprietary

assets is an issue. The transfer of majority control may create value by providing a

mechanism through which acquirers are able to lend developed-market institutions to

emerging-market targets (Acemoglu and Johnson, 2003; Bris and Cabolis, 2004).




                                                                                        5
         It is important to caution that the value gains estimated in this paper pertain to

specific acquirer-target pairs that engage in cross-border M&A transactions. As a result,

the evidence does not speak to the issue of the welfare implications of cross-border

mergers and acquisitions from a general equilibrium perspective. In particular, the results

do not provide evidence on the impact of a cross-border M&A transaction on the other

firms in an emerging-market target’s industry. The estimates of wealth creation from

cross-border M&A activity cannot, therefore, be generalized to the rest of the emerging-

market economy.

       The focus of this paper is on the stock price reaction, an inherently ex-ante

measure, to news of an acquisition as a summary statistic to capture the gains and losses

from an acquisition. It does not consider whether the synergies from the acquisition as

measured by announcement returns are in fact realized. Indeed, the empirical analysis

does not look at the ex-post performance of the combined firm. A drawback of ex-post

performance measures is that these measures tend to be fraught with endogeneity

problems and are sensitive to the choice of different sample periods as well as the

benchmark that is used to measure risk (Barber, Lyon, and Tsai, 1999).

       In light of these issues, this paper turns to changes in stock prices to derive

forward-looking estimates of changes in discounted expected future cash flows when a

cross-border acquisition is announced. Illusory or not, the stock market’s reaction tells us

what the market thinks (Lang and Stulz, 1994). Whether the stock market’s reaction is

rational or not is a separate question.




                                                                                          6
2. The Data

        The empirical analysis is based on data from SDC Thompson’s International

Mergers and Acquisitions database.              The data include all public and private M&A

transactions involving at least 5% ownership of the target company.                        SDC collates

information from over 200 English and foreign language news sources, SEC filings and

the filings from its international counterparts, trade publications, newswire reports, and

proprietary surveys of investment banks, law firms, and other advisory firms.

        The sample of emerging market targets covers nine Latin American and East

Asian countries over the period 1988-2002. The nine target countries are Argentina,

Brazil, Chile, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand.

Subsidiary firms of multinational companies domiciled in a developed market are not

used in the estimations, because while they are identified as publicly traded firms in the

SDC database, they are not necessarily listed on the stock exchanges in the target nations.

        For each transaction, the SDC database provides information about the date on

which the transaction was announced and the date on which the transaction became

effective. The database also provides some characteristics of the target and acquiring

firms such as name, nation, industry sector, and primary SIC classification. Many of the

transactions contain transaction-specific information such as the percent of shares

acquired, the percent of shares owned before and after the transaction is completed, and

the percent of shares sought by the acquiring firm.2 The paper supplements this data with


2 SDC also provides some information about the nature of the transaction. Cross-border mergers and

acquisitions are transacted through a variety of means, from privately negotiated sales to open market
tender offers. In the emerging market sample, a significant number of acquisitions are transacted through a
third party. In these cases, the target share price is unaffected by possible bidding pressure, and instead,
any change in price will reflect the markets view of the value of the new owner relative to the previous
owner. However, even with developed-market targets, this bidding pressure infrequently contributes to
target price changes as the majority of transactions in the sample are completed without the acquirer
directly tapping into the open market.

                                                                                                          7
 stock price information from Datastream, Bloomberg and the ISI Emerging Markets

 Database for the target and acquirer firms. The announcement dates and firm names

 were cross-checked using Factiva to confirm the identity of the firms as well as double-

 check the announcement dates provided by SDC. Buy and hold returns are constructed

 using weekly data on stock prices. All returns are denominated in the local currency and

 the US dollar. For target firms, return data is dropped from sample if during the event

 window the target security did not change price for more than two consecutive weeks.

        The data description covers 1629 M&A transactions by publicly traded developed

 market acquirers that involve a publicly traded emerging-market target.          Of these

 transactions, stock price data was available for 379 emerging market firms. The sample

 of emerging-market targets is supplemented with an additional 1150 observations of

 developed market acquisitions by the acquirer firms in the sample. These observations

 cover M&A transactions that result in a change in majority control in the target firm as

 well as acquisitions of minority shares – a distinction that is explored in detail in later

 sections.



2.1 Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions in Emerging Markets

        Table 1 provides a breakdown of M&A transactions in emerging markets over

 time by region of target, by target sector, and by country or region of acquirer. The first

 panel shows the number of M&A transactions of targets in Asia and Latin America. The

 number of M&A transactions increased in both regions over time, with a particularly

 large increase in the 1998-2002 period (Figure 1). Throughout the sample period the

 number of cross-border M&A transactions in Latin America exceeds the number of

 M&A transactions in Asia (Table 1). When decomposed by sector, it appears that most


                                                                                          8
target firms are either in the finance, insurance, and real estate (FIRE), manufacturing, or

utilities sectors. The M&A transactions appear evenly split between “tradables” and

“nontradables” sectors. The bottom panel of the table shows the decomposition by the

acquirer’s country of origin. US firms acquire roughly 40–50% of the emerging-market

targets while European firms acquire 20-30%.3 Firms in Singapore and Hong Kong made

a large number of M&A transactions in emerging Asia during 1998-2002.

         The difference in the timing of M&A activity in the two regions is largely due to

differences in the regulations governing foreign participation in domestic capital markets.

Both regions undertook capital market liberalizations in the middle to late 1980s and

early 1990s. However, the degree of openness varied across countries. Latin America

began its process of capital market liberalization in the early 1990s and actively sought

foreign investment in its newly privatized industries. The market for corporate control in

Asia was more restricted as evidenced by the low volume of mergers and acquisition

activity prior to the Asian Crisis in 1997.

         In many countries in East Asia, foreign investors were explicitly prohibited from

gaining a controlling share in local firms. For example, in 1996 the ceiling on the amount

of stock foreigners could acquire in all Korean companies without the approval of the

board of directors was only 18%. Another feature of the market for corporate control in

Korea was that cross-holdings across business groups (Chaebols) were substantial. At

the same time, the voting rights of institutional and minority shareholders were limited.

As a result, the founder family could effectively control a business group with a relatively

small direct ownership stake in the group.



3This pattern differs across regions. US and Spanish acquirers account for a larger share of targets in Latin
America, Japan, Hong Kong, and Singapore account for a larger share in Asia.

                                                                                                           9
       This situation changed dramatically as a consequence of the financial crises that

swept through the region during 1997. The IMF bail-out packages to Thailand, Korea,

and Indonesia imposed additional conditions such as restructuring domestic capital

markets to allow foreign competition in the market for corporate control. The policy

recommendations had a dramatic effect on M&A activity in the region. Figures 2a and

2b show the volume of cross-border M&A in Thailand and Korea, highlighting the

relevant changes in policy. The Thai agreement largely affected the foreign ownership of

real estate and financial companies. The regulations changed in the second half of 1997,

and cross-border mergers and acquisitions peaked shortly thereafter. Similarly, in Korea,

regulations allowing foreigners to obtain controlling shares of Korean firms and to

establish banking subsidiaries in Korea occurred in late 1997 and early 1998. Cross-

border transactions rapidly increased thereafter, peaking at $10 billion in 1999.

       Table 2 shows the change in the extent of corporate control resulting from the

M&A transactions included in this paper. The columns of the table show the extent of

ownership of the target prior to the acquisition, while the rows indicate post-acquisition

ownership shares. The data show that in 842 out of 1011 transactions, the acquirer had

no ownership stake in the target prior to the announcement. In 659 transactions (490+

138+31) or about 65% of the sample, the acquisition leads to a majority or near complete

transfer of control to the acquirer. Note that in about 10% of the sample, the acquirer had

majority ownership of the target prior to the acquisition.

       Table 3 presents the transaction details for a sample of 62 US firms which

engaged in M&A activity in both developed and emerging markets. Panel A shows that

the 66% of the total M&A transactions are in the US as compared to 25% in other

developed markets and 10% in emerging markets. Tender offers, although receiving


                                                                                        10
significant attention in the domestic literature, are a small portion of the overall sample.

Instead, it is three times more frequent for an emerging-market transaction to be privately

negotiated.   Method of payment data was not available for all observations.            For

observations with data, cash is the most common method of payment with all-cash

acquisitions being six times more common than all-stock acquisitions. This pattern holds

for targets in the United States, other developed markets, and emerging markets.

Divestitures represent approximately 30% of the total sample with a higher proportion of

spin-offs in the target regions outside of the US.

       Panel B of Table 3 shows that the sample of mergers and acquisitions made by

US firms domestically includes a wide range of deal values with a minimum transaction

value of $0.75 million and a maximum value of $65.59 billion. The median transaction

value is $100 million. The median transaction values for targets in other developed and

emerging markets are comparable to the domestic observations. The median transaction

value for targets in developed markets other than the US is $71.3 million and $73.1

million for targets in emerging markets.       Typically, for targets in the US or other

developed markets, the average target stake acquired is 84.47% and 74.95%, respectively.

For targets in emerging markets, majority control is acquired in approximately half the

observations, with an average control stake of 50.94% being acquired.



2.2 Measuring Returns

       The most statistically reliable evidence on whether M&A activity creates value

for shareholders comes from traditional event studies, where the average abnormal stock

market reaction to a cross-border acquisition announcement is used to gauge the creation

or destruction of value (Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford, 2001). In efficient capital


                                                                                         11
markets, stock prices adjust quickly to news of the acquisition and incorporate the

acquisition’s impact on expected changes in the value of the combined firm. At the

announcement date, the combined firm values minus the pre-announcement stand-alone

firm values reflect the market’s assessment of the value creation or destruction resulting

from the acquisition. To the extent that the real option of making an acquisition is

embedded in the acquirer’s stock price before the announcement is made, the returns on

the announcement date suffer from attenuation bias.

       This paper uses weekly stock price data to compute three different measures of

returns for the acquirer and target firms, as well as the combined firm. The first measure

is the raw buy-and-hold return over the relevant event window around the acquisition

announcement. The second measure computes the raw returns minus the market returns

over the event window. The third measure computes the cumulative abnormal return

(CAR) over the event window using a market model as follows:

                                   Rit = α i + β i Rmt + ε it .   (1)

       The coefficients αi and βi are estimated for a given firm over a one-year interval

starting eighteen months prior to the announced acquisition and ending six months before

the announcement. The coefficients are then used to compute weekly expected returns

around the acquisition announcement. The abnormal return is defined as the difference

between the actual return and the expected return in the event window. Abnormal returns

are cumulative, due to continuous compounding over the event window. The market

returns used in the estimation are the broadest market index available for a particular

country. For target firms, return data is dropped from sample if during the event window

the target security did not change price for more than two consecutive weeks. Acquirer

and target returns are calculated in terms of the local currency. Joint returns are based on


                                                                                         12
returns in US dollars and a market-capitalization-weighted average of individual acquirer

and target returns. The event window returns are standardized to monthly returns.

         We report results for a three-week event window which includes the week before,

the week of, and the week after the announcement. Since this paper focuses on targets in

emerging stock markets where trading may be thin, the estimations were also repeated

using a five-week event window starting two weeks before and ending two weeks after

the acquisition.4


3. How does the Stock Market React to Cross-border M&A Transaction
Announcements?

         If markets are efficient, changes in stock prices provide a summary statistic for

changes in the fundamentals. To that extent, the responses of firms’ stock prices to the

announcement of an M&A transaction reflect news about the present value of future cash

flows. This section addresses the following question: Do acquisitions by foreign firms in

emerging markets create value?

         An acquisition can lead to a creation of value measured by joint returns if the cash

flows of the merged firm are greater than the sum of its parts, namely, the cash flows of

the two stand-alone firms. Table 4 displays the stock price reactions for the full sample

of acquirers and targets as well as the joint returns for the combined firms.5 Joint

announcement returns for acquirers and targets are positive and fairly similar across the

different measures of returns and across the different event windows. Based on raw

returns, joint returns range from 1.73% to 2.28%, and are slightly smaller for market-

4
  The estimations were also conducted for acquirer firms with a three-day event window commonly used in
the literature based on developed market returns which includes the day before, the day of, and the day
after the announcement.
5
  The results include the stock price data for all acquirers and all targets, not just the sample of matched
acquirer and target firms. The sample of acquiring firms is greater than the sample of target firms because
of stock price data availability.

                                                                                                         13
adjusted returns, ranging from 1.08% to 1.79%. The average combined market-adjusted

announcement returns involving targets from East Asia is 2.34% and in Latin America is

0.86%, although Latin American returns are not statistically significant.


3.1 Joint Returns Increase When a Developed-Market Acquirer Gains Majority
Control of an Emerging-Market Target


       In a world with incomplete contracts, the allocation of ownership within firms

becomes important (Grossman and Hart, 1986). If the acquisition results in a transfer of

control, it will shift the boundary of the acquiring firm and can alter the acquiring firm’s

incentives to transfer technology or invest in the target. The stock price reactions of the

acquiring and target firms, when a cross-border acquisition leads to a majority control of

the target firm by the foreign owner, capture the importance of acquiring control. The

acquisition of majority control may be more important in countries with poor protection

and enforcement of the minority shareholder rights (La Porta, Lopez-de- Silanes, Shliefer

and Vishny, 1999).

       If the transfer of control leads to an increase in investment and transfer of

technology, joint returns should increase with control. The last panel of Table 4 displays

average three-week announcement returns for a subsample of cross-border M&A

transactions where the developed-market acquirer gains majority control of the emerging-

market target.   The magnitude of value creation increases when the acquirer gains

majority control of the target in comparison to the results for the full sample in the first

panel. The average joint acquirer and target announcement return is 5.89% in market-

adjusted terms over the three-week window and is significantly higher statistically when

compared to transactions where the acquirer does not gain majority control.



                                                                                         14
         The paper now turns to formal estimations to explore the hypothesis that the

acquisition of majority control drives value creation in cross-border mergers and

acquisitions.


4. Does the Acquisition of Majority Control Drive Value Creation Through Cross-
Border M&A Transactions?

         The benchmark regression specification for examining the effects of acquisition

characteristics on announcement returns is:

                                                           n
         Rit = α i + β1 ⋅ MAJORITYCONTROLi + γ ∑ CONTROLS j + ε it                        (2)
                                                          j =1



         The left-hand side variable, Rit , represents market-adjusted returns for the three-

week window that begins one week before and ends one week after the announcement of

the acquisition. The intercept term, αi, measures the magnitude of the average

announcement return over the three-week event window. MAJORITYCONTROLi is a

dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the acquirer owns a 50% or more share of

the target following the acquisition and did not have control before.6

         Table 5 presents the estimates for joint returns in the three-week window

surrounding the cross-border acquisition announcement.                     Recall that estimating (2)

without the majority control variable yields an estimate of the average change in joint

returns surrounding an acquisition announcement. The coefficient estimate on the

constant is 0.018 in Column 1a and is significant at the 5% level. This indicates that joint

returns increase significantly in the three-week announcement event window.

         Column 1b shows the results for the benchmark regression in (2). The magnitude

of the coefficient on the MAJORITYCONTROL variable is 0.068 and is significant at the

6
  The regressions were also run including country-fixed effects. In general, country effects were
insignificant.

                                                                                                    15
1% level. The estimate suggests that the acquisition of majority control of the target

drives joint returns up by 6.8% in the three-week event window surrounding the

acquisition announcement. The coefficient on the constant term in Column 1a shows

that, on average, joint returns increase by 1.8% when majority control is not included as

an explanatory variable. Taking the difference in the coefficients, the result suggests that,

conditional on acquiring majority control, average joint returns increase by 5% compared

to the case when majority control is not acquired. Note that the constant term becomes

insignificant after conditioning on acquiring majority control of the target.

       The magnitude of the coefficient estimate on MAJORITYCONTROL ranges from

0.058 to 0.078 in the two regression specifications shown in Columns 1c and 1d and is

statistically significant at the 1% level in all specifications. Columns 1c and 1d explore

whether the existence of a prior relationship between the acquirer and the target firm has

an impact on joint returns. The acquirer is classified as having a prior relationship with

the target if the acquirer had an equity stake in the target prior to the acquisition

announcement. The inclusion of the existence of a prior relationship by itself does not

have a statistically significant impact on joint announcement period returns as seen in

Column 1c.

       Joint returns increase if the acquirer gains majority control after the acquisition,

conditional on the existence of a prior relationship between the acquirer and the target

(Column 1d). PRIOR RELATION*CONTROL captures the marginal effect of acquiring

majority control conditional on the existence of a prior relationship between the acquirer

and the target. The magnitude of this coefficient estimate is 0.07, and it is statistically

significant at the 10% level. Note that the raw effect of acquiring majority control is

0.058. The total effect is the sum of the coefficients for the raw and marginal effects.


                                                                                          16
Thus, the total effect of acquiring majority control, conditional on the existence of a prior

relationship between the acquirer and the target is 12.8% on joint returns.

       Save for the acquisition of majority control, a whole host of other factors may

also affect the creation of value through cross-border mergers and acquisitions. The

estimations below explore alternative explanations that may be responsible for the

positive announcement returns that accompany cross-border M&A transactions.



4.1 Alternative Explanations: Do Synergies Affect the Creation of Value?

       It is a common assumption that for both the acquirer and target firms to benefit

from the synergies that accrue from an acquisition, the two firms must be related in some

way (Bradley, Desai, and Kim, 1988). The two firms could be related because they are in

the same industry, or through a vertical value chain. Since it is difficult to measure

synergies directly the estimation procedure tests for the opposite case of diversifying

transactions where it would be hard to make a case for the existence of synergies (Berger

and Ofek, 1995). The estimation procedure includes an industry diversification variable

to see whether returns are higher when the target and the acquiring firm are in the same

two-digit industry.

       The DIVERSIFY variable in Column 1e captures industrial diversification through

the acquisition. The coefficient estimate is negative but statistically insignificant. The

statistical insignificance of the coefficient estimate suggests that the acquisition of a

target in an unrelated line of business does not affect joint returns in the acquisition-

announcement period.         Out of 380 transactions where SIC code information was

available for both the acquirer and the target, 129 transactions are classified as

diversifying transactions.


                                                                                          17
        When examining the effects of M&A activity in unrelated lines of business in the

cross-border context, an additional case must be considered. Value creation in this case

can be associated with the acquisition of a cash-starved emerging-market target by a

cash-rich developed-market acquirer, regardless of industrial overlap. A high number of

M&A transactions between unrelated industries could in fact be a sign of cash-motivated

mergers. If liquidity or cash is the main motivation for the acquisition, rather than

technological synergies, the incidence of M&A transactions in unrelated industries may

increase during periods of financial crises. The provision of liquidity may have been an

especially important factor during the Asian financial crisis, when firms were unable to

borrow due to their high levels of dollar-denominated debt. In our sample 18 out of 58

observations that are recorded as having taken place during a crisis are diversifying

transactions.    To test the effect of liquidity-motivated sales by cash-strapped firms, the

diversification dummy, DIVERSIFY, is interacted with a financial crisis dummy, CRISIS.

The CRISIS dummy takes a value of one during a crisis and is zero otherwise. The effect

is statistically insignificant.


4.2 Alternative Explanations: Do Crisis Periods Affect the Creation of Value?


        The factors motivating an acquisition may change during periods of crisis.

During periods of relative calm, cross-border M&A activity can be attributed to factors

such as the transfer of technology, synergies, vertical specialization, management

externalities, differences in the cost of capital, and the acquisition of control. During

crisis periods the same factors may continue to drive cross-border M&A activity.

However, a number of additional factors, such as the presence of financially distressed or

liquidity-constrained targets and increases in the bargaining power of the foreign


                                                                                         18
acquirers, may also become important drivers of cross-border M&A activity. If this is

indeed true then crisis periods should coincide with greater joint acquirer and target

gains.

         A country-specific dummy for financial crisis, CRISIS, is included in Column 1j

of Table 5 to see if the joint returns from an acquisition are systematically different

during periods of financial turmoil in emerging markets.7 The point estimate for the

CRISIS variable is statistically insignificant.


4.3 Alternative Explanations: Do Changes in Regulations or Relative Bargaining
Power Drive the Creation of Value?


         A number of factors could affect value creation and the distribution of gains

between the acquirer and the target firm. Acquirer and target size are included in the

estimations as possible indicators of firm bargaining power. Acquirer cash is included to

pick up possible effects of liquidity provision for the target. Columns 1f and 1g of Table

5 show that the point estimates for TARGET SIZE and ACQUIRER SIZE are statistically

insignificant.    Column 1h shows that there is no significant statistical relationship

between joint announcement returns and the amount of cash the acquirer has on hand. A

caveat to bear in mind is that cash on hand does not provide an indication of the access to

cash that the acquiring firm may have. ACQUIRER CASH in column 1h provides a

proxy, albeit an imperfect one, of the acquirer’s access to cash. The effect of this

variable on joint returns is statistically insignificant.

         Columns 1k and 1l explore whether the acquirer or target being in the finance,

insurance, or real estate sector affects joint returns. Dummies for the acquirer and target

7
  The crises included are Mexico (1994), Thailand (1997), Malaysia (1997), Korea (1997), Indonesia
(1997), Philippines (1997), Brazil (1999), and Argentina (2001). The crisis dummy takes a value of one
from six months prior to the crisis to one year following the crisis.

                                                                                                         19
being in the FIRE sector are included to control for the possibility that the particular

regulatory restrictions in that sector (on banks, in particular) may have a systematic effect

on the returns to M&A transactions. Again, the coefficient estimates for the ACQUIRER

IN FIRE and TARGET IN FIRE dummies are statistically insignificant. Finally, the

hypothesis that the regional location of the target affects joint announcement returns is

explored in Column 1i. The coefficient for the TARGET IN ASIA variable is statistically

insignificant suggesting that regional factors do not explain joint returns.

       The coefficients on the interaction terms between the independent variables

included in regression specifications 1e-1l and the majority control variable are all

insignificant. See Table 5 for details.



4.4 Alternative Explanations: Do Deal Characteristics Drive the Creation of Value?

       The estimations were also run including various deal and target characteristics

reported in the previous literature as determinants of joint returns.          The additional

variables tested include whether the target was bankrupt, there was a competing bidder,

or an unsolicited bid, the target was a division, the deal was a new joint venture, the

target was being privatized, the deal was privately negotiated, and whether the deal was a

tender offer.   None of these additional variables explain acquirer returns when an

emerging-market target is acquired. A variable to capture the impact of the medium of

payment was created as the fraction of cash paid in an acquisition relative to the total

cash plus equity. The method of payment also proved insignificant in explaining joint

returns.

       In summary, the evidence from the formal panel estimations suggest that joint

returns for the acquirers and targets increase significantly when a cross-border acquisition


                                                                                          20
is announced. The increase in joint returns is linked to the acquisition of majority control

of the target. Joint returns are also significantly related to the acquisition of majority

control, conditional on the existence of a previous relationship between the acquirer and

the target. These results are robust to the inclusion of a number of controls for acquirer

and target characteristics.


5. Shareholders of Both Developed Market Acquirers As Well As Emerging-Market
Targets Gain from Cross-Border M&A Transactions


       Based on US data, previous studies have found evidence of overall value creation

through mergers and acquisitions (Andrade, Mitchell, and Stafford, 2001).        Typically,

joint returns tend to be positive, but following the Williams Act (1968), the lion’s share

of the joint gains accrue to target shareholders leaving little for the shareholders of the

acquiring firms (Jensen and Ruback, 1983; Brickley, Jarrell, and Netter, 1988). This

section provides evidence about the distribution of the joint gains that arise from cross-

border M&A transactions.

       The first panel of Table 6A shows that shareholders of developed market firms

reap significant gains when an emerging-market target is acquired. For the full sample of

developed-market acquirers, the average announcement return in the event window that

begins one week before and ends one week after the acquisition announcement ranges

from 2.43% to 3.05% depending on the returns measure used.

       The fact that acquiring firms realize positive returns when an acquisition is

announced in an emerging market may suggest that developed-market acquirers have

greater bargaining power relative to the emerging-market targets. Acquirers may have

greater bargaining power, because fewer bidders compete for emerging-market targets,



                                                                                         21
cash-strapped targets have liquidity needs, or changes in government policies help

facilitate foreign M&A transactions.

       An alternative interpretation for the increase in acquirer returns may be

asymmetric information between the acquirer and the target about the target’s true

fundamental value. In order for the target firm to negotiate the best possible offer, the

target must be in a position to form an accurate estimate of its fundamental value. If the

target is uncertain about its true stand-alone value, the firm may undervalue its assets.

On the other hand, if acquirers are better able to assess the synergies from the merger,

acquirers may be able to select and execute only those transactions that result in

significant gains for them. The ability of acquirer firms to form a better estimate of the

target’s true value has particular significance in emerging markets where the stock price

is often viewed as an especially noisy estimate of true firm values.

       Announcement returns for target firms are also positive and statistically

significant. In local currency terms, the average market-adjusted return for the target

firm in the three-week event window ranges from 6.68% to 6.87%. On average, M&A

transactions in emerging markets create value for acquirer as well as target firm

shareholders.

       Panels B and C in Table 6A report the acquirer and target returns by region. In

East Asia, acquirer gains range from 2.7% to 3.45% and are significant at the 5% level.

Acquirer gains in Latin America are also positive, ranging from 1.89% to 2.23%, and

again are significant at the 5% level. Targets also gain, especially in Latin America. In

Asia, the target returns are 5.17% and in Latin America target returns are 9.68%.

       Acquirers will also gain from M&A transactions that achieve control of the target

firm. This gain can be the result of the total gains being higher and the target and


                                                                                       22
acquirer splitting these gains in a constant ratio. Alternatively, acquirers may pay a

different price when they acquire control of the target.

       The impact of the foreign acquirer gaining majority control on the target’s stock

price is less clear. On the one hand, if the market expects that the acquirer will transfer

better technology and provide access to cheaper capital to the target, its stock price will

increase. On the other hand if the foreign acquisition dilutes the ability of the previous

owners to exercise private benefits of control, the target’s stock price may fall or rise

(Dyck and Zingales, 2004). Panel D in Table 6A shows that when the acquirer gains

majority control of the target, the average monthly market-adjusted announcement return

using a three-week event window is 3.99% for acquirer firms and 8.92% for target firms.

Both acquirer and target returns increase with the acquisition of majority control.

       Turning to the formal estimations, Table 7 presents the results for the acquisition

announcement returns for acquirer firms. Column 2a shows that the coefficient for the

average announcement returns for the acquirers is 0.024 and is significant at the 5% level.

This estimate suggests that acquirer monthly abnormal returns increase by 2.4% in the

three-week cross-border acquisition announcement window. This estimate corroborates

the evidence presented using the raw data that, on average, cross-border M&A

transactions create value for developed-market acquirers when the target is in an

emerging market.

       The coefficient for MAJORITYCONTROL is 0.033 and is significant at the 5%

level in Column 2b. The estimate suggests that acquirer returns rise by 3.3% if the

acquirer gains majority control of the target. Column 2d shows that the magnitude for the

estimate for PRIOR RELATION*CONTROL is 0.06. The estimate is significant at the

10% level. The estimate suggests that conditional on the existence of a prior relationship


                                                                                        23
between the acquirer and the target, the acquisition announcement results in a 6%

increase in acquirer returns if the acquisition results in majority control of the target.

       The coefficient estimate for the DIVERSIFY variable in Table 7 (column 2e) is

also negative and insignificant suggesting that the industrial diversification does not

explain acquirer returns. The results in Columns 2f-2l demonstrate a similar pattern to

the results for joint returns in the three-week announcement window. After controlling

for variables such as acquirer size, target size, acquirer cash, a crisis dummy, and whether

the acquirer or the target are in the financial sector, the coefficient on

MAJORITYCONTROL is significant in alternative regression specifications. According

to the regression estimates, the increase in acquirer returns ranges from 3.1% to 4.6% in

alternative specifications. The increase in acquirer returns, in turn, suggests that cross-

border M&A transactions in emerging markets create value for developed-market

acquirers.

       Table 8 shows the results for target returns. The constant term in Column 3a

captures the average increase in target returns when a cross-border acquisition

announcement is made. The magnitude of the coefficient is 0.069 and is significant at the

1% level. The estimate suggests that, on average, target returns increase by 6.9% when a

cross-border acquisition is announced.

       The results in Columns 3b to 3d suggest that when MAJORITYCONTROL is

included in the regression specification, the intercept term is positive but statistically

significant in only one instance. Moreover, there is no statistical relationship between

target returns and the acquisition of majority control by the developed-market acquirer.

The coefficient on MAJORITYCONTROL is not statistically significant in any

specification. It appears that target returns cannot be explained by the acquisition of


                                                                                             24
majority control by the acquirer. However, given the small sample size and the fact that

emerging-market returns are measured with greater noise, the lack of statistical

significance should be interpreted with caution.

       The regression specifications in Columns 3a to 3d were also run without including

MAJORITYCONTROL as an explanatory variable on the right hand side. The intercept

term is statistically significant in all specifications at the 1% or 5% levels.         The

magnitude of the coefficient on the intercept term ranges from 0.031 to 0.069 in

alternative regression specifications.   The evidence suggests that, on average, target

returns increase from 3.4% to 9.6% in the three-week announcement window

surrounding the cross-border acquisition announcement.

       To get a sense of the magnitude of the wealth creation from a typical acquisition,

the Table 6b shows the median and average market returns and market capitalization

figures for acquirers and target firms. The median equity market value for the developed

market acquirer firms in the sample is $12.91 billion. Also in Panel A, the 0.91% median

market adjusted return corresponds to a $117.17 million market capitalization gain for

acquirer firm shareholders over the three week window in the full sample.

       The average market-adjusted return for acquirers in transactions where control is

acquired is 4.06% compared with an average acquirer return of 0.47% when control is not

required. A Wilcox-signed-rank test of medians also shows that acquirer returns are

significantly higher in transactions where the acquirer gains majority control of the target

in comparison to transactions where majority control is not acquired (p=0.008). In

transactions where the acquirer gains majority control, the median acquirer return of

3.97% corresponds to a median market-capitalization gain of $512.1 million—the

acquirer value gains are four times higher than the full sample (Panel B). Panel C shows


                                                                                         25
that the median acquirer return in transactions where majority control is not acquired is

0.42% and leads to median market capitalization gain of $54 million.8

         The median equity market value for an emerging-market target in Table 6B is

$201.6 million. For the full sample, a 1.55% median market-adjusted return corresponds

to a $3.12 million increase in the market capitalization value for target firm shareholders

over the three week event window. The Wilcox-signed-rank test shows that the median

target returns are not significantly different in transactions where the acquirer gains

majority control (p=0.367). In transactions where the acquirer gains majority control, the

median market capitalization gain for target firm shareholders is $1.69 million and $2.83

million in transactions where the acquirer does not gain majority control. The evidence

from the back-of-the-envelope value gain calculations in Table 6B suggest that, distinct

from domestic transactions, the distribution of gains from cross-border M&A transactions

shifts in favor of acquirer firms.



5. Do Foreign Acquirers Take Advantage of Emerging-Market Targets? Revisiting
Value Creation During Crisis Periods


         If the bargaining power of foreign acquirers increases during crises, the

distribution of the value gains may change in favor of the acquirers. Alternatively, the

price that acquirers pay for the target during a crisis may be different compared to periods

of financial calm. Crisis periods generally result in a collapse in beliefs about future

payoffs in the emerging stock markets. If these beliefs are not rational and acquirers have

greater confidence in the fundamentals, acquirers may realize further gains during times


8
 The value gains were also estimated on a transaction by transaction basis. The median market
capitalization gain is $309.03 million in transactions which result in a transfer of majority control to the
acquirer compared with $0.99 million in transactions that do not result in a transfer of majority control.

                                                                                                               26
of crisis. The identification strategy employed in this paper allows for the following test

of whether the acquirers paid different prices for the targets during a crisis. Acquirer

returns in crisis periods should be higher than in non-crisis periods, if targets are acquired

at bargain prices during a crisis.

       Table 9 displays the results for the acquirers. Columns 1a to 3a show that

acquirer returns in the pre-crisis, crisis, and post-crisis periods. Note that the time

dummy for the early, pre-crisis period (1988-1995) is negative and significant. However,

the time dummy for the middle period (1997-1999) in Column 1b which coincides with

the Asian crisis is statistically insignificant. The data suggest that acquirer returns did not

increase during the crisis. The time dummy for the post-Asian-crisis period (2000-2003)

in Column 3a of Table 9, on the other hand, is significantly positive. Moreover, when

MAJORITY CONTROL is included in the regression specifications in Columns 4a to 6a,

the coefficient estimates on the time dummies are no longer significant. The coefficient

estimate for MAJORITY CONTROL is positive and significant at the 5% level. At first

pass, the effect of acquiring majority control appears to be invariant to the state of the

financial markets in Panel A. The estimations in Panel B explore the impact of financial

crisis on the returns to acquirers and targets in greater detail below.

           Sovereign bond spreads can be used as a measure for the cost of capital in

emerging markets. As a robustness check, the estimates include the relative value of the

JP Morgan Emerging Market’s Bond Index (EMBI) spread as an explanatory variable.

Column 1b in Panel B of Table 9 shows that the coefficient estimate for the EMBI spread

is positive and significant—as sovereign spreads widen, acquirer returns increase. The

result suggests that acquirer returns increase as the cost of capital increases in emerging

markets.


                                                                                            27
       Note that the cost of capital is likely to increase further in emerging markets

during financial crises. The regression specification in Column 2b of Table 9 includes

the effect of the EMBI spread conditional on there being a crisis in the emerging market.

While the raw effect of the EMBI spread remains positive and significant in explaining

announcement returns for acquirers, the coefficient on the interaction term between the

spread and crisis, EMBI*CRISIS, is statistically insignificant. The result suggests that

the effect of EMBI spreads on acquirer returns does not appear to change during crisis

periods. The evidence, therefore, does not confirm that targets were being acquired at

bargain prices during the crisis.

       Finally, Column 3b examines the effect of acquiring majority control conditional

on the cost of capital as measured by the EMBI spread. While the coefficient estimate

for MAJORITY CONTROL is positive and significant, the effect of acquiring control

conditional on the EMBI spread (EMBI*CONTROL) is statistically insignificant.

Similarly, the coefficient estimate on EMBI*CRISIS*CONTROL in Column 4b is also

statistically insignificant. The two sets of results suggest that the impact of acquiring

control on acquirer returns is not significantly different between crisis and non crisis

periods.


6.  Selection Bias: Do the Acquirers in the Sample Experience Positive
Announcement Returns When They Acquire Developed Market Targets?


       The results reported thus far suggest that there are significant gains to acquirers

from emerging-market M&A transactions. Although the estimations include controls for

a number of factors, the results may largely be driven by acquirer-firm characteristics that

have little to do with the particular circumstances in emerging markets. For example,



                                                                                         28
note that the median size of a developed market acquirer in the sample is $12.91 billion,

more than 60 times larger than the median emerging-market target.

        It is possible that large firms have greater bargaining power or an informational

advantage in making acquisitions in general and not in emerging markets in particular.

The following questions arise in this context. Are the gains to acquirers specific to

emerging-market acquisitions? Or, do the acquirer firms in the sample reap gains even

when they make acquisitions in developed markets? If the acquirer-firm returns increase

when they announce an acquisition regardless of whether it is in an emerging or a

developed market, then a sample selection bias in the form of acquirer characteristics

may be driving the results in this paper. However, if the acquirer-firm returns increase

only when they acquire an emerging-market target, then the appropriate interpretation of

the increase in acquirer returns may be that the acquisition of control in emerging

markets, in particular, is driving the result.

        To test whether majority control matters outright or only in situations where

institutions are poor, the announcement returns for developed-market acquirers are

compared between developed- and emerging-market M&A transactions. The sample is

extended to include the acquisitions made by developed-market acquirers in France,

Germany, Japan, United Kingdom, United States, Italy, Spain, Hong Kong, and

Singapore in addition to the emerging-market acquisitions.

        Table 10 presents the results. Column 1a shows that in the full set of targets,

acquirers now experience negative but statistically insignificant returns in the three-week

event window. The results in Column 1b show that when a dummy variable for an

emerging-market target is introduced into the regression specification, developed-market

acquirers experience positive and statistically significant returns of 3.3% in the three-


                                                                                        29
week event windows. Taken together, the results in Column 1a and 1b suggest that

shareholder wealth effects for developed-market acquirers are positive only when an

acquisition is made in an emerging market and not in developed markets.

       Column 1c shows that while the coefficient on the emerging-market-target

dummy variable has a magnitude of 0.033 and continues to be significant when the

acquisition of MAJORITY CONTROL is introduced as an explanatory variable on the

right-hand side. However, the coefficient on the MAJORITY CONTROL is negative and

statistically insignificant suggesting, when developed-market targets are pooled together

with emerging-market targets, the acquisition of control per se does not result in positive

returns for developed-market acquirers.

       In column 1d, MAJORITY CONTROL is interacted with the emerging markets

dummy variable.     The coefficient on MAJORITYCONTROL*EMERGING MARKET

TARGET is 0.075 and is significant at the 5% level. The result suggests that conditional

on the target being in an emerging market, the acquisition of majority control results in

positive returns for developed-market acquirers.    Note that the total effect of acquiring

an emerging-market target on developed-market-acquirer returns is the sum of the

coefficients on the raw effects of the EMERGING MARKET TARGET dummy variable

and the MAJORITY CONTROL dummy variable and the condition effect of MAJORITY

CONTROL*EMERGING MARKET TARGET which is equal to 0.056. The sum of the

coefficients suggests that, on average, developed-market-acquirer returns increase by

5.6% when majority control is acquired in an emerging-market target.

       Columns 1e and 1f suggest that the acquisition of majority control leads to a

positive and significant increase in acquirer returns when the regression specification

includes a proxy for whether or not the acquirer had a relationship with the target firm


                                                                                        30
before the acquisition was announced.          The results show that the coefficient on

MAJORITYCONTROL*EMERGING MARKET TARGET is 0.075 and 0.074 in the two

columns, respectively, and is significant at the 5% level. In contrast to the results in

section 4, the acquisition of control in an emerging-market target for an acquirer that had

a previous relationship with the target does not explain the increase in acquirer returns

when a cross-border acquisition is announced.             The coefficients PREVIOUS

RELATIONSHIP and PREVIOUS RELATIONSHIP*EMERGING MARKET TARGET are

statistically insignificant.

        The coefficient on MAJORITYCONTROL*EMERGING MARKET TARGET is

0.075 and 0.077 in Columns 1g and 1h and is significant at the 5% level. The two

regression specifications also show that the impact on acquirer returns is negative and

insignificant when US acquirers make unrelated acquisitions.          The coefficient on

DIVERSIFY and the coefficient on DIVERSIFY*EMERGING MARKET TARGET are

both negative but not statistically significant. The acquisition of majority control in the

emerging-market target leads to a 7.5%-7.7% increase in acquirer returns when a cross-

border acquisition is announced even with the inclusion of industrial diversification as an

explanatory variable on the right-hand side.

        Finally, Columns 1i and 1j examine whether the deal size has any explanatory

power for US-acquirer announcement returns. In both regression specifications, the

value of the transaction has a positive but insignificant effect on acquirer returns. The

coefficient on MAJORITY CONTROL*EMERGING MARKET TARGET is 0.129 in the

both columns and is significant at the 10% level.

        In summary, the results in this section suggest that when the sample of cross-

border M&A transactions announced by US acquirers in emerging markets is extended to


                                                                                        31
include M&A transactions in other developed markets, acquirer returns increase

significantly only when the acquisition of an emerging-market target is announced. The

evidence therefore suggests that the increase in acquirer returns is not being driven by

acquirer characteristics. Rather, the acquisition of majority control of an emerging-

market target is the primary driver of acquirer returns when a cross-border acquisition is

announced. One explanation for the result that the acquisition of majority control appears

to matter only in emerging markets is that the transfer of majority control may provide a

mechanism through which acquirers are able to lend developed-market institutions in the

form of improved property rights to emerging-market targets (Acemoglu and Johnson,

2003; Bris and Cabolis, 2004).



7. Do Industry Characteristics Drive the Importance of Acquiring Majority Control
in Emerging Markets?

7.1 Does the R&D Intensity in the Target Firm’s Industry Matter?

       To investigate the factors that drive the importance of acquiring majority control,

a number of alternative hypotheses are considered. First, in the absence of control, weak

institutions and legal environments in emerging markets may inhibit acquiring firms from

making technology transfers to the target firms. If acquiring firms hold back from

transferring technology in emerging-market transactions which do not involve control,

the impact of this effect should be the most acute in R&D-intensive industries. Since

patent and legal protection matter in R&D-intensive industries, the prediction is that the

stock market’s reaction to transactions where control is acquired will be directly

proportionate to the R&D intensity of an industry.

       To test the prediction that the R&D intensity of an industry matters, the paper

constructs a metric of R&D intensity using US data. Using all US firms in Compustat

                                                                                       32
from 1990 to 2002 the research and development expense (Compustat data item #46) is

divided by net sales (Compustat data item #12). Dividing by net sales normalizes the

R&D expenses by the size of the firm. This measure is sorted by 2-digit SIC codes and

an average measure of R&D intensity by 2-digit SIC code is constructed. The measure

of R&D intensity is then matched by industry with the 2-digit SIC code of the emerging-

market targets.

        The findings are as follows. Table 11 shows that the raw effect of the acquisition

of control in an emerging-market target is positive and significant in alternative

specifications. In column 3, the marginal effect of control conditional on the level of

R&D intensity is also positive and significant at the 1% level.           The sum of the

coefficients on CONTROL and CONTROL*RDINTENSITY provides a measure of the

total effect of control and R&D intensity on acquirer returns. The sum of the two

coefficients is 0.43 and suggests that acquirer returns increase by 4.3% when control is

acquired in an R&D-intensive industry.

        It is worth noting that the RDINTENSITY measure also predicts whether control is

acquired in any given transaction. For example, compare a target, say, an electric power

plant, with an average R&D intensity of 0.148 with a target which manufactures

automobiles with an R&D intensity of 0.324. Logit regression estimates with control as a

right-hand side variable suggest the difference in the R&D intensity of the two industries

predicts a 16% increase in the probability that control is acquired in the transaction. The

result is statistically significant at the 5% level.

        If it is the case that weak legal settings in emerging markets drives the importance

of acquiring control, the effect should not be evident in developed markets. When the

estimations are run by pooling developed- and emerging-market targets, the results show


                                                                                         33
that the acquisition of control conditional on R&D intensity appears to matter only when

the target is located in an emerging market. Column 6 of Table 11 shows that the

acquisition of control conditional on R&D intensity is positive and significant when the

transaction   involves     an   emerging-market       target.        The   coefficient     on

EMTARGET*CONTROL*RDINTENSITY is 0.044 and is significant at the 1% level. On

the other hand, the coefficient on CONTROL*RDINTENSITY which does not condition

on the target being in an emerging market is negative and significant.

       R&D-intensive industries such as information technology and pharmaceuticals

experienced very high returns in the late 1990s. There is a concern, therefore, that the

result of R&D intensity as a key determinant of acquirer returns is merely picking up the

boom-time returns in these industries. As a final robustness check for the result that

R&D intensity matters in explaining acquirer returns in emerging markets, additional

estimations were conducted by using industry-adjusted returns on the left-hand side. The

results remain qualitatively similar. The coefficient estimate for

CONTROL*RDINTENSITY when the target is in an emerging market remains positive

and significant.


7.2 Does the Dependence on External Finance, Investment Intensity, or Fixed
Assets in the Target Firm’s Industry Matter?

       A second hypothesis may be that foreign acquirers are more likely to provide

access to external-capital markets to emerging-market targets if they own a majority stake

in these firms. A measure of the dependence on external capital, EXCAP, in an industry

is adapted from Rajan and Zingales (1998) as follows. Using all US firms in Compustat

from 1990 to 2002, we calculated their annual capital expenditures minus cash flow from

operations divided by their capital expenditures. Cash flow from operations is defined as


                                                                                           34
operating income before depreciation plus decreases in inventories plus decrease in

receivables plus increase in payables. An industry level average measure is constructed

by 2-digit SIC code, and these results are matched to the 2-digit SIC code of the

emerging-market targets. The measure is designed to capture an industry’s dependence

on external finance and whether this dependence makes an acquiring firm more likely to

acquire control.      However, the estimations do not bear out this hypothesis.          The

coefficient on the EXCAP measure interacted with the MAJORITY CONTROL does not

explain the positive returns to acquiring firms when an emerging-market M&A

transaction is announced.

           The third hypothesis for why majority control matters may be related to the

degree of investment intensity in an industry.         A measure of investment intensity,

INVMEASURE, is calculated by dividing capital expenditures by net sales for any given

firm in Compustat from 1990-2002. Capital expenditures are normalized by sales to be

consistent with the R&D measure. Industry-level averages are constructed by using the

firm-level measures and matched with the 2-digit SIC codes of the emerging-market

targets.     Once again, the measure of investment intensity does not explain the positive

acquirer returns when majority control of the emerging-market target is acquired.

           The final hypothesis for why majority control may matter is that foreign acquirers

may be more likely to transfer fixed assets when they have majority control of the

emerging-market target. To explore this hypothesis, FASSETMEASURE is constructed

by dividing net property plant and equipment by net sales for all firms in Compustat from

1990-2002. Industry-level averages were matched to emerging-market-target 2-digit SIC

codes.      The coefficient on the FASSETMEASURE interacted with the MAJORITY




                                                                                          35
CONTROL*EMTARGET is positive and significant. However, this result holds for only

the US acquirers in the sample.



7. Conclusion

        There has been considerable debate about the welfare effects of the boom in

cross-border M&A transactions in emerging markets. At the root of this debate is the

question of whether cross-border mergers and acquisitions result in a creation of value

through the transfer of corporate ownership from domestic to foreign investors and the

distribution of the potential gains from the acquisition between shareholders of target and

acquiring firms. This paper uses the stock-price reaction of acquiring and target firms to

the announcement of an acquisition as a summary statistic for value creation through

foreign M&A transactions. The acquirer and target firms’ stock price reaction to the

announcement of an acquisition reveals information about (i) the potential wealth creation

from the merger and (ii) how the gains and losses from an acquisition are assigned to the

acquiring and target firms. The stock market’s reaction to the information contained in

the acquisition announcement reveals the market’s view of the transaction.

       The paper examines all transactions involving a developed-country acquirer and

an emerging-market target between January 1, 1988 and December 31, 2002 for which

stock-price data are available. In general, the results from panel data estimations suggest

that the stock market anticipates significant value creation from the merger for the target

and the acquiring firms. Joint monthly returns based on market-capitalization weighted

returns in dollars increase by 1.8% when a cross-border acquisition is announced. The

benchmark results indicate that target firms benefit from the acquisition, experiencing

average monthly returns of 6.69%. Both sets of results are consistent with the findings in


                                                                                        36
the literature on domestic mergers and acquisitions. In contrast to the previous literature

that uses US data, the evidence suggests that acquirer returns also show a statistically

significant increase of 2.4%.

       The benefits from the acquisition stem from the transfer of majority control from

the emerging-market target to the developed-market acquirer. The paper also compares

acquirer returns for US firms when the acquisition is announced in a developed-market

rather than in an emerging market. The data suggest that positive acquirer returns are

specific to M&A transactions in emerging markets, and that gaining corporate control is

the key feature of transactions that deliver positive returns. Joint return increases range

from 5.8% to 7.8% when majority control is acquired. Overall, the results in the paper

suggest that the boom in foreign direct investment flows to emerging markets in the

1990s led to a transfer of control to foreign acquirers and substantial gains to shareholders

of both the acquiring and the target firms.




                                                                                          37
References

Acemoglu, Daron and Simon H. Johnson (2003). "Unbundling Institutions." MIT Department of
     Economics Working Paper No. 03-29.

Aitken, Brian J. and Ann E. Harrison (1999). "Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign
       Investment? Evidence from Venezuela." American Economic Review, Vol. 89, 605-
       618.

Alchian, Armen, Robert Crawford, and Benjiman Klien (1978). "Vertical Integration,
       Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process." Journal of Law and
       Economics, Vol. 21, No. 2, 297-326.

Andrade, Gregor, Mark L. Mitchell, and Erik Stafford (2001). “New Evidence and Perspectives
      on Mergers.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, No. 2, 103-120.

Antras, Pol (2003). “Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
       Vol. 118, No. 4, 1375-1418.

Barber, Brad, Richard Lyon and Chih-Ling Tsai (1999). “Improved Methods for Tests of Long-
       Run Abnormal Performance.” Journal of Finance, Vol. 54, No. 1, 165-201.

Berger, Philip and Eli Ofek (1995). “Diversification’s Effect on Firm Value.” Journal of
       Finacial Economics, Vol. 37, No.1, 39-66.

Bradley, Michael, Anand Desai, and E. Han Kim (1988). “Synergistic Gains from Corporate
       Acquisitions and their Division Between the Stockholders of Target and Acquiring
       Firms.” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 21, No. 1, 3-40.

Brickley, James, Gregg Jarrell, and Jeffrey Netter (1988). “The Market for Corporate Control:
       The Empirical Evidence Since 1980.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 2, No. 1
       49-68.

Bris, Arturo and Christos Cabolis (2004). “Adopting Better Corporate Governance:
       Evidence from Cross-Border Mergers.” Mimeo, Yale School of Management.

Caves, Richard E. (1996). Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. 2nd Edition,
       Cambridge University Press.

Coase, Ronald (1937). "The Nature of the Firm." Economica, Vol. 4, No. 16, 386-405.

Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales (2004). “The Private Benefits of Control.” Journal of
      Finance, Vol. 59, No. 2, 533-596.

Froot, Kenneth (1991). "Japanese Foreign Direct Investment," in U.S.-Japan Economic
       Forum, Vol. 1, M. Feldstein and Y. Kosai, eds., National Bureau of Economic
       Research and Japan Center for Economic Research.


                                                                                      38
Froot, Kenneth and Jeremy Stein (1991). “Exchange Rates and Foreign DirectInvestment:
       An Imperfect Capital Markets Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol.
       106, No. 4, 1191-217.

Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart (1986). “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory of
      Vertical and Lateral Integration.” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94, No. 4, pp.
      691-719.

Jensen, Michael and Richard Ruback (1983). "The Market for Corporate Control: The Scientific
       Evidence." Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 11, No. 1, 5-50.

Kindleberger, Charles (1969). American Business Abroad: Six Lectures on Direct Investment.
       New Haven. Yale University Press.

Krugman, Paul (1998). "Firesale FDI." MIT Working Paper.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1998). “Law
       and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 106, No. 6, 1113-1155.

Lang, Larry and Rene Stulz (1994), “Tobin’s q, Corporate Diversification and Firm
       Performance.” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 102, No. 6, 1248-1280.

Moeller, Sara B., Frederik P. Schlingemann, and Rene M. Stulz (2004). "Wealth Destruction on
      a Massive Scale? A Study of Acquiring-Firm Returns in the Recent Merger Wave."
      Journal of Finance, Forthcoming.

Perez-Gonzales, Francisco (2004). “The Impact of Acquiring Control on Productivity: Evidence
       from Mexican Manufacturing Plants.” Working Paper, Columbia University.

Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (1998). “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American
       Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 3, 559-586.

Williamson, Oliver E. (1979). “Transaction Cost Economics: The Governance of Contractual
       Relations.” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. 22, No. 2, 233-261.




                                                                                    39
                                           Figure 1: As a Fraction of FDI, Cross Border M&As increase in the 1990s

                      1.1


                       1


                      0.9


                      0.8


                      0.7
$ Value of CBMA/FDI




                      0.6                                                                                                            Total
                                                                                                                                     Latin America
                      0.5                                                                                                            East Asia


                      0.4


                      0.3


                      0.2


                      0.1


                       0
                            1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001
                                                                             Year




                                                                                                                                                 40
                              Figure 2a: Deregulation of Foreign Ownership Restrictions Facilitates the Increase in Cross-Border M&A Activity.



                                                                     Thailand: Value of Cross-Border M&A (US$ millions)

                       4500


                       4000

                                              The Bank of Thailand announced that foreign investors
                                              would be allowed to hold more than 49% of the shares in
                       3500
                                              existing financial institutions for a period of 10 years
                                              without the approval of the Ministry of Finance. 11/97

                       3000
Value (US$ millions)




                       2500
                                The foreign ownership limit of 25% for financial institutions was lifted on a
                                case-by-case basis. 10/97
                       2000



                       1500   The restriction on foreign ownership of office buildings and
                              condominiums was lifted in end-April 1997 in an effort to shrink the
                              country's oversupply of real estate. 5/97
                       1000



                       500


                         0
                               1990         1991          1992           1993          1994          1995          1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001
                                                                                                            Year




                                                                                                                                                             41
                             Figure 2b: Deregulation of Foreign Ownership Restrictions Facilitates the Increase in Cross-Border M&A Activity.



                                                                South Korea: Value of Cross-Border M&A (US$ millions)


                     12000
                                                                                          Foreign investors were allowed to take over corporations, except defense-related
                                                                                          companies, and the ceiling on the amount of stock foreigners may acquire in all
                                                                                          companies without the approval of the board of directors was abolished. 5/98



                     10000
                              Foreign banks and brokerage houses were allowed
                              to establish subsidiaries if their equity capital was
                              more than W200 million. 4/98




                     8000
Value(US$millions)




                     6000


                                                                         The ceiling on aggregate foreigners'
                                                                         ownership of Korean shares was
                                                                         increased to 55%. 12/97

                     4000




                     2000




                        0
                             1990        1991         1992          1993         1994         1995           1996      1997         1998        1999         2000            2001
                                                                                                     Ye ar




                                                                                                                                                                                    42
Table 1. The Frequency of Cross-Border M&A Transactions in Emerging Markets Varies by Time,
         Region, and Sector.


                                                 1988-90           1991-95          1996-97           1998-02

                                    Decomposition by Region of Target
                East Asia                      25            110                        78               437
              Latin America                    35            239                       184               520

                                Decomposition by Target Sector
         Basic Manufacturing             19             67                              50               135
       Machinery & Electronics            8             60                              48               205
 Utilities, Telecom & Transportation      2             37                              29               165
      Wholesale & Retail Trade            2             21                              15                69
                 FIRE                     8             47                              57               165
 Hotels, Tourism & Misc. Services         2             20                              15               103

                         Decomposition by Country/Region of Acquirer
               Canada                      5           51                              30                 90
               Europe                     27           62                              54                293
                Japan                     9            18                              10                 74
       Singapore & Hong Kong              1            31                              27                129
            United States                 18           187                             141               371
 Notes: The table summarizes all cross-border mergers and acquisitions involving a public acquirer from a developed
 market and a public target from a developing market by region, by sector, and over time for all cross-border M&A
 transactions which were announced between 1988 and 2002. The emerging markets include Argentina, Brazil,
 Chile, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand. The developed markets include
 Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Singapore, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the
 United States. Basic manufacturing is targets with 2-digit SIC codes 20-29; Machinery & Electronics is targets in
 SIC codes 30-39; Utilities, Telecom and Transportation is targets in SIC codes 40-49; Wholesale and Retail Trade is
 targets in SIC codes 50-59; FIRE is targets in SIC codes 60-69; Hotels, Tourism and Miscellaneous services is
 targets in SIC codes 70-89. Data for M&A transactions, primary SIC codes, and target and acquirer nations is from
 SDC.




                                                                                                                  43
Table 2. There Is Cross Sectional Variation in Post Acquisition Ownership through Cross-Border
Mergers and Acquisitions.

 Number of M&A             Acquirer had
   transactions              Minority                            Pre-Acquisition Ownership
                          Interest Before
                            Acquisition

  Post-Acquisition          No        Yes         < 20%             20-40%            40-50%             50%+
    Ownership

        0-50%               214        16            8                 6                 2                 0


       51-95%               138        47            5                 9                 5                 28


      95-100%               490       106            1                 3                 8                 94

Notes: The table summarizes cross-border mergers and acquisitions involving a public acquirer from a developed market
and a public target from an emerging market by pre- and post-acquisition ownership. The table covers all M&A
transactions announced between 1988 and 2002 and for which control data is available. Emerging markets include
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand. Developed markets
include Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Singapore, Spain, the United Kingdom, and
the United States. M&A transactions are identified and control information is collected from SDC data items “Percent
Shares Acquired” and “Percent Shares Owned After Transaction.” Control information is available for 1011
observations.




                                                                                                                 44
Table 3. There Is Cross Sectional Variation in Cross-Border M&A Transaction Characteristics.

                                                         Panel A

  Transaction Characteristics             Targets in       Targets from other             Targets from Emerging
                                          the United       Developed Markets                     Markets
                                            States
Total M&A transactions                        836                   314                               124
Tender offer                                   33                    7                                 9
All-cash payment                              257                   102                               65
All-stock payment                              59                    7                                 2
Payment mix of cash and                        18                    2                                 1
stock
Target being privatized                        2                     6                                 2
Acquisition privately                         107                    35                                22
negotiated
Target bankrupt                                5                     8                                  1
Target being divested                         218                   119                                44
Joint Venture                                  2                     2                                  5

                                                         Panel B
                                                                                                          Percent of
                                             Mean          Median Minimum Maximum                        Sample with
                                                                                                        Reported Data
                                                 Transaction Value
Targets in US                               $1.24B     $100M $0.75 M                   $62.59B               44.4%

Other developed market                    $355.7 M        $71.3M        $0.47 M         $5.25B               38.2%
targets

Emerging-market targets                    $216.4     $73.1M $0.05 M                   $3.204B               60.4%
                                              Target Stake Acquired
Targets in US                              84.47%       100%      1.1%                   100%                67.3%
Other developed market                     74.95%       100%       1%                    100%                67.2%
targets
Emerging-market targets                    50.94%           49%           0.37%          100%                57.3%
Notes: This table summarizes the deal value and target stake acquired for the 62 US firms in the sample which
announced M&A transactions in emerging markets and other M&A transactions in developed markets from 1990 to
2002 by the geographic region where the target is present. All data is collected from SDC. Data was consistently
available for all characteristics except method of payment which suffers from missing data in Panel A. Data was also
not consistently available for transaction value or target stake acquired and thus the percent of the sample with data is
reported in the final column of Panel B.




                                                                                                                        45
Table 4. Joint Returns Increase When a Cross-Border M&A Transaction Is Announced.
                                                         Full Sample

                 Joint Returns
                     (US$)                                Raw Returns                         Market-Adjusted Returns

                     -1:+1                                    2.28%**                                 1.79%**

                     -2:+2                                    1.73%**                                  1.08%*

                       N                                         224                                     221

                                                      Target in East Asia

                 Joint Returns                                  Raw                               Market-Adjusted
                (US$ Returns)                                  Returns                               Returns

                     -1:+1                                     2.34%*                                 2.29%**

                       N                                         144                                     144


                                                   Target in Latin America

                 Joint Returns                                  Raw                               Market-Adjusted
                (US$ Returns)                                  Returns                               Returns

                     -1:+1                                     2.15%*                                   0.86%

                       N                                         80                                       77


                                 Acquirer Gains Majority Control of Emerging-Market Target

                 Joint Returns                                  Raw                               Market-Adjusted
                (US$ Returns)                                  Returns                               Returns

                     -1:+1                                   7.42%***                                 5.89%***

                       N                                         55                                       55

Notes: This table summarizes average stock market reactions to the announcement of cross-border M&A transactions involving
a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from a developing market. Averages are reported in standardized
monthly return units. The sample size is based on a subset of transactions where stock price data was available for acquirer-
target pairs (N=224). -1:+1 is a symmetric 3-week event window and -2:+2 is a symmetric 5-week event window around the
week of the announcement. Returns are calculated using continuous compounding of the percent changes in the weekly closing
stock prices (equivalent to a buy-and-hold methodology). Raw returns are unadjusted average returns. Market-adjusted
returns are calculated by subtracting the market return from the raw return for any given firm. Joint returns are calculated as
market-capitalization-weighted average returns for both the target and the acquirer using dollar-denominated returns for both
parties. *, ** , and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                         46
Table 5. The Acquisition of Majority Control of the Target Drives Joint Returns in Cross-Border M&A Transactions.
                      (1a)        (1b)         (1c)          (1d)         (1e)         (1f)         (1g)        (1h)         (1i)         (1j)         (1k)          (1l)
                    0.018**      -0.001       -0.008        -0.002       -0.008       -0.012       -0.014      -0.013       -0.009       -0.008       -0.01         -0.009
     Intercept      (0.008)     (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.012)      (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.010)     (0.010)      (0.012)      (0.009)      (0.011)       (0.010)

     Majority                  0.068***     0.078***      0.058***     0.069***     0.068***     0.069***     0.07***     0.068***     0.069***     0.068***      0.068***
     Control                    (0.015)      (0.018)       (0.021)      (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)      (0.015)       (0.015)
     Previous                                 0.002         -0.016
   Relationship                              (0.017)       (0.020)
   Control*Prev                                              0.07*
   Relationship                                            (0.039)
                                                                        -0.0038
     Diversify                                                         (0.0150)
                                                                                    9.16e-08
   Acquirer Size                                                                    (1.5e-07)
                                                                                                 4.27-e06
    Target Size                                                                                  (3.4e-06)
                                                                                                              1.8e-06
  Acquirer Cash                                                                                               (1.9e06)
  Target in Asia                                                                                                            0.001
                                                                                                                           (0.015)
                                                                                                                                         -0.006
   Crisis Period                                                                                                                        (0.020)
   Acquirer in                                                                                                                                        0.004
       FIRE                                                                                                                                          (0.017)
                                                                                                                                                                     0.001
  Target in FIRE                                                                                                                                                    (0.018)
    R-squared           0.12        0.12        0.14           0.16       0.13          0.12        0.13          0.14        0.12         0.12          0.12        0.12
          N             216         150          124           124        149           150          150          149         150          150           150          150
Notes: This table summarizes the results of regressions where the dependent variable is joint (acquirer + target) abnormal returns during a 3-week event window
(standardized to monthly return units) around the announcement date. Mean coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. All M&A
transactions in the sample involve a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from an emerging market. Joint returns are market-capitalization-
weighted averages of acquirer and target returns and US$-denominated. Weekly abnormal returns are calculated using a market model and are continuously
compounded, then standardized to monthly units. The acquisition of control is a dummy variable identified if the acquirer holds 50% or more of the target firm’s
equity following the acquisition and did not previously have control. Previous relationship is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the acquirer held equity
in the target firm prior to the acquisition. Diversification is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the absolute value of the difference in SIC codes between
acquirer and target is 1000 or greater. Acquirer and target size and acquirer cash is measured in US$ million. Emerging markets included are Indonesia, Malaysia,
Philippines, South Korea, Thailand, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico. The developed markets include Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Singapore, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Crisis period is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the target country is in a
currency crisis. Acquirer and target FIRE dummies take on a value of one if the firm has an SIC code between 6000 and 6999. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                         47
Table 6A. Cross-border M&A Transactions Create Value for both Acquirers and Targets.

             Panel A                         Developed Market Acquirer                         Emerging-Market Target
                                              (Local Currency Returns)                         (Local Currency Returns)

          Full Sample                        Raw               Market-Adjusted               Raw                Market-Adjusted
                                            Returns               Returns                   Returns                Returns

              -1:+1                       3.05%***                 2.43%**                 6.68%***                 6.87%***
              -2:+2                        2.00%**                  1.26%                  5.51%***                 5.05%***

                N                               346                     346                    299                     299


             Panel B                        Developed Market Acquirer                          Emerging-Market Target
                                             (Local Currency Returns)                          (Local Currency Returns)

            East Asia                       Raw               Market-Adjusted                Raw                Market-Adjusted
                                           Returns               Returns                    Returns                Returns

              -1:+1                       3.45%**                   2.70**                  5.17%*                   5.17%*

                N                            230                      230                     188                      188


             Panel C                        Developed Market Acquirer                          Emerging-Market Target
                                             (Local Currency Returns)                          (Local Currency Returns)

         Latin America                      Raw               Market-Adjusted                Raw                Market-Adjusted
                                           Returns               Returns                    Returns                Returns

              -1:+1                       2.23%**                  1.89%**                 9.18%***                 9.68%***

                N                            116                      116                     111                      111


             Panel D                        Developed Market Acquirer                          Emerging-Market Target
                                             (Local Currency Returns)                          (Local Currency Returns)

  Majority Control Acquired              Raw               Market-Adjusted                   Raw                Market-Adjusted
                                        Returns               Returns                       Returns                Returns

              -1:+1                    5.66%***                3.99%***                    9.87%***                 8.92%***

                N                          92                      92                          85                       85

 Notes: This table summarizes average stock market reactions to the announcement of a cross-border acquisition involving a public
 acquirer from a developed market and a public target from a developing market for the full sample (Panel A) and by region (Panels B
 and C). Panel D summarizes average stock market reactions to the announcement of a cross-border acquisition in which majority
 control is transferred to the acquirer. Averages are reported in standardized monthly return units. East Asian emerging markets
 include Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand. Latin American emerging markets include Argentina, Brazil,
 Chile, and Mexico. The developed markets include Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Singapore,
 Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The event window comprises a symmetric 3- or 5-week period. Returns are
 calculated using continuous compounding of the percent changes in the weekly equity closing prices (equivalent to a buy and hold
 methodology). Raw returns are unadjusted average returns. Market-adjusted returns are alculated by subtracting the market return
 from the raw return for any given firm. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                 48
  Table 6B. Majority Control is Accompanied by Higher Value Gains for Acquirers and Targets.
                                                        Panel A: Full Sample

                                              Developed-Market Acquirer                        Emerging-Market Target
                                                    (US$ Returns)                                  (US$ Returns)

               Average                                   2.34%**                                       7.07%***
                                                        (0.013)                                        (0.002)

                Median                                    0.91%                                           1.55%
                                                         (0.027)                                         (0.026)

                                  Panel B: Acquirer Gains Control of Emerging-Market Target

                                                Developed-Market Acquirer                         Emerging-Market Target
                                                      (US$ Returns)                                   (US$ Returns)

               Average                                     4.06%***                                       10.02%**
                                                          (0.001)                                           (0.05)

                Median                                       3.97%                                           0.84%
                                                            (0.001)                                         (0.111)

                              Panel C: Acquirer Does Not Gain Control of Emerging-Market Target

                                                Developed-Market Acquirer                         Emerging-Market Target
                                                      (US$ Returns)                                   (US$ Returns)

               Average                                      0.47%                                          4.88%*
                                                            (0.51)                                          (0.10)

                Median                                      0.42%                                           1.41%
                                                            (0.42)                                          (0.41)

                                              Panel D: Market Capitalization Values

                                                Developed-Market Acquirer                         Emerging-Market Target
                                                  (Market Capitalization)                         (Market Capitalization)

               Average                                  $33.48 Billion                                 $895.81 Million

                Median                                  $12.91 Billion                                 $201.60 Million

 Notes: This table summarizes average and median stock market reactions to the announcement of a cross-border acquisition
involving a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from a developing market for the full sample (Panel A),
when the acquirer gains majority control (Panel B), and when the acquirer does not gain majority control (Panel C). Panel D
summarizes the average and median stock market capitalization for acquirer and target firms. East Asian emerging markets include
Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, and Thailand. Latin American emerging markets include Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
and Mexico. The developed markets include Canada, France, Germany, Hong Kong, Italy, Japan, Netherlands, Singapore, Spain, the
United Kingdom, and the United States. The event window comprises a symmetric 3- week period which includes the week before
and the week following the announcement. Returns are calculated using continuous compounding of the percent changes in the
weekly equity closing prices (equivalent to a buy and hold methodology). Market-adjusted returns are calculated by subtracting the
market return from the raw return for any given firm. P-values are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                               49
Table 7. The Acquisition of Majority Control of the Target Drives Acquirer Returns in Cross-border M&A Transactions.
                        (2a)          (2b)          (2c)          (2d)          (2e)          (2f)         (2g)         (2h)           (2i)         (2j)          (2k)            (2l)
                       0.024         0.007         0.008        0.014        0.006         0.009         0.003       4.68e-04         0.004         0.009         0.010          0.011
      Intercept      (0.009)**      (0.008)       (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.009)       (0.010)        (0.009)       (0.008)       (0.010)        (0.009)

     Majority                      0.033**        0.043***      0.026      0.035 ***       0.033**      0.046***      0.042***      0.048***      0.035***       0.031**        0.033**
     Control                       (0.013)        (0.015)      (0.017)      (0.013)       (0.013)       (0.014)       (0.015)       (0.014)       (0.013)        (0.013)        (0.013)
     Previous                                      -0.004       0.021
   Relationship                                   (0.015)      (0.017)
   Control*Prev                                                0.060*
   Relationship                                                (0.033)
                                                                             -0.001
     Diversify                                                              (0.013)
                                                                                           -0.004
   Target in Asia                                                                         (0.013)
                                                                                                       2.96e-08
   Acquirer Size                                                                                      (1.27e-07)
                                                                                                                     5.30e-06
    Target Size                                                                                                     (4.07e-06)
                                                                                                                                    -9.39e-08
   Acquirer Cash                                                                                                                   (1.70e-06)
                                                                                                                                                    -0.017
   Crisis Period                                                                                                                                   (0.018)
   Acquirer in                                                                                                                                                    -0.010
       FIRE                                                                                                                                                      (0.014)
                                                                                                                                                                                 -0.015
  Target in FIRE                                                                                                                                                                (0.015)
    R-squared                          0.03          0.04         0.03          0.03           0.05      0.05             0.06          0.03          0.03          0.03          0.06
          N               341          237            198          234          237            210          198           209           237           237           235           198
Notes: This table summarizes the results of regressions where the dependent variable is abnormal returns for acquirer firms during a 3-week event window (standardized
to monthly return units) around the announcement date on characteristics of the involved firms. Mean coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in
parentheses. All M&A transactions in the sample involve a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from an emerging market. Weekly abnormal
returns are calculated using a market model and are continuously compounded, then standardized to monthly units. The acquisition of control is a dummy variable
identified if the acquirer holds 50% or more of the target firm’s equity following the acquisition and did not previously have control. Previous relationship is a dummy
variable that takes on a value of one if the acquirer held equity in the target firm prior to the acquisition. Diversification is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one
if the absolute value of the difference in SIC codes between acquirer and target is 1000 or greater. Acquirer and target size and acquirer cash is measured in US$ million.
Emerging markets included are Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, Thailand, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico. Crisis period is a dummy variable that
takes on a value of one if the target country is in a currency crisis. Acquirer and target FIRE dummies take on a value of one if the firm has an SIC code between 6000
and 6999. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                           50
Table 8. The Acquisition of Majority Control of the Target Does Not Drive Target Returns in Cross-border M&A Transactions.
                         (3a)          (3b)        (3c)        (3d)         (3e)        (3f)         (3g)         (3h)          (3i)         (3j)        (3k)        (3l)
                       0.069***      0.045*       0.031       0.037        0.051      0.063*        0.005        0.033         0.025        0.036       0.040      0.053*
     Intercept         (0.020)       (0.027)     (0.032)     (0.034)      (0.033)     (0.034)      (0.025)      (0.032)       (0.025)      (0.028)     (0.033)     (0.031)

     Majority                         0.044       0.055       0.039        0.044       0.045        0.029        0.044         0.038        0.039       0.046       0.039
     Control                         (0.042)     (0.046)     (0.055)      (0.043)     (0.042)      (0.036)      (0.047)       (0.037)      (0.042)     (0.044)     (0.043)
     Previous                                     0.028       0.010
   Relationship                                  (0.047)     (0.057)
   Control*Prev                                               0.056
   Relationship                                              (0.102)
                                                                           -0.014
     Diversify                                                            (0.044)
                                                                                       -0.034
  Target in Asia                                                                      (0.042)
                                                                                                 7.7e-07**
   Acquirer Size                                                                                 (3.8e-07)
                                                                                                                3.71e-06
    Target Size                                                                                                (1.27-e05)
                                                                                                                              -7.5e-08
  Acquirer Cash                                                                                                               (5.2e06)
                                                                                                                                            0.071
   Crisis Period                                                                                                                            (0.05)
   Acquirer in                                                                                                                                          0.014
       FIRE                                                                                                                                            (0.046)
                                                                                                                                                                      -0.021
  Target in FIRE                                                                                                                                                     (0.048)
     R-squared            0.01           0.01        0.01        0.01        0.01         0.01       0.03          0.01          0.01         0.01        0.01         0.01
          N               292            209          175        175         205          209        180            180          180           209        208          206
 Notes: This table summarizes the results of regressions where the dependent variable is market adjusted target returns during a 3-week event window (standardized
 to monthly return units) around the announcement date. Mean coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. All M&A transactions in the
 sample involve a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from an emerging market. Weekly abnormal returns are calculated using a market
 model and are continuously compounded, then standardized to monthly units. The acquisition of control is a dummy variable identified if the acquirer holds 50% or
 more of the target firm’s equity following the acquisition and did not previously have control. Previous relationship is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one
 if the acquirer held equity in the target firm prior to the acquisition. Diversification is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the absolute value of the
 difference in SIC codes between acquirer and target is 1000 or greater. Acquirer and target size and acquirer cash is measured in US$ million. Emerging markets
 included are Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, South Korea, Thailand, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Mexico. Crisis period is a dummy variable that takes on a value
 of one if the target country is in a currency crisis. Acquirer and target FIRE dummies take on a value of one if the firm has an SIC code between 6000 and 6999. *,
 ** , and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
  Table 9. Do Crisis Periods Affect the Creation of Value?
                                                          Panel A                                                               Panel B
                             (1a)        (2a)       (3a)     (4a)         (5a)          (6a)           (1b)            (2b)        (3b)              (4b)
  Intercept                 0.033***     0.026**    0.013    0.011        0.009         0.002          0.035***        0.035***    0.009             0.011
                            (0.011)      (0.013)    (0.011) (0.009)       (0.009)       (0.009)         (0.012)         (0.013)     (0.01)            (0.011)
  1988 – 1996               -0.039*                          -0.014
                            (0.023)                          (0.015)
  1997 – 1999                            -0.004                           -0.004
                                          (0.019)                         (0.013)
  2000 - 2003                                       0.034*                              0.017
                                                    (0.020)                              (0.014)
  EMBI spread                                                                                          0.117**         0.131**       0.005           -0.008
                                                                                                       (0.053)          (0.058)      (0.043)         (0.035)
  Crisis period                                                                                                        -0.051                        -0.016
                                                                                                                       (0.055)                       (0.025)
  Majority Control                                            0.031**     0.034**       0.033**                                      0.031**         0.034**
                                                              (0.013)     (0.013)       (0.013)                                      (0.015)         (0.016)
  EMBI* Crisis                                                                                                         -0.278
                                                                                                                       (0.245)
  EMBI*Control                                                                                                                       -0.008
                                                                                                                                      (0.0687)
  EMBI* Crisis* Control                                                                                                                              0.027
                                                                                                                                                     (0.163)

   N                        341          341        341        237        237             237            263              263           180          180
   R-squared                0.0088       0.0001     0.0086     0.0309     0.0278          0.0334         0.0185           0.0234        0.02421      0.0286
Notes: This table summarizes the results of regressions where the dependent variable is abnormal returns for acquirer firms during a 3-week event window
(standardized to monthly return units) around the announcement date. Mean coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. The acquisition of
control is a dummy variable identified if the acquirer holds 50% or more of the target firm’s equity following the acquisition and did not previously have control. Crisis
period is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the target country is in a currency crisis. EMBI is the relative value of the JP Morgan Emerging Market’s
Bond Index (EMBI) spread. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                                                                                                                                                       52
Table 10. Value is Created By Acquiring Targets in Emerging Markets and Not Developed Markets.

                          1a          1b           1c           1d            1e             1f             1g            1h            1i            1j

  Intercept            -0.0002     -0.0038     -0.0002      0.008           0.006          0.0013       0.013         0.012        -0.009         -0.009
                       (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.01)       (0.011)        (0.012)         (0.013)      (0.011)       (0.011)      (0.013)        (0.013)
  Emerging-market                  0.033**     0.033**      -0.007          -0.007         0.0144       -0.008        0.00002      -0.0004        -0.003
  Target                           (0.013)     (0.017)      (0.024)        (0.024)         (0.028)      (0.023)       (0.025)      (0.03)         (0.031)
  Majority Control                             -0.0023      -0.012           -.009          -0.006      -0.013        -0.013       0.002          0.002
                                               (0.011)      (0.012)        (0.013)         (0.014)      (0.012)       (0.012)      (0.016)        (0.016)
  Emerging-market
  Target* Control                                           0.075**       0.0738**         0.058*       0.075**       0.077**      0.129***       0.122***
                                                            (0.032)        (0.032)         (0.033)      (0.032)       (0.032)      (0.04)         (0.044)
  Previous                                                                  0.005           0.018
  Relationship                                                             (0.017)         (0.019)
  Previous
  Relationship*                                                                             -0.056
  Emerging-market                                                                          (0.039)
  Target
  Diversify                                                                                             -0.013        -.001
                                                                                                        (0.01)        (0.011)
  Diversify*
  Emerging-market                                                                                                     -0.036
  Target                                                                                                              (0.036)

   Value of                                                                                                                           0.000001        0.000001
   Transaction                                                                                                                        (0.000001) (0.000001)
   Emerging-market
   Target * Value                                                                                                                                     0.000029
   of Transaction                                                                                                                                     (0.000035)
   Firm Fixed           NO           YES         YES        YES           YES           YES               YES           YES           YES             YES
   Effects Included
   R-squared
   N                    1235         1235        843        843           843           843               1235          1235          843             843
Notes: This table summarizes the results of regressions where the dependent variable is abnormal returns for acquirer firms during a 3-week event window
(standardized to monthly return units) around the announcement date. Mean coefficient estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. All M&A
transactions in the sample involve a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from an emerging market, or a target in Canada, Europe, Hong Kong,
Japan, Singapore or the United States. The acquisition of control is a dummy variable identified if the acquirer holds 50% or more of the target firm’s equity following
the acquisition and did not previously have control. Previous relationship is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the acquirer held equity in the target firm
prior to the acquisition. Diversification is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the absolute value of the difference in SIC codes between acquirer and
target is 1000 or greater. Crisis period is a dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the target country is in a currency crisis. *, ** , and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.


                                                                                                                                                                        53
Table 11. Majority Control Matters More in R&D Intensive Industries in Emerging Markets.
                                         1             2              3              4              5              6
 Intercept                             0.007         0.007          0.012        0.062*         0.063*         0.061*
                                      (0.008)       (0.008)        (0.008)       (0.033)        (0.033)        (0.034)
 Majority Control                     0.033**        0.033**       0.024*         -0.012         -0.012         -0.011
                                      (0.013)       (0.013)        (0.014)       (0.012)        (0.012)        (0.014)
 Rdintensity                                         0.000        -0.013**                       -0.001         -0.001
                                                    (0.003)        (0.006)                      (0.002)        (0.004)
 Rdintensity* Control                                              0.019***                                     -0.001
                                                                   (0.007)                                     (0.005)
 Emerging-market Target                                                          -0.007          -0.008         0.011
                                                                                 (0.024)        (0.024)        (0.026)
 Emerging-market                                                                 0.074**        0.075**         0.043
 Target*Control                                                                  (0.032)        (0.032)        (0.035)
 Rdintensity*Emerging-market                                                                                  -0.035***
 Target                                                                                                        (0.013)
 Emerging-market                                                                                               0.044***
 Target*Control*Rdintensity                                                                                    (0.015)

Firm Fixed Effects Included                 No            No          No             Yes          Yes             Yes
R-squared                                 0.027          0.028       0.057          0.345        0.346           0.355
N                                          237            236         236            838          838             838
Notes: This table summarizes the results of regressions where the dependent variable is abnormal returns for acquirer firms
during a 3-week event window (standardized to monthly return units) around the announcement date. Mean coefficient
estimates are reported with standard errors in parentheses. M&A transactions in the sample for regressions 1-3 involve
a public acquirer from a developed market and a public target from an emerging market. Regressions 4-6 extend the
sample of targets to include developed market targets. The acquisition of control is a dummy variable identified if the
acquirer holds 50% or more of the target firm’s equity following the acquisition and did not previously have control.
Rdintensity is a measure that is constructed using all US firms in Compustat from 1990 to 2002. The research and
development expense (Compustat data item #46) is divided by net sales (Compustat data item #12) for all firms. This
measure is sorted by 2-digit SIC codes, and an average measure of R&D intensity by 2-digit SIC code is constructed.
The measure of R&D intensity is then matched by industry with the 2-digit SIC code of the emerging-market targets.
*, ** , and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.
