NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PRODUCT QUALITY, LINDER,
AND THE DIRECTION OF TRADE
Juan Carlos Hallak
Working Paper 10877
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10877
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

I am particularly grateful to Elhanan Helpman and Marc Melitz for their guidance and support, to Alan
Deardorff for very helpful discussions and comments, and to Peter Morrow for excellent research assistance.
I also thank Robert Barro, Francesco Caselli, Edwin Diewert, Doireann Fitzgerald, Daniel Hamermesh, Jim
Levinsohn, Rosa Matzkin, Gary Solon, Silvana Tenreyro, and seminar participants at Columbia, Di Tella,
Duke, Harvard, Michigan, Michigan State, Purdue, San Andres, Texas-Austin, Toronto, University of British
Columbia, the World Bank, Yale, and the EIIT Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2004 by Juan Carlos Hallak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Product Quality, Linder, and the Direction of Trade
Juan Carlos Hallak
NBER Working Paper No. 10877
October 2004
JEL No. F1
ABSTRACT
A substantial amount of theoretical work predicts that quality plays an important role as a
determinant of the global patterns of bilateral trade. This paper develops an empirical framework to
estimate the empirical relevance of this prediction. In particular, it identifies the effect of quality
operating on the demand side through the relationship between per capita income and aggregate
demand for quality. The model yields predictions for bilateral flows at the sectoral level, and is
estimated using cross-sectional data for bilateral trade among 60 countries in 1995. The empirical
results confirm the theoretical prediction: rich countries tend to import relatively more from
countries that produce high quality goods. The paper also shows that a severe aggregation bias
explains the failure of the literature so far to find consistent empirical support for the "Linder
hypothesis", the conjectured corollary to the first theory relating product quality and the direction
of trade.
Juan Carlos Hallak
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48103
and NBER
hallak@umich.edu

1

Introduction

Increasing evidence indicates that there are large diﬀerences across countries in the quality of the
products that they produce and export. While traditional theories of international trade neglect
the existence of product quality diﬀerences across countries, a substantial amount of theoretical
work predicts that quality systematically aﬀects the direction of international trade. In spite of the
theoretical predictions, there is yet no evidence evaluating the empirical relevance of quality as a
determinant of bilateral trade volumes. Understanding the influence of quality on the direction of
trade might be crucial for enhancing the predictive power of benchmark empirical trade models,
which will result in improved assessments of the impact of other determinants of trade, such as
commercial policies or natural barriers to international exchange.
Linder (1961) first noted the role of quality as a determinant of the direction of trade. He
argued that richer countries spend a larger proportion of their income on high quality goods.
He also argued that closeness to demand is a source of comparative advantage, providing richer
countries with a comparative advantage in the production of high quality goods–the goods that
they demand. He then conjectured that the congruence of production and consumption patterns
leads countries with similar income per capita to trade more with one another. This is the Linder
hypothesis, the earliest theory explaining the eﬀects of quality diﬀerences on the direction of trade.
It has received considerable attention for its contrast with the standard Heckscher-Ohlin theory,
which predicts trade intensity to be higher between countries of dissimilar income per capita–as
the latter reflects diﬀerences in relative factor endowments.
More recent theoretical work has developed general equilibrium models to formalize the role of
quality as a determinant of trade patterns.1 These models share two key features with Linder’s
theory. First, rich countries have a comparative advantage in the production of high quality goods
(comparative advantage comes here from productivity or factor endowment diﬀerences). Second,
rich countries consume high quality goods in larger proportions than poorer countries. Even though
the models yield theoretical results in the spirit of the Linder hypothesis, they do not obtain this
conjecture as a general result.
Recent empirical work provides support for the supply-side relationship between per capita income and quality production postulated by Linder and subsequent theorists. Schott (2004) shows
1

See Falvey and Kierzkowski (1987), Flam and Helpman (1987), Stokey (1991), Murphy and Shleifer (1997).

2

that export unit values increase systematically with exporter per capita income and relative factor endowments, while Hummels and Klenow (2002) use quantities exported and proxies for the
number of varieties to argue that quality diﬀerences are necessary to explain (at least part of) the
observed diﬀerences in unit values. In contrast to the evidence on the supply side, the demand-side
relationship between per capita income and quality consumption, and the impact of this relationship on bilateral trade flows, have not been the subject of similar empirical scrutiny. In particular,
there is yet no attempt at estimating the existence and magnitude of such a quality-driven demand
eﬀect on the global patterns of bilateral trade.2
A vast related literature has concentrated on estimating the Linder hypothesis. Since this is a
conjectured corollary to a theory that places quality at center stage, tests of this hypothesis could be
interpreted as evidence on the role of quality. This literature typically uses the gravity equation as
benchmark3 , and adds a “Linder term”, a measure of income dissimilarity between pairs of countries.
The Linder hypothesis predicts a negative sign for the estimated coeﬃcient on the Linder term.
But the empirical results on the sign of this coeﬃcient are mixed.4 There is nevertheless an even
more fundamental problem than failure to confirm the Linder hypothesis: the empirical framework
used by this literature cannot properly identify the role of quality as a determinant of the direction
of trade. First, the prediction that the intensity of trade is higher between countries with similar
income per capita can also result from inter-sectoral non-homotheticities in demand, not related
to quality. This is the case if income elasticities diﬀer across sectors, and richer countries have a
comparative advantage in sectors with high income elasticities.5 Second, quality eﬀects coexist with
other traditional (inter-sectoral) determinants of trade, such as diﬀerences in factor proportions.
But the gravity-equation framework does not nest these diﬀerent forces. It is thus unable to isolate
the role of quality from other inter-sectoral determinants of trade.
This paper provides a testable framework to estimate the impact of quality on the direction
2

Brooks (2003) provides evidence of this eﬀect in a specific context. She shows that diﬀerences in export shares

among Colombian firms (in industries with exports largely oriented to the US) depend negatively on the industry-level
quality gap relative to G7 countries, as measured by diﬀerences in unit value of exports to the US.
3
The gravity equation, in its traditional form, postulates a log-linear relationship between the volume of bilateral
trade, the GDP of each country, and the distance between them.
4
See surveys in Deardorﬀ (1984), Leamer and Levinsohn (1995), and McPherson, Redfearn, and Tieslau (2001).
5
The role of this type of non-homotheticities has been addressed by Markusen (1986), Hunter and Markusen
(1988), Bergstrand (1989), Hunter (1991), Deardorﬀ (1998), and Matsuyama (2000).

3

of trade. In particular, it identifies the eﬀect of quality operating on the demand side through
the relationship between income and aggregate demand for quality. The theoretical framework,
described in section 2, yields an empirical specification for estimating bilateral trade that has a
strong resemblance to the gravity equation. However, it yields predictions for bilateral trade flows
at the sectoral instead of at the aggregate level. By focusing on sectoral trade, the empirical
specification embeds and controls for inter-sectoral determinants of comparative advantage. A
parameter in the demand system captures the extent to which income per capita aﬀects quality
choice. In the empirical specification, this parameter translates into the coeﬃcient on an interaction
term between the exporter quality and the importer per capita income. If income aﬀects quality
demand–and therefore trade patterns–this coeﬃcient is predicted to be positive.
Quality is unobservable. I follow two complementary approaches to deal with unobserved quality. First, based on recent empirical findings, in section 3 I use exporter income per capita as a
proxy for quality. The relevant term in the empirical specification then becomes the interaction
between exporter and importer per capita incomes, capturing respectively supply of and demand
for quality. I estimate the empirical model using a cross-section of sectoral bilateral trade flows (at
the 3-digit level) among 60 countries in 1995. Sectors are divided into three categories according
to Rauch (1999): Diﬀerentiated, Reference-priced, and Homogeneous. The theory is primarily applicable to Diﬀerentiated sectors. In those sectors, the results support the theoretical prediction:
rich countries tend to import relatively more from other rich countries–those that produce higher
quality goods. I also estimate the empirical model for sectors in the other two categories to check
that it is indeed quality that drives the results. In Reference-priced sectors, where the theory may
still reasonably apply, the results are similar to those obtained for Diﬀerentiated sectors. In Homogeneous sectors, however, the theory is not expected to apply, as the income interaction term no
longer captures supply of and demand for quality. Consistent with this prediction, the results are
very diﬀerent here; the interaction term shows no systematic eﬀect on trade.
Since the interaction term is very similar to a Linder term, the results can be interpreted as a
sector-level confirmation of the Linder hypothesis. Furthermore, they are not sensitive to the use
of alternative Linder terms often used in the literature. But when the empirical specification is
estimated on aggregate trade flows–as is typically done–the results are reversed. I show that this
is the result of an aggregation bias, the direction of which depends on the extent of cross-country

4

correlation between per capita income and sectoral pattern of specialization. The aggregation bias
explains the failure of the literature so far to find consistent evidence in support of the Linder
hypothesis. If quality drives its main insight–as originally conjectured by Linder–this suggests
a reformulation of the hypothesis as a sector-level prediction, requiring inter-sectoral determinants
of trade to be controlled for.
Keeping constant factors such as production costs, we expect higher quality goods to command
higher prices. Export prices then convey useful information on product quality. In section 4, I
construct export price indices at the sectoral level from unit values of exports to the US (calculated
at the finest possible level of aggregation). I then use these indices as indicators of quality. The
advantage of this approach, relative to the approach in the previous section, is the use of crosssector variation in export price indices within countries to capture cross-sector variation in quality
levels. The disadvantage is that measurement error is pervasive in the dataset used to construct the
indices. The findings here are still consistent with the theoretical prediction: rich countries tend
to import relatively more from countries that produce higher quality goods. These results further
support the findings in the previous section on the role of quality as a determinant of trade. They
also provide complementary evidence that it is quality–as opposed to other factors correlated with
income per capita but unrelated to quality– that drives those results. Section 5 concludes.

2
2.1

Theoretical Framework
The Demand System

Demand in each country k is generated by a representative consumer with a two-tier utility function.
The upper tier utility is weakly separable into subutility indices defined for each diﬀerentiated-good
sector z = 1, ..., Z, and for each homogeneous-good sector g = Z + 1, ..., G,
i
h
U k = U uk1 , ..., ukz , ..., ukZ , ukZ+1 , ..., ukg , ..., ukG .

(1)

The subutility index ukg is a general function of the quantity consumed of good g. The subutility
index ukz takes the specific form:
⎡

⎤1
α
X ³ γ k ´αz z
k
z
⎣
⎦
θh qh
uz =
h∈Hz

5

0 < αz , γ kz < 1 ∀z, k

(2)

where ukz is defined over all varieties h ∈ Hz in sector z. In (2), qh and θh are the quantity and
quality of variety h, and the parameter γ kz is the intensity of preference for quality of country k.
None of the parameters is restricted to be the same across sectors.
The subutility functions ukz are an augmented version of the Dixit-Stiglitz structure of preferences. Quality enters as a utility shifter, while there is still a horizontal dimension of product
diﬀerentiation (consumers love variety). This specification of utility is designed to capture diﬀerences across countries in quality demand, stemming from their diﬀerences in income. For a given
shape of the income distribution, we expect countries with higher average income to consume a
larger proportion of high-quality goods. In the demand system that this utility generates, the parameter γ k captures–in a reduced form–the eﬀect of income on quality demand at the aggregate
level.
The representative consumer uses two-stage budgeting. In the first stage, for a given expenditure
k , expenditure on variety h in sector z is:
allocation across sectors E1k , ..., EZk , ..., EG

pkh qhk

=

P

µ

pkh

γk

θhz

r∈Hz

¶1−σz

µ

pkr

γk

θr z

k
k
k
¶1−σz Ez = s (h)Ez ,

(3)

where σ z = 1/(1 − αz ) > 1 is the elasticity of substitution, and pkh is the price of h faced by
consumers in country k. Equation (3) shows expenditure on h as a share sk (h) of total expenditure
in sector z. This share depends on the value of γ k , and it changes with this parameter according
to:
"

#

X
∂sk (h)
k
=
λ
−
s(r) ln θr ,
ln
θ
h
hz
∂γ kz
r∈Hz

λkhz =

µ

pkh

γk

θhz

P

¶1−σz

r∈Hz

µ

(σ z − 1)

pkr

γk

θr z

¶1−σz > 0.

(4)

Equation (4) highlights the main characteristic of the demand system. For a variety h of aboveaverage quality–the term in brackets in (4) is positive–a higher γ k induces a larger share spent
on h. For a variety h of below-average quality, a higher γ k induces a smaller share spent on h.
Countries with higher γ k thus spend a larger share of their income on high quality goods. Allowing
γ k to vary across countries, this demand system has the convenient property of accommodating
in a simple form cross-country diﬀerences in the pattern of expenditures for goods of diﬀerent

6

quality.6 A special case arises when γ k is the same for every country. In that case, the demand
system is equivalent to the demand system generated by the Dixit-Stiglitz structure of preferences,
where there are no diﬀerences across countries in quality choice.7 Since Dixit-Stiglitz preferences
are standard in international trade models and empirical frameworks with product diﬀerentiation,
the proposed demand system has the additional advantage of embedding a meaningful benchmark
against which to assess the impact of quality on aggregate demand and trade.

2.2

Bilateral trade flows at the sectoral level

Country i produces Niz diﬀerent varieties in sector z. These varieties are symmetric; they share the
same quality and sell at the same price.8 We can multiply equation (3) by the number of varieties
Niz to obtain country k’s total imports from i in sector z:

impkiz

= Niz

P

µ

piz τ kiz
γk

θizz

r∈Hz

µ

¶1−σz

pr τ kr
γk
θr z

k

¶1−σz Ez ,

(5)

where we use pkiz = piz τ kiz , the equality between import price and the product of export price and
trade cost factor between i and k.
Countries diﬀer in the quality of the goods they produce and in their pattern of sectoral specialization. Recent empirical work [Schott (2004), Hummels and Klenow (2002)] provides evidence
characterizing supply-side determinants of quality production. This paper instead takes the distribution of quality production across countries as given and, conditional on this distribution, attempts
to identify the eﬀect of quality on the direction of trade operating on the demand side through the
relationship between income and quality choice. Income as a determinant of the demand for product quality–and hence of the intensity of trade between country pairs–has been one the main
ingredients of most theoretical work addressing the impact of quality on the direction of trade.
6

I do not address here the eﬀects of diﬀerences in higher moments of the income distribution. See Francois and

Kaplan (1996) and Dalgin, Mitra, and Trindade (2004) for an empirical treatment of inequality and trade based on
inter-sectoral non-homotheticities.
7
In this case, quantity substitutes for quality at the same rate in every country. Quantities and prices can then
be renormalized to "common-quality" units to obtain the typical Dixit-Stiglitz specification.
8
This will not be a strong restriction so long as the variation of quality levels within countries is small compared
to the variation of quality levels between countries.

7

However, there is yet no empirical evidence identifying this eﬀect in global patterns of trade.
The proposed demand system allows quality choice to depend on a country-specific parameter.
In the special case with equal γ k across countries, the demand system is equivalent to the standard
Dixit-Stiglitz structure of preferences, which does not allow the demand for quality to vary across
countries. I show next that Dixit-Stiglitz preferences impose a strong restriction on the relationship
between bilateral flows at the sectoral level. This restriction is independent of the distribution of
quality production across countries, and thus provides a key for identifying quality eﬀects on the
direction of trade.
Using (5), consider US (country k) imports of Rubber Tires (sector z) from Germany (country
i). Consider also US imports of tires from Turkey (country j) by replacing i with j in (5). The ratio
between these two expressions indicates the ratio of US imports of tires from Germany relative to
those originating from Turkey, and is independent of the expenditure level and the price index for
tires in the US:

⎛

⎞1−σz
γ kz
k
Niz ⎝ piz τ iz /θiz ⎠
Njz pjz τ k /θγ kz
jz jz

ratiokij (z) =

.

(6)

Replacing k with l in (6), consider the same ratio for a diﬀerent importer, Argentina (country
l). Then, compare these two ratios by taking the ratio between the two:
kl
(z) =
rij

ratiokij (z)
ratiolij (z)

=

Ã

τ kiz /τ kjz
τ liz /τ ljz

!1−σz "

k

(θiz /θjz )γ z
l

(θiz /θjz )γ z

To abstract from the impact of trade costs, assume for now that

kl
(z)
rij

=

"

k

(θiz /θjz )γ z
l

(θiz /θjz )γ z

#σz −1

.

#σz −1

τ kiz /τ kjz
τ liz /τ ljz

.

(7)

= 1. Then,

(8)

There are three possible cases in (8). The first one is trivial. If Germany and Turkey produce
the same quality of tires (θi = θj ), then relative imports from Germany and Turkey are the
kl = 1). A much more relevant case is the second one,
same for both the US and Argentina (rij

which is our benchmark case of no income eﬀects on quality choice. If the US and Argentina
have the same intensity of preference for quality (γ k = γ l ), then relative imports from Germany
kl = 1), even if qualities are diﬀerent
and Turkey will still be the same for both importers (rij

(θi 6= θj ). As argued before, standard Dixit-Stiglitz preferences can accommodate this case after an
8

appropriate normalization to “common-quality” units. Thus interpreted, these preferences impose
the restriction that any two countries’ relative imports from any other two countries are identical,
kl = 1, regardless of the quality produced by the two exporting countries.9 The restriction
i.e. rij

does not neglect inter-sectoral determinants of trade. Suppose that Germany has a comparative
advantage in producing tires. Then, Germany will have many firms in this sector. Niz will be large,
and Germany will be a large exporter of tires.10 But exports from Germany will be large to both
kl . A similar exercise focusing on an importer provides the
the US and Argentina without aﬀecting rij

same answer. Suppose that Argentina has a comparative advantage in producing tires. We then
expect a large number of firms there, leading to a low price index for tires since domestic goods do
not pay trade costs. Relative prices of imported varieties will then be high, discouraging Argentina’s
kl will not be aﬀected. Finally, suppose that
imports from both Germany and Turkey. But again, rij

Ezk is large for the US because of a combination of size and inter-sectoral non-homotheticities in
demand. This will aﬀect US imports from both countries proportionally, but it will still not aﬀect
kl .
the relative ratio rij

It is only in the third case, where both quality and the intensity of preference for quality are
kl 6= 1. Only then will quality aﬀect the relative intensity of
diﬀerent (θi 6= θj and γ k 6= γ l ), that rij

sectoral trade between diﬀerent country pairs. If Germany’s quality is higher (θi > θj ) and US’s
intensity of preference for quality is higher (γ k > γ l ), then the US will import relatively more from
Germany while Argentina will import relatively more from Turkey. More generally, countries with
higher γ k will import relatively more from countries that produce higher quality goods.
Taking logarithms on both sides of equation (5), we obtain the following prediction for bilateral
trade:
ez ln piz − ln
ln impkiz = ln Niz − σ

X

r∈Hz

Ã

pkr
γk
θr z

!−eσz

+ ln Ezk − σ
ez ln τ kiz + σ
ez γ kz ln θiz ,

(9)

where σ
ez = σ z − 1. In a cross-section of bilateral trade flows, the first two terms on the RHS

are specific to exporting country i. These terms take the same value when i is the exporter,
independent of who importer k is. In the econometric specification, they will be captured by
exporter fixed eﬀects. Similarly, the next two terms are specific to importer k and take the same
9
10

In the more general case, this is only true after controlling for diﬀerences in bilateral trade costs.
Romalis (2004) derives the eﬀect of comparative advantage on the number of firms in a Heckscher-Ohlin model

that accounts for product diﬀerentiation and trade costs.

9

value independent of exporter i. These terms will be captured by importer fixed eﬀects. Only the
last two terms are specific to the bilateral pair. I assume that trade costs are determined by:
e Ik − vk ,
ln τ kiz = η z ln Distki + β
z i
iz

(10)

k is a random disturbance, and
where Distki is the bilateral distance between each country pair, viz

e is a vector of parameters associated with dummy variables Ik indicating whether the country
β
z
i

pair shares, respectively, a common border, a common language, a preferential trade agreement, a
colonial relationship, or a common colonizer.11 I also postulate a relationship between the intensity
of demand for quality–captured by γ kz –and income12 :
γ kz = γ z + µz ln y k .

(11)

Under the null hypothesis that income does not aﬀect aggregate demand for quality, µz = 0, and
γ kz = γ z . This is the benchmark Dixit-Stiglitz case. Under the alternative hypothesis that it does
aﬀect aggregate demand for quality, µz > 0, and γ kz increases with income.
Combining (10) and (11) with (9), we obtain:
k
ez η z ln Distki + βz Iki + σ
ez µz ln θiz ln y k + σ
ez viz
,
ln impkiz = ϕiz + ψ kz − σ

(12)

e .
σz β
where ϕiz and ψ kz are fixed eﬀects for exporter and importer country, respectively, and βz = −e
z
I am unable to estimate (12) because I do not observe quality (θiz ). The next two sections deal

with unobserved quality in two diﬀerent ways. First, exporter income is used as a proxy for quality.
Second, export price indices (constructed from export unit values) are used as indicators of quality.

3

Exporter Income as Proxy for Quality

There is increasing evidence that suggests the existence of a positive relationship between per capita
income and quality supply. Diﬀerent trade theories are consistent with this evidence. For example,
a Ricardian view of quality specialization would predict that richer countries will produce higher
11

The empirical specification would not change if trade costs depended on quality, so long as they are modeled

with a (negative) function of quality as an additive term in (10). This term would be subsumed into the exporter
fixed eﬀect.
12
Throughout the paper–unless explicitly noted–income will refer to income per capita.

10

quality goods if they have a relatively larger productivity advantage in the production of those
goods. Alternatively, a factor proportions view of quality specialization would predict that richer
countries, which tend to be capital abundant, will have a comparative advantage in the production
of high quality goods if these goods are capital intensive.13 Based on the evidence of a positive
relationship between quality supply and income, but without taking a stand on which underlying
theory generates this relationship, I postulate the following stochastic log-linear equation:
ln θiz = δ z ln yi + η iz .

(13)

The random disturbance η iz introduces quality variation between sectors for a given country, allowing the cross-country ordering of sectoral quality levels to diﬀer from the ordering of income.
Substituting (13) into (12), we obtain:
ez η z ln Distki + βz Iki + σ
ez µz δ z ln yi ln y k + εkiz ,
ln impkiz = ϕiz + ψ kz − σ

(14)

k .14 The component disturbances η and v k are assumed to be uncorrewhere εkiz = σ
ez µz ηiz + σ
ez viz
iz
iz

lated with the regressors; therefore, so is εkiz . I will estimate (14) on a cross-section of bilateral trade

flows at the sectoral level. Unfortunately, I will not be able to separately identify the magnitude of
ez > 0, if based on the available evidence we maintain the assumption that δ z > 0,
µz . But since σ
then a test of the joint hypothesis σ
ez µz δ z = 0 will imply a test of the hypothesis µz = 0.

Several sectors used in the estimation contain intermediate goods. If we interpret (1) and (2)

as a production function of a final good based on the use of intermediate inputs, then (3) is the
demand function for these inputs. In that case, it may be reasonable to assume that γ kz is not a
function of the importer income as in (11), but of the quality of the final good θkz (assuming that
it is demanded in only one sector). Since the quality of the final good is in turn a function of the
importer income by (13), we can still derive (14). The error term contains additional terms in this
case, but it is still uncorrelated with the regressors.
Equation (14) is a prediction for bilateral trade at the sectoral level. Estimating it with aggregate
data would only be appropriate if the parameters were constrained to be equal across sectors. This
restriction is not plausible in general. In particular, it will be strongly violated in the case of the
exporter and importer fixed eﬀects, which must be sector-specific as they control for inter-sectoral
13
14

Schott (2004) provides empirical evidence in support of this view.
A constant in (13) would be absorbed in the fixed eﬀect ψ kz , without aﬀecting (14).

11

determinants of comparative advantage. I thus estimate (14) sector by sector. Also, to obtain a
single estimate of the parameter of interest, I estimate (14) pooling the observations across sectors.
In this case, I allow all the parameters to take sector-specific values except for the cross-sector
eµδ.
restriction σ
ez µz δ z = σ

Finally, I focus on diﬀerentiated-good sectors because the theory underlying (14) is only valid

for those sectors. But I also use other sectors to benchmark the results.

3.1

Data and sample selection

The data consist of a cross section of bilateral trade flows and country-level variables for 60 countries
in 1995. Bilateral trade data, disaggregated at the sectoral level, come from Feenstra (2000). The
dataset is based on the World Trade Analyzer assembled by Statistics Canada. I define sectors at
the 3-digit SITC (Rev.2) level.
I follow Rauch’s (1999) classification of 4-digit SITC sectors into three categories. Homogeneous
sectors include goods that are internationally traded in organized exchanges, with a well-defined
price (e.g., wheat). Reference-priced sectors include goods that are not traded in organized exchanges, but have reference prices available in specialized publications (e.g., polyethylene). Diﬀerentiated sectors are those sectors that do not satisfy either of the two previous criteria. Rauch uses
two standards to make his classification, one “liberal” and one “conservative”. I use the liberal
standard because it is more stringent in the classification of goods as Diﬀerentiated. When a 3-digit
sector includes 4-digit subsectors that belong to diﬀerent classifications, the 3-digit sector is broken
down accordingly, each part including only the relevant 4-digit sectors.
There is a large proportion of bilateral country pairs with zero trade. The proportion is larger
for smaller countries. Since I want to prevent zero-trade observations from dominating the sample,
I concentrate only on relatively large countries. I include countries with a population larger than 3
million, and with more than 2 billion-dollar imports of Diﬀerentiated goods. Hungary is additionally
excluded because sectoral trade data are of poor quality. Algeria, Iran, Libya, and the US are
excluded because they lack data on export unit values, used in the next section of the paper. In
the case of the US, export unit values are not available because they are obtained from a database
on US imports. The final sample consists of 60 countries, listed in Table A1. I also drop very
small sectors, keeping only sectors with a volume of trade (within the 60 selected countries) above

12

2 billion dollars. The final sample includes 114 Diﬀerentiated sectors, 51 Reference-priced sectors,
and 38 Homogeneous sectors. They are listed in Tables A2, A3, and A4, respectively.
Distance measures great circle distance between capital cities and was prepared by Howard
Shatz (1997). Dummies for border, common language, colonizer-colony relationship, and commoncolonizer relationship were constructed using the CIA Factbook. Only “oﬃcial” languages are
considered in the construction of the common language variable. An exception is made for MalaysiaSingapore, which is recorded as having a common language. Colonial links are only considered if the
colonizer-colony relationship was still in force after 1922. The indicator variable for Preferential
Trade Agreement includes PTAs in force and with substantial coverage in 1995: Andean Pact,
ASEAN, CACM, EFTA, EEA, EU, MERCOSUR, NAFTA, Australia-New Zealand, EC-Turkey,
EFTA-Turkey, EC-Israel, EFTA-Israel. Data on PPP GDP come from the World Bank WDI.

3.2

Estimation results

I first estimate (14) separately for each Diﬀerentiated sector using OLS. Since I cannot report detailed regression results for all 114 sectors, I provide summary results for the distribution of the estimated coeﬃcients according to sign and significance levels in Table 1. In all cases, heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors are used. The results for the coeﬃcient of interest (the interaction term)
are shown in the first row. This coeﬃcient is positive in more than 2/3 of the sectors (78), and
negative in less than 1/3 (36) of the sectors. The coeﬃcient is positive and significant in almost
1/2 of the sectors (56), and negative and significant in 1/5 (23).
The median coeﬃcient across sectors is 0.1218. The interpretation of this coeﬃcient is related
to the ratio of ratios in equations (7) and (8). Keeping trade costs constant, and denoting µ
bz the
estimate of σ
ez µz δ z , we can use (14) to calculate the predicted ratio of ratios:
kl
)=µ
bz ln
ln(rijz

yi yk
ln l .
yj
y

(15)

To understand this expression, take countries at the 75th percentile (Sweden and the UK) and the
25th percentile (Dominican Republican and Lebanon) of the income distribution in our sample.
Consider Dominican Republic’s ratio of imports from the UK relative to those from Lebanon. How
much would this ratio increase if the Dominican Republic were to have the income of Sweden?
kl = exp(0.1218 ∗ 1.6115 ∗ .1.5912) =
Substituting for the actual income values in (15), we obtain: rijz

13

1.366; Dominican Republic’s imports from the UK relative to Lebanon would increase by 36.6% (in
the median sector). This is the relevant exercise for interpreting the estimated magnitude of the
quality eﬀect. Other typical measures of explanatory power such as the beta coeﬃcient are very
small because size (captured by the dummy variables) and distance dominate most of the variation
in bilateral trade flows.
The last column of Table 1 shows results for the pooled regression, where the coeﬃcient on the
interaction term is constrained to be the same across sectors. Here, as in every pooled regression,
the estimates are reported with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and clustering by country
pair across sectors. The pooled coeﬃcient is substantially smaller than the median of the sectoral
coeﬃcients. But we can reject the null hypothesis that µ = 0 at the 1% level of significance.
The estimated coeﬃcients for the rest of the variables have the expected signs in most sectors.
Distance hinders trade, whereas Border, Common Language, PTA, Colonial relationships, and
Common Colony relationships facilitate trade, presumably through a reduction in trade costs. A
similar set of results for these variables is available from the pooled regression. Since the coeﬃcients
are allowed to take sector-specific values, there is not a unique value to report, as is the case with
the (constrained) coeﬃcient on the interaction term. To save space, I do not report these results,
which are very similar to those from the sectoral regressions.
Both the sectoral and the pooled regression results are consistent with the theoretical prediction:
rich countries tend to import relatively more from other rich countries, which are those assumed
to produce higher quality goods. However, there are two reasons for concern. First, the estimated
coeﬃcient is significantly negative in a substantial number of sectors (23 out of 114). This suggests
that factors other than product quality might aﬀect the estimates. Second, per capita income
is correlated with many other characteristics of countries besides quality supply and demand, and
these other characteristics instead of quality might be driving the results. To address these concerns,
I repeat the estimation using Reference-priced and Homogeneous sectors.
Equation (14) is derived under the assumptions that there are cross-country diﬀerences in
quality levels and that quality levels are correlated with income. Even though quality diﬀerences
still exist in Reference-priced sectors and even possibly in Homogeneous sectors, the diﬀerences
in those sectors are less likely to be large. They are also less likely to be strongly correlated
with income, since higher product quality may stem from the higher quality of natural resources–

14

not obviously correlated with income–instead of the accumulation of human or physical capital.
Evidence on export prices discussed in the next section suggests that, as we move from Diﬀerentiated
to Homogeneous goods, both the dispersion of quality levels and the correlation between quality and
income decrease. Equation (14) is also derived under the assumption that there are horizontal and
vertical components of product diﬀerentiation. Absent the horizontal component, goods of similar
quality would be close substitutes, and the pattern of sectoral bilateral trade would tend to have
corner solutions. In that case, (14) would not be an accurate predictor of bilateral trade. However,
so long as quality diﬀerences are substantial and are also correlated with income, (14) might still be
able to capture the quality eﬀect on average. Rich countries will still import relatively more from
countries that produce high quality, although they will import from only a few such countries. Since
the classification into the three categories of goods was originally designed to distinguish sectors
according to their degree of product diﬀerentiation, we can expect the extent of this problem to
increase as we move from Diﬀerentiated to Homogeneous goods. In sum, we expect the theory
to work for Diﬀerentiated sectors, and we expect it not to work for Homogeneous sectors. For
Reference-priced sectors, the theoretical prediction is ambiguous, as we ignore the extent to which
the premises of the theory apply to them.
Table 2 compares the distribution of estimates for the interaction term in each category. To
facilitate comparability, the results for Diﬀerentiated goods are repeated in this table. In the case of
Reference-priced sectors, the results are similar to those for Diﬀerentiated sectors. The coeﬃcient
is positive in 2/3 of the sectors (33) and is negative in 1/3 (18). It is positive and significant in 1/3
of the sectors (17), and negative and significant in 1/8 (6). The median coeﬃcient is considerably
lower than for Diﬀerentiated goods, but the coeﬃcient in the pooled regression is only slightly
smaller (and also significant at the 1% level). For Homogeneous goods, however, the results are
very diﬀerent. The estimated coeﬃcient is more often negative than positive, and more often
negative and significant than positive and significant. In addition, both the median coeﬃcient
and the pooled coeﬃcient are negative. The contrast can be visually appreciated in Graph 1,
which shows the frequency distribution of the estimated coeﬃcient for each category. These results
support the idea that it is quality, and not other factors correlated with income, that drives most
of the estimated eﬀect of the income interaction term. The coeﬃcient on this term matches the
predicted sign only in those categories for which the (quality-based) theory is expected to apply.

15

3.3

Fixed costs of exporting

Almost half of all sectoral bilateral pairs in the sample report no trade. Since the estimating equation uses the logarithm of bilateral trade, these observations must be discarded when using OLS.
Researchers working with the gravity equation have long acknowledged that dropping observations
with zero values might induce selection bias. I address this concern here using fixed costs of exporting to explain the substantial fraction of zero values in bilateral trade. International trade only
occurs when the profits it generates cover the fixed costs.
This is a censored data problem. However, the use of a standard censoring model for estimation
is not convincing for two reasons. First, we do not know the censoring value. Second, fixed
exporting costs are likely to vary across bilateral pairs. I model the (unobserved) censoring value
for country-pair ik in sector z as:
log ckiz = δ 0z + δ dz log Distki + δ z Iki + δ xz log GDPi + δ mz log GDP k + ukiz ,

(16)

where Iki is the same vector of dummy variables as in (14), GDPi and GDP k are total income of i
and k, respectively, and ukiz is a normally distributed random disturbance.
Given the demand structure in (3), mark-ups are constant, and profits are a constant fraction
of the value of exports: π kiz =

1
k 15
σ z impiz .

Countries trade if the profits that export sales generate

are suﬃcient to cover the fixed costs. Hence, exports occur if π kiz =

1
k
σ z impiz

> Fizk , which implies

impkiz > σ z Fizk = ckiz . Therefore, up to a constant shift, (16) is in fact the equation determining
bilateral fixed costs. The empirical specification is then a censoring model with two equations, (14)
and (16), where in the first equation the dependent variable is now a latent variable; (16) determines
k
the (unobserved) censoring point ckiz , and (14) only takes non-zero values if imp∗k
iz > ciz . Even

though the censoring point is unobservable, the parameters of both equations can be estimated
jointly by maximum likelihood. This specification is a more general version of the standard Tobit
estimation, with unknown and random censoring value.16 A shortcoming of this approach is the
implicit assumption that the decision to export is made at the country-sector level, while fixed
exporting costs are in fact borne at the firm level. Another shortcoming is the need to assume a
15
16

With a finite number of varieties, this is only true as a limiting property.
A similar approach was taken by Cogan (1981) to model labor supply with fixed costs of entry into the labor

market.

16

particular distribution for the error disturbances. However, it is an appealing robustness exercise
for assessing the potential magnitude of the selection bias.
The estimation is performed sector by sector, assuming a bivariate normal distribution for the
random disturbances. Table 3 shows the results for the coeﬃcient on the interaction term in the
case of Diﬀerentiated, Reference-priced, and Homogeneous goods.17 In this and in the next tables,
I do not report results on the other controls, as they are very similar to the results in Table 1.
Despite some diﬀerences, the censoring model broadly confirms the OLS results. For the Differentiated sectors, the coeﬃcient on the interaction term is positive in almost 2/3 of the sectors
(72) and is positive and significant in almost 1/2 of them (52). The sign of the coeﬃcient matches
the sign obtained under OLS in all but 10 sectors, in 9 of which the coeﬃcient is statistically insignificant in both specifications. The median magnitude of the coeﬃcient is considerably lower in
the maximum likelihood estimation, and it is now closer to the estimate obtained from the pooled
specification. This indicates that discarding zero-valued observations does not induce important differences in sign and significance of the estimated coeﬃcients but might overestimate the coeﬃcient
magnitude. For Reference-priced and Homogeneous sectors, the results lead to similar conclusions
to those obtained using OLS. For these sectors, the magnitude of the estimated coeﬃcient is not
largely aﬀected.

3.4

Aggregation bias and the Linder Hypothesis

The prediction that richer countries will import relatively more from countries that produce higher
quality goods, i.e. other rich countries, strongly resembles the Linder hypothesis, which states that
countries of similar income will trade more with one another. The Linder hypothesis is typically
tested by introducing some measure of income dissimilarity between countries–the Linder term–
into a standard empirical framework for estimating bilateral trade, such as the gravity equation.
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
¯
Examples of Linder terms used in the literature are: ¯yi − y k ¯, ln ¯yi − y k ¯, and ¯ln yi − ln y k ¯. The

results of estimating (14) are in fact not sensitive to the use of any of these Linder terms instead of

the income interaction term ln yi ln yk . This is shown in Table 4, where the signs of the coeﬃcient
on the Linder terms are reversed to facilitate comparability. Both for the sector-by-sector and the
pooled estimations, the results using the Linder terms are very similar to the results using the
17

Due to computational constraints, I do not perform the maximum likelihood estimation on the pooled data.

17

interaction term. Thus, we can interpret the (quality-driven) predictions of this paper as Lindertype predictions, and the results as a sectoral-level confirmation of the Linder hypothesis.
As opposed to the standard Linder hypothesis, however, these predictions hold at the sectoral
instead of at the aggregate level. At the sectoral level, inter-sectoral determinants of comparative
advantage can be controlled for. Failure to control for these determinants introduces a severe
(aggregation) bias, which obscures the eﬀect of quality on demand and trade patterns. Furthermore,
this bias explains the failure of the literature, which uses aggregate data, to find systematic support
for the Linder hypothesis. I next discuss a very simple example, artificially constructed, that conveys
the basic intuition of how aggregation might induce systematic bias. Then, I estimate (14) using
aggregate data and show that the bias is empirically relevant.
Consider the countries of our previous example: two exporters, the UK and Lebanon, and two
importers, Sweden and the Dominican Republic (DR). Table 5 shows hypothetical exports of the
UK and Lebanon to Sweden and DR in two sectors, Machinery and Apparel. This artificial example
abstracts from trade costs and diﬀerences in size. The UK and Sweden have similar income and
a comparative advantage in Machinery. Lebanon and DR have similar income and a comparative
advantage in Apparel. Therefore, the UK is a large exporter of Machinery relative to Lebanon and
Sweden is a large importer of Apparel relative to DR. UK’s quality is higher in both sectors.
The prediction for the quality eﬀect holds at the sectoral level. In Machinery, Sweden imports
relatively more from the UK, and DR imports relatively more from Lebanon. The ratio of ratios
kl = 1.5). The same is true in Apparel, where r kl = 1.5.
discussed in section 2 is higher than 1 (rij
ij

However, when we aggregate trade in both sectors, the quality eﬀect appears to be reversed. In the
aggregate, Sweden imports relatively more from Lebanon and DR imports relatively more from the
kl = 0.73) . Using the empirical framework of this paper on the aggregated data, we would
UK (rij

probably find a misleading negative coeﬃcient on the interaction term. The reason is the failure to
control for inter-sectoral determinants of comparative advantage. In the aggregate, Sweden imports
relatively more from Lebanon than from the UK, not because Sweden’s demand is biased towards
low-quality goods but because Sweden is a large importer of Apparel, the sector in which Lebanon
is a large exporter. Similarly, DR imports relatively more from the UK than from Lebanon, not
because DR’s demand is biased towards high-quality goods, but because DR is a large importer of
Machinery, the sector in which the UK is a large exporter.

18

The particular direction of the aggregation bias in this example (opposite to the prediction)
hinges on the assumption that countries with similar income specialize in the same sectors. This
might not always be a reasonable assumption. The first column of table 6 shows the results
of estimating (14) using our data of actual trade flows aggregated across sectors in each of the
three diﬀerent categories of goods. In contrast to the sectoral results, the estimated coeﬃcient is
now negative for the aggregate of Diﬀerentiated sectors. Even though at the sectoral level richer
countries import relatively more from other rich countries, the quality eﬀect is overshadowed in the
aggregate by a (more powerful) composition eﬀect, the aggregation bias described in the artificial
example. This example is particularly applicable to Diﬀerentiated sectors because the assumption
that the determinants of comparative advantage are correlated with income level is likely to hold
in those sectors. For example, richer countries are typically skilled-labor abundant, and thus they
tend to be relatively large exporters of skilled-labor intensive sectors, such as Machinery. When
(14) is estimated on an aggregate of only Reference-priced goods, the coeﬃcient is also reversed,
but it is not significantly diﬀerent from zero. It is not surprising that the bias is weaker here,
since diﬀerences in comparative advantage among Reference-priced sectors are often caused by
diﬀerences in the relative abundance of natural resources, which are not systematically related to
income. This is more obviously true in the case of Homogeneous sectors, where the estimated
coeﬃcient is positive, but not significantly diﬀerent from zero. Finally, the last two rows of table
6 show the results when all sectors in the sample are aggregated into one, and when all trade
is aggregated, including sectors both in the sample and out of the sample. In both cases, the
aggregation bias is suﬃciently strong to reverse the sign of the estimated coeﬃcient. Incidentally,
Linder himself explicitly argued that the quality eﬀect on demand operated mostly within sectors
instead of across sectors (Linder 1961, p. 95): “Qualitative product diﬀerences are not well brought
out in empirical studies of consumer behavior along the lines first followed by Engel. The qualitative
factor is submerged by taking broad groups of goods such as “food” or “clothing”.”
The estimation of (14) using aggregate trade is similar to a standard test of the Linder hypothesis. In fact, it is primarily the Linder term that distinguishes it from usual empirical specifications
used to test it.18 The last three columns of table 6 show that the existence and direction of the
bias are not sensitive to which Linder term is used in the estimation (the signs on the alternative
18

Using exporter and importer GDP instead of fixed eﬀects does not substantially aﬀect the results.

19

Linder terms are again reversed to facilitate comparability). Regardless of the Linder term, there
is no support for the Linder hypothesis from estimations using aggregate data.
By addressing explicitly the within-sector demand eﬀect of quality, this paper provides a unifying framework for understanding simultaneously the long appeal of Linder’s premises and the
failure to find consistent empirical support for the Linder hypothesis (the hypothesized corollary).
Linder’s premises are correct: countries with similar income have similar production and consumption patterns–they produce and consume goods of higher quality. But the Linder hypothesis,
that countries of similar income trade more with each other, only holds at the sectoral level, and
relative to a benchmark where sectoral diﬀerences in comparative advantage are controlled for. At
the aggregate level, it is not a valid hypothesis, since it does not follow from the premises that are
supposed to imply it. Moreover, its empirical rejection using aggregate data is uninformative about
the validity of the premises, as the estimates come from a misspecified empirical model.

3.5

A caveat on the notion of sectoral comparative advantage

In traditional models of international trade, both the supply and the demand side treat varieties
within sectors symmetrically. For example, on the supply side of the factor-proportions model,
all firms in a sector share the same production technology. On the demand side, varieties in a
sector are either perfect substitutes (homogeneous goods) or closer substitutes for one another
than for varieties in other sectors (diﬀerentiated goods). Sectoral comparative advantage is thus
well defined, as it refers to all varieties in a sector. When quality is introduced, this is no longer
true. A skill-abundant country may have a comparative advantage in skill-intensive high-quality
varieties but a comparative disadvantage in unskill-intensive low-quality varieties. While a sector
might still be well defined on the demand side, the production technologies for the diﬀerent varieties
may be very diﬀerent.19 Despite this problem, the reference to sectoral patterns of comparative
advantage might still meaningfully characterize average properties of sectors. For example, exports
of Apparel are systematically larger as a fraction of total exports in poor countries, and exports
of Machinery are systematically larger in rich countries. Even though rich countries might have
19

Schott (2003) argues that we should consider goods of diﬀerent qualities as diﬀerent sectors. This approach,

although appealing from a supply-side perspective, still needs to deal with the demand-side links between goods of
diﬀerent qualities.

20

a comparative advantage in high-quality apparel, poor countries have a comparative advantage in
a range of qualities that accounts for most of world demand in that sector. The opposite is true
for Machinery. It is only in this average sense that we should understand any reference to sectoral
comparative advantage in this context (e.g. in the artificial example of table 5). This caveat,
however, does not undermine the validity of the empirical framework used here for estimation,
since it does not rely on any particular interpretation of comparative advantage.

4

Export Price as Indicator of Quality

Other things equal, higher quality goods are expected to sell at higher prices. Hence, we can use
prices to extract information on quality levels. This section uses export price indices, constructed
from export unit values, as indicators of quality supply. The results provide complementary evidence
of the existence of a quality-driven demand eﬀect on trade patterns. They also provide further
evidence, in addition to the use of diﬀerent categories of goods, that it is product quality that
drives the results of the previous section.

4.1

Export price indices

I construct export price indices piz , for country i and 3-digit sector z, based on cross-country
diﬀerences in export unit values. Unit values measure, for a given export category, the ratio between
the value and the quantity of exports. They are the average price for the category. Composition
problems are pervasive in unit value comparisons. If a category includes diﬀerent goods, then
diﬀerences in unit values might not merely reflect diﬀerences in prices but also diﬀerences in the
composition of exports within the category. To minimize the incidence of composition problems,
I measure unit values at the finest possible level of aggregation for which data are available. The
NBER Trade Database compiled by Feenstra, Romalis, and Schott (2002) classifies US imports by
country of origin and type of good at the 10-digit level of the Harmonized Tariﬀ Schedule (HTS),
the level at which import duties are defined. For each of these categories and source countries, the
database provides information on the customs value and quantity of US imports, and the units in
which quantities are measured.20 Examples of 10-digit categories are:
20

Customs values do not include freight, and are used as the basis for duty assessment. They are intended to serve

as arm’s length transaction values for commodities.

21

HTS Code

Description

1006204060

Rice, short grain, husked (brown)

1902112000

Uncooked pasta, not stuﬀed or otherwise prepared, containing eggs, exclusively pasta

5208292020

Woven fabrics of cotton, containing 85% or more by weight of cotton, weighing not more
than 200g/m2 , bleached, sateens

6203492010

Men’s trousers and breeches of artificial fibers

8413702022

Centrifugal pumps for liquids, single-stage, single-suction, frame-mounted, with discharge
outlet under 7.6 cm. in diameter

8418210010

Refrigerators of household type, compression type, having a refrigerated volume of under
184 liters

Based on cross-country diﬀerences in unit values at the 10-digit level, I construct export price
indices piz at the 3-digit level using a slightly modified version of the Eltetö, Köves, and Szulc
(EKS) multilateral price index, which in turn is based on bilateral Fisher indices. Appendix A
describes the methodology in detail.21
Several shortcomings are associated with the construction of these indices. Countries often
report exports to the US in only a few or even none of the 10-digit categories included in a particular
3-digit sector. When countries are active in only a few 10-digit categories, the price index is very
sensitive to measurement error. When countries are not active in any 10-digit category, the price
index has a missing value. To increase the availability and reliability of the indices, I merge two
years of data, 1995 and 1996, instead of using only one year. I also calculate the indices at the
2-digit level and then use the 2-digit indices for the relevant 3-digit categories. This procedure
has two advantages. First, the indices are more reliable, as they are based on a larger number
of observations. Second, bilateral trade observations for which the exporter’s 3-digit price index
would be missing are kept in the sample if the corresponding 2-digit index can be calculated.
The indices are based on a source database with considerable measurement error.22 To deal
with this problem, I remove observations with extreme unit values (four times above or below the
category mean) and observations with very low quantity (below the lower of 50 units or a quarter
21
22

See also Diewart (1993), Ch.5, for properties of this and similar indices.
The General Accounting Oﬃce (1995) conducted a detailed study of 8 specific 10-digit product categories. It found

that wide dispersion among countries in unit values of US imports within the same product category is explained by
two main factors: categories not including identical products and classification and data entry errors. Unfortunately,
the GAO cannot assess the generality of these problems because its sample is not representative.

22

of the category mean quantity). Lastly, aggregation problems may still be present at the 10-digit
level, but I expect these problems to be minimized at the 10-digit level of aggregation.
Table A1 provides summary measures of the export price indices. Ordering countries by income,
and normalizing the indices so that Canada has a value of 1 in every sector, the table shows the
geometric average of the sectoral indices for each goods category. Graphs 2a to 2c provide the
same information. The correlation between export price indices and income is positive for all
Diﬀerentiated sectors, and for most of Reference-priced and Homogenous sectors. The average
correlation across sectors is 0.45 for Diﬀerentiated sectors, 0.36 for Reference-priced sectors, and 0.23
for Homogeneous sectors. This is consistent with the supply-side assumptions of most theoretical
trade models accounting for vertical diﬀerentiation, and it confirms the findings of Hummels and
Klenow (2002) and Schott (2004). The average across sectors of the cross-country dispersion of
price indices is also higher for Diﬀerentiated sectors (0.43) than for Reference-priced (0.40) and
Homogeneous (0.34) sectors.23 For any given country, there is also considerable variation in export
prices across sectors. The average across countries of the cross-sector dispersion of price indices is
0.49 for Diﬀerentiated goods, 0.40 for Referenced-priced goods, and 0.35 for Homogeneous goods.24

4.2

Empirical Specification

Quality diﬀerences are presumably one of the main sources of cross-country variation in export
prices. However, this variation might also reflect diﬀerences in prices for goods of the same quality,
which might stem, for example, from diﬀerences in production costs. I postulate a reduced-form
specification for the determination of the export price that includes both quality level and exporter
income per capita. The inclusion of the latter variable attempts to capture cross-country variation
in production costs systematically related to income. Distance of country i to the US is also included
to control for selection bias in the quality composition of exports to the US. Export prices are thus
determined by:
S
+ ξ iz .
ln piz = ζ 0z + ζ 1z ln θiz + ζ 2z ln yi + ζ 3z ln DistU
i

(17)

The partial relationship between product quality and export price is given by ζ 1z . Since it is
23

Dispersion measures are calculated taking the logarithm of the indices. Thus, their magnitude does not depend

on which particular country is used to normalize.
24
The MATLAB code used to construct the indices and the detailed tables with the export price indices sector by
sector are available online: http://www.econ.lsa.umich.edu/~hallak/papers.html

23

more costly to produce goods of higher than of lower quality, we expect this relationship to be
positive. The sign of ζ 2z is instead ambiguous. Once we control for product quality, diﬀerences in
comparative advantage are likely to drive any systematic relationship between income and production costs (and hence export prices). The relationship can take either sign. Higher income countries
often have a comparative advantage in capital-intensive sectors, as they tend to be capital abundant. In those sectors, higher income implies stronger comparative advantage, and a lower export
price. We thus expect ζ 2z < 0. For other (labor-intensive) sectors, higher income is associated with
comparative disadvantage. We thus expect ζ 2z > 0. The caveat about the inappropriateness of a
sectoral understanding of comparative advantage also applies here. But it now applies more forcefully since it aﬀects the empirical specification. Once we introduce quality diﬀerences, sectors might
not be either capital or labor intensive. Within a sector, high quality varieties might be capital
intensive while low quality varieties are labor intensive. More generally, we expect the relationship
between income and production costs to vary according to quality. The constant parameter ζ 2z in
(17) can only capture the sectoral average of this (quality-dependent) relationship.
The distance to the US is included in (17) to capture the Alchian-Allen conjecture. In the
presence of quality diﬀerences, trade costs might not be proportional to price. In particular, if
transport costs depend on weight, these costs will be lower as a fraction of price for high quality
goods. The quality composition of exports will then depend on the magnitude of transport costs,
which in turn depends on the distance between trading partners. Hummels and Skiba (2003)
provide evidence on the empirical relevance of this conjecture. In our sample of unit values of US
imports, this might induce selection bias as only high quality varieties will be exported to the US
by distant countries. Hence, controlling for a country’s average quality of exports to all countries
(θiz ), a larger distance to the US will imply a higher quality selection of exports to that market,
and thus a higher observed price index piz . We thus expect a positive sign for ζ 3z .25
The main advantage of using export price indices, compared to the use of income in the previous
section, is that their cross-sector variation is able to capture variation across sectors in quality
supply. However, there is considerable measurement error in the price indices, and their reliability
as price measures is yet untested. The indices will be a very noisy indicator of quality if the variance
25

The assumption of uniform quality within country-sector in fact rules out the Alchian-Allen eﬀect. I still include

distance to the US to prevent this eﬀect from causing selection bias in the estimation.

24

of the error term ξ iz in (17) is large. There is then a trade-oﬀ involved in the choice between the two
approaches. But we can use the results of both as complementary evidence on the role of quality.
Solving for ln θiz in (17), we obtain:
ln θiz = −

ζ 0z
1
ζ
ζ
ξ
+
ln piz − 2z ln yi − 3z ln DistUS
− iz .
i
ζ 1z
ζ 1z
ζ 1z
ζ 1z
ζ 1z

(18)

Substituting (18) into (12) yields the estimating equation:
ez η z ln Distki + βz Iki + ζ 01z ln piz ln yk
ln impkiz = ϕiz + ψ kz − σ

(19)

S
k
0
+ζ 02z ln yi ln y k + ζ 03z ln DistU
i ln y + ξ iz ,

where ζ 01z =

σ
e z µz
ζ 1z ,

ζ 02z = − σe z ζµz ζ 2z , ζ 03z = − σe z µζ z ζ 3z , and ξ 0iz = − σeζz µz ξ iz ln y k + σ
ez ν ki .
1z

1z

1z

There are three interaction terms in (19): the “price interaction” (ln piz ln y k ), the “income ink
teraction” (ln yi ln y k ), and the “distance (to the US) interaction” (ln DistUS
i ln y ). The parameter

of interest µz is now included in the coeﬃcients associated with these three terms (ζ 01z , ζ 02z , and
ζ 03z ). Assuming that ζ 1z > 0, we can still test for the sign of µz by testing the sign of the coeﬃcient
on the price interaction (ζ 01z ). If µz > 0, then ζ 01z > 0. We cannot do the same with the income
interaction, because the sign of ζ 02z also depends on the sign of ζ 2z . We expect ζ 02z > 0 in sectors
where rich countries have a comparative advantage (ζ 2z < 0) and ζ 02z < 0 in sectors where they
have a comparative disadvantage (ζ 2z > 0). The sign of ζ 03z is expected to be negative, but a test
on the sign of this parameter implies a joint test on the signs of µz and ζ 3z .
Since ξ iz is a component of piz , the disturbance ξ 0iz and the regressor ln piz ln y k are correlated in
(19). I calculate piz,t−1 for the (merged) years 1993 and 1994, and use ln piz,t−1 ln y k as instrument
for ln piz ln y k . To the extent that ξ iz captures classical measurement error in the price index, the
instrument will be uncorrelated with the disturbance term. Since measurement error is substantial,
I expect the use of this instrument to remove much of the correlation between regressor and error
term. However, the disturbance ξ iz might also capture omitted factors aﬀecting export prices, not
included in (17). For example, country i might have a technological advantage in sector z that
allows it to produce at lower cost. In that case, ξ iz will be persistent over time, and instrumenting
with the lagged variable will not remove the correlation between regressor and error term. Since I
have no alternative instrument, this is a concern to keep in mind when interpreting the results.

25

4.3

Estimation results

I estimate (19) using 2SLS, sector by sector and pooling across sectors. I first focus on Diﬀerentiated
goods, and impose the restrictions that ζ 2z = 0 and ζ 3z = 0, thus keeping only the price interaction.
Under these restrictions, it is only diﬀerences in quality (plus a random disturbance) that drive
diﬀerences in export prices.26 This is primarily a benchmarking exercise to compare the performance
of the price interaction with the performance of the income interaction (as used in the previous
section). The first row of Table 7 shows the results. Comparing them with those of Table 1, we
find that the number of positive and negative estimated coeﬃcients is very similar. However, the
estimates using exporter price are on average less precisely estimated; while in Table 1 there are
only 35 sectors with non-significant coeﬃcients, there are 54 of these sectors when price is used
instead of income. The last two columns of Table 7 show the results of the pooled regression, where
only the coeﬃcient on the price interaction is constrained to be the same across sectors. The first
of these columns shows the unweighted 2SLS results. The second column shows estimation results
with observations weighted according to the precision of the price index. Denoting by Giz the
number of active 10-digit categories used in the construction of piz , I assume that the precision of
p
piz is positively related to Giz , and use weights w = ln(Giz ). In both cases, results are reported
with heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors and clustering by country pair. The unweighted and

weighted regressions show similar results. Both coeﬃcient estimates are positive and statistically
significant at the 5% level. Maintaining the assumption that ζ 1 > 0, this implies that µ > 0.
The lower precision of the sector-by-sector estimates of Table 7 compared to those of Table 1
suggests that, since export prices are correlated with income, the price interaction might be merely
picking up the explanatory power of the (omitted) income interaction, itself unrelated to quality.
The second specification deals with this concern by including both the price and income interactions
(still imposing ζ 3z = 0). The results are shown below in Table 7. When both price and income
interactions are included, the price interaction retains considerable explanatory power. In the
sectoral regressions, the sign of the price interaction is still positive in the same number of sectors,
even though the number of them with significantly positive coeﬃcient decreases substantially. The
change is even stronger, however, for the estimates of the income interaction. The coeﬃcient is less
often positive, and it is positive and significant in only a few more sectors than it is negative and
26

A previous version of this paper (Hallak 2003) implicitly imposed these restrictions.

26

significant. Furthermore, the coeﬃcient on the income interaction is more aﬀected by the inclusion
of the price interaction than viceversa. This is consistent with the prediction. Once export prices
are controlled for, the sign of the income interaction depends on the relationship between income
and production costs, and is no longer expected to be uniformly positive.
In the pooled regression, only the coeﬃcient on the price interaction is constrained to be the
same across sectors. The coeﬃcients on all other variables are free to take sector-specific values. In
particular, the coeﬃcient on the income interaction is allowed to vary across sectors to control for
the (sector-specific) average relationship between income and production costs. In the unweighted
estimation, we cannot reject the null that µ = 0. This in part reflects the fact that, while the
coeﬃcient on the price interaction is positive in almost 2/3 of the sectors, it is still negative in a
substantial number of them (39). But it might also reflect the fact that, in sectors where the price
indices are not accurately measured, the income interaction might end up misleadingly capturing,
because of its correlation with the price interaction, the quality eﬀect that the price term is unable
to capture itself. This is partly supported by the results of the last column, where both the
magnitude and the significance of the coeﬃcient increase as observations are weighted according to
the precision of the price measure.
The last set of results corresponds to the full specification, where distance to the US is measured
by the distance from capital cities to New York. The results here are slightly more consistent with
the theoretical predictions. The coeﬃcient on the price interaction is more often positive and
significant and less often negative and significant, while the median across sectors increases. The
estimates for the income interaction are unaﬀected, except for a decrease in the median magnitude.
The coeﬃcient on the distance interaction is weekly consistent with the Alchian-Allen prediction;
it is more often negative than positive, and more often negative and significant than positive and
significant. The median coeﬃcient is also negative. In most of the sectors, however, the estimates
are statistically insignificant. Since the empirical specification captures the Alchian-Allen eﬀect
only indirectly–as it is not designed for that purpose–it is not surprising that it fails to identify
this eﬀect with precision.
The pooled estimates resemble those of the previous specification. The unweighted regression
yields a positive but statistically insignificant coeﬃcient (the p-value is 0.11). But the coeﬃcient
on the price interaction is significant at the 5% level when observations are weighted according

27

to the precision of the export price index. The diﬀerence between the unweighted and weighted
results for the price interaction suggests that measurement error in the export price indices might
be an important reason explaining the paucity of significantly positive coeﬃcients in the sectoral
regressions. In addition, the substantial change in the estimates for the income interaction term
when the price interaction is included in the regression further support the idea that quality drives
the (stronger) results of section 3. It is nevertheless appropriate here to keep in mind two strong
caveats already raised. First, the estimates may be biased due to the correlation between the
disturbance term and the instrument (the lagged price interaction). Second, the coeﬃcient on
the interaction term fails to capture the quality-dependent nature of the relationship between
production costs and income.
Table 8 shows the results of estimating (19) using OLS and alternative measures of GDP and
distance to the US. The OLS estimates are in the top panel. The sector-by-sector regressions
show that the coeﬃcient on the price interaction is less often positive and less often significant,
while the coeﬃcient on the income interaction is more often positive and more often positive and
significant. The median coeﬃcient also decreases for the price interaction and increases for the
income interaction. In contrast to the sectoral results, the pooled regressions show an increase in
both the magnitude and significance of the estimated coeﬃcients for the price interaction term.
The middle panel shows results using per capita GDP not adjusted for purchasing power parity.
The results are not very sensitive to which measure is used. The most salient change is that the
coeﬃcient on the price interaction in the weighted pooled regression is now significant at only the
10% level (the higher variance of this alternative GDP measure explains the smaller magnitude of
the estimates). Finally, the bottom panel shows results when distance to the closest US coast (Los
Angeles or New York) is used as an alternative measure of distance to the US. Here, the results are
almost unchanged.
Even though the baseline results in Table 7 are in general consistent with the theoretical prediction, the sign of the estimated coeﬃcient has the opposite sign in many sectors. In 14 of these
sectors, the estimates are significantly diﬀerent from zero. To evaluate whether sectors with similar
results have common characteristics, Graph 3 groups the 114 sectors into 11 broader categories.
For each of these groups, the upper bar summarizes the results for the coeﬃcient on the price
interaction and the lower bar for the coeﬃcient on the income interaction. The part of the bar to

28

the right (left) of the vertical center line counts the number of sectors with positive (negative) coefficients. Darker colors represent significant coeﬃcients. The results are systematic for some of these
groups. For example, the sign of the coeﬃcient on the price interaction is positive, as predicted,
in all 17 sectors in the group “Textiles, Apparel, and Footwear”. It is positive and significant in
14 of these sectors. In “Chemicals”, the coeﬃcient is positive in 6 out of 7 sectors, and positive
and significant in 3. In contrast, the coeﬃcient tends to be negative in the groups “Household
Appliances and Electronics” (5 out of 6), “Electrical Machinery and Apparatus” (6 out of 7), and
“Professional and Scientific Equipment” (5 out of 7). There is no single convincing explanation for
the observed pattern of results. Since prices are measured with considerable error, if in the latter
sectors most of the cross-country variation of export prices is due to quality diﬀerences and not to
diﬀerences in production costs, then the information conveyed by cross-country variation in export
prices not already contained in the variation of income may consist of mere noise. In that case,
the income interaction might end up capturing most of the quality eﬀect. Although in principle
appealing, this explanation presumes–without evidence supporting it–that export prices reflect
mostly quality instead of costs in these sectors. In addition, it fails to explain why the estimated
coeﬃcient is significantly negative in some sectors. The coeﬃcient on the income interaction tends
to be negative, as predicted, in groups such as “Food and Beverages” and “Textiles, Apparel, and
Footwear”, where it is plausible that lower income countries have a comparative advantage. It tends
to be positive in groups such “Agricultural and Industrial Machinery” and “Electrical Machinery
and Apparatus”, where we expect higher income countries to have a comparative advantage.
Table 9 shows the results of estimating (19) for Reference-priced and Homogeneous sectors
(the top panel replicates results for Diﬀerentiated sectors shown in Table 7). For Referenced-price
sectors, the distribution of the estimated coeﬃcient on the price interaction in terms of sign and
significance is similar to the case of Diﬀerentiated sectors. The coeﬃcient is positive in 2/3 of
the sectors (35) and positive and significant in 1/3 (14). However, the median magnitude of the
estimated coeﬃcient almost doubles the median for Diﬀerentiated goods. This result is confirmed
by the pooled regression estimates; the coeﬃcient is positive and significant at the 1% level in both
the unweighted and weighted regressions. The coeﬃcient on the income interaction term is now
more often negative than positive and the median magnitude is negative. This is consistent with the
theoretical prediction if higher income is a source of comparative disadvantage in a higher proportion

29

of Reference-priced sectors than of Diﬀerentiated sectors. Finally, the distance interaction gives
stronger support to the Alchian-Allen conjecture. In sum, the results for Reference-priced sectors
are consistent with the main theoretical prediction. But the theory would also predict weaker rather
than stronger results than those for Diﬀerentiated sectors.
As in the previous section, the estimates are very diﬀerent for Homogeneous goods. Both the
coeﬃcient on the price interaction and on the income interaction are in more sectors negative than
positive. They are almost never significant. The distance term is negative in most sectors, but it
is also not significant. In all three cases, the median coeﬃcient is negative.

5

Conclusions and Further Comments

A substantial amount of theoretical work predicts that product quality plays an important role
as a determinant of the direction of trade. This paper provides evidence supporting the empirical
relevance of this prediction. A key aspect of the paper is its strategy for identifying unobserved
cross-country diﬀerences in product quality. Exporter income per capita is first used as a proxy,
yielding results that are consistent with the theoretical prediction in a majority of Diﬀerentiatedgood sectors: rich countries tend to import relatively more from countries that produce high quality
goods. These results can be interpreted as a sector-level confirmation of the Linder hypothesis.
Furthermore, the inability of typical specifications using aggregate data to control for inter-sectoral
determinants of comparative advantage explains the failure so far to find empirical support for this
hypothesis.
Concerns about forces other than quality driving the results are addressed in two ways. First,
still using income as proxy for quality, the estimation is performed on Referenced-priced sectors,
where the theory can reasonably be expected to apply, and on Homogeneous sectors, where the
theory should not apply. The results are strongly consistent with the predictions. Second, export
price indices are used as indicators of quality. The results here are weaker, but they are still
consistent with the predictions. An overall assessment of the evidence presented in the paper
provides a compelling case for quality as a significant factor explaining global patterns of bilateral
trade.
Further research will hopefully improve many aspects of the theoretical framework and empir-

30

ical strategy used here. First, an advantage of the proposed demand system is its simplicity for
capturing income eﬀects on quality choice. However, it could be extended to allow for more flexible
substitution patterns, in particular, closer substitutability between goods of similar quality. This
possibility is ruled out here, which might explain why, in several sectors, the results contradict
the theoretical prediction. Second, as suggested by the theoretical work on trade with vertical
diﬀerentiation, it is not merely the mean but the entire distribution of income that matters as a
determinant of international trade. Third, the accuracy and reliability of the export price indices
used in this study is yet untested. Since unit values are likely to be the best, although indirect,
available source of information on cross-country diﬀerences in quality levels covering a broad range
of goods, further research focused on these indices seems necessary and promising.

References
[1] Bergstrand, J. (1989), “The Generalized Gravity Equation, Monopolistic Competition, and
the Factor-Proportions Theory of International Trade,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
71 (1), 143-153.
[2] Brooks, E. (2003), “Why Don’t Firms Export More? Product Quality and Colombian Plants,”
UC Santa Cruz, mimeo.
[3] Cogan, J. (1981), “Fixed Costs and Labor Supply,” Econometrica, 49, 945-963.
[4] Dalgin, M., Mitra, D., and V. Trindade (2004), “Inequality, Nonhomothetic Preferences, and
Trade: A Gravity Approach,” mimeo.
[5] Deardorﬀ, A. (1984), “Testing Trade Theories and Predicting Trade Flows,” in R.W.Jones and
P.B.Kenen, ed., Handbook of International Economics, Vol.1, (Amsterdam, Elsevier).
[6] Deardorﬀ, A. (1998), “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
World?,” in J. Frankel, ed., The Regionalization of the World Economy, (Chicago, Chicago
University Press).
[7] Diewert, W. (1993), “Index Numbers,” in W. Diewert and A. Nakamura, Essays in Index
Number Theory, Vol. 1, (Amsterdam, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.).
31

[8] Falvey, R. and H. Kierzkowski (1987), “Product Quality, Intra-industry Trade and (Im)perfect
Competition,” in H. Kierzkowski, ed., Protection and Competition in International Trade,
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
[9] Feenstra, R, Romalis, J., and P. Schott (2002), “US Imports, Exports, and Tariﬀ Data, 19892001,” NBER Working Paper 9387.
[10] Feenstra, R. (2000), “World Trade Flows, 1980-1997,” Center for International Data, Institute
of Governmental Aﬀairs, UC Davis.
[11] Flam, H., and E. Helpman (1987), “Vertical Product Diﬀerentiation and North-South Trade,”
American Economic Review, 77 (5), 810-822.
[12] Francois, J. and S. Kaplan (1996), “Aggregate Demand Shifts, Income Distribution, and the
Linder Hypothesis,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, 244-250.
[13] General Accounting Oﬃce (1995), “US Imports: Unit Values Vary Widely for Identically
Classified Commodities,” Report GAO/GGD-95-90.
[14] Hallak, J. (2003), “The Eﬀect of Cross-Country Diﬀerences in Product Quality on the Direction
of International Trade,” RSIE Working Paper 493.
[15] Hummels, D. and P. Klenow (2002), “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” mimeo.
[16] Hummels, D. and A. Skiba (2003), “Shipping the Good Apples Out? An Empirical Confirmation of the Alchian-Allen Conjecture,” Purdue University, mimeo. Forthcoming Journal of
Political Economy.
[17] Hunter, L. (1991), “The Contribution of Non-homothetic Preferences to Trade,” Journal of
International Economics, 30, 345-358.
[18] Hunter, L. and J. Markusen (1988), “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade, in R.
Feenstra, ed., Empirical Methods for International Trade, (Cambridge, MA, MIT Press).
[19] Leamer, E. and J. Levinsohn (1995), “International Trade Theory: The Evidence,” in G.
Grossman and K. Rogoﬀ, ed., Handbook of International Economics, Vol.3, (Amsterdam, Elsevier).
32

[20] Linder (1961), S., An Essay on Trade and Transformation, (Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell).
[21] Markusen, J. (1986), “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach,” American
Economic Review, 76 (5), 1002-1011.
[22] Matsuyama, K. (2000), “A Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods under Nonhomothetic
Preferences: Demand Complementarities, Income Distribution, and North-South Trade, Journal of Political Economy, 108 (6), 1093-1120.
[23] McPherson, M., M. Redfearn, and M. Tieslau (2001), “International Trade and Developing
Countries: An Empirical Investigation of the Linder Hypothesis,” Applied Economics, 33,
649-657.
[24] Murphy, K.M. and A. Shleifer (1997), “Quality and Trade,” Journal of Development Economics, 53, 1-15.
[25] Rauch, J. (1999), “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of International
Economics, 48, 7-35.
[26] Romalis, J. (2004), “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade”, American
Economic Review, 94, 67-97.
[27] Schott, P. (2003), “One Size Fits All? Heckscher-Ohlin Specialization in Global Production,”
American Economic Review, 93, 686-708.
[28] Schott, P. (2004), “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International
Trade,” Forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
[29] Shatz, H. (1997), “Note on Distance Data”, Harvard University, mimeo.
[30] Stokey, N. (1991), “The Volume and Composition of Trade between Rich and Poor Countries.”
Review of Economic Studies, 58, 63-80.

33

A

Appendix: Methodology of construction of export price indices

A representative 2-digit sector z includes 10-digit categories n = 1, ..., N . Dividing the value by
the quantity of imports in each of these categories, we obtain the unit value (average export price)
pin for country i in category n. Based on 10-digit-level prices pin , I will construct multilateral price
indices piz at the 2-digit level. Country i is “active” in category n if pin is non-missing. Country i
is active in sector z if it has at least two active categories. Otherwise, piz takes a missing value.
There is considerable measurement error in the source database. I use the following procedure
to detect and remove outliers. For each category n, I calculate the geometric mean of unit values
across countries, excluding the observations with maximum and minimum values. I then remove
observations with unit values 4 times above or below the mean. Since observations with extreme
unit values show disproportionately low export quantities, I remove observations with quantity
below the minimum of 50 units or a quarter of the average quantity for the category.
I then take country j as a numeraire. For each other country i, I calculate the bilateral Fisher
price index Pij between i and j, using only their common active categories (Pij takes a missing value
if i and j do not have any common active category). As a result, I obtain a vector of bilateral price
indices P j , with country j as the numeraire. I repeat this procedure taking alternatively all countries
as numeraire, and obtain vectors P j , j = 1, ..., C, where C is the number of active countries in the
sector. These vectors are separated into three groups. The first group contains vectors j = 1, ..., C1 ,
those with non-missing values. The second group contains vectors j = C1 + 1, ..., C2 , with at most
5 missing values. The third group contains the remaining vectors j = C2 + 1, ...C.
I then follow a three step procedure. I take the first group and normalize each vector to sum
up to 1. Denote normalized vectors by Pej . The geometric weighted average of these vectors is:
Pz1 =

C ³
´wj
Y
,
Pej

(20)

j=1

where wj is the number of active categories of country j in sector z. In the second step, I take
each vector P j in the second group and normalize it to sum up to 1 − mj , where mj is the sum
of the entries in Pz1 corresponding to the the missing elements in P j . I then impute the values in
Pz1 to the missing elements in P j , thus obtaining a normalized (to 1) vector Pej . Using normalized

vectors Pej , j = 1, ...C2 , I recalculate (20) and obtain Pz2 . In the third step, I repeat the procedure
³ ´wj
Q
ej
, where each element is piz.
for the remaining vectors. I finally calculate pz = C
j=1 P
34

Table 1: Basic Results
OLS - Differentiated goods (114 Sectors)

Regressions by Sector
Sign

Pooled Regression

Significance (5%)
Not Sig.
Neg.

Pos.

Neg.

Pos.

Median

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

78

36

56

35

23

0.1218

ln(Distanceik)
Borderik
Common Languageik
PTAik
Colonial Linkik
Common Colonyik

0
103
112
95
110
88

114
11
2
19
4
26

0
41
95
61
89
20

0
73
19
51
25
92

114
0
0
2
0
2

-1.0451
0.3260
0.5366
0.3755
0.8288
0.3351

Coefficient
0.0782***
(0.0230)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in pooled
regression. Columns 2 and 3 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient.
Columns 4 to 6 provide a breakdown by sign and significance.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table 2: All Sectors
OLS - Coefficient on interaction term

Regressions by Sector
Sign
Pos.
Neg.

Pos.

Pooled Regression

Significance (5%)
Not Sig.
Neg.

Median

Coefficient

Differentiated Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)

78

36

56

35

23

0.1218

0.0782***
(0.0230)

33

18

17

28

6

0.0776

0.0723***
(0.0252)

18

20

3

29

6

-0.0498

-0.0453
(0.0295)

Reference Priced Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)
Homogenous Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in
pooled regression. Columns 2 and 3 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of the estimated
coefficient. Columns 4 to 6 provide a breakdown by sign and significance.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table 3: Fixed Exporting Costs
MLE – Coefficient on interaction term
Regressions by Sector

Pos.

Sign
Neg.

Pos.

Significance (5%)
Not Sig.

Neg.

Median

72

42

52

36

26

0.0797

36

15

24

22

5

0.0661

12

26

3

24

11

-0.0372

Differentiated Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)
Reference Priced Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)
Homogenous Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Columns 2 and 3 provide a breakdown of the
total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 4 to 6 provide a breakdown by sign and
significance.

Table 4: Sectoral data: Alternative Linder Terms
OLS – Coefficient on Linder term (signs reversed)

Regressions by Sector
Sign
Pos.
Neg.

Pos.

Pooled Regression

Significance (5%)
Not Sig.
Neg.

Median

Coefficient

0.0782***
(0.0230)
0.0090***
(0.0025)
0.0343***
(0.0129)
0.1033***
(0.0273)

Differentiated Goods
ln(yi)*ln(yk)

78

36

56

35

23

0.1218

-|yi-yk|

79

35

55

41

18

0.0118

-ln(|yi-yk|)

77

37

51

44

19

0.0504

-|ln(yi)-ln(yk)|

78

36

58

36

20

0.1530

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

33

18

17

28

6

0.0776

-|yi-yk|

32

19

16

28

7

0.0072

-ln(|yi-yk|)

33

18

14

33

4

0.0327

-|ln(yi)-ln(yk)|

32

19

16

29

6

0.0968

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

18

20

3

29

6

-0.0498

-|yi-yk|

15

23

5

26

7

-0.0079

-ln(|yi-yk|)

18

20

5

29

4

-0.0097

-|ln(yi)-ln(yk)|

17

21

4

27

7

-0.0860

Reference Priced Goods
0.0723***
(0.0252)
0.0070**
(0.0028)
0.0307**
(0.0143)
0.0826***
(0.0302)

Homogenous Goods
-0.0453
(0.0295)
-0.0067**
(0.0034)
-0.0152
(0.0182)
-0.0712**
(0.0357)

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in
pooled regression. Columns 2 and 3 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of the estimated
coefficient. Columns 4 to 6 provide a breakdown by sign and significance.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table 5: The Aggregation Bias
An artificial example

Importer

Exporter

UK
Lebanon (L)
Total Imports
Ratio UK/L
Ratio of Ratios
(UK/L)S /(UK/L)DR

Sweden
(S)

Machinery
Domin.
Rep.
Total
(DR)
Exports

150
50
200

300
150
450

3

2

1.5

450
200
650

Sweden
(S)

Apparel
Domin.
Rep.
(DR)

Total
Exports

150
300
450

50
150
200

200
450
650

0.5

0.33

1.5

Sweden
(S)

Total
Domin.
Rep.
(DR)

Total
Exports

300
350
650

350
300
650

650
650
1300

0.86

1.17

0.73

Table 6: Aggregate data - Failure of Standard Test of the Linder Hypothesis
OLS - Coefficient on Linder term (signs reversed)

Linder Term
ln(yi)*ln(yk)

-|yi-yk|

-ln|yi-yk|

-|ln(yi)-ln(yk)|

-.1812***
(0.0321)

-0.0203***
(0.0035)

-0.0893***
(0.0197)

-0.1953***
(0.0386)

Reference Priced Goods

-0.0267
(0.0384)

-0.0045
(0.0041)

-0.0206
(0.0210)

-0.0254
(0.0453)

Homogenous Goods

0.0726
(0.0489)

0.0062
(0.0054)

0.0110
(0.0271)

0.0690
(0.0560)

Total (All Sectors in
Sample)

-0.0447
(0.0298)

-0.0068**
(0.0034)

-0.0378**
(0.0175)

-0.0574*
(0.0349)

Total (All Sectors)

-0.0371
(0.0311)

-0.0082**
(0.0034)

-0.0286
(0.0176)

-0.0406
(0.0358)

Differentiated Goods

Notes: Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in all regressions. The coefficients and standard errors in the third
column are multiplied by 1,000.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table 7: Price as Indicator of Quality
IV - Differentiated goods
Regressions by Sector

Pos.

Sign
Neg.

Pooled Regression

Significance (5%)
Pos. Not Sig. Neg.

Median

Coefficient
(unweighted)

Coefficient
(weighted)

Price Only
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

75

39

44

54

16

0.1880

0.1056**
(0.0441)

0.1016**
(0.0462)

ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

75

39

33

66

15

0.1858

0.0648
(0.0541)

0.0981*
(0.0579)

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

66

48

35

51

28

0.1016

0.0877
(0.0553)

0.1304**
(0.0596)

Price and Income

Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

75

39

36

64

14

0.1923

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

66

48

35

51

28

0.0823

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

53

61

11

87

16

-0.0181

Notes: The lagged export price index (93-94) is used as instrument for the current index (95-96). Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in pooled regression. Columns 2 and
3 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 4 to 6 provide a
breakdown by sign and significance.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table 8: Robustness
IV - Differentiated goods
Regressions by Sector

Pos.

Sign
Neg.

Pooled Regression

Significance (5%)
Pos. Not Sig. Neg.

Median

Coefficient
(unweighted)

Coefficient
(weighted)

0.0958**
(0.0393)

0.1405***
(0.0455)

0.0472
(0.0351)

0.0720*
(0.0382)

0.0891
(0.0554)

0.1315**
(0.0597)

OLS
Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

69

45

34

68

12

0.1582

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

69

45

47

39

28

0.1113

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

57

57

14

84

16

0.0006

GDP – no PPP
adjustment
Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

73

41

36

64

14

0.1322

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

66

48

34

52

28

0.0228

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

54

60

11

87

16

-0.0125

Distance to closest US coast
Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

75

39

36

65

13

0.1894

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

66

48

35

52

27

0.0803

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

54

60

13

85

16

-0.0086

Notes: The lagged export price index (93-94) is used as instrument for the current index (95-96). Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in pooled regression. Columns 2 and
3 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 4 to 6 provide a
breakdown by sign and significance.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table 9: All sectors
IV Estimation
Regressions by Sector

Pos.

Sign
Neg.

Pooled Regression

Significance (5%)
Pos. Not Sig. Neg.

Median

Coefficient
(unweighted)

Coefficient
(weighted)

0.0877
(0.0553)

0.1304**
(0.0596)

0.3066***
(0.0679)

0.3868***
(0.0771)

-0.0839
(0.1494)

-0.0709
(0.1519)

Differentiated Goods
Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

75

39

36

64

14

0.1923

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

66

48

35

51

28

0.0823

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

53

61

11

87

16

-0.0181

Reference Priced Goods
Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

35

16

14

33

4

0.3608

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

23

28

9

32

10

-0.0291

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

19

32

5

35

11

-0.0436

Homogeneous Goods
Price, Income, and Distance to US
ln(Pi)*ln(yk)

17

21

0

37

1

-0.1355

ln(yi)*ln(yk)

12

26

0

36

2

-0.1369

ln(DistiUS)* ln(yk)

10

28

1

35

2

-0.1186

Notes: The lagged export price index (93-94) is used as instrument for the current index (95-96). Heteroskedasticityrobust standard errors in all regressions. Clustering by country pair across sectors in pooled regression. Columns 2 and
3 provide a breakdown of the total number of sectors by sign of the estimated coefficient. Columns 4 to 6 provide a
breakdown by sign and significance.
* Significant at the 10% level
** Significant at the 5% level
*** Significant at the 1% level

Table A1
Geometric Mean of Sectoral Price Indices
Country
Switzerland
Norway
Japan
Canada
Denmark
Belgium-Lux.
Singapore
Hong Kong
Austria
Germany
Australia
Netherlands
Italy
France
Sweden
United Kingdom
Finland
New Zealand
Israel
Ireland
Spain
Portugal
South Korea
Taiwan
Greece
Saudi Arabia
Argentina
South Africa
Malaysia
Uruguay
Chile
Mexico
Poland
Brazil
Romania
Thailand
Colombia
Venezuela
Costa Rica
Turkey
Bulgaria
Tunisia
Paraguay
Peru
Dominican Rep.
Lebanon
Philippines
Guatemala
Syria
Ecuador
Morocco
Indonesia
Egypt
Sri Lanka
China
India
Pakistan
Vietnam
Bangladesh
Nigeria

GDP per Capita
(PPP)
25,475
24,693
23,211
23,085
22,947
22,700
22,270
22,166
22,089
21,478
21,267
20,812
20,512
20,492
20,030
19,465
18,764
17,705
17,394
17,264
15,163
13,613
13,502
13,335
13,147
10,766
10,736
8,581
8,145
7,831
7,544
7,061
6,605
6,572
6,430
6,217
6,151
5,979
5,940
5,803
5,608
4,870
4,598
4,329
3,997
3,964
3,518
3,444
3,211
3,162
3,052
2,869
2,869
2,741
2,560
1,877
1,733
1,478
1,253
832

Differentiated Goods

Reference Priced Goods

Homogenous Goods

1.64
1.46
1.48
1.00
1.51
1.45
1.09
0.79
1.43
1.46
1.29
1.41
1.33
1.54
1.46
1.39
1.60
1.30
1.33
1.46
1.29
1.20
0.91
0.81
1.10
1.12
1.02
1.11
0.94
1.04
1.00
0.74
0.86
0.89
0.81
0.79
0.87
0.73
0.97
0.93
0.91
1.02
0.83
1.02
0.87
0.94
0.89
0.87
1.06
0.89
0.94
0.80
1.05
0.70
0.63
0.82
0.82
0.70
0.76
0.81

1.79
1.47
1.92
1.00
1.48
1.41
1.26
1.28
1.71
1.49
1.36
1.39
1.41
1.64
1.56
1.47
1.39
1.39
1.57
1.76
1.21
1.24
1.25
1.38
1.20
1.27
1.10
1.19
1.14
0.79
0.98
0.95
1.11
1.07
0.72
1.15
1.04
0.89
1.18
1.33
0.86
1.36
0.48
1.06
0.93
1.13
1.06
0.98
1.40
1.02
1.34
1.01
0.88
1.06
1.02
0.97
0.70
1.02
1.34
0.97

1.00
1.23
1.31
1.00
1.58
0.97
1.17
1.06
1.16
1.14
1.00
1.20
1.25
1.42
1.49
1.25
1.24
0.95
1.27
1.13
0.93
1.12
1.28
1.20
1.13
1.13
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.02
1.19
1.02
1.09
1.07
1.02
0.96
1.11
0.82
0.92
0.98
0.79
1.36
0.83
0.98
0.89
1.13
0.92
0.90
0.93
0.89
2.37*
0.88
0.68
1.11
1.06
0.87
0.81
0.65
0.58
0.73

Average correlation b/w sectoral index and GDP Per Capita
0.45
0.36
Note: The bottom row gives the average across sectors of the correlation between PPP GDP per capita and the price index.
* Morocco has price indices for only two sectors.

0.23

Table A2. List of 3-digit SITC sectors included Differentiated sample (some 4-digit sectors may be excluded)
Sector
34
48
56
73
98
111
248
431
533
541
551
553
554
591
598
611
612
621
625
628
635
642
651
652
653
654
655
656
657
658
659
661
662
663
665
666
667
673
678
679
691
692
694
695
696
697
699
711
713
714
716
721
722
723
724
725
726

Description
Fish,fresh (live or dead),chilled or frozen
Cereal prepar. & preps. Of flour of fruits or veg.
Vegetab.,roots & tubers,prepared/preserved,n.e.s.
Chocolate & other food preptns. Containing cocoa
Edible products and preparations n.e.s.
Non alcoholic beverages,n.e.s.
Wood,simply worked,and railway sleepers of wood
Animal & vegetable oils and fats,processed & waxes
Pigments,paints,varnishes & related materials
Medicinal and pharmaceutical products
Essential oils,perfume and flavour materials
Perfumery,cosmetics and toilet preparations
Soap,cleansing and polishing preparations
Disinfectants,insecticides,fungicidesweed killers
Miscellaneous chemical products,n.e.s.
Leather
Manufactures of leather/of composition leather nes
Materials of rubber(e.g.,pastes.plates,sheets,etc)
Rubber tyres,tyre cases,etc.for wheels
Articles of rubber,n.e.s.
Wood manufactures,n.e.s.
Paper and paperboard,cut to size or shape
Textile yarn
Cotton fabrics,woven
Fabrics,woven,of man-made fibres
Textil.fabrics,woven,oth.than cotton/man-made fibr
Knitted or crocheted fabrics
Tulle,lace,embroidery,ribbons,& other small wares
Special textile fabrics and related products
Made-up articles,wholly/chiefly of text.materials
Floor coverings,etc.
Lime,cement,and fabricated construction materials
Clay construct.materials & refractory constr.mate
Mineral manufactures,n.e.s
Glassware
Pottery
Pearls,precious& semi-prec.stones,unwork./worked
Iron and steel bars,rods,angles.shapes & sections
Tubes,pipes and fittings,of iron or steel
Iron & steel castings,forgings & stampings;rough
Structures& parts of struc.;iron,steel,aluminium
Metal containers for storage and transport
Nails,screws,nuts,bolts etc.of iron.steel,copper
Tools for use in hand or in machines
Cutlery
Household equipment of base metal,n.e.s.
Manufactures of base metal,n.e.s.
Steam & other vapour generating boilers & parts
Internal combustion piston engines& parts
Engines & motors,non-electric
Rotating electric plant and parts
Agricultural machinery and parts
Tractors fitted or not with power take-offs, etc.
Civil engineering & contractors plant and parts
Textile & leather machinery and parts
Paper & pulp mill mach.,mach for manuf.of paper
Printing & bookbinding mach.and parts

Sector
727
728
736
741
742
743
744
745
749
751
752
759
761
762
764
771
772
773
774
775
776
778
781
782
783
784
785
786
791
792
793
812
821
831
842
843
844
845
846
847
848
851
871
872
874
881
882
884
885
892
893
894
895
896
897
898
899

Description
Food processing machines and parts
Mach.& Equipment specialized for particular ind.
Mach.tools for working metal or met.carb., Parts
Heating & cooling equipment and parts
Pumps for liquids.liq.elevators and parts
Pumps & compressors,fans & blowers,centrifuges
Mechanical handling equip.and parts
Other non-electrical mach.tools,apparatus & parts
Non-electric parts and accessories of machines
Office machines
Automatic data processing machines & units thereof
Parts of and accessories suitable for 751--or 752Television receivers
Radio-broadcast receivers
Telecommunications equipment and parts
Electric power machinery and parts thereof
Elect.app.such as switches,relays,fuses,pwgs etc.
Equipment for distributing electricity
Electric apparatus for medical purposes,(radiolog)
Household type,elect.& Non-electrical equipment
Thermionic,cold & photo-cathode valves,tubes,parts
Electrical machinery and apparatus,n.e.s.
Passenger motor cars,for transport of pass.& Good
Motor vehicles for transport of goods/materials
Road motor vehicles,n.e.s.
Parts & accessories of 722-,781--,782-,783Motorcycles,motor scooters,invalid carriages
Trailers & other vehicles,not motorized
Railway vehicles & associated equipment
Aircraft & associated equipment and parts
Ships,boats and floating structures
Sanitary,plumbing,heating,lighting fixtures
Furniture and parts thereof
Travel goods,handbags,brief-cases,purses,sheaths
Outer garments,mens,of textile fabrics
Outer garments,womens,of textile fabrics
Under garments of textile fabrics
Outer garments and other articles,knitted
Under garments,knitted or crocheted
Clothing accessories of textile fabrics
Art.of apparel & clothing accessories,no textile
Footwear
Optical instruments and apparatus
Medical instruments and appliances
Measuring,checking,analysing instruments
Photographic apparatus and equipment,n.e.s.
Photographic & cinematographic supplies
Optical goods,n.e.s.
Watches and clocks
Printed matter
Articles of materials described in division 58
Baby carriages,toys,games and sporting goods
Office and stationery supplies,n.e.s.
Art,collectors pieces & antiques
Jewellery,goldsmiths and other art. Of precious m.
Musical instruments,parts and accessories
Other miscellaneous manufactured articles

Table A3. List of 3-digit SITC sectors included in Reference-priced sample (some 4-digit sectors may be excluded)
Sector
11
14
34
36
37
54
57
58
62
81
112
122
233
266
278
334
335
341
511
512
513
514
515
516
522
523

Description
Meat, edible meat offals, fresh, chilled or frozen
Meat& edib. offals, prepjpres., fish extracts
Fish, fresh (live or dead),chilled or frozen
Crustaceans and molluscs, fresh, chilled, frozen etc
Fish, crustaceans and molluscs, prepar. or preserv.
Vegetab.,fresh, chilled, frozen/pres.; roots, tubers
Fruit & nuts (not includ. oil nuts),fresh or dried
Fruit, preserved, and fruit preparations
Sugar confectionery and other sugar preparations
Feed.stuff for animals(not incl.unmilled cereals)
Alcoholic beverages
Tobacco manufactured
Synth.rubb.lat.; synth. rubb.& reclaimed; waste scrap
Synthetic fibres suitable for spinning
Other crude minerals
Petroleum products, refined
Residual petroleum products, nes.& relat. materials
Gas, natural and manufactured
Hydrocarbons nes, & their halogen.& etc.derivatives
Alcohols, phenols, phenol-alcohols,& their derivat.
Carboxylic acids,& their anhydrides, halides, etc.
Nitrogen
Organo-inorganic and heterocyclic compounds
Other organic chemicals
Inorganic chemical elements, oxides & halogen salts
Other inorganic chemicals

Sector
524
533
541
562
582
583
592
634
641
642
651
652
653
661
662
671
672
673
674
677
678
682
684
699
778

Description
Radio-active and associated materials
Pigments, paints, varnishes & related materials
Medicinal and pharmaceutical products
Fertilizers, manufactured
Condensation, polycondensation & polyaddition prod
Polymerization and copolymerization products
Starches, inulin &wheat gluten; albuminoidal subst.
Veneers, plywood, improved or reconstituted wood
Paper and paperboard
Paper and paperboard, cut to size or shape
Textile yarn
Cotton fabrics, woven
Fabrics, woven, of man-made fibres
Lime, cement, and fabricated construction materials
Clay construct .materials & refractory constr. mate
Pig iron, spiegeleisen, sponge iron, iron or steel
Ingots and other primary forms, of iron or steel
Iron and steel bars, rods, angles. shapes & sections
Universals, plates and sheets, of iron or steel
Iron/steel wire/wheth/not coated, but not insulated
Tubes, pipes and fittings, of iron or steel
Copper
Aluminum
Manufactures of base metal, n.e.s.
Electrical machinery and apparatus, n.e.s.

Table A4. List of 3-digit SITC sectors included in Homogeneous sample (some 4-digit sectors may be excluded)
Sector
11
22
23
24
41
42
43
44
54
57
58
61
71
121
222
232
247
251
263

Description
Meat, edible meat offals, fresh, chilled or frozen
Milk and cream
Butter
Cheese and curd
Wheat (including spelt) and meslin, unmilled
Rice
Barley, unmilled
Maize (corn), unmilled
Vegetab., fresh, chilled, frozen/pres.; roots, tubers
Fruit & nuts (not includ. oil nuts),fresh or dried
Fruit, preserved, and fruit preparations
Sugar and honey
Coffee and coffee substitutes
Tobacco, unmanufactured; tobacco refuse
Oil seeds and oleaginous fruit, whole or broken
Natural rubber latex; nat.rubber & sim.nat.gums
Other wood in the rough or roughly squared
Pulp and waste paper
Cotton

Sector
268
281
282
287
288
333
334
423
424
522
634
651
667
681
682
684
686
689
971

Description
Wool and other animal hair (excluding wool tops)
Iron ore and concentrates
Waste and scrap metal of iron or steel
Ores and concentrates of base metals, n.e.s.
Non-ferrous base metal waste and scrap, n.e.s.
Petrol.oils & crude oils obt.from bitumin. minerals
Petroleum products, refined
Fixed vegetable oils, soft, crude, refined/purified
Other fixed vegetable oils, fluid or solid, crude
Inorganic chemical elements, oxides & halogen salts
Veneers, plywood, improved or reconstituted wood
Textile yarn
Pearls, precious & semi-prec.stones,unwork./worked
Silver, platinum & oth. metals of the platinum group
Copper
Aluminum
Zinc
Miscell. non-ferrous base metals employ.in metallgy
Structures& parts of struc.; iron, steel, aluminum

Graph 1:
Histogram of OLS Estimates of Interaction Term Coefficient
25
20
15
10
5
0
<0.5

-0.5 -0.4

-0.4 -0.3

-0.3 -0.2

Differentiated Goods

-0.2 -0.1

-0.1 0

00.1

0.1 0.2

Reference Priced Goods

0.2 0.3

0.3 0.4

0.4 0.5

Homogenous Goods

>0.5

Graphs 2a-2c:
Relationship Between Average Price Indices and Income per Capita

Differentiated Goods

ln(Average Price Index)

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

9.5

10

10.5

9.5

10

10.5

9.5

10

10.5

ln(Income per Capita)

Reference Priced Goods
ln(Average Price Index)

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

ln(Income per Capita)

Homogenous Goods
ln(Average Price Index)

0.75
0.5
0.25
0
-0.25
-0.5
-0.75
6.5

7

7.5

8

8.5

9

ln(Income per Capita)

Graph 3:
Distribution of Coefficients by Group
20

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

20

Food and Beverages

Chemicals

Manuf. of Leather, Rubber, Cork, Wood and Paper

Textiles, Apparel and Footwear

Manuf. of Metals and Non-metallic Minerals

Agricultural and Industrial Machinery

Household Appliances and Electronics

Significantly negative
Not significant
Significantly positive

Electrical Machinery and Apparatus

Road Vehicles and Transportation Equipment

Professional and Scientific Equipment

Miscellaneous Manufactures

20

15

10

5

0

5

10

15

Number of sectors
Note: The upper and lower bars in each group show the distribution of the coefficients on the price and
income interactions by size and significance levels, respectively.

20

