NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FROM HOME TO HOSPITAL:
THE EVOLUTION OF CHILDBIRTH IN THE UNITED STATES, 1927-1940
Melissa A. Thomasson
Jaret Treber
Working Paper 10873
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10873
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

Thomasson is an Assistant Professor of Economics and a Faculty Research Fellow at the National Bureau
of Economic Research. Treber is a Ph.D. student at the University of Arizona. Excellent research assistance
was provided by Bradley Epstein, Lauren Hartman and Jill Haubner. We are grateful for comments from
Janet Currie, Price Fishback, Gary Libecap, and participants at the All-Ohio Economic Seminar, the 2004
ASSA meetings, Indiana University and the 2004 NBER Summer Institute. Thomasson gratefully
acknowledges support from NSF grant # SES-0095990, and support from the National Bureau of Economic
Research as a National Fellow during 2002-2003. We accept responsibility for all errors or omissions. The
views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2004 by Melissa A. Thomasson and Jaret Treber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

From Home to Hospital: The Evolution of Childbirth in the United States, 1927-1940
Melissa A. Thomasson and Jaret Treber
NBER Working Paper No. 10873
October 2004
JEL No. I12, N32
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the shift in childbirth from home to hospital that occurred in the United States
in the early twentieth century. Using a panel of city-level data over the period 1927-1940, we
examine the shift of childbirth from home to hospital and analyze the impact of medical care on
maternal mortality. Results suggest that increased operative intervention on the part of physicians
and a resultant greater risk of infection increased maternal mortality prior to the introduction of sulfa
drugs in 1937. However, the introduction of sulfa enabled doctors to reduce maternal mortality by
enabling them to do potentially life-saving procedures (such as cesareans) without the risk of
subsequent infection. Regressions estimated separately by race suggest that the impact of medical
care on maternal mortality differed for blacks and whites. Relative to whites, hospitals posed a
greater risk for black mothers prior to the availability of sulfa drugs in 1937, and were less beneficial
for them afterwards, suggesting that blacks may have received lower quality medical care.
Melissa A. Thomasson
Department of Economics
Miami University
Oxford, OH 45056
and NBER
thomasma@muohio.edu
Jaret Treber
Department of Economics
University of Arizona
McClelland Hall, Room 401
Tucson, AZ 85721
jaret@bpa.arizona.edu

1.

Introduction
The early twentieth-century transformation of the hospital from almshouse to center of medical

science is remarkable both in its physical scope and in its social importance. In the late nineteenth
century, hospitals were noisy, dirty places that cared for indigents and were operated by charities,
religious organizations and government. Respectable persons were cared for at home by their families.
As noted by Rosenberg, “No one wanted to enter a hospital in the mid-1870s, except for the small
minority of the least enterprising and lacking in self-respect.” (Rosenberg 1987, p.116).1 The relatively
primitive state of medical technology meant that there were virtually no reasons for families to seek care
in hospitals rather than be attended by physicians in their homes. Medical care consisted primarily of the
administering of drugs, a task that could be easily accomplished at home (Temin 1988, p. 79).
As medical technology advanced, the gradual transformation of the hospital from an almshouse to
a modern, scientific institution occurred. Hospitals became natural arenas for medical care and science
because technological advances necessitated centralization. Rapid advances in bacteriology led to a
greater understanding and implementation of complex aseptic surgical techniques that could more easily
be performed in specially designed hospital surgical suites than in living rooms. Advances in pathology
led to the formation of clinical laboratories in hospitals, and the X-ray became an important, non-portable
diagnostic tool.
The centralization of medical technologies in hospitals coincided with the increasing
standardization and professionalization of medical education that began in the late nineteenth century.
From 1880 to 1904, the number of medical schools in the U.S. increased from 90 to 154, leading some
physicians to argue for education reforms to stem the tide of poor-quality doctors that contributed to
“dwindling” medical incomes in an “overcrowded” profession (Stevens 1971, p. 60). Neither medical
school entrance requirements nor medical school coursework was rigorous. Medical schools did not
require a bachelor’s degree for would-be medical students, and medical education often consisted of no
1

A common perception of the day was poor health was often the result of poor moral character. Therefore,
hospitals concerned themselves more with curing a person’s moral flaws than becoming a steward of medical
advances. (Temin 1988, p. 79).

2

more than two or three years in a training program that was frequently devoid of hospital clinical
experience, despite the fact that as early as the 1840s the American Medical Association had indicated the
hospital was indispensable in providing training for physicians (Rosenberg 1987, p. 202; Starr 1982, pp.
114-116).
While some universities opened small hospitals of their own to provide clinical teaching for at
least some of their students, it was not until the 1890s that significant reforms linking medical education
to hospitals occurred. In 1893, Johns Hopkins became the first medical school to treat medicine as a field
of graduate study, emphasizing science and clinical experience in their training of medical students. The
first two years of the four-year program were dedicated to studying science, while the last two were spent
in hospital wards. This reform cemented the marriage of physician education to hospital clinical
experience, whereas previous medical school students had learned the practice of medicine “… in their
preceptor’s office and the patient’s home” (Starr 1982, p. 116).
Following the reforms at Johns Hopkins, the American Medical Association (AMA) and the
Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) pushed for stricter entrance requirements and more
rigorous courses of study in all medical schools. The changes at Hopkins spurred reforms elsewhere, and
by the time Abraham Flexner published his famous indictment of medical education in 1910, the Hopkins
model had become the standard for medical education that other schools strove to imitate.
The link between medical education and clinical experience in hospitals ushered in the era of
hospital-based medicine. On the supply side, physicians trained in hospitals came to view hospitals as
physician workshops, and as the number of physicians trained in hospital settings continued to grow, the
shift in medical care from home to hospital began in earnest. Hospitals focused on image-building and
customer-service, specializing in obstetrical deliveries, tonsillectomies, and appendectomies—all
procedures with usually happy outcomes (Stevens 1989, p. 105). On the demand side, the decline in
average family size that occurred with urbanization further spurred the shift as families moved into
smaller homes with fewer people left in the home to care for the sick (Vogel 1980, p. 99; Temin 1988, p.
83). Medical discoveries such as the prophylactic treatment of rabies (1885), diphtheria antitoxin (1891),

3

and tests for typhoid (1897) and syphilis (1906) lent a new scientific aura to medicine (Rosenberg 1987,
p. 159). By 1920, American upper- and middle-class families began to accept hospitals as a consumer
good, and hospitals catered to this new consumerism.
While the shift from home to hospital is well-documented, what is less clear is the extent to which
this shift occurred because it benefited practitioners or because it benefited patients. Obstetrical care in
particular is a remarkable example of the shift from home to hospital, and an example in which the
reasons underlying the shift may not have been due to the fact that women received better care in
hospitals than in their homes. In 1900, only five percent of all births occurred in hospitals (Wertz and
Wertz 1977, p. 133). Particularly in urban areas, the shift from home to hospital occurred quickly. By
1935, nearly 75 percent of urban births occurred in hospitals, and nearly all urban births occurred in
hospitals by 1950.2
Despite the rapid shift from home birth to hospital birth, Figures 1 and 2 show that maternal
mortality remained flat until the mid-1930s, even as death rates among women due to other causes such as
respiratory tuberculosis decreased. Figure 1 shows total, urban (places over 10,000) and rural maternal
mortality from 1915-1940. Strikingly, maternal mortality was higher in urban areas than in rural areas
until the late 1930s when sulfa drugs became available, even though women in urban areas had greater
access to physicians and hospitals. Figure 2 shows the death rate among women for tuberculosis and all
causes related to childbirth (puerperal causes) from 1900-1940. While tuberculosis death rates fell
throughout the period, maternal mortality did not begin to decline until the 1930s. Ignoring the spike in
maternal mortality rates associated with the 1918 influenza epidemic, maternal mortality death rates are
essentially flat until the 1930s, even as childbirth increasingly moved from home to hospital over the
period.3 Further, infant mortality rates due to birth injuries increased 40-50 percent between 1915 and

2

The transition occurred more slowly in rural areas initially. In 1935, roughly 20 percent of rural births occurred in
hospitals. By 1950, over 70 percent of rural births occurred in hospitals, and by the 1960s, it was rare for any birth to
occur outside of a hospital (Leavitt 1986, p. 171; Wertz and Wertz 1977 p. 135).
3
The spike in 1918 due to influenza occurs because the U.S. classified influenza deaths among pregnant women as
due to puerperal causes instead of influenza. When joint causes of death were present, they were coded using the
Manual of Joint Causes of Death prepared by the U.S. Bureau of the Census. For each cause of death, the Manual of

4

1929 as hospital birthrates increased (White House Conference on Child Health and Protection 1933, pp.
215-217).
It could be argued that the seeming rise (or lack of decline) in maternal mortality rates may have
resulted from improved reporting of maternal deaths as time progressed, or because a decline in the birth
rate meant that more hazardous first births accounted for a greater share of total births over time.
However, neither of these reasons can fully account for the trend in maternal mortality from 1900-1940.
Improvements in reporting could have led to a seeming increase in maternal mortality for two reasons.
First, states with higher mortality rates may have been admitted to the U.S. death registration area later
than states with lower rates. As these higher mortality states were admitted, the U.S. overall maternal
mortality rate would increase. While plausible, it does not appear to be the case that an increasing number
of states admitted to the death registration area was responsible for the trend in maternal mortality. Even
in those states that were in the death registration area in 1900, maternal mortality did not decline over the
period. Figure 3 shows the essentially flat trend until the 1930s in Massachusetts, a state that had
collected maternal mortality data since 1850. Further, international comparisons, shown in Figure 4,
reveal that both England and Sweden had flat or rising maternal mortality rates during the same period,
even though they possessed fairly accurate vital statistics data (Loudon 1992, p. 240).4
Another reason why the increase in maternal mortality in the early twentieth century may be an
artifact of the data is that there may have been a tendency on the part of physicians to misreport deaths
from puerperal fever in order to avoid blame (Loudon 1992, pp. 35-36). While such deaths were usually
classified as due to another puerperal cause such as hemorrhage, so that the overall maternal mortality
rate would be the same, some doctors may have coded deaths from puerperal infection as due to non-

Joint Causes tells what other causes are “preferred” and should be listed as the primary cause if both are present. For
example, puerperal septicemia as a primary cause took precedence over tuberculosis, but not over syphilis.
4
A note of caution when looking at this figure: the levels are difficult to compare because of differences between
countries in classifying deaths due to joint causes (for example, Sweden and England coded joint deaths in which the
mother had influenza as due to influenza, not due to puerperal causes as was done in the U.S., so that the U.S. has a
spike in maternal mortality during the influenza epidemic that is not seen in international data). A study done in
1927 found that the rates in England and Sweden would be higher if classified using the American method, although
the rank order would be the same (Tandy 1935).

5

childbirth related causes. As the quality of vital statistics reporting improved over time, these deaths may
have been more accurately reported, so that maternal mortality seemed to increase. These effects were
undoubtedly present, but probably small and not large enough to obscure the overall trend, especially by
the 1920s. In a 1917 study that investigated maternal mortality in the U.S. and examined the quality of the
data, Meigs states, “… it is safe to say that any marked decrease in the actual death rate from childbirth
during the last 13 years could not have been masked by “the improvement in reporting deaths from
childbirth (Meigs 1917, p. 18).
Even if the data were accurately reported, it may be that maternal mortality failed to decrease
over this period because a decline in the birth rate meant that more hazardous first births (primiparity)
increased as a share of total births. While it is true that first births are more hazardous than second or third
births, it is also true that grand multiparity (four or more births) is more hazardous as well (Loudon 1992,
p. 242). If birth rates were declining, then primiparity was increasing, but grand multiparity was
decreasing. Thus, the increased risk of maternal mortality associated with higher primiparity may have
been offset by the decreased risk of maternal mortality associated with lower grand multiparity. Statistics
available from 1920-1940 suggest that as the total birth rate per 1,000 women aged 10-54 fell from 72.6
births to 52.3 births, the percentage of first births as a share of total births rose from 29 percent to 37
percent. At the same time, the share of fourth and subsequent births fell from 35 percent to 24 percent
(Linder and Grove 1947, Table 48, Table XIV-A). Given that the decrease in grand multiparity more than
offsets the increase in primiparity as a share of total births, it seems unlikely that the overall trend in
maternal mortality can be attributed to changes in fertility.
The data clearly suggest, then, that maternal mortality was not decreasing over the period 19001940 even as hospital birth rates increased. If, ostensibly, one of the primary reasons underlying the shift
from home to hospital birth was that hospitals provided greater safety for women and infants during labor
and childbirth, why was this effect not seen in declining maternal mortality rates? Several historians have
argued that stagnant maternal mortality rates and rising rates of infant mortality due to birth injury
occurred as a result of increased operative intervention on the part of practitioners as birth moved from

6

the home to the hospital, combined with a lack of set standards for the practice of obstetrics. Unnecessary
intervention may have led to excess maternal deaths for a number of reasons. A primary cause of maternal
mortality was puerperal septicemia, and increased operative intervention in the form of version, forceps
delivery and cesarean section all increased the likelihood of such an infection. Complications from
anesthesia could also lead to maternal death. How preventable was maternal death in this period? Two
studies in the early 1930s claimed that between half and two-thirds of maternal deaths could have been
prevented by better training of the attendants (White House Conference on Child Health and Protection
1933; New York Academy of Medicine 1933 p. 213). If these arguments are correct, then modern
medicine may have actually increased the number of maternal deaths due to childbirth than otherwise
would have occurred.
This paper uses a panel of city-level data over the period 1927-1940 to examine the shift of
childbirth from home to hospital and to analyze whether or not medical care contributed to maternal
mortality. Results indicate that medical care generated a slight increase in maternal mortality prior to
1937, and a slightly larger decrease after 1937 when sulfa drugs became available. The remainder of the
paper is structured as follows. Section 2 discusses the background and history of childbirth in the United
States, and frames the model discussed in Section 3. Section 4 describes the data and results, while
Section 5 concludes.
2.

The History of Childbirth in America

Childbirth Prior to 1900
Before 1750, women controlled childbirth. Typically, a pregnant woman entering confinement
requested the attendance of a midwife and several close friends and relatives who would aid her during
the process of childbirth in her home. The technology of childbirth was relatively simple; midwives were
generally passive but supportive participants in the birthing process, especially during normal deliveries.
They were able to turn breech births, but in complicated cases could do little to prevent either maternal or
infant death (Wertz and Wertz 1977, p.17-18). Women feared childbirth, and while actual data are scarce,
Leavitt notes that women’s diaries in colonial times (and even through the turn of the twentieth century)

7

showed that “… an important part of women’s experience of childbirth was their anticipation of dying or
being permanently injured during the event” (Leavitt 1986, p. 14).
Medical intervention during childbirth, even the presence of a physician during labor and
delivery, was rare until after 1750, when men trained as physicians abroad returned to practice in America
(Wertz and Wertz 1977, p. 29). Physicians trained in the “new midwifery” in Europe brought forceps to
the United States, offering middle- and upper-class women an alternative to traditional, midwife-attended
childbirth.5 The fear of childbirth led women to invite physicians (and their promises of greater safety and
less pain) into the birthing room (Leavitt 1986, pp. 37-38). With forceps, physicians could assist women
in difficult births, or hasten slow deliveries. Technological developments such as with the introduction of
ergot (a drug used to cause uterine contractions), and the advent of pain-relieving drugs such as ether and
chloroform also provided physicians with an aura of science that led more and more women to choose to
have physician-attended births. General practitioners were eager to accommodate women. They viewed
childbirth as central to their attempts to build a practice, given that successful births led to more patients
(Wertz and Wertz 1977, p. 67) At the same time, midwives, most of whom were without formal education
and who lacked professional organization, gradually attended fewer and fewer births as the century
progressed.
The idea that physician-attended deliveries were in fact safer was not necessarily true; while there
are no records of epidemics of puerperal fever in America during the 18th century, puerperal fever became
more common in America after 1840, perhaps because of increasing physician intervention during
childbirth (Wertz and Wertz 1977, p. 119). Regardless, by the end of the nineteenth century nearly 50
percent of all births were physician-attended, although the majority still occurred in women’s homes.
Most middle-and upper-class white women were attended by physicians in their homes during childbirth,
while Southern black families and immigrants relied heavily on midwives (Litoff 1978, p. 26). The only

5

An Englishman named Peter Chamberlen is believed to have invented forceps in the early 17th century. The device
consisted of “… two enlarged spoons with handles” that could be joined and locked together. The Chamberlen
family kept the device a secret for over 100 years, so that they were not widely used until after 1800 (Wertz and
Wertz 1977, pp. 34-35; Radcliffe 1967, pp. 31-32).

8

births that occurred in hospitals were those of homeless women or women who could not receive in-home
assistance (Leavitt 1986, p. 61).

Childbirth After 1900
After the turn of the century, the shift from home to hospital began in earnest, although it
occurred slowly at first. A Children’s Bureau study conducted in Baltimore in 1915 sheds some light on
trends in urban areas. By 1915, the percentage of births attended by physicians had increased, and women
were more likely to deliver in hospitals (Rochester 1923, pp. 212-213). However, as shown in Tables 1a
and 1b, the percentage of women attended by physicians and delivering in hospitals varied widely by both
income and nationality of mother. Table 1a shows that physician-attended births in Baltimore hospitals
were highest among families where the father reported no earnings and among the highest-earning
fathers. Middle-class families were more likely to deliver at home while being attended by a physician,
while midwives generally limited their services to middle- and lower-income families. Table 1b illustrates
the fact that foreign-born mothers in Baltimore were more likely to use midwives than native-born
mothers, usually because of a reluctance to admit men into the birthing room. Only 27.4 percent of infants
born to white, native-born mothers were delivered by midwives in 1915, while midwives attended the
births of over 77 percent of Italian-born women.

The Rise of the Physician and Hospital-Based Childbirth
What engendered the shift from home to hospital based childbirth in the first decades of the
twentieth century? On the supply side, reforms in medical education, increasing professional organization
and specialization among physicians, the economic gains that accrued to physicians who had hospitalcentered practices, and the disappearance of the midwife as an alternative to physician-attended birth all
played a role in the transition of birth from home to hospital.
By the turn of the century, reforms in medical education were well underway. The impetus for
reform stemmed from the success of the Johns Hopkins model and the willingness of American

9

philanthropists to fund improvements in medical science and education.6 However, the chief proponent
for change became the newly restructured and more powerful American Medical Association (AMA).7
The AMA recognized the fact that improving standards would not only lead to additional funding of
medical school endowments and improvements in the quality of medical care, but would also serve to
reduce the number of medical practitioners at a time when many physicians were struggling financially.
The problem of “overcrowding” in the profession was referred to in several articles at the turn of the
century. A Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA) editorial written in October, 1901
stated, “It is evident from the census statistics that we must be rapidly approaching the limit of additions
to the medical profession if the individual members are to find the practice of medicine a lucrative
occupation” (JAMA, October 26, 1901, p. 1119).
Regardless of motive, the reforms in medical education that occurred in the first two decades of
the twentieth century influenced the shift in childbirth from home to hospital in two ways. First, reforms
in medical education focused on the close incorporation of hospitals with physician education. Prior to the
twentieth century, most physicians had little clinical experience in hospitals. Even before the Flexner
Report was published in 1910, medical reformers recognized the need for a close tie between hospitals
and medical training.8 Thus, increasing numbers of physicians were routinely trained in hospitals and
came to view hospitals as workshops in which they could use the latest medical technologies. With
respect to childbirth, hospitals enabled physicians to use technologies that may have been more difficult at
home. For example, physicians often had physical difficulty utilizing forceps in the home birthing bed,

6

Stevens notes that endowments to medical schools rose as educational standards increased. She quotes the
president of Harvard in 1907 as stating “Gentlemen, the way to get endowment for medicine is to improve medical
education.” American Medical Association Bulletin, 1907, p. 263, quoted by Stevens 1971, p. 60.
7
The growth in AMA membership over the time period is striking. While the reorganization of the AMA in 1913 to
include all members in good standing with local medical societies makes it difficult to compare AMA membership
over time, Burrow notes that by comparing the number of AMA fellows (members who were in good standing with
a local society, actually applied for AMA membership, subscribed to the Journal and paid the annual fee) with the
number of members before 1913 allows for nearly parallel comparisons. Total fellows in the AMA in 1920 equaled
47,045 (of total membership of 83,338), compared to 8,401 members in 1900 (Burrow 1963, pp. 49-50).
8
Some philanthropists encouraged the development of ties between medical schools and hospitals. Markowitz and
Rosner (1973) note several incidences where philanthropists and other industrialists “… attempted to foster
consolidation of the medical school and hospital by giving money with certain substantial strings attached,” usually
requiring hospitals to allow medical schools to use their facilities for teaching (p. 103).

10

and some types of anesthesia were best administered in a hospital environment. Further, an increasing
awareness of the importance of a germ-free environment to prevent puerperal fever led doctors to prefer
hospital-based over home-based childbirth (Leavitt p. 177).
In addition to being more comfortable practicing in a hospital setting, physicians also found that
centralizing childbirth in hospitals was more convenient and perhaps more lucrative. They no longer had
to carry their equipment and travel great distances to women’s homes to attend labor and delivery, and
hospitals provided trained nurses to assist doctors during delivery (Wertz and Wertz 1977, p. 144; Vogel
1980, pp. 102-103). In addition, hospital-centered practices may have allowed doctors to increase their
incomes. Doctors could see more patients than they could if they traveled to patient’s houses, and
hospitals enabled them to do more complicated (and more expensive) procedures. The idea that
physicians may have used excessive intervention to increase their incomes is in line with the modern
theory of “supplier-induced demand.” For example, Gruber and Owings (1996) found that the decrease in
fertility that occurred from 1970-1982 led obstetricians to substitute normal childbirth with more highly
compensated cesarean deliveries. Two studies published much earlier are also suggestive of the presence
of supplier-induced demand. A 1915 Children’s Bureau study found that physicians used forceps (for
which they were reimbursed more) in only 4.3 percent of births in families with fathers earning less than
$450, compared to 14.2 percent of births in families with earnings over $1,850 (Woodbury 1925, p. 236).
Similarly, results from the National Health Survey of 1935-1936 found that the cesarean birth rates varied
from a low of 1.4 percent among those families on relief to 3.7 percent among those women with a family
income of $2,000 or more. Even more striking, the percentage of hospitalized women undergoing
episiotomy ranged from a low of 25 percent among relief families to nearly 50 percent among women
with family income over $2,000. (Goddard 1941, pp. 44-45).
The second reason reforms in medical education helped to foster the shift in childbirth from home
to hospital was that they were part of a larger effort by the AMA to increase the level of professional
organization and status among physicians, activities that may have in turn reduced the number of nonphysician practitioners (such as midwives) that were available as alternatives to physician-attended

11

childbirth. As the scope of medical knowledge broadened, greater numbers of physicians sought to
specialize in an area of medicine rather than practice as generalists.9 State licensing requirements rose
with increasing standards in medical education, and physicians resisted efforts by non-medical
competitors to treat patients (Stevens 1971, p. 99-100). The desire to reform obstetrics education and to
raise the status of obstetricians led some physicians to call for the elimination of the midwife. Physicians
may have felt threatened economically by midwives, who typically received one-half the fee charged by
physicians for performing obstetrics services (Litoff 1978, p. 73; Chapin 1923, p. 77). Further, some
suggested that midwives took teaching opportunities away from medical students, particularly midwives
who worked on charity cases. Accordingly, many physicians regarded midwives as inferior substitutes
and blamed them for high rates of maternal mortality. A physician writing in the American Journal of
Obstetrics and Diseases of Women and Children in 1911 stated:
…40 to 50 per cent. of the births in the large cities of this country are attended by midwives who,
except in some rare instances, are ignorant, untrained, incompetent women, and some of the
results of their obstetric incompetence are unnecessary deaths and blindness of the infants, and
unavoidable invalidism, suffering and deaths of the mothers…the gist of the matter is that one or
two things must be done with the midwife—she must be eliminated or educated and placed under
state control. (Edgar 1911, p. 881).
Indeed, there is little disagreement that untrained midwives contributed to high maternal mortality
rates. However, it is not clear that trained midwives were any more hazardous than poorly trained
physicians, especially since the maternal mortality rate did not fall as fewer and fewer women were
delivered by midwives over time. Speaking in 1911 to the New York Academy of Medicine about the
“midwife problem”, a New York physician noted that “... much that is said to-night concerning the evil
results of midwife practice here in New York, can be said—even to a higher degree—of the physician.
The poorly trained physician does far more harm than the midwife, as is abundantly shown by the various
hospital records as well as by the records of the Board of Health” (Lobenstine 1911, p. 879).
9

Only 23 percent of medical students graduating in 1915 went on to practice solely as general practitioners. Thirtysix percent developed a specialist interest, while 41 percent limited themselves entirely to a specialty (Stevens 1971,
p. 116). As more physicians became specialists, specialists sought to organize and delineate their specialties. The
American College of Surgeons (ACS) was founded in 1912 to standardize surgical quality and to openly distinguish
between “quality” surgeons and other surgical practitioners. Other specialties soon followed suit.

12

Some physicians and public health officials were actually in favor of training and regulating
midwives to reduce maternal mortality. Midwife proponents pointed to the much lower puerperal death
rates experienced by some European countries that relied almost exclusively on trained midwives to
deliver pregnant women. Mothers in Sweden and England relied more extensively on midwives than did
mothers in the U.S., and midwives in these countries were better trained and regulated (Loudon 1992).
Despite the much greater number of births delivered at home, both England and Sweden realized much
lower levels of maternal mortality than the United States, as shown in Figure 4.
In America, further evidence of the ability of trained midwives to reduce maternal mortality is
given by the example of the Kentucky Frontier Nursing Service, founded by Mary Breckinridge, a nurse
who later trained as a midwife in England. In the Frontier Nursing Service, more than 30 nurses trained as
midwives in England and then provided midwifery services to families in rural Kentucky. Over the period
1925-1937, the nurse-midwives delivered 3,000 babies. Physicians were called in to perform cesarean
sections 6 times, and forceps were used only 14 times. The maternal mortality rate associated with the
Frontier Nursing Service over the period was 6.8 deaths per 10,000 births, in contrast to 56-68 deaths per
10,000 births for the U.S. as a whole, and 80-90 deaths per 10,000 births for white women delivered in
hospitals in Lexington. (Dye 1983, pp. 501-502). New York City and New Jersey also experienced
significant declines in infant mortality after implementing midwife training and regulatory programs
(Litoff 1978, p. 93).
Despite the efforts of midwifery proponents, the percentage of births attended by midwives
decreased from 50 to 12.5 percent over the period 1900 to 1935 (Loudon 1992, p.298).10 The absolute
number of midwives declined from 7.39 midwives per 100,000 people in 1900 to 2.90 per 100,000 in
1930. This trend was particularly pronounced in large cities. Southern states reported greater numbers of
midwives throughout the period, and lower levels of decline, as seen in Figure 5.

10

In New Jersey, 42 percent of births were attended by midwives in 1918, compared to less than 19 percent in 1930.
By 1930, 80 percent of midwives were in the rural South (Stevens 1971, pp. 100, 180).

13

Efforts by physicians to discredit the midwife profession were likely responsible for at least some
of this decrease, as physicians regarded midwives as a “… temporary stopgap until all patients could be
delivered by physicians” (Stevens 1971, p. 180). States began to pass laws to regulate midwives over this
period, and one state (Massachusetts) even outlawed midwifery (Litoff 1986, p. 9).11 Overall, these laws
did little to reduce the number of midwives as they were fairly lenient and poorly enforced. There were
many other factors that contributed to the decline of midwives (Litoff 1986, pp. 9-10). In contrast to
physicians, midwives were not professionally organized, and given that many midwives were women
who attended blacks and immigrants, they may have lacked a political voice. Midwife proponents were
less organized than opponents, and the demand for midwife services also fell as immigration declined
(Litoff 1978, p. 113).

Advances in Anesthesia and Women’s Preferences for Hospital Birth
While supply-side factors such as the increasing professionalization of physicians and their
preferences for hospital-centered births, and the fact that fewer midwives were available to serve as
alternatives doubtlessly contributed to the shift of birth from the home to the hospital, demand-side
factors also played a role. Some women may have simply preferred hospital births over home births. With
technological advances in anesthesia, more and more women turned away from midwives and turned to
physicians who could administer anesthetics during labor and delivery. As hospitals shifted their focus to
customer-service, they offered women greater comfort and assistance than women could receive at home.
Trained nurses could assist women, and lengthy hospital stays permitted women to rest and escape
household duties.12 Safety concerns also prompted women to adhere to their physician’s advice regarding

11

In 1896, the year Washington, D.C. enacted a law requiring midwives to pass an examination, midwives attended
50 percent of all births. By 1910, midwives attended less than 10 percent (Chapin 1923, p. 77).
12
Even after a nursing shortage following World War II shortened obstetrical length of stays in hospitals, ward
patients stayed an average of two weeks post-partum, and private, paying patients often stayed as long as three
weeks, perhaps they “…appreciated the efficiency of transferring to an institution the whole daily round of care,
feeding, and washing that could hardly be done anymore in the home” (Wertz and Wertz 1977, p. 156). Leavitt also
suggests that urbanization transformed birth from a “woman-centered” event where a woman’s friends and relatives

14

hospitals. Childbirth in the early twentieth-century was hazardous; a 1917 report noted that childbirth in
1913 caused more deaths among women 15 to 44 years old than any disease except tuberculosis (Meigs
1917, p. 7). Advertisements in popular women’s magazines trumpeted the virtues of hospital births by
proclaiming that “…motherhood is easier and far safer due… to the modern hospital and the great strides
made in obstetrics” (Ladies’ Home Journal, September 1930, p. 83). Advertisements also frequently
touted their products as those used by “hospital leaders” and as “hospital-safe” (Ladies’ Home Journal,
February 1932, p. 120).
While doctors’ advice, comfort, convenience, and supposedly greater safety played a role in the
shift from home to hospital birth, the availability of anesthesia also contributed to a growing demand for
hospital birth. The advent of pain relieving drugs and techniques, notably “Twilight Sleep” in 1914
(Leavitt 1986, p. 130 and Wertz and Wertz 1977, p.150), likely played a large part in convincing women
that hospitals were more comfortable than homes for delivering a child. Although ether and chloroform
had been used since the mid-1800s, they were far from ideal. Induction and recovery were slow with
ether, and while women were induced much faster using chloroform, it carried higher risks of cardiac
complications (Rushman, Davies, Atkinson 1996, pp. 23-26). Most other drugs could not be administered
until late in labor, so that women still experienced pain (Leavitt 1986, p. 127).
An advance in the early twentieth-century opened the door for greater anesthetic possibilities.
Unlike earlier methods, “twilight sleep” involved the administration of the amnesiac scopolamine, which
did not relieve pain but rather prevented women from remembering the painful experience. Pioneered in
Germany, U.S. physicians were reluctant to use twilight sleep since they were unsure of its safety.
Complications included delayed labor, and infant respiratory depression (Sandelowski 1984, pp. 11-15).
Women sometimes had to be restrained during its use, making the hospital the preferable setting for
delivery (Sandelowski 1984, p. 16). By slowing labor and incapacitating women, twilight sleep often
required obstetrical interventions such as the administration of Pituitrin (a drug used to increase

took care of her and her family both during labor and after delivery to one in which women could not find the help
they needed (1986, p. 175).

15

contractions) and the applications of forceps to deliver infants. Despite its drawbacks, women
campaigned vigorously for its adoption. Proponents of twilight sleep included many wealthy society
women, including Mrs. John Jacob Astor, whose picture appeared in newspaper articles endorsing the
method (Leavitt 1986, pp. 131-33; Wertz and Wertz 1977, pp. 150-54). While the popularity of the
Twilight Sleep method faded somewhat after 1915 when a noted advocate died during childbirth, the
furor it initially created served to increasingly medicalize childbirth, and to make obstetrics an
increasingly surgical specialty that routinely involved anesthesia and instrumental intervention.
Because of these reasons, increasingly large numbers of American women began to give birth in
hospitals. The image of hospitals as safer places to give birth, however, is little supported by empirical
evidence. Maternal mortality rates were flat and in some cases increasing until the 1930s, and several
studies blamed the increase on excessive physician intervention in childbirth.13 As early as 1880
physicians were aware of the streptococci bacteria that caused sepsis, often called “child-bed” or
“puerperal” fever. Nevertheless, puerperal septicemia remained a leading killer of women of childbearing
age until the mid-1930s, when the anti-infective sulfonamide drugs were developed.14 Women attended
by physicians and giving birth in hospitals prior to 1936 may have been at increased risk for septicemia,
given that they were much more likely to have some sort of physical intervention. Results from the 19351936 National Health Survey found that forceps were used “… with two or three times the frequency” in
hospital deliveries compared to nonhospitalized deliveries (Goddard 1941, p. 47). One prominent

13

A study conducted by the Children’s Bureau in 1927 and 1928 found that maternal deaths due to puerperal causes
were 36 percent higher in urban areas than in rural areas (Maternal Mortality in Fifteen States Children’s Bureau
1934, p. 19). Loudon (1991, p.294) and Leavitt (1986, p.183) also provide evidence that maternal deaths due to
puerperal fever remained higher in urban areas than in rural areas. Given the higher incidence of hospital births in
urban than rural areas this may suggest that hospitals may have actually increased the risks associated with
childbirth. Further evidence is suggested by interracial comparisons: Despite the fact that white mothers were
hospitalized with much greater frequency than nonwhite infants (twice as many white births occurred in hospitals
than did nonwhite births), the racial gap in maternal mortality did not widen and even narrowed during this time
period (Loudon 1991, p. 299).
14
Until sulfa drugs were developed, between 35-55 percent of maternal deaths were due to sepsis. Twenty percent
were due to eclampsia, 20 percent due to hemorrhage, with the remainder due to other causes such as abortion
(Loudon 1991, p. 34). Dr. Gerhard Domagk described the antibacterial properties of the first sulfa drug (called
“Prontosil” in results published in February, 1935. The antibacterial action came from the drug’s sulphonamide
compounds, which were generally effective against streptococcal agents, and to a lesser extent against staphyloccal
infection. Domagk won the 1939 Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine for his work.

16

physician, Joseph B. DeLee, recommended the routine use of episiotomy and outlet forceps after sedating
patients with ether and scopolamine. Describing this as the “prophylactic forceps operation,” DeLee
stated that the technique was a “…rounded method for relieving pain, supplementing and anticipating the
efforts of Nature, reducing the hemorrhage, and preventing and repairing damage” (DeLee 1920, p. 34).15
This “meddlesome midwifery” may have increased morbidity and mortality among childbearing women.
Drugs slowed delivery and necessitated interventions such as forceps that could transmit infection.
Physicians who inappropriately applied forceps risked lacerations of the cervix and perineum, as well as
infection and hemorrhage.
Two studies conducted in the early 1930s confirmed the notion that physician interference may
have harmed women. A study conducted by the New York Academy of Medicine from 1930-1932 found
the septicemia death rate to be 1.67 deaths per 1,000 live births in the hospital, but only 0.90 deaths per
1,000 live births for infants delivered at home.16 A second study conducted by a subcommittee of the
White House Conference on Child Health and Protection also suggested that excessive interference led to
increased morbidity and mortality, with the result that “… all the advances in medical knowledge have
been almost lost to the parturient woman through too great a recourse to instrumental delivery” (White
House Conference 1933, p. 18).
3.

Model
Despite the purported claims of increased maternal safety associated with hospital birth, Section 2

shows that it is not clear that hospitals really led to safer birth outcomes for mothers. However, if
hospitals were really actually dangerous for mothers, would more and more women voluntarily give birth
in hospitals? In this paper, we seek to statistically examine the link between hospital births and maternal
mortality. Loudon (1991) suggests that there are two views that explain differential maternal mortality
rates. The first is that “…high mortality is due to poor obstetric practice and low mortality to good
15

Other doctors such as J. Whitridge Williams believed that DeLee proposed excessive intervention, a debate that
played out in medical journals in the 1920s (Leavitt 1986, p. 120).
16
Even if cesarean sections are excluded, the hospital maternal mortality rate falls to 1.07—still 18 percentage
points higher than the maternal mortality rate associated with home births (New York Academy of Medicine 1933,
p. 85).

17

practice” whereas the second is that the underlying causes of high maternal mortality “…can be found in
the social, economic, and political conditions of a population” (Loudon 1991, p. 34). By attempting to
control for medical inputs as well as the socioeconomic conditions that prevailed at the time, we seek to
shed light on the question of whether or not the shift to hospital births actually benefited women.
We begin by using city-level data for the period 1927-1940 that allow us to control for different
factors—both medical and socioeconomic—that may have impacted maternal mortality rates.17 To
capture medical factors that may have impacted maternal mortality rates, we include a control for medical
inputs. Ideally, this variable would be measured as the percentage of all births in a city occurring in
hospitals; however, it is not possible to construct this variable for every year in the sample. Instead, we
use hospital beds per 100,000 population to control for medical inputs. Presumably, cities with greater
numbers of hospital beds may have provided greater levels of physician-attended, hospital births for
several reasons. First, the costs (both actual costs and travel costs) of using a hospital may have been
lower in cities with more hospital beds per 100,000. In addition, if physicians are more likely to locate in
areas with greater numbers of hospital beds, then this may have increased the probability that a pregnant
woman sought a physician’s assistance during delivery and thus increased her chance of delivering in a
hospital.
A priori, it is not clear whether the sign on the estimated coefficient on hospital beds per 100,000
should be positive or negative. Clearly, physicians and mothers believed that hospital births were safer.
Undoubtedly, the lives of some women were saved by the efforts of a physician during difficult births. On
the other hand, we are aware that excessive medical intervention may have claimed lives. It is possible
that the impact of medical inputs on maternal mortality changed during the period of time we are
considering. In particular, with the introduction of sulfa drugs in the spring of 1937, obstetricians were
able to more effectively combat puerperal infections. After sulfa drugs were introduced, doctors could

17

Ideally, we would like a panel of city level data from 1920-1950 to more fully capture the shift, given that
maternal mortality already begins to fall in the early 1930s. However, consistent city-level information on hospitals
is not available until 1927, and beginning in 1943, only county information is reported on maternal mortality. Thus,
we limit ourselves to the 1927-1940 period.

18

intervene with less chance of spreading an infection that would later claim the mother’s life. For this
reason we included a dummy variable indicating observations prior to 1937 as well the interaction
between this variable and hospital beds per 100,000 in order to distinguish between pre- and post-1937
effects of medical care on maternal mortality.
In order to control for socioeconomic characteristics that may have affected maternal health, we
include county level measures of education, real income per capita, and race. Construction of the
variables is discussed in the data appendix. Education may be important if maternal health practices
influenced maternal mortality. For example, educational deficiencies might also have facilitated the
continuing influence of superstition, folk remedies, and “lay referral” even when modern medical care
and information was available (Beardsley 1987, pp. 32-35). In addition, better educated people appear to
be more behaviorally responsive to health-related information than others (Berger and Leigh 1989,
Kenkel 1991, Meara 2001). The percent of the population that is illiterate is included as a measure of
educational attainment. As a proxy for income, we include real retail sales per capita (Fishback et al
2001). Income may be important for several reasons. First, women with higher incomes may have been
better nourished and thus better able to withstand childbirth and its potential complications. This suggests
that the estimated coefficient on the income variable should be negative. Higher income families may
have also been able to obtain better access to medical care. To the extent that medical care lowered
maternal mortality, this suggests that the estimated coefficient on the income variable should be negative.
However, if medical care did increase the risk of maternal mortality, and to the extent that the hospital
beds per 100,000 variable inadequately captures the impact of medical care on maternal mortality, then
the estimated coefficient on the income variable may be positive.
The percentage of the population that is black (also from the census) is included to measure the
extent to which racial differences impacted maternal mortality. Finally, women under 16 years of age and
women over 35 are at a greater risk for puerperal complications (Cunningham et al 1997, pp. 570-572).
As a control for this potential maternal health risk we include variables reflecting females in various age

19

groups as a percentage of women in their childbearing years (ages 15 to 44). Thus, our basic regression
equation is:
MMRit = Zitα + Ytθ + [Yt*Zit]π + Xitβ + eit ,
B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

where i refers to cities, t refers to years, Zit reflects hospital beds per 100,000, Yt is the dummy variable
B

B

B

B

indicating whether the observation occurred prior to 1937, and Xit includes the city-year characteristics
B

B

described above. In some specifications we include state dummies to capture any additional effects that
vary across states but were constant over time. Finally, because it could be the case that cities that were
added to the registration areas after 1927 may have had greater levels of maternal mortality and more
incomplete registration of maternal deaths as well as infant births, we run a balanced panel consisting of
only those cities that were in the sample in the first year (1927) and an unbalanced panel consisting of all
cities regardless of when they entered the sample. Table 2 presents summary statistics for the variables.
4.

Results
Regression results are reported in Table 3. Looking at the results for the balanced panel in column

[1], the estimated coefficient on the beds per 100,000 population variable is negative and statistically
significant, suggesting that beginning in 1937, an increase of 100 beds per 100,000 population resulted in
10.5 fewer maternal deaths per 100,000 births. The estimated coefficient on the beds per 100,000
interaction term is positive and statistically significant, suggesting that prior to 1937, an increase of 100
beds per 100,000 population resulted in an increase of about 7 maternal deaths per 100,000 live births.
These results are consistent with the conjecture that until the late 1930s obstetrical devotion to medical
intervention rendered medical care detrimental to the health of women during the birthing process. The
introduction of anti-infective sulfa drugs and improving obstetrics practices enabled obstetricians to
prevent injury and combat infections induced by their medical interventions later in the 1930s.18 The
TP

PT

estimated coefficient for the pre-1937 variable indicates that maternal mortality was higher during the

TP

18

Sulfa drugs were effective against puerperal fever, but not as effective as antibiotics. City-level data are not
reported beyond 1943, and antibiotics were not widely produced until 1946. However, state level data run for the
period 1937-1950 (not reported here) show that penicillin had an even stronger impact on reducing maternal
mortality after 1946.
PT

20

early to mid 1930s than the rest of the period. Racial differences also appear to have played a role in
maternal mortality; cities with larger black populations had higher levels of maternal mortality. The odd
result in the balanced panel is the negative and statistically significant coefficient on the percent of the
population that is illiterate. There is speculation in the historical literature that maternal mortality may
have been higher among more educated, higher-income women exactly because of the fact that they
tended to use hospitals for births, while less educated, lower-income women may have been less likely to
deliver in hospitals.
Results for the unbalanced panel are somewhat different. The reason we use the balanced panel is
because it may have been the case that cities added to the birth registration area later might have had
higher rates of maternal mortality. This is consistent with the summary statistics presented in Table 2; the
mean maternal mortality rate for the full sample is 627 deaths per 100,000 births, compared to 598 deaths
per 100,000 births. To a large extent, the cities added later were in the South, where hospital quality may
have been more dubious than in northern cities, and where blacks in particular had a more difficult time
obtaining access to hospitals. Thus, it may not be surprising that the estimated coefficient on beds per
100,000 is not statistically significant. However, the interaction term is again positive and statistically
significant, suggesting that prior to 1937 medical care may have hindered maternal mortality more than it
helped.
We also estimate separate regressions by race over the same period to gauge whether medical
care had a differential impact on blacks and whites.19 Blacks, particularly in the South, may have had
difficulty gaining access to quality medical care. Black women may have preferred to use black
physicians, who were often excluded from good medical schools and residencies, and denied privileges at
all but black hospitals or hospitals for the indigent, many of which were unable to keep up with rapidly
advancing medical technologies (Smith 1999, p. 21). Even if blacks did not prefer to be attended by black

19

The number of observations in the race regressions is significantly lower than for the regressions based on the
total population as mortality and birth data were only provided for cities in which the minority population was
greater than 10,000 or 10% of the total population. Also, mortality data by cause of death was not reported by race
at the city level in 1938.

21

physicians, they may have been excluded from other hospitals or restricted to segregated facilities that
offered lower quality care, especially in Southern cities (Almond, Chay and Greenstone 2001). If blacks
were restricted in their access of medical care, or if they received substandard care, we would expect to
see a differential effect of medical care on black maternal mortality relative to white maternal mortality.
Summary statistics by race are provided in Tables 4 and 5. Estimates from the race regressions
are provided in Tables 6 and 7. Overall, results are consistent with those reported in Table 3, suggesting
that hospitals had an adverse impact on maternal mortality for both blacks and whites prior to the advent
of sulfa drugs. There is however, a differential effect of medical care for blacks compared to whites.
Results from both the unbalanced and balanced panels show that the estimated coefficient on the
beds*pre-1937 interaction term is much larger for blacks than whites, which is consistent with the
hypothesis that blacks received lower quality care. Also consistent with this hypothesis is the estimated
coefficient on hospital beds per 100,000. For white mothers, improvements in obstetrics practice and the
use of sulfa drugs lowers maternal mortality; an increase in hospital beds per 100,000 after 1937 lowers
maternal mortality by between 9.5 and 31 deaths per 100,000. For black mothers, medical care does not
have a statistically significant effect on maternal mortality after 1937, suggesting that black mothers may
have received a lower quality of care than white mothers.

5.

Discussion
Despite the fact that hospital births increased dramatically over the period 1920 to 1950, maternal

mortality rates did not decline until the mid-1930s when sulfa drugs were developed. This paper seeks to
understand the relationship between medical care and maternal mortality. Did maternal mortality rates
remain flat and even increase because of iatrogenic causes? If so, why did women increasingly seek
hospital births for their children? Results based on a sample of city-level data from 1927-1940 provide
support for the hypothesis that medical intervention prior to the advent of sulfa drugs in 1937 increased
maternal mortality rates. From 1927-1936 the number of hospital beds per 100,000 people in a city seems
to have increased maternal mortality, albeit very slightly. However, the development of anti-infectives

22

such as sulfa drugs did enable doctors to save mothers’ lives in childbirth. In a sense, these drugs made
medical care more effective by not only directly reducing deaths from puerperal fever, but also by
enabling doctors to perform potentially life-saving procedures such as cesarean sections without the risk
of subsequent life-threatening infections.
Regressions estimated separately by race reinforce the overall results that medical care increased
maternal mortality prior to 1937, but also suggest that the impact of medical care on maternal mortality
differed for blacks and whites. Relative to whites, hospitals posed a greater risk for black mothers prior to
the availability of sulfa drugs in 1937, and were less beneficial for them afterwards, suggesting that blacks
received lower quality medical care.
If medical care did not contribute to reducing maternal mortality, why did women increasingly
turn to hospitals for childbirth? We can only speculate as to the reasons why the shift occurred, but it
appears that women’s preferences for anesthesia and physician preferences for convenience and higher
incomes played a significant role. In addition, it may be very likely that women were not aware of the
increased risk. Overall, hospitals increased maternal mortality in the late 1920s and early 1930s by only
10 deaths per 100,000 births, a number that few women may have noticed and may have been willing to
overlook given the lack of alternatives and the comfort and convenience offered by hospital birth.

23

DATA APPENDIX
Data on maternal deaths and number of live births were obtained from reports on vital statistics
published annually by the U.S. Bureau of the Census. These reports provided data at the city level for
each city with a population of at least 10,000. There were 941 cities consistently represented in these
reports. The maternal mortality variable was constructed by dividing maternal deaths by live births and
multiplying by 100,000. This variable was used as the dependent variable in all regressions.
The American Medical Association’s annual report on “Hospital Service in the United States”
provided a listing of hospital beds by city. From this report an annual count of hospital beds could be
obtained for each city. City populations for 1920, 1930, and 1940 were obtained from the Fourteenth,
Fifteenth, and Sixteenth U.S. population censuses. Populations for all other years were calculated using a
straight line interpolation between the two closest census years. The hospital beds and city population
data were utilized to construct a hospital beds per 100,000 population variable. This variable was
included in the regressions as an explanatory variable representing medical inputs.
Socioeconomic variables were constructed based on county level census data. Percent black,
percent illiterate, and percentages of females in different age groups were calculated for 1920, 1930, and
1940. Straight line interpolation was used to obtain values for all other years. The percent black variable
was created based on population data obtained from Historical, Demographic, Economic, and Social
Data: The United States, 1790-1970, ICPSR file 0003, as corrected by Michael Haines. The percent
female variables represent the number of females in each age group as a percent of the female population
from 15 to 44 years of age. These variables were calculated from data provided in Gardner and Cohen’s
ICPSR file 0020 and the Fourteenth U.S. population census. For 1920 and 1930, the percent illiterate
variable was calculated as the percentage of the population aged 10 and older that was illiterate. This data
was captured in the 1920 and 1930 censuses and reported in ICPSR file 0003 as corrected by Michael
Haines. However, beginning in 1940 the illiteracy counts were replaced in the census by years of
schooling completed for people over 24 years old. We were able to combine this data with illiteracy data
by age group and level of education for the entire U.S., obtained from the U.S. Bureau of the Census
(1948, 7), to calculate percent illiterate for 1940. This process involved computing separate national
illiteracy rates for males and females over 24 years old with no schooling (78.2% and 80.7% respectively)
and males and females over 24 years old with one to four years of schooling (22.5% and 16.7%
respectively). Applying these percentages to the census figures for the population aged 25 and older by
sex and years of schooling provided a count of illiteracy from which we could calculate the percent
illiterate. This is the same method utilized by Thomasson (2002) and Fishback et al. (2001).
The last socioeconomic variable included in the regressions was real retail sales per capita. This
variable was constructed from county level data on population and retail sales. Population data for 1920,
1930, 1940, and 1950 was obtained from ICPSR file 0003 as corrected by Michael Haines. We used
straight line interpolation to obtain population counts for 1929, 1933, 1935, 1939, and 1948. These were
the only years in which retail sales information was available. Retail sales data for 1929 and 1939 were
obtained from ICPSR file 0003 as corrected by Michael Haines. For 1933 and 1935 the data were
acquired from the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, 1936 and
1939. Lastly, 1948 retail sales figures were pulled from the City and County Data Book Consolidated
File, County Data 1947-1977, ICPSR file 7736. The retail sales per capita variable was calculated
directly for these years and was interpolated for all other years. The interpolation procedure involved a
weighting mechanism based on changes in per capita state income. This was included to reflect the
likelihood that retail sales per capita was closely linked to general economic performance. This variable
was also adjusted for inflation.

24

REFERENCES
Almond, Douglas V., Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone. “Civil Rights, the War on Poverty, and
Black-White Convergence in Infant Mortality Rates in Mississippi.” Working paper, August
2001.
American Medical Association, Council on Medical Education. Hospital Service in the United States,
various issues. Chicago: American Medical Association.
Beardsley, Edward H. A History of Neglect: Health Care for Blacks and Mill Workers in the TwentiethCentury South. Knoxville, TN: University of Tennessee Press, 1987.
Berger, Mark C. and J. Paul Leigh. “Schooling, Self-Selection, and Health.” Journal of Human
Resources 24, 3 (1989), 433-455.
Burrow, James G. AMA: Voice of American Medicine. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1963.
Chapin, Charles V. “The Control of Midwifery.” Medical Progress, 39 (1923): 76-79.
Cunningham, F. Gary, Paul C. MacDonald, Norman F. Gant, Kenneth J. Leveno, Larry C. Gilstrap III,
Gardy D.V. Hankins and Steven L. Clark. Williams Obstetrics, 20th Edition. Stamford, CT:
Appleton & Lange, 1997.
De Lee, Joseph B. “The Prophylactic Forceps Operation.” American Journal of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, 1 (October, 1920): 34-44.
Dye, Nancy Schrom. “Mary Breckinridge, The Frontier Nursing Service and the Introduction of NurseMidwifery in the United States.” Bulletin of the History of Medicine 57, 4 (Winter 1983): 485507.
Edgar, J. Clifton. “The Remedy for the Midwife Problem.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Diseases
of Women and Children, 63 (1911): 881-884.
Fishback, Price V., William C. Horrace and Shawn Everett Kantor. “The Impact of New Deal
Expenditures on Local Economic Activity: An Examination of Retail Sales, 1929-1939." National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #W8108, 2001
Gardner, John, and William Cohen, “Demographic Characteristics of the Population of the United States,
1930-1950: County-Level,” ICPSR file 0020, 1992.
Goddard, Jeanne C. Medical and Nursing Services for the Maternal Cases of the National Health Survey.
U.S. Public Health Bulletin No. 264. Washington, Government Printing Office, 1941.
Gruber, Jonathan and Maria Owings. “Physician Financial Incentives and Cesarean Section Delivery.”
RAND Journal of Economics 27, 1 (Spring 1996): 99-123.
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, Historical, Demographic, Economic, and
Social Data: The United States, 1790-1970, ICPSR file 0003. Computerized data tapes from
ICPSR. The version has corrections by Michael Haines, Department of Economics, Colgate
University, Hamilton, NY.

25

Kenkel, Donald S. “Health Behavior, Health Knowledge, and Schooling.” Journal of Political Economy
99, 2 (1991): 287-305.
Ladies Home Journal, various issues, 1930-1932.
Leavitt, Judith Walter. Brought to Bed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1986.
Linder, Forrest E. and Robert D. Grove. Vital Statistics Rates in the United States, 1900-1940.
Washington, D.C. Government Printing Office, 1943.
Litoff, Judy Barrett. American Midwives, 1860 to the Present. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press,
1978.
Litoff, Judy Barrett. The American Midwife Debate. NewYork: Greenwood Press, 1986.
Lobenstine, Ralph Waldo. “The Influence of the Midwife upon Infant and Maternal Morbidity and
Mortality.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Diseases of Women and Children 63 (1911):
876-880.
Loudon, Irvine. “On Maternal and Infant Mortality 1900-1960.” Social History of Medicine, 4, (1991):
29-73.
Loudon, Irvine. Death in Childbirth: An International Study of Maternal Care and Maternal Mortality
1800-1950. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1992.
Markowitz, Gerald E. and David Karl Rosner. “Doctors in Crisis: A Study of the Use of Medical
Education Reform to Establish Modern Professional Elitism in Medicine.” American Quarterly,
25 (March 1973): 83-107.
Meara, Ellen. “Why Is Health Related to Socioeconomic Status? The Case of Pregnancy and Low Birth
Weight.” NBER Working Paper 8231 (2001).
Meigs, Grace L. Maternal Mortality From All Conditions Connected with Childribth in the United States
and Certain Other Countries. U.S. Department of Labor Children’s Bureau, Miscellaneous Series
No. 6, Bureau Publication No. 19. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1917.
New York Academy of Medicine Committee on Public Health Relations. Maternal Mortality in New York
City: A Study of all Puerperal Deaths, 1930-1932. New York: Commonwealth Fund, 1933.
Radcliffe, Walter. Milestones in Midwifery. Bristol: John Wright & Sons Ltd., 1967.
Rochester, Anna. Infant Mortality: Results of a Field Study in Baltimore, MD Based on Births in One
Year. U.S. Children’s Bureau Publication No. 119. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing
Office, 1923.
Rosenberg, Charles E. The Care of Strangers. New York: Basic Books, 1987.
Rushman, G.B., N.J.H. Davies, R.S. Atkinson. A Short History of Anesthesia: The First 150 Years.
Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1996.

26

Sandelowski, Margarete. Pain, Pleasure and American Childbirth: From the Twilight Sleep to the Read
Method, 1914-1960. Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1984.
Smith, David Barton. Health Care Divided: Race and Healing a Nation. Ann Arbor: The University of
Michigan Press, 1999.
Starr , Paul. The Social Transformation of American Medicine. New York: Basic Books, 1982.
Stevens, Rosemary. American Medicine and the Public Interest. New Haven and London: Yale
University Press, 1971.
Stevens, Rosemary. In Sickness and in Wealth: American Hospitals in the Twentieth Century. New York:
Basic Books, 1989.
Tandy, Elizabeth C. “Comparability of Maternal Mortality Rates in the United States and Certain Foreign
Countries.” U.S. Children’s Bureau Publication No. 229. Washington: Government Printing
Office, 1935.
Temin, Peter. “An Economic History of American Hospitals.” Health Care in America: The Political
Economy of Hospitals and Health Insurance. Ed. H.E. Frech. San Francisco: Pacific Research
Institute for Public Policy, 1988. 75-102.
Thomasson, Melissa A. “From Sickness to Health: The Twentieth Century Development of U.S. Health
Insurance.” Explorations in Economic History, 39, 3 (July 2002): 233-53.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Birth, Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Birth Registration Area
of the United States, various issues 1930-1932. Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Birth, Stillbirth, and Infant Mortality Statistics for the Continental United
States, The Territory of Hawaii, and the Virgin Islands various issues 1933-1936., Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, “County and City Data Book Consolidated File, County Data 1947-1977,”
[machine-readable data file] Washington: The Bureau, 1978. ICPSR file 7736, 1999.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, “Illiteracy in the United States, October 1947,” Current Population Reports:
Population Characteristics, Series P-20 no. 20, September 22, 1948.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, “School Enrollment, Educational Attainment, and Illiteracy, October 1952,”
Current Population Reports: Population Characteristics, Series P-20 no. 45, October 22, 1953.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, “Special Reports: Occupations of the Twelfth Census.” Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1904.
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Vital Statistics of the United States various issues 1937-1943., Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.

27

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Fourteenth Census of the United States: Population, Volumes I & II.
Washington DC: Govt. Printing Office, 1921.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Fifteenth Census of the United States: Population, Volume VI, Families.
Washington DC: Govt. Printing Office, 1933.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Sixteenth Census of the United States: Population, Volume I, Number of
Inhabitants. Washington DC: Govt. Printing Office, 1942.
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Seventeenth Census of the United States: Population, Volume II, Parts 2-50,
Characteristic of Population. Washington DC: Govt. Printing Office, 1952.
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, State Personal Income: 1929-1987. Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office, 1989.
Wertz, Richard W., and Dorothy C. Wertz. Lying-In: A History of Childbirth in America. New Haven
and London: Yale University Press. 1989.
Woodbury, Robert Morse. Causal Factors in Infant Mortality: A Statistical Study Based on Investigations
in Eight Cities. U.S. Children’s Bureau Publication No. 142. Washington: Government Printing
Office, 1925.
Vogel, Morris J. The Invention of the Modern Hospital, Boston, 1870-1930. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press, 1980.
White House Conference on Child Health and Protection. Fetal, Newborn and Maternal Morbidity and
Mortality. New York and London: D. Appleton-Century Company, 1933.

28

Table 1a:

Birth Attendant, by Place of Birth and by Earnings of Father, Baltimore, 1915

Percent Attended by
Earnings of Father
Physician
Midwife
In hospital Outside hospital
None
26.3
51.7
20.7
Less than $850
7.9
52.7
39.1
$850-$1,849
9.1
68.7
22.0
$1,850 and over
25.9
67.5
6.6
Source: Rochester 1923, Appendix VI, Table VI, p. 212.

Table 1b:

Other
1.3
0.2
0.8
0.0

Birth Attendant, by Nationality of Mother, Baltimore, 1915

Percent Attended by
Physician
Midwife
In hospital
Outside hospital
Native, white
8.1
64.4
Jewish
23.8
41.1
Polish
2.9
18.9
Italian
2.3
52.4
Other foreign born, white
5.9
50.6
Nonwhite
13.5
60.4
Source: Rochester 1923, Appendix VI, Table VII, p. 213.
Race and Nationality of
Mother

Other
27.4
35.0
77.6
44.8
42.8
25.9

0.2
0.1
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.2

29

Table 2: Summary Statistics
ALL OBSERVATIONS
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Maternal Mortality Rate

627.18

389.55

0.00

100000.00

Hospital Beds Per 100,000 Population

537.47

350.20

0.00

7258.77

% Black

7.47

9.86

0.00

77.40

% Illiterate

3.68

2.09

0.30

36.99

Real Retail Sales Per Capita

0.89

0.23

0.14

1.92

% Females 15-19

17.52

2.02

12.90

28.21

% Females 20-24

18.47

1.00

14.37

24.29

% Females 25-34

34.29

1.49

27.16

42.10

Notes: 10,279 observations. Summary statistics weighted by total births. The maternal mortality rate is
calculated as the number of deaths from puerperal causes per 100,000 live births.

BALANCED PANEL
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Maternal Mortality Rate

598.25

282.27

0.00

9523.81

Hospital Beds Per 100,000 Population

509.57

200.71

0.00

3013.79

% Black

6.45

7.45

0.00

45.75

% Illiterate

3.59

1.69

0.48

9.93

Real Retail Sales Per Capita

0.92

0.21

0.36

1.63

% Females 15-19

17.13

1.67

12.90

24.62

% Females 20-24

18.37

0.86

15.91

24.29

% Females 25-34

34.49

1.34

28.31

37.98

Notes: 3,668 observations. Summary statistics weighted by total births. The maternal mortality rate is
calculated as the number of deaths from puerperal causes per 100,000 live births.

30

Table 3: Maternal Mortality Regressions, 1927-1940
(Total Population)

Variable

Est. Coefficient

Est. Coefficient

(Std. Error)

(Std. Error)

b

-0.011
(0.014)

Hospital Beds Per 100K

-0.105
(0.043)

(Hospital Beds Per 100K)*Pre-1937

0.177 a
(0.051)

0.117 a
(0.022)

182.950 a
(30.648)

233.010 a
(16.241)

Percent Black

7.173 a
(1.964)

9.822 a
(1.281)

Percent Illiterate

-13.816 a
(5.236)

-3.911
(3.973)

Pre-1937 Dummy

Real Retail Sales Per Cap

23.874
(29.176)

33.339
(25.894)

% Females ages 15-19

28.987 a
(9.182)

26.637 a
(6.572)

% Females ages 20-24

30.853 a
(8.985)

33.738 a
(6.654)

% Females ages 25-34

-20.775 b
(9.523)

-34.955 a
(7.341)

Constant

-77.206
(442.965)

250.194
(334.510)

State Dummies

Yes

Yes

Balanced Panel

Yes

No

R2

0.4934

0.3956

# of observations

3,668

10,279

Notes: Dependent variable is the total maternal mortality rate, defined as number of maternal deaths/total
births per 100,000 births. Excluded state dummy is Connecticut in both regressions. Regressions are
weighted by total births.
a: Significant at the 1% level
b: Significant at the 5% level
c: Significant at the 10% level

31

Table 4: Summary Statistics
(white population)
ALL OBSERVATIONS
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Maternal Mortality Rate

583.79

314.47

0.00

14285.71

Hospital Beds Per 100,000 Population

516.85

212.13

0.00

4255.74

10.25

9.98

0.20

77.40

% Illiterate

4.07

1.97

0.75

36.99

Real Retail Sales Per Capita

0.94

0.23

0.14

1.63

% Females 15-19

16.68

1.65

12.90

28.21

% Females 20-24

18.54

1.01

15.91

24.29

% Females 25-34

35.01

1.18

27.16

42.10

% Black

Notes: 1,960 observations. Summary statistics weighted by white births. The maternal mortality rate is
calculated as the number of deaths from puerperal causes per 100,000 live births.

BALANCED PANEL
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

Maternal Mortality Rate

553.92

224.56

0.00

14285.71

Hospital Beds Per 100,000 Population

490.21

138.35

179.28

2809.78

% Black

9.30

7.55

2.28

45.75

% Illiterate

4.15

1.43

1.16

9.93

Real Retail Sales Per Capita

0.97

0.20

0.36

1.63

% Females 15-19

16.49

1.05

13.55

21.76

% Females 20-24

18.54

0.77

16.56

24.29

% Females 25-34

35.15

0.95

30.88

37.98

Notes: 468 observations. Summary statistics weighted by white births. The maternal mortality rate is
calculated as the number of deaths from puerperal causes per 100,000 live births.

32

Table 5: Summary Statistics
(non-white population)
ALL OBSERVATIONS
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

1188.23

875.47

0.00

50000.00

569.53

259.40

0.00

4255.74

19.81

15.17

0.20

77.40

% Illiterate

4.89

2.98

0.75

36.99

Real Retail Sales Per Capita

0.85

0.25

0.14

1.63

% Females 15-19

17.22

2.07

12.90

28.21

% Females 20-24

18.97

1.28

15.91

24.29

% Females 25-34

34.82

1.35

27.16

42.10

Maternal Mortality Rate
Hospital Beds Per 100,000 Population
% Black

Notes: 1,959 observations. Summary statistics weighted by nonwhite births. The maternal mortality rate
is calculated as the number of deaths from puerperal causes per 100,000 live births.

BALANCED PANEL
Variable

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

1074.34

527.75

0.00

4761.91

536.73

175.29

179.28

2809.78

16.10

12.10

2.28

45.75

% Illiterate

4.39

1.69

1.16

9.93

Real Retail Sales Per Capita

0.89

0.20

0.36

1.63

% Females 15-19

16.79

1.14

13.55

21.76

% Females 20-24

18.79

1.05

16.56

24.29

% Females 25-34

35.08

0.89

30.88

37.98

Maternal Mortality Rate
Hospital Beds Per 100,000 Population
% Black

Notes: 468 observations. Summary statistics weighted by nonwhite births. The maternal mortality rate is
calculated as the number of deaths from puerperal causes per 100,000 live births.

33

Table 6: Maternal Mortality Regressions, 1927-1940
(White Population)

Variable

Est. Coefficient

Est. Coefficient

(Std. Error)

(Std. Error)

Hospital Beds Per 100K

-0.390
(0.142)

a

-0.105 b
(0.048)

(Hospital Beds Per 100K)*Pre-1937

0.492 a
(0.137)

0.195 a
(0.058)

Pre-1937 Dummy
Percent Black

-35.985
(75.597)
5.177 c
(2.936)

146.988 a
(39.398)
4.130 b
(1.666)

Percent Illiterate

-1.998
(10.511)

-0.805
(6.468)

Real Retail Sales Per Cap

64.093
(58.146)

61.903
(44.176)

% Females ages 15-19

31.915
(24.892)

25.649 c
(13.894)

% Females ages 20-24

58.847 a
(16.152)

39.219 a
(11.686)

% Females ages 25-34

9.841
(27.014)

-36.848 b
(16.851)

Constant

-1,424.659
(1,163.689)

444.294
(762.559)

State Dummies

Yes

Yes

Balanced Panel

Yes

No

0.6162

0.4448

468

1,960

R2
# of observations

Notes: Dependent variable is the total maternal mortality rate, defined as number of maternal deaths/total
births per 100,000 births. Excluded state dummy is Connecticut in both regressions. Regressions
weighted by total white births.
a: Significant at the 1% level
b: Significant at the 5% level
c: Significant at the 10% level

34

Table 7: Maternal Mortality Regressions, 1927-1940
(Non-White Population)

Variable

Est. Coefficient

Est. Coefficient

(Std. Error)

(Std. Error)

Hospital Beds Per 100K

-0.447
(0.341)

0.070
(0.136)

(Hospital Beds Per 100K)*Pre-1937

1.088 a
(0.330)

0.554 a
(0.188)

Pre-1937 Dummy
Percent Black

-137.448
(181.163)
17.003 a
(6.128)

120.675
(104.276)
17.207 a
(3.444)

60.755 b
(26.013)

-7.732
(12.267)

422.332 a
(134.475)

369.987 a
(123.150)

% Females ages 15-19

140.689 b
(55.196)

144.025 a
(38.935)

% Females ages 20-24

27.339
(38.712)

51.961 c
(29.806)

% Females ages 25-34

65.885
(63.934)

-3.820
(51.630)

Percent Illiterate
Real Retail Sales Per Cap

Constant

-5,262.002 c
(2,857.644)

-3,373.066
(2,334.672)

State Dummies

Yes

Yes

Balanced Panel

Yes

No

0.5288

0.3118

468

1,959

R2
# of observations

Notes: Dependent variable is the total maternal mortality rate, defined as number of maternal deaths/total
births per 100,000 births. Excluded state dummy is Connecticut in both regressions. Regression weighted
by total nonwhite births.
a: Significant at the 1% level
b: Significant at the 5% level
c: Significant at the 10% level

35

Figure 1: Maternal Mortality: Birth Registration States, 1915-1940
12

Deaths per 1,000 Live Births

10

8

Total
Urban
Rural

6

4

2

1940

1939

1938

1937

1936

1935

1934

1933

1932

1931

1930

1929

1928

1927

1926

1925

1924

1923

1922

1921

1920

1919

1918

1917

1916

1915

0

Year
Source: Linder and Grove (1943). Vital Statistics Rates in the United States, 1900-1940, Table 37, p. 622.

36

Figure 2: Death Rates Among Females due to Tuberculosis v. All Puerperal Causes, Death Registration States: 1900-1940

6

Ln(Female Death Rate per 100,000)

5

4

Ln(Tuberculosis)
Ln(Puerperal Causes)

3

2

1

0
1900

1905

1910

1915

1920

1925

1930

1935

1940

Year

Source: Linder and Grove (1943). Vital Statistics Rates in the United States, 1900-1940, Table 15, pp. 258-253

37

Figure 3: Maternal Mortality in Massachusetts, 1915-1940

10
9
8

6
5
4
3
2
1
0
19
15
19
16
19
17
19
18
19
19
19
20
19
21
19
22
19
23
19
24
19
25
19
26
19
27
19
28
19
29
19
30
19
31
19
32
19
33
19
34
19
35
19
36
19
37
19
38
19
39
19
40

Deaths per 1,000 Births

7

Year
Source: Linder and Grove (1943). Vital Statistics Rates in the United States, 1900-1940, Table 36

38

Figure 4: International Maternal Mortality

100
90
England
Sweden
U.S.

Deaths per 10,000 Births

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

19
01
19
03
19
05
19
07
19
09
19
11
19
13
19
15
19
17
19
19
19
21
19
23
19
25
19
27
19
29
19
31
19
33
19
35
19
37
19
39

0

Year

Source: U.S. data are from Linder and Grove (1943), Vital Statistics of the United States, 1900-1940, Table 36, “Maternal Mortality: Birth
Registration States, 1915-1940.” Data for England and Sweden are from Loudon (1992), Appendix 6, Table 1 and 7

39

Figure 5: Midwives per 100,000 Population: 1900-1930

12.00

10.00

8.00

U.S.
South
Non-South

6.00

4.00

2.00

0.00

1900

1910

1920

1930

Source: Data are from the U.S. Bureau of the Census. 1900: U.S. Bureau of the Census Special Reports:
Occupations in the Twelfth Census. Tables 33 and 42. 1910: Thirteenth Census of the United States,
Volume IV: Population: Occupation Statistics. Tables II, II, IV. 1920: Fourteenth Census of the United
States. Volume IV: Population: Occupations. Tables 15, 19, 20. 1930: Fifteenth Census of the United
States. Volume IV: Population: Occupations, by States. Tables 4 and 5.

40

