                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           PIRACY ON THE HIGH C’s:
                  MUSIC DOWNLOADING, SALES DISPLACEMENT,
             AND SOCIAL WELFARE IN A SAMPLE OF COLLEGE STUDENTS

                                                Rafael Rob
                                              Joel Waldfogel

                                          Working Paper 10874
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10874


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




We are grateful to Betsy Bailey, Mary Benner, Lisa George, Jeff Milyo, and Yochanan Shachmurove for
allowing us to administer surveys to their students, and to Hannah and Sarah Waldfogel for help
administering the surveys. Lu Chen, David Sokoler and Duygu Baydur provided diligent research assistance.
Rob thanks the NSF, and Waldfogel thanks the Wharton Electronic Business Initiative, for financial support,
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Rafael Rob and Joel Waldfogel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Piracy on the High C’s: Music Downloading, Sales Displacement, and Social Welfare in a Sample
of College Students
Rafael Rob and Joel Waldfogel
NBER Working Paper No. 10874
October 2004
JEL No. L82

                                          ABSTRACT

Recording industry revenue has fallen sharply in the last three years, and some    but not all

observers attribute this to file sharing. We collect new data on albums obtained via purchase and

downloading, as well as the consumers’’ valuations of these albums, among a sample of US college

students in 2003. We provide new estimates of sales displacement induced by downloading using

both OLS and an instrumental variables approach using access to broadband as a source of

exogenous variation in downloading. Each album download reduces purchases by about 0.2 in our

sample, although possibly much more. Our valuation data allow us to measure the effects of

downloading on welfare as well as expenditure in a subsample of Penn undergraduates, and we find

that downloading reduces their per capita expenditure (on hit albums released 1999-2003) from $126

to $100 but raises per capita consumer welfare by $70.

Rafael Rob
Department of Economics
University of Pennsylvania
rrob@econ.sas.upenn.edu

Joel Waldfogel
Public Policy and Management
University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School
3100 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6372
and NBER
waldfogj@wharton.upenn.edu
No black flags with skull and crossbones, no cutlasses, cannons, or daggers identify today’s pirates. You can’t see them
coming; there’s no warning shot across your bow. Yet rest assured the pirates are out there because today there is
plenty of gold (and platinum and diamonds) to be had. – RIAA website (http://www.riaa.com/issues/piracy/default.asp)

         After growing an average of 10 percent per year over the previous 7 years, US music

industry revenue has shrunk by 16 percent in the last 3 years (see figure 1). There is considerable

debate about causes. Theoretical work on sharing of information products has ambiguous

predictions for the effects of file sharing on industry revenue (see Besen, 1986; Bakos,

Brynjolffson, and Lichtman, 1999; Varian, 2000; and Shapiro and Varian, 1999); and the empirical

literature on the sales-displacing effects of music downloading has achieved no consensus as yet.

Two recent studies reach opposite conclusions (see Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf, 2004, and

Zentner, 2003).

         One obstacle to empirical consensus is the difficulty of obtaining suitable data, namely

information on purchase and download volumes for the same individuals. This study examines the

effect of downloading on sales and welfare, asking a series of specific questions. First, using a new

survey-based dataset on quantities of music downloading and purchases of 8200 albums by 412

college students at Penn, CCNY, Hunter, and master’s students at Chicago’s Harris School, we

revisit the question of how downloading affects music purchases. Using both OLS as well as an

empirical strategy instrumenting downloading volumes with information about broadband access,

we ask whether individuals downloading more albums purchase fewer albums. We document that

downloading reduces music purchases, by roughly one fifth of a sale for each recent download and

possibly much more. Because we have measures of the quantities of music purchased and

downloaded, we can estimate the size of the downloading- induced sales displacement, not simply

document whether it occurred. Our conservative estimates indicate that downloading reduced

recent purchases by individuals in the sample by about 10 percent during 2003.




                                                           1
        We then turn to welfare analysis. Two features of the CD market make the welfare analysis

of downloading interesting. First, because CDs were easily transferable even in the absence of

downloading, substantial price discrimination was impracticable. As a result, firms were

compelled to price as single-price monopolists, leaving some socially beneficial transactions (with

buyer valuation above marginal cost) unconsummated. This problem was exacerbated by CDs’

second feature: the product has a low marginal cost – now that digital distribution is feasible, it is

essentially a marketable public good – so the market without unpaid downloading has the potential

for substantial deadweight loss.

        The advent of unpaid downloading allows consumers to engage in a crude “do- it-yourself”

form of third degree price discrimination. Based on access to the Internet and willingness to

engage in file sharing, consumers segment themselves into downloaders and buyers. Given the

available supply of music, downloaders pay zero and are clearly better off. But that leaves various

avenues for downloading to affect welfare more generally. Revenue may decline, harming firms

and their suppliers. But revenue will only decline if downloaded albums would otherwise have

been purchased. If downloaded albums would not have been purchased, then not only is revenue

unaffected but deadweight loss shrinks as well. 1

        We address these issues though surveys asking respondents not just what they bought and

downloaded but also how highly they value the music in dollar terms. We document that, on

average, our respondents download music that they value a third to a half less than their purchased

music. This indicates that at least some of the music that is downloaded would not otherwise have

been purchased and therefore supports the incomplete sales displacement that we document.

1
 Downloading might also two have other interesting effects outside the scope of the current study. First, downloading
may change the residual (non-downloader) demand for music in a way causes firms to change prices, harming or
helping actual buyers. Second, downloading may change the supply of available music in ways that ultimately change
consumers’ options.



                                                          2
Moreover, it suggests that some of the surplus enjoyed by downloaders would otherwise have been

the deadweight loss associated with a foregone but socially beneficial transaction.

       Music has the complicating feature of being an experience good, so that consumers’ ex ante

valuation (at the time of purchase or downloading) need not be the same as the ex post valuation

after experiencing the product. Hence, the ex post valuation, relevant to welfare, deviates from the

valuation determining the purchase decision. To address this we administered an additional survey

to 92 Penn students eliciting both ex ante and ex post valuation information for 1209 purchased and

downloaded music albums. Assuming that albums with ex ante valuations above $15 would have

been purchased, while those with ex ante valuations below $15 would not, we find that

downloading reduces expenditures by individuals in this sub-sample by roughly 20 percent, from

$126 to $101 per capita. Although downloading reduces revenue by $25 per capita, it raises

consumer surplus by $70 per capita (for their purchases of hit albums, 1999-2003). The reduction

in deadweight loss ($45 per capita) is nearly double the reduction in industry revenue (from

individuals in our sample).

       The paper proceeds in four sections. Section 1 provides industry background and links to

relevant literatures. Section 2 explores possible effects of downloading on consumption and

welfare in theory. Section 3 describes the data used in the study. Section 4 presents empirical

results on sales displacement and whether high or low valuation albums are downloaded. Section 4

also presents estimates of the effects of downloading on welfare.



       I.      Background

               a. Industry background




                                                  3
           The US music industry is highly concentrated. Although there are hundreds of “labels,”

five owners account for 80 percent of music sales. The major firms include Sony, Vivendi-

Universal, EMI, Bertelsman, and Time-Warner (see Graves, 2004). According to some reports,

there are nearly 30,000 CDs released per year. The major labels collectively release about 7000. 2

Sales are very highly concentrated, though. In 2000 the top 250 (100, 50, 10) albums accounted for

48 (32, 22, 8) percent of total sales. Sales in other years are similarly skewed.

           After increasing about 10 percent per year 1993-1999, US album sales have declined 16

percent since (see figure 1). The recording industry, represented by the Recording Industry

Association of America (RIAA), blames illegal downloading, which they term “piracy” for sales

displacement. “Each year, the industry loses about $4.2 billion to piracy worldwide -- "we estimate

we lose millions of dollars a day to all forms of piracy."” 3 The decline in demand is substantial

enough to encourage consolidation. Sony and Bertelsman have had discussions, and EMI and Time

Warner have been rumored to be in discussions (see Helmore, 2003).

           Other developments are suggestive of downloading. Internet penetration has increased

from 16 percent in 1997 to 47 percent in 2000. And broadband connection, allowing convenient

downloading of large files, stood in early 2003 at 40 percent of connected households. Moreover,

the sales of a important complementary goods, MP3 players and blank CDs, has increased

substantially over the past five years. MP3 player sales grew from 0.5 million yearly in 1999 to an

estimated 2.1 million in 2003 (according to CEA Market Research). Of course, one can use such

goods for purchased as well as downloaded music, so these developments are merely suggestive of

illegal downloading.




2
    These figures, reported at http://www.azoz.com/music/features/0008.html , are attributed to RIAA.
3
    See http://www.riaa.com/issues/piracy/default.asp (accessed January 9, 2004).


                                                            4
       Concerned with reductions in revenue – and convinced that music downloading is the cause

– the industry has initiated hundreds of lawsuits against ordinary downloaders as a means of

deterring downloading activity. There is some evidence that the lawsuits are having an effect

(Schwartz, 2004). In concert, Universal reduced its list prices by 30 percent in October 2003 (USA

Today, 2003).

       The music industry, initially slow to offer sales over the web, has moved recently to make

music available online. They were preceded by Apple Computer, maker of the leading MP3

player, who launched their iTunes music site in 2002. There consumers can download music for

$0.99 per song. As of March 2004, customers had downloaded 50 million songs from iTunes (see

Apple Computer, 2004).



       b. Relevant Literature

       This study is related to three strands of academic research. First, our general question, of

how differentiated product firms’ ability to harvest revenue from potential buyers limits the types

of products the firm can market, relates to the product selection problem discussed by Spence

(1976) and Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). In general, the structure of demand suggests what set of

products would optimally be offered. Which products are actually offered in a market depends on

how well firms can appropriate consumers’ valuation as revenue whether firms can appropriate. Of

course, downloading substantially undermines the ability of firms to appropriate valuations as

revenue.

       Closer to the phenomenon, our study is related to existing research on the effect of

reproduction technology on markets for information goods, beginning with Leibowitz (1985).

Liebowitz documents that the advent of widespread photocopying induced academic journal




                                                  5
publishers to raise their prices to libraries as they lost much of the individual market to

photocopiers. The issues addressed in this study also echo the issues in the software piracy

literature. 4

          This paper is also part of a literature on the effect of file sharing on the revenue from selling

information. A number of theoretical papers make the point that file-sharing need not reduce seller

revenue (see Bakos, Brynjolffson, and Lichtman, 1999; and Varian, 2000). To see this, imagine

two individuals each valuing a good below its price. If they can share it, they may together be

willing to purchase the good that they alone were not willing to buy. Shapiro and Varian (1999)

also emphasize possible sales-stimulating effects of free samples. Thus, for a number of reasons,

whether file sharing displaces sales is an empirical question.

          Finally, this is one of a number of recent studies of the effect of music downloading on

album sales. Liebowitz (2003) examines a variety of possible explanations for the recent

reductions in album sales and, finding them all wanting, concludes that downloading must be

responsible. Zentner (2003) uses international time series aggregate data, in conjunction with

Internet connectedness, to document that places with more Internet – and broadband – connections

have experienced sharper reductions in album sales. He also uses micro data to show that persons

who self-report downloading music – instrumented with measures of technical sophistication – are

also less likely to have purchased music recently. Hui and Png (2003), using international panel

data, 1994-1998, estimate that each download reduces sales by 0.42. The time period they study

predates the growth of broadband and widespread file sharing. Moreover, their measure of piracy

has the shortcoming that it is an estimate based in part on the level of legitimate sales in a country.

          On the other hand, Oberholzer-Gee and Strumpf (OS, 2004) examine weekly time series

data on downloading and sales of major hit albums, finding little relationship. And in expert
4
    See Besen (1986), Conner and Rumelt (1991), Takeyama (1997).


                                                         6
testimony on the Napster case, Fader (2000) argues that file sharing stimulates sales of recorded

music, although his analysis covers a period prior to the sales decline depicted in figure 1.

       It is difficult to obtain data well suited to measuring the possible sales-displacing effects of

downloading. Album sales data exist, by album and by time. OS have combined weekly sales data

with novel data on the weekly volume of downloads to ask whether albums are purchased less

when in the weeks when they are downloaded more heavily. They identify sales displacement

using within-album weekly variation in downloading and sales. In effect, they ask whether an

album sells fewer copies in a week that it is downloaded frequently. Given the durable nature of

music files, it is not clear that the absence of contemporaneous substitution rules out substitution

more generally.

       Their contemporaneous album sales approach faces the basic handicap that the variation in

a particular album’s popularity over time would tend to induce a positive relationship between

purchases and downloads. Purchase and download are simply two ways of obtaining an album. To

see this clearly, consider a different pair of channels for obtaining an album, from Sam Goody or

from HMV.      Virtually no one purchases a particular album from both outlets. Thus, the

displacement is one- for-one. Yet, the weekly sales of a particular album at Sam Goody are surely

highly positively correlated the weekly sales of the same album at HMV. Do HMV sales stimulate

Sam Goody sales? Probably not. Downloading and purchases have the same problem. An

album’s popularity has a time component to it; and when it is popular though one distribution

channel, it is popular through other channels as well. And this does not mean that availability

through one of the channels stimulates demand through other channels.

       It is not even necessary for the relationship between album sales and downloads to inform

the sales displacement question. Suppose there are two types of people, buyers and downloaders.




                                                   7
Suppose that buyers never download, and downloaders never buy. Then a negative correlation

between sales and downloads across albums just means that buyers and downloaders have different

tastes. What we really want to know is whether a person’s downloading of an album reduces the

probability that he will purchase the album. Hence, it is not enough to have sales and downloads

by album.   Rather, one needs data on sales and downloads by person, or groups of persons.

       The ideal data for studying sales displacement would be volumes of sales and downloads,

by individual rather than by album. If one could find exogenous variation in downloading across

individuals, then displacement could be inferred from the relationship between downloads and

sales (i.e. “do people who download more albums, or songs, purchase fewer albums?”). To our

knowledge, surveys are the only way to obtain this information. Zentner (2003) has made use of

European individual- level survey data on music downloading and purchases, as well as a host of

individual level characteristics. Unfortunately, Zentner’s micro data include only binary measures

of downloading and music purchase (do you download music? Have you purchased music

recently?), preventing him from measuring the size of downloading- induced sales displacement.

       A lack of alternative data sources led us to undertake our own surveys. The benefit of this

data collection is that it allowed us to get information on individuals’ volumes of music downloads

and purchases. Because we surveyed the college student populations available to us, our surveys

are necessarily not nationally representative. We cannot therefore draw inferences about the

magnitude of aggregate downloading on US album sales. But we can ask whether the sales

displacement phenomenon operates at all. That is, do people who download more purchase less? If

so – and if we believe we have isolated exogenous variation in the volume of downloading – then

we can at least draw inference about whether downloading – again for our sample – tends to

stimulate or cannibalize album sales. This is the spirit in which we proceed.




                                                 8
        II.    Theory

        The possible effects of illegal downloading on welfare are best analyzed in two parts. First,

we discuss the analysis when there is no distinction between ex ante and ex post valuation with

simple demand and supply examples. This conveys much useful intuition but misses some

important issues that arise with experience goods. We then discuss how the analysis must be

adapted for experience goods. Throughout, we ignore possible effects on supply.

               a. Effects of Downloading on Sales and Welfare

        Prior to the advent of unpaid downloading but after digital distribution is technically

feasible, we view the seller of each album as a single-price monopolist in a context with essentially

zero marginal costs. For most demand structures, this will lead to deadweight loss, as sellers

restrict output to maximize profit. See figure 2, panel 1, which assumes zero marginal cost.

        Downloading segments demand into two groups. Prior to downloading there is some

overall demand function for music CDs, D(p) reflecting the distribution of consumers’ willingness

to pay for music (each element along the function is a consumer-album). The area under the

overall demand curve provides a welfare baseline: with zero marginal costs, this area is the sum of

revenue, consumer surplus, and deadweight loss. After the advent of downloading, consumers

divide themselves into buyers and downloaders, with aggregate valuation functions, DB(p) and

DD(p), where at any price, DD(p) + DB(p)= D(p). Note, however, that for downloaders the

valuation function simply measures only hypothetical willingness to pay if downloading were not

feasible.

        We can work through some simple illustrative examples, although a more realistic analysis

require information on what D(p) and DB(p) actually look like, a topic we address empirically




                                                   9
below. Still, the examples help to fix ideas. First, consider a case with linear demand and in which

downloaders are drawn uniformly from the overall demand distribution. Then the buyer demand

curve is simply an inward rotation of D(p). One can easily show that downloading then raises

consumer surplus, while reducing revenue and consumer surplus. Note that with linear demand the

monopolist’s profit- maximizing price is invariant with rotations of the linear demand curve.

       Two other polar cases, illustrated in the remainder of figure 2, differing in whether highest

or lowest value users download, are instructive. First, consider a case in which low-value users

download, in which the pre-downloading price is p. When downloading is feasible, all users with

valuations above p continue to purchase, while all consumers with valuations between p and 0,

which is the marginal cost of downloading, download. In this extreme case, revenue, and the

consumer surplus of persons who bought prior to downloading, are unaffected by downloading.

The deadweight loss existing prior to downloading is transformed into consumer surplus. See

panel 2.

       At another extreme, the high value consumers – say, those with valuations above p’ – could

download. For example, if p’= p, then regions representing CS and revenue prior to downloading

become downloader surplus. The region formerly representing DWL now contains revenue,

additional CS as well as some deadweight loss if the price is above MC (as it would be for a profit-

maximizer). See panel 3.

       While these special cases based on simple – and restrictive – representations of demand are

suggestive, realistic analysis of the welfare effects of downloading require information about the

actual distribution of valuations for buyers and downloaders. The key question, for both the

welfare analysis of downloading and the size of the sales displacement, is whether individuals

download high or low-valuation albums. The more that consumers obtain low- valuation music




                                                 10
through downloading, the smaller its negative impact on revenue and the greater its beneficial

effect on welfare.



                b. Decoupling Ex Ante and Ex Post Valuation

        Because music is an experience good, the ex ante valuation determining purchase is

decoupled from the ex post valuation relevant to welfare. As a result, actual welfare is slightly

more complicated than the foregoing section would suggest. At the time of first obtaining the

album, the individual’s willingness to pay is based only on a guess about how much she will like an

album. Call this the ex ante valuation, v ia , where “a” denotes ex ante, and (i) indexes a buyer-

album pair. Her ex post valuation of the album, once she has listened to it for a while, can devia te

from v ia . Term the ex post valuation v ip , where the “p” denotes ex post. Define pi as the purchase

price the buyer faces. Finally, each consumer-album pair has a binary willingness to download

(di=1 if yes, 0 if no).

        There are two regimes, a downloading regime (when downloading without paying is

feasible) and a non-downloading regime (when it is not). When downloading is feasible, each

consumer-album pair requires first a decision about willingness to download. If di=1 (yes), then

downloading occurs as long as v ia >0 (regardless of whether the ex ante valuation exceeds the

price). If di=0, then she purchases only if v ia = pi. If di=0 and v ia < pi, she goes without, even though

she has valuation in excess of downloading’s zero marginal cost.

        In the non-downloading regime, individuals purchase only when v ia = pi, even though they

have valuations in excess of marginal cost. To make matters simple, assume that what is infeasible

in the non-downloading regime is illegal downloading but that legal – and revenue-generating –

forms of zero- marginal cost distribution are available.


                                                    11
       While individuals decide whether to obtain albums on the basis of ( v ia ,di, pi), their ultimate

satisfaction from the album depends on v ip , less a price paid, if any. Hence, CS= v ip for

downloaded albums, and it equals v ip - pi for purchased albums. Table 1 summarizes the

circumstances in which people buy and download in the downloading and non-downloading

regimes by partitioning space according to whether di=1, and whether v ia = pi.

       One point bears discussion here. Because our survey – discussed below – elicits

information only about albums that individuals have in their possession (either via purchase or

downloading), we will have data on v a , vp , and δ for only three of the four cells in the tables. We

have no valuation information about albums that people are willing neither to download nor to

purchase (with δ = 0 and v ia < pi ). Note, however, that the deadweight loss in this cell is identical

across downloading and non-downloading regimes, so that our inability to measure this will not

inhibit our ability to measure the change in welfare from downloading.



       III.    Data

       The basic data for this study are derived from two surveys administered to roughly 500

college students (at Penn, Hunter, Chicago’s MA program in public policy, and CCNY) between

December 2003 and February 2004. The first survey, administered to 412 students, elicits

information on the respondent (age, race, gender, family income number of CDs owned, speed of

Internet access, as well as interest in music), along with ex post valuation on two groups of albums

purchased or downloaded: those obtained in the last year, and those among a common list of 261

hit albums released since 1999.




                                                   12
       Table 2 presents some characteristics of the individuals in the survey one sample. Blacks

make up 9 percent of the sample, Hispanics 10 percent, Asians 32. The remainder are white.

Fourteen percent of the sample has family income below $25 thousand; 20 percent has family

income between $25 and $50 thousand; 28 percent has family income between $50 and $100

thousand; 22 percent has family income between $100 and $250 thousand, and the remaining 16

percent has family income in excess of $250 thousand. The mean age is 21.9.

       The respondents report high interest in music. Only 15 percent report being less of a music

fan than others they know. Nearly forty percent claim to be about the same, 30 percent are

somewhat more, and 17 percent are a lot more interested in music than others they know. The

mean CD collection is 103.

       In a second wave of the first survey we asked about current and past Internet access. We

obtained this information on 260 of the 412 respondents. Seventy percent report having dialup

access in 1999, while 21 percent had broadband (DSL, cable modem, or Ethernet) access in 1999.

By 2003, roughly 85 percent had high speed access, while the remainder had dialup access.

       Respondent characteristics vary substantially across the universities sampled. Chicago and

Penn are heavily white and Asian, while Hunter and especially CCNY have larger black and

Hispanic populations. Chicago income is low because the MA students tend to report their own, as

opposed to parents’, income (note their comparatively high ages). Penn income is substantially

higher than elsewhere. Reported interest in music is somewhat higher at Penn and Hunter than

elsewhere. Finally, patterns of Internet access differ substantially across school. Penn students,

most living in wired dorms, have virtually 100 percent broadband access. Rates elsewhere are

much lower.




                                                 13
       The second part of survey one asks respondents to attach dollar value to two groups of

albums they have. First, we present them with a list of all 261 albums certified by the RIAA as

having sold 2 million or more copies since 1999. For each album, respondents indicate whether

they own it, how they got it, and how highly they value it in dollar terms. We term this the “hit”

module, and responses to this module provide valuations on a common set of albums across all

respondents. Second, we ask respondents to list all albums they have obtained in the past year. For

each album they list, we ask them how they obtained it (via purchase, downloading, or as a gift) as

well as their valuation. We term this the “current” module.

       Two different versions of the valuation question were used initially. The “buy” set asked

respondents, “Imagine you no longer have the album and must pay to get it. What is the maximum

you are willing to pay to get the album.” In the alternative “sell” treatment, the question is worded,

“Imagine someone offered to pay you money to permanently give up the album (and never again

hear any of the songs on it). For each album, how much compensation would you require never to

hear it again?” We employed the buy formulation for 337 of 412 surveys.

       We use the survey data in two ways. First, we can aggregate them to the respondent level

to create a cross-respondent dataset on the volume of CDs purchased and downloaded. Although

we do not know when respondents purchased each CD, we do know the CDs’ “vintage,” i.e. the

year in which they were first certified. This allows us to create a second, panel dataset on the

numbers of albums downloaded and purchased, among those of each vintage. Third, we can use

the data at the album level.

       Table 3 reports mean and median valuations of purchased (including gifts) and downloaded

hit and current albums using both the buy and sell valuation methods. The first point to note is that

sell-based valuations are enormous. The average purchased hit is va lued at over $50,000. While




                                                  14
the means are sensitive to outliers, even the median sell valuations - $100 per album for hits and

current albums – are rather high. The buy-based valuations appear to be more reasonable. Of 2726

purchased hits, the mean valuation is $12.70, while the mean valuation of a purchased current

album is $15.25. Second, downloaded albums are valued substantially below purchased albums.

       Although more reasonable in the sense of being within an order of magnitude of purchase

prices, the survey 1 buy valuation data are still, at first blush, puzzlingly low. Of 2726 purchased

albums valued via the buy method, the mean valuation was $12.70. On its face this seems to

contradict logic, since a person should only buy a product if the value equals or exceeds the price.

And, indeed, 58 percent were valued below $15. Moreover, 28 percent were valued below $10.

These results raised concerns for us that music may be a) an experience good, b) subject to

depreciation as listeners grow tired of music, or c) both.

       Low ex post valuations are not just a theoretical curiosity; they also prevent using survey 1

valuation data to determine which downloaded albums would have been purchased absent

downloading. It seems natural to assume that individuals would have purchased albums when v>p.

Yet, it is not true that v exceeds p for all, or even most, purchased albums.

       Our concern about music as an experience good led us to administer survey two to 92 Penn

students, asking about both ex ante and ex post valuations of the 261 albums in the hit sample, as

well as the individual characteristics covered in survey one. Our valuation instructions on this

survey were rather explicitly designed to elicit ex ante valuations at or above the prices paid:

       Initial val uation - At the time you obtained the album, what is the maximum you would have been willing to
       pay for it? If you paid for it, you must have valued it at least as much as its price initially. For this question,
       suppose that there is only one possible source. That is, your answer should not be based on an alternative
       price or sharing opportunity. (Don’t say you’re not willing to pay since you know you can obtain it via
       sharing for free, or that you are not willing to pay more than some particular amount since you know you can
       buy from another seller for some particular price. Here, you are asked to assume no such alternative sources
       exist.)
       Finally, if you would have been willing to purchase it at the time you downloaded it or received it as a gift,
       report a valuation at or above the going price at that time.




                                                           15
       Current valuation - Now that you’ve had the music for a while, what is the maximum you would be willing
       to pay for it? Here, again, suppose that there is only one possible source so your answer, as above, should not
       be based on an alternative price or sharing opportunity.



The last column of table 2 reports characteristics of the individuals in the survey 2 sample. The

bottom panel of table 3 reports ex ante and ex post valuations of hits from survey 2. Here, the

mean ex ante valuation is nearly $16, while the mean ex post valuation, at $13.39, is very similar to

the (ex post) valuation in survey 1. Two points merit discussion. First, the ex post valuation is

below the ex ante, indicating depreciation. Second, the correlation of ex ante and ex post value is

only about 0.6, indicating that most of the variation in ex post value is realized after purchase, so

the experience good aspect of music is important.

       We supplement the survey data with information on aggregate sales data on all of our hits –

as well as roughly 8000 other hit albums certified by RIAA – from the Recording Industry

Association of America Website (RIAA.COM). The source reports individual certifications. An

album is certified “gold” when it has sold 0.5 million units, “platinum” when it sells 1 million, and

it receives a multiple platinum certification for each additional million copies sold. An album

released in, say, 1985, can continue to sell in subsequent years. We attribute the additional sales

leading to most recent certification to the year of the current certification. This makes the

certification-based data compatible with the RIAA aggregate sales data (except that the aggregate

data also include albums selling fewer than 0.5 million copies). RIAA also provides data on annual

units sold and revenue. Figure 1 shows the overall and certified album sales. RIAA certified

albums account for roughly three quarters of overall sales.

       Table 4 lists the top 40 albums in the hit sample, by number of appearances among the hit

albums in our respondents’ collections. The last column reports the certified sales of each album

(as of late 2003). Although we make no claims of representativeness in our sampling, the albums



                                                        16
with high sales tend to appear frequently in our sample. For example, the Backstreet Boys and ‘N

Sync albums which each sold over 10 million copies each appear among more than 50 of our

respondents’ hit album collections.

        Table 5 presents the average number of purchases and downloads, in the current and hit

samples, overall and by race and school. 5 Respondents report an average of 7.8 hit purchases and

5.1 hit downloads (for albums first certified in 1999 and by late 2003 selling at least 2 million

copies). Blacks download fewer albums than others in the sample. Penn students in our sample

download substantially more albums than Hunter, CCNY, or Chicago students (7.2 hit albums as

opposed to 2-3). Interestingly, Penn students purchase fewer albums than the others, suggesting

sales displacement.

        We can compare our self- reported purchase information with aggregate data on album sales.

According to the RIAA, US album sales in 2002 totaled $11.233 billion. Of this total, 11.5

percent, or $1.292 billion, was sold to persons age 20-24. According to the 2000 Census, there

were 18.964 million persons in this age group in 2000. Dividing, we get average annual

expenditure of $68 per person aged 20-24. Given the price of CDs this translates to just under 5

albums per person. Our respondents, by contrast, report purchasing an average of 2.6 albums in

the past year.

        Table 6 describes music obtained by the respondents – and percent downloaded – for hit

albums in our list, by date of first certification, 1999-2003. The number obtained decline over time

because albums released later have fewer years of sales exposure. Roughly a third of hit albums

released in 1999 are obtained by downloading. The share rises to nearly half for albums released




5
 In this paper we group albums received as gifts with purchases. All exercises reported in the paper were also
performed excluding gifts from purchases. No substantive results change.


                                                         17
during 2002-3. Relative reliance on downloading varies substantially across some groups in our

sample, with Penn students downloading proportionally more than others in the sample.



        IV.      Sales Displacement

                 a.   Does downloading reduce album sales?

        Aggregating our survey data to the respondent level creates data on album purchases and

downloads for 412 individuals. Of these, 364 have valid data on all variables needed for basic

analysis of the hits. Our first pass at the sales displacement question is through cross sectional

regressions of the number of albums purchased on the number of albums downloaded and a host of

controls. In particular, we estimate the following equation:

Pi = X i β + αDi + ε i ,               (1)

where: Pi is individual i’s purchases of albums from some set (either the hit or current),

        Di is individual i’s downloads of albums (again from some set),

        X i includes characteristics of the individual such as their level of interest in music, race,

        and income,

        ε i is unobserved characteristics, and

        α and β are coefficients to be estimated.

        Columns (1-3) of table 7 reports estimates of equation (1) using the entire hit album sample.

In this equation, P is the total number of albums on the hit list (those albums selling 2 million or

more between 1999 and 2003) that the individual has purchased, while D is the number of those

albums that the person has obtained via downloading. The first column shows that the estimated

sales displacement coefficient α using the full time period is insignificantly different from zero.

The result does not change if we control for school (column 2) or estimate a tobit rather than an


                                                    18
OLS model (column 3). Columns (4-6) present estimates of equation (1) using the current sample.

The OLS regressions in columns (4) and (5) give displacement estimates of –0.17 to –0.19,

changing little when we control for school. Column (6) reports a tobit estimate on the current

sample, yielding a negative and significant displacement estimate. 6

           In interpreting these estimates, it is important to keep in mind that broadband Internet

access stood at low levels for our respondents in 1999. If a person is not connected, there is no

scope for downloading to displace her purchases. Many, if not most, of the persons in the sample

purchased 1999 releases prior to having the ability to download. The sales displacement question

is addressed cleanly only when people have the ability to download albums at the time they might

otherwise have purchased them. These considerations suggest that recent years would be most

useful for detecting possible displacement and explain why we see displacement in the current

estimates but not for the 1999-2003 hits overall. When we estimate equation (1) only on the hits

first certified in 2003, we find displacement of –0.09 (p- val = 0.10, two-sided).

           The estimates in table 7 are vulnerable to the concern that downloading is endogenous, or at

least that it is subject to unobserved heterogeneity. We might expect music lovers to both

download and purchase more music. One way to deal with this is simply to recognize that it would

lead OLS to underestimate the amount of sales displacement and to view our coefficients as

underestimates of true sales displacement. Alternatively, one can try to find instruments for music

downloading that are not themselves related to music demand. The speed of one’s access to the

Internet can serve as such an instrument, provided that connection speed is exogenous to interest in

music. It wo uld undermine this strategy, for example, if people chose high-speed connections

because of their interest in music.



6
    Because purchases are positive for 243 of 347 observations, the associated displacement estimate is –0.18.


                                                            19
       We have two approaches to using access speed as an instrument for downloading. First, we

can use the school the student attends; and second, for a subsample, we can use whether she has

broadband access. Far more than college students at Hunter or CCNY, or MA students at Chicago,

Penn students live in dormitories with high-speed Internet access. “Only 612 of Hunter's 17,000

students have the opportunity to live in the Residence Hall” ( see

http://www.hunter.cuny.edu/~reslife/index.html). And there are no dormitories at CCNY (see

http://www.ccny.cuny.edu/bulletin02/about_usU.htm). By contrast, there is space for 5683 of the

“nearly 10,000 undergraduates” at Penn. Our own survey shows this: broadband access is

ubiquitous among Penn students, far less common among others. Our two IV strategies are (1) to

use which school they attend to instrument downloading, and (2) to use the survey’s individual

measure of broadband access as an instruments.

       The first four columns of table 8 present first and second-stage regressions on the hit

sample. The first two columns report first-stage (download) regressions, using school attended

and the individual broadband access variables, respectively, as instruments for downloading. As

one would expect from the raw data in the tables above, Penn students download more than other

students, after accounting for race, income, and interest in music. Columns (3-4) report second-

stage hit displacement regressions, and the estimated hit sales displacement coefficients are –0.25

and –0.57. Columns (5-8) repeat the exercise using the current sample, and again, individuals with

broadband access download more, and the estimated current sales displacement coefficients are

-0.88 and –1.47. The estimated IV displacement coefficients in table 8 are much larger than their

OLS analogues in table 7, although they are also less precisely estimated.




                                                 20
        The panel structure of our data allows another empirical approach. Table 9 uses the panel

data, in which a unit of observation is a person-by-vintage for the hit sample. We estimate

equations of the form:

Pit = X i β + αDit + φ t + ε it .

Thus we run regressions of the number of albums released in each year that an individual

purchased on the number of that year’s albums that the person downloads, along with time

dummies (φ t) and our various controls. This pooled cross-section time series estimates give sales

displacement coefficients of roughly –0.04 but not significant. The second column of table 9

incorporates individual fixed effects, identifying the sale s displacement coefficient from the

relationship between changes in the tendency to download and changes in the tendency to

purchase, over and above the common vintage pattern. That is, we make the substitution ε it = µi +

ν it, where µi is an individual-specific fixed effect, and ν it is an individual-and- year-specific error.

Here we obtain a coefficient estimate of -0.08, and it is statistically significantly. When we restrict

attention to persons purchasing more than 5 albums from the hit sample we get a coefficient twice

as large (-0.15 and significant).

        What do all of these estimates mean? Estimates based on data for periods when

downloading is feasible suggest sales displacement of roughly –0.2 per album downloaded in the

OLS specifications and much higher in the IV estimates. Average current year downloads – see

table 4 – were 1.24, while current purchases averaged 2.61. Using the –0.2 displacement estimate,

in the absence of downloading, purchases would have averaged 2.86, suggesting that downloading

reduced purchases by individuals in the sample by about 9 percent.



                  b. Do consumers download high or low value music?



                                                     21
       Before analyzing the valuation data, it is worthwhile to discuss the virtues and shortcomings

of survey-based valuation information. Economists have traditionally been skeptical of surveys of

valuation because a respondent’s valuation of an object he has never thought about – or never will

see – may not have any meaning (Diamond and Hausman, 1994). In our context, however, we are

asking about familiar objects. Indeed, we are in particular asking about objects that the

respondents actually possess. Moreover, these are objects of a sort the respondents have obtained

repeatedly, so their valuation responses may be more meaningful than responses about unfamiliar

and largely hypothetical goods.

       Hence, we are willing to put aside qualms about survey valuation data to ask whether

downloading is a means of obtaining high or low valuation albums. To this end, Table 10 reports

album- level regressions of log valuation on a downloading dummy. The top panel reports

regressions of log (ex post) valuation on a downloading dummy, using data from survey one. Only

buy valuation data are included in these regressions (to ensure comparability with survey two

results). The first column shows that downloaded hits are valued 33 percent below purchased hits.

The second column shows that downloaded current albums are valued 39 percent less than

purchased current albums. Standard errors in all table 10 regressions are adjusted for clustering on

individuals. Columns (3) and (4) repeat the exercise with individual fixed effects, showing not

only that downloaded albums are less valuable than purchased albums but also that this is true

within individual.

       The bottom panel of table 10 performs a similar exercise on the ex ante and ex post hit

valuation information from sample two. As in sample one, the ex post valuations of downloaded

albums are nearly a third (27 percent) less than the valuations for purchased albums. The ex ante

valuations of downloaded albums, relative to purchased albums, however, are even lower than the




                                                 22
ex post valuations (46 percent vs 27). At the time of obtaining the music, then, persons expect the

albums they download to be much less valuable to them than purchased music. This suggests that

they would not have been willing to pay much for this music, and that they would not likely have

purchased it. But the coefficient estimate describes only the average valuation difference between

downloaded and purchased CDs. A more thorough analysis of downloading requires information

about the full structure of ex ante valuation (for demand) and ex post valuation (for welfare).



               c. Ex Ante and Ex Post Valuation of Music

       This section provides some descriptive characterization of the ex ante and ex post valuation

data. For each album, we asked for an ex ante valuation, a price (if they purchased the album), an

ex post valuation, as well as indicators for why the current valuation deviated (from the initial

valuation). If the current valuation exceeded the initial valuation, we allowed respondents to

indicate a) that they were pleasantly surprised, b) that the music grew on them, or c) both. If the

current valuation equaled the initial, we allowed respondents to indicate that a) they were familiar

with the music before purchase, b) they guessed right, or c) both. Finally, if the current valuation

fell short of the initial valuation, we allowed respondents to indicate that a) they were disappointed

from the start, b) they grew tired of the music, or c) both.

       The data are described in table 11. The average ex ante valuation is $13.34, while the

average ex post valuation is $11.94 for the 1209 albums in sample two, indicating depreciation.

Respondents report higher ex post than ex ante valuations because of pleasant surprise at 16.4

percent of albums and that 16.5 percent of albums grew on them. Respondents report equal ex post

and ex ante valuations: 21.8 percent of albums were familiar before purchase, and respondents

guessed accurately on the value of 11.5 percent of albums. Finally, respondents report lower ex




                                                   23
post than ex ante valuations for many albums. 9.5 percent of albums are disappointing from the

start, while respondents grew tired of 31.7 percent of albums.

       These data also allow us to explore the distributions of ex ante and ex post valuations and

therefore what the determinants of purchase decisions and welfare look like. The top panel of

figure 3 depicts the distribution of ex ante valuations, ordered from highest to lowest ex ante

valuations. The curve is, in effect, a demand curve, since points above any price indicate a

willingness for an individual to purchase an album. It is worth noting that their demand curve does

not appear to belo ng to any familiar parametric family. If ex ante valuations, which are guesses

about how much the person will like an album, are not accurate, then the area under the demand

curve does not represent welfare.

       The second panel of the figure shows the distribution of ex post valuations, ordered by ex

post valuations. This curve is not relevant to purchase decisions, since the valuations are not

known at the time of purchase. These valuations are relevant to welfare, however. The curves in

the two panels look very similar, but one needs to bear in mind that they are ranked by different

variables.

       Figure 4 illustrates the distinction between ex ante and ex post valuation more directly. The

top panel reproduces the ex ante curve (the line) with ex post valuations overlayed as open circles.

It is clear that many purchases with high ex ante value have low ex post value, and vice versa. The

bottom panel shows the same information in a different way, with a plot of ex post valuation on ex

ante valuation and a 45 degree line. This diagram too shows that, while ex ante and ex post

valuations are correlated, the correlation, at 0.63, is far from perfect. Moreover, the preponderance

of dots below the 45 degree line indicates depreciation overall.




                                                  24
        Column (1) of table 11 reports a regression of ex post valuation on ex ante valuation and

dummies that reflect, for example, whether an individual has grown tired of an album. The

coefficient on “grew tired” is negative and significant.

        The true ex post valuation of an album is the sum over the flow utilities experienced,

appropriately discounted. If the flow utility declines over time, then the current valuation of a three

year old album will understate its original ex post value. To address this we examine average

depreciation directly, via a regression of (ex post valuation – ex ante valuation) on dummies for

year of release. 7 Albums released in 1999 are on average $3 less valuable than albums released in

2003, and the earlier the release, the greater the gap, which we interpret as depreciation.

Consequently, we adjust ex post valuation by adding back the average depreciation depicted in

column (2) of table 11. By construction this equalizes average ex ante and ex post valuation.

        Table 12 presents the average depreciation8 , along with the averages of the indicators for

pleasant surprise, etc, for albums by artists appearing 15 or more times in sample two. The artists

are sorted from least to most depreciated. For example, respondents adjusted ex post valuation of

the Red Hot Chili Peppers’ record exceeds their ex ante valuation by an average of 31 percent.

Nearly a third report being pleasantly surprised by their album, and almost half report that their

album grew on them. Albums by the Beatles, Norah Jones, and U2 also appreciated substantially.

At the other end of the spectrum, albums by various artists 9 depreciated by an average of 92

percent. Nearly half of respondents with albums by various artists report growing tired of them.

Similarly, over 80 percent of Britney Spears album owners report having grown tired of their

albums.


7
  We don’t know the year the individual obtained the album, but we assume earlier acquisition of albums released
sooner.
8
  We calculate depreciation as ln(ex post valuation/ex ante valuation).
9
  These are primarily albums in the “Now, That’s What I Call Music!” series.


                                                         25
                  d.   Simulating the Effects of Downloading on Sales and Welfare

         We now turn to measuring the welfare effects of downloading directly for a subsample.

Given that we have data on ex ante and ex post valuations for respondents in the second Penn

sample, we can calculate their expenditure, consumer surplus, and the number of albums purchased

and downloaded (in the downloading regime) straightforwardly according to the scheme in table 1.

         Assuming that pi is $15, all of the information required to simulate expenditure, consumer

surplus, and deadweight loss is available in table 13. 10 Of the 1209 albums in sample 2 obtained

under the downloading regime, 617 albums were purchased, while 592 alb ums were downloaded

by the 92 persons in the ex post-ex ante valuation sub-sample. The buyers paid $15 per album,

generating revenue of $9255. Buyers experienced ex post valuations of $14.94 per album, giving

rise to buyer consumer surplus of -$37.11 The 154 downloaded albums that would have been

purchased are valued at $17.91 each, generating $2738 in surplus. In conjunction with the 438

albums that would not have been purchased and which are ultimately valued at $9.48 each, the total

downloader surplus is $6910, and the overall consumer surplus under downloading is $6873.

         If downloading were not feasible, the 617 purchased albums would still be purchased, as

would 154 downloaded albums with ex ante valuations of $15 or more, generating revenue of

$11,565 from this sample. Sales and revenue – since prices are assumed constant – are 20 percent

lower with downloading than without. Consumer surplus would include both the -$37 from those




10
   We asked prices paid for albums in survey 2. The mean price paid was $15.30. The simulation results do not change
in important ways if we use different prices (for example $13, 14, or 16).
11
   Note that negative consumer surplus is ruled out by construction with ex ante valuations but is possible with ex post
valuation realizations below prices paid.


                                                          26
albums which were purchased along with $448 from the 154 albums which would have been

purchased generating $17.91 in ex post valuation on average, for a total of

-$411 in consumer surplus. Finally, the sum of the ex post valuations of the albums which would

not have been purchased (with ex ante valuations below $15) generate deadweight losses of $4152.

         In per capita terms, consumers spend $126 without downloading and $101 with

downloading. Downloading increases consumer welfare by $70 per capita for sample individuals.

Nearly two thirds (64 percent) of this derives from the $45 per capita reduction in deadweight loss.

The remaining 36 percent comes from the $25 per capita reduction in spending.

         If we compute consumer surplus and deadweight loss using ex ante rather than ex post

music valuations (see the last part of table 13), the results are similar. Downloading raises

consumer welfare for sample individuals by $64 per capita, and 60 percent of this results from the

$39 per capita reduction in deadweight loss.



                  e. Other Issues

         We administered a small-scale follow-up survey to address two questions left unanswered

by the previous analysis, the relationship between song and album downloads and the tendency for

people to purchase albums following downloading.

         Our surveys asked respondents to indicate whether they had obtained “albums” via sharing.

As table 5 indicates, Penn students report downloading roughly as many albums as they purchase

(about 7.2). Yet, music downloading is done song by song, raising a question of what it means to

“download an album.” 12 To address this we administered a follow up survey asking 25 Penn

students asking how many songs they had obtained via sharing from each of the albums in the hit


12
  When respondents to the earlier asked how to fill out the survey, they were told to include an album if they had
obtained they parts they though were valuable to them.


                                                          27
sample. For these students the mean number of purchased albums is 6.96, just slightly below the

full Penn sample average. The average number of albums from which they had obtained at least

one song via sharing was 19.7, or more than double the number of “albums” they reported

obtaining via sharing. On the other hand, they report downloading an average of only 4.0 entire

albums. It appears, then, that including all albums from which they download 6 or more songs,

they obtained 4.1 albums via sharing. Constructing successively more inclusive sharing measures,

we get the following: including 5 or more songs yields 4.6; 4 or more yields 6.3; 3 or more yields

8.8; and 2 or more yields 14.3. It therefore appears that respondents reported obtaining an album if

they have downloaded 3 or 4 (or more) of its songs.

       The follow-up survey also allows us to examine whether people download, then buy. Of

the 476 albums – or album fragments – obtained via sharing, respondents subsequently purchased

21, or 4.4 percent.



       V.      Conclusion

       We argue that successfully measuring the possible sales-displacing effect of unpaid music

downloading requires data on the quantities of purchases and downloads made by individuals,

leading us to conduct original surveys. Using a variety of empirical approaches, we document that

downloading displaces sales among a convenience sample of college students. The estimate we

consider most conservative indicate that an additional download reduces sales by between 0.1 and

0.2 units. As a result, for the individuals in our sample, downloading reduced expenditure by about

10 percent but possibly much more. Supporting incomplete sales displacement is our finding that

downloaded music is valued much less than purchased music.




                                                 28
       While downloading reduces expenditure (on hit albums, 1999-2003) by $25 per capita in

the sub-sample for which we perform a direct welfare analysis of downloading, it raises sample

consumers’ welfare associated with these albums by $70 per capita. Some of the benefit to

consumers are transfers from sellers, but most of the benefit ($45 per capita) comes from

reductions in deadweight loss.

       Two facts bear emphasis again. First, our sample is not representative, so our results should

not be generalized. Second, our evaluation of welfare takes supply as given. It is entirely possible

that downloading has important effects on the quantity and types of music recorded and marketed

in the first place. This is an important area for further research.




                                                   29
References

Bakos, Yannis, Erik Brynjolfsson, and Douglas Lichtman. “Shared Information Goods.” Journal of
Law & Economics XLII (April 1999): 117-155.

Besen, Stanley M. “Private Copying, Reproduction Costs, and the Supply of Intellectual Property,”
Information Economics and Policy, 2 (1986): 5-22.

Conner, Kathleen Reavis and Richard Rumelt. “Software Piracy: An Analysis of Protection
Strategies.” Management Science, vol 37, no. 2 (Feb 1991): 125-139.

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman. “Contingent Valuation: Is Some Number Better than
No Number?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 8, no. 4, Fall 1994, pp. 45-64

Dixit, Avinash K; Stiglitz, Joseph E. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity.”
American Economic Review. Vol. 67 (3). p 297-308. June 1977.

Fader, Peter S. Expert Report, A&M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc. 114 F Supp. 2d 896, 2000.

Graves, Tom. “Standard & Poor’s Industry Surveys: Movies & Home Entertainment.” Vol. 172,
no. 7, section 1. February 12, 2004.

Hui, Kai-Leung and Ivan Png. “Piracy and the Legitimate Demand for Recorded Music.”
Contributions to Economic Analysis. Vol. 2, no. 1, article 11 (2003).

Liebowitz, Stanley J. “Copying and Indirect Appropriability.” Journal of Political Economy, vol.
93, No. 5 (Oct 1985): 945-957

Liebowitz, Stan “Will MP3 Downloads Annihilate the Record Industry? The Evidence So Far.”
Unpublished Manuscript. University of Texas at Dallas. June 2003.

Oberholzer-Gee, Felix and Koleman Strumpf. “The Effect of File Sharing on Record Sales: An
Empirical Analysis.” Mimeo. Harvard Business School. January 2004.

Shapiro, Carl and Hal Varian. Information Rules. Harvard Business School Press. Cambridge,
MA. 1999.

Spence, Michael. “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition.” The Review of
Economic Studies. Vol. 43 (2). p 217-35. June 1976.

Spence, Michael. “Product Differentiation and Welfare.” American Economic Review. Vol. 66 (2).
p 407-14. May 1976.

Takeyama, Lisa. “The Intertemporal Consequences of Unauthorized Reproduction of Intellectual
Property.” Journal of Law & Economics, vol. XL, (October 1997): 511-522.




                                                30
Varian, Hal. “Buying, Sharing, and Renting Information Goods.” Journal of Industrial Economics.
Vol. XLVIII, no. 4, Dec 2000, pp. 473-488

Zentner, Alejandro. “Measuring the Effect of Online Piracy on Music Sales.” Unpublished
Manuscript. University of Chicago. December 2003.




                                               31
Table 1: Summary of Behavior and Welfare in Downloading and Non-Downloading Regimes

1. DOWNLOADING REGIME (Illegal downloading is feasible)
Ex ante valuations Willing to download    Not willing to download
relative to price: (δ i = 1 )             (δ i = 0 )
0 < via < p i             •   v ip = CS                  •   v ip = DWL
                          •   rev=0                      •   rev=0
                          •   downloading occurs         •   album not obtained
                                                         •   not observed in our
                                                             data
v ia ≥ p i                •   v ip = CS                  •   v ip - pi = CS
                          •   rev=0                      •   pi =revenue
                          •   downloading occurs         •   purchase occurs


2. NON-DOWNLOADING REGIME (Illegal downloading is not feasible)
                      Would have been willing to Would not have been
Ex ante valuations    download                        willing to download
relative to price:    (δ i = 1 )                      (δ i = 0 )
0 < vi < p i
      a
                           • v i = DWL
                                 p
                                                           • v ip = DWL
                           • rev=0                         • rev=0
                           • album not obtained            • album not obtained
                                                           • not observed in our
                                                               data
vi ≥ pi
  a
                           • v i - pi = CS
                                 p
                                                           • v ip - pi = CS
                           • pi =revenue                   • pi =revenue
                           • purchase occurs               • purchase occurs
Note: Assume that zero marginal cost distribution is available when illegal downloading is not
feasible.




                                                32
Table 2: Respondent Characteristics
                    overall         CCNY     Chicago        Hunter        Penn       Penn
                                                                        Survey 1   Survey 2
Male             60% of 414     65% of 66   29.7% of 64   45.4% of 33   67.7% of   58% of 98
                                                                           251

Black               8.9           31.8         10.9           6.3         4.0        3.0
Hispanic            9.8           33.3          3.1          25.0         3.2        1.0
Asian               31.8          21.2         26.6          12.5         38.5       43.4
White               48.2          13.6         59.4          53.1         53.8       52.5
N                   409            66           64            32          247         99

Age                21.9/400       24.6         27.4          20.5         20.0       20.2

<$25               14.3%           23          41.4          12.9         5.2        2.2
$25-50k            19.8%          41.5         25.9          38.7         19.8       8.8
$50-100            27.6%          29.2         17.2          29.3         27.6       36.3
$100-250           21.9%           4.6         12.1          12.9         30.4       34.1
>$250              16.4%           1.5          3.5           6.5         24.8       18.7
N                   384            65           58            31          230         91

Fandom 1(low)       6.3            6.2          6.3           3.0         6.8        11.1
2                   9.2            9.2         10.9           6.1         9.2        10.1
3                   38.4          47.7         43.8          30.3         35.6       33.3
4                   29.6          18.5         12.3          36.4         33.2       29.3
5                   16.5          18.5         15.6          24.2         15.2       16.2

Dialup ‘99         70.4%          85.2%       56.5%           Na         73.2%       76.0
‘00                63.1%          82.1%       60.3%           Na         60.9%       59.8
‘01                49.8%          77.8%       58.7%           Na         42.0%       29.9
‘02                31.5%          63.0%       47.6%           Na         20.6%       20.6
‘03                16.2%          53.6%       32.3%           Na          4.1%       4.1
Present            15.2%          57.1%       30.6%           Na          2.4%       3.2

Hi-speed ‘99       20.6%          0.0%        29.0%           Na         20.8%       17.7
‘00                31.9%          7.1%        28.6%           Na         37.3%       38.1
‘01                47.1%          18.5%       31.7%           Na         57.4%       69.1
‘02                66.5%          33.3%       46.0%           Na         79.4%       79.4
‘03                83.8%          46.4%       67.7%           Na         95.9%       95.9
Present            86.0%          42.9%       69.4%           Na         97.6%       96.8
N                   260             28          63                        170         97
Collection         103.3          157.9       147.5          96.4         79.0       83.6




                                             33
Table 3: Average Value of Hits and Current Purchases
                      hit                       current
                    Mean median           N      Mean     median     N
SURVEY 1 (buy)
Ex post
 bought             12.70       12      2726     15.25     15        695
 downloaded          8.81       8.5     1512     11.15     10        337

SURVEY 1 (sell)
Ex post
 bought             56,344     100      702      1,831     100       173
 downloaded          2,534      30      264       710       50        64

SURVEY 2
Ex ante
 bought              15.91      15      617
 downloaded          10.66      10      592
Ex post
 bought              13.39      13      617
 downloaded          10.47      10      592




                                                                34
Table 4: Top 40 Sample Albums
artist/album                               sample freq sample rank sales (mil) sales rank
50 CENT / GET RICH OR DIE TRYIN'              112           1           5          34
EMINEM / THE EMINEM SHOW                      103           2           8          10
COLDPLAY / A RUSH OF BLOOD TO THE HEAD        100           3           2         102
EMINEM / THE MARSHALL MATHERS LP               88           4           8          11
EMINEM / THE SLIM SHADY LP                     87           5           4          45
RED HOT CHILI PEPPERS / CALIFORNICATION        77           6           5          35
2 PAC / GREATEST HITS                          74           7           9           8
SANTANA / SUPERNATURAL                         69           8          14           1
U2 / ALL THAT YOU CAN'T LEAVE BEHIND           68           9           3          59
BEATLES, THE / 1                               66          10           8          12
MAYER, JOHN / ROOM FOR SQUARES                 60          11           3          60
JONES, NORAH / COME AWAY WITH ME               57          12           7          19
DMX / FLESH OF MY FLESH, BLOOD OF MY BLO       56          13           3          61
MATTHEWS, DAVE BAND / EVERYDAY                 56          14           3          62
'N SYNC / NO STRINGS ATTACHED                  53          15          11           4
BACKSTREET BOYS / MILLENNIUM                   52          16          13           2
JAY-Z / THE BLUEPRINT                          52          17           2         103
NELLY / COUNTRY GRAMMAR                        52          18           8          13
CAREY, MARIAH / #1'S                           50          19           5          36
DMX / ...AND THEN THERE WAS X                  49          20           5          37
DR. DRE / DR. DRE 2001                         49          21           6          23
LINKIN PARK / HYBRID THEORY                    49          22           8          14
OUTKAST / STANKONIA                            48          23           3          63
BLINK 182 / ENEMA OF THE STATE                 47          24           5          38
MATCHBOX TWENTY / MAD SEASON                   47          25           4          46
CREED / HUMAN CLAY                             46          26          10           6
DIDO / NO ANGEL                                46          27           4          47
DOORS, THE / GREATEST HITS (1996)              45          28           2         104
MADONNA / MUSIC                                42          29           2         105
JAY-Z / THE BLUEPRINT 2: THE GIFT AND TH       41          30           3          64
DESTINY'S CHILD / SURVIVOR                     40          31           4          48
JAY-Z / VOL. 3...LIFE AND TIMES OF S. CA       40          32           3          65
SPEARS, BRITNEY / ...BABY ONE MORE TIME        40          33          13           3
'N SYNC / CELEBRITY                            39          34           5          39
ENYA / A DAY WITHOUT RAIN                      39          35           6          24
NOTORIOUS B.I.G. / BORN AGAIN                  39          36           2         106
SPEARS, BRITNEY / OOPS!...I DID IT AGAIN       39          37           9           9
TIMBERLAKE, JUSTIN / JUSTIFIED                 39          38           3          66
2 PAC / UNTIL THE END OF TIME                  37          39           3          67
MOBY / PLAY                                    37          40           2         107




                                            35
Table 5: Purchases and Downloads
              Hit        hit    hit current current current
           purchase download N purchase download      N
All          8.24       5.36   365   2.61    1.24    349

Asian       6.74    7.98    108    1.98      1.16     101
Black       9.53    2.34     32    3.34      1.31      32
Hispanic   11.62    4.83     37    2.85      1.03      33
White       8.31    4.55    184    2.75      1.35     179

CCNY       10.96    3.24     54    2.90      0.63      52
Chicago     8.21    2.25     56    2.82      0.54      57
Hunter     11.13    1.72     32    3.96      0.56      27
Penn        7.17    7.17    365    2.31      1.67     213




                                                       36
Table 6: Hit Purchases and Downloads, by Year of Albums’ First Certification
                       total    Total    CCNY CCNY Chicago Chicago                 Hunter      Hunter       Penn        Penn
         % of hits       #         #         #         #         #         #           #           #           #           #
                     purchased dwnloaded purchased dwnloaded purchased dwnloaded   purchased   dwnloaded   purchased   dwnloaded
       downloaded
1999      32.9%        2.39      1.17      2.90      0.74      1.78      0.41       2.88         0.38       2.35         1.57
2000      38.9%        2.43      1.55      3.32      0.92      2.33      0.69       3.34         0.53       2.12         2.07
2001      41.7%        1.76      1.26      2.86      0.82      1.91      0.44       2.41         0.47       1.38         1.68
2002      45.8%        1.28      1.08      1.60      0.52      1.61      0.67       1.43         0.19       1.09         1.45
2003      46.4%        0.52      0.45      1.10      0.42      0.31      0.13       1.06         0.16       0.36         0.58




                                                                 37
           Table 7: OLS and Tobit Sales Displacement Estimates
                       (1)         (2)          (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
                       Hit         Hit          Hit            Current      Current      Current      2003 Hit
                    Purchases   Purchases    Purchases        Purchases    Purchases    Purchases    Purchases
Current                                                        -0.1945      -0.1722      -0.2579
Downloads
                                                              (0.0718)**   (0.0728)*    (0.1001)*
Hit Downloads        -0.0266       -0.0085      -0.0310                                                -0.0910
                    (0.0521)      (0.0527)     (0.0598)                                               (0.0556)
male                 -3.3089       -3.5692      -4.4627          -0.6344     -0.6188       -1.0338
                   (0.9708)**   (1.0173)**   (1.1373)**        (0.3167)*    (0.3306)     (0.4419)*
Fan = 2               4.0584        3.7992       8.0407           0.1022      0.0572        1.1415       0.3705
                    (2.4907)      (2.4789)   (2.9994)**         (0.8161)    (0.8161)      (1.2328)     (0.2494)
Fan = 3               5.6050        5.3117       9.2048           0.9109      0.8855        2.4968       0.5430
                   (2.1314)**    (2.1219)*   (2.6438)**         (0.6982)    (0.6979)     (1.0789)*    (0.2128)*
Fan = 4               6.7212        6.4736     10.6962            1.9665      1.9228        3.9187       0.6201
                   (2.1738)**   (2.1652)**   (2.6787)**       (0.7144)**   (0.7141)**   (1.0955)**   (0.2173)**
Fan = 5               9.9391        9.5997     14.1591            2.6707      2.5686        4.8472       0.6221
                   (2.3228)**   (2.3144)**   (2.8243)**       (0.7518)**   (0.7527)**   (1.1391)**   (0.2327)**
$25-50k               2.2034        1.6273       2.0517           0.5603      0.4071        0.4576       0.0848
                    (1.5629)      (1.5824)     (1.7785)         (0.4988)    (0.5089)      (0.6768)     (0.1564)
$50-100               1.0381        1.1821       1.5687           0.2371      0.2931        0.1194      -0.0025
                    (1.3790)      (1.4304)     (1.6202)         (0.4659)    (0.4823)      (0.6504)     (0.1373)
$100-250              0.7783        1.3815       2.2364           0.3413      0.5042        0.5354       0.0577
                    (1.4597)      (1.5420)     (1.7435)         (0.4827)    (0.5088)      (0.6845)     (0.1450)
>$250                 2.6972        3.4626       4.3480           0.4111      0.6026        0.5559       0.0485
                    (1.6185)     (1.7117)*    (1.9276)*         (0.5340)    (0.5647)      (0.7550)     (0.1606)
black                 1.7491        0.3582       0.6459           0.3397      0.2338        0.4188       0.7495
                    (1.7698)      (1.8678)     (2.0700)         (0.5682)    (0.5923)      (0.7799)   (0.1768)**
hisp                  1.7620       -0.0623       0.0169          -0.2467     -0.5010       -0.2740       0.2155
                    (1.6841)      (1.8210)     (2.0131)         (0.5553)    (0.6063)      (0.7901)     (0.1689)
asian                -0.8649       -0.9258      -1.6524          -0.7525     -0.6987       -1.0400       0.2989
                    (1.1388)      (1.1535)     (1.3002)        (0.3611)*    (0.3667)     (0.4964)*   (0.1126)**
Chicago                            -3.5870      -3.9167                      -0.3204       -0.5408
                                  (1.9267)     (2.1508)                     (0.6088)      (0.8167)
Hunter                             -1.4116      -1.3880                       0.4883        0.6874
                                  (2.0773)     (2.3001)                     (0.7008)      (0.9171)
Penn                               -4.1112      -4.5066                      -0.6275       -0.5965
                                 (1.6526)*    (1.8442)*                     (0.5351)      (0.7167)

                      OLS          OLS          tobit            OLS          OLS          tobit         OLS
Constant             2.8597       6.4934       2.1786           1.7047       2.0768       0.0260       -0.1857
                    (2.2992)    (2.8164)*     (3.3257)        (0.7482)*    (0.9027)*     (1.3107)     (0.2214)
Observations           364         364           364             347          347           347          364
R-squared             0.12         0.14                          0.14         0.15
         Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.



                                                         38
           Table 8: IV Estimates of Hit and Current Sales Displacement
                      (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)           (7)          (8)
Sample               Hit           Hit         Hit           Hit        Current      Current      Current      Current
Depend. Var        Download     Download     Purchase     Purchase     Download     Download     Purchase     Purchase
Instrument          School       Individ.     School       Individ.     School       Individ.      School      Individ.
Current                                                                                           -0.8804      -1.4676
Downloads
                                                                                                  (0.4570)     (0.8502)
Hit Downloads                                 -0.5719      -0.2563
                                              (0.3334)     (0.4415)
Broadband Access                   3.9311                                              1.0707
                                  (2.0540)                                           (0.5222)*
male                  0.1042       0.4737      -2.9788      -3.0819       0.5737       0.9173      -0.2050       0.4658
                     (1.0355)     (1.3606)   (1.1299)**    (1.1891)*    (0.2475)*   (0.3465)**    (0.4551)      (1.0341)
Fan =2                3.3970       3.9291       5.8858       6.4379       0.6286       0.7874       0.4870       0.7147
                     (2.5165)     (3.3562)     (3.0582)    (3.1422)*     (0.6149)     (0.8373)    (0.9552)      (1.5463)
Fan =3                6.0806       7.5175       8.8921       6.8162       0.7307       0.9770       1.3940       2.3849
                   (2.1350)**   (2.7380)**   (3.1421)**     (3.9991)     (0.5251)     (0.7038)    (0.8494)      (1.4629)
Fan =4                5.8373       6.7521       9.8673       8.7015       0.8491       1.0916       2.5449       3.2605
                   (2.1814)**    (2.8182)*   (3.1280)**    (3.7107)*     (0.5368)     (0.7232)   (0.8912)**    (1.5214)*
Fan =5                4.8969       5.3952      12.4919       9.9086       0.8452       1.3516       3.1924       4.8208
                    (2.3410)*     (3.0554)   (3.0726)**   (3.4224)**     (0.5661)     (0.7707)   (0.9150)**   (1.7036)**
$25-50k               0.6323       1.1859       2.3412       3.5615       0.1678      -0.1327       0.6081      -0.0888
                     (1.6102)     (2.2458)     (1.7926)     (1.9947)     (0.3839)     (0.5638)    (0.5640)      (0.9854)
$50-100               1.3031       1.8318       2.2499       1.5951       0.5565       0.4007       0.7611       1.0134
                     (1.4543)     (1.9315)     (1.7400)     (1.9552)     (0.3627)     (0.5105)    (0.6282)      (1.0181)
$100-250              1.6783       0.9198       2.5392       0.1394       0.6131       0.4236       1.0042       0.9678
                     (1.5669)     (2.0122)     (1.9796)     (1.8480)     (0.3825)     (0.5225)    (0.6970)      (1.0653)
>$250                 0.9148       0.4349       4.1691       3.4247       0.6004       0.2875       1.1005       0.6888
                     (1.7415)     (2.2544)    (2.0549)*     (1.9585)     (0.4248)     (0.5968)    (0.7535)      (1.1256)
black                -0.4683       0.1327       1.0382       0.8998       0.6541       0.8319       0.6239       0.3569
                     (1.9010)     (2.5156)     (2.0723)     (2.1152)     (0.4455)     (0.6096)    (0.6679)      (1.2014)
hisp                  2.2792       4.3455       2.3844       4.9284       0.4618       0.9973      -0.1939       1.1861
                     (1.8495)     (2.6193)     (1.9655)     (2.5741)     (0.4568)     (0.6604)    (0.6278)      (1.2501)
asian                 3.4776       5.8701       1.3554       0.7168      -0.0192       0.1463      -0.7229      -0.9885
                   (1.1592)**   (1.5129)**     (1.8671)     (2.8829)     (0.2767)     (0.3935)    (0.4081)      (0.6960)
Chicago               0.0573                                              0.4089
                     (1.9611)                                            (0.4588)
Hunter               -1.3440                                              0.0841
                     (2.1131)                                            (0.5288)
Penn                  3.6365                                              1.0906
                    (1.6707)*                                          (0.3994)**
Constant             -4.1479     -6.7023       1.2116       1.7005       -1.0581     -1.4387       1.3955       1.1489
                     (2.8580)   (3.3334)*     (2.8147)     (2.9569)      (0.6787)    (0.8401)     (0.8686)     (1.3918)
Observations            364        231           364          231           347         219          347          219

           Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                          39
Table 9: Longitudinal Sales Displacement Es timates
(hit sample)
                           (1)                    (2)                 (3)
                     Purch's from yr.     Purch's from yr.    Purch's from yr.
                                                  all                 >5
Dwnld's from yr.          -0.0447              -0.0789             -0.1565
                         (0.0458)            (0.0334)*           (0.0656)*
d2000                      0.0527               0.0656              0.2061
                         (0.1138)             (0.1137)            (0.2113)
d2001                     -0.6141              -0.6110             -0.9055
                        (0.0995)**          (0.1131)**          (0.2096)**
d2002                     -1.1111              -1.1141             -2.0608
                        (0.1185)**          (0.1131)**          (0.2096)**
d2003                     -1.8747              -1.8987             -3.5251
                        (0.1291)**          (0.1154)**          (0.2135)**
Fan =2                     0.9301
                        (0.2558)**
Fan =3                     1.2497
                        (0.2035)**
Fan =4                     1.4370
                        (0.2221)**
Fan =5                     2.0663
                        (0.3374)**
$25-50k                    0.3723
                         (0.2932)
$50-100                    0.1326
                         (0.2475)
$100-250                   0.0702
                         (0.2776)
>$250                      0.3923
                         (0.2710)
black                      0.4463
                         (0.3307)
hisp                       0.4105
                         (0.3766)
asian                     -0.0662
                         (0.2273)
Constant                   0.8397             2.4469               4.4216
                        (0.2218)**          (0.0885)**           (0.1625)**
Observations                1820               1820                  820
R-squared                   0.14                0.22                 0.39
method                      OLS                 FE                   FE
Number of                                       364                  164
individuals

Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%.




                                                     40
Table 10: Relative Valuation of Downloaded CDs
a. Survey One – Ex Post Valuation (Hit and Current Samples)
                          (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                         Log          Log         Log          Log
                        value        value       value        value
                          hit      current         hit       current
Downloaded             -0.330       -0.390      -0.177       -0.238
                     (0.072)** (0.089)** (0.023)** (0.041)**
Constant                2.382        2.605       2.331        2.557
                     (0.037)** (0.038)** (0.011)** (0.018)**
Observations            4017         1011        4017         1011
R-squared                0.05         0.08        0.02         0.04
                        OLS          OLS           FE           FE
Number of                                         284          226
individuals
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%


b. Survey Two – Ex Ante and Ex Post Valuations (Hits Only)
                           (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)
                     Log Ex Ante           Log Ex Post          Log Ex Ante           Log Ex Post
                       Valuation            Valuation             Valuation            Valuation
Downloaded              -0.4623              -0.2654               -0.2857              -0.0857
                      (0.0822)**            (0.1043)*            (0.0283)**            (0.0511)
Constant                 2.7104               2.3879                2.6253               2.3013
                      (0.0348)**           (0.0765)**            (0.0175)**           (0.0317)**
Observations              1133                 1133                  1133                 1133
R-squared                 0.15                 0.02                  0.09                 0.00
                          OLS                  OLS                    FE                   FE
Number of                                                             93                   92
individuals
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                            41
Table 11: Ex Ante and Ex Post Valuations
                                                            (1)                  (2)
                                  mean               Ex Post Valuation        Ex Post –
                                                                              Ex Ante
                                                                              Valuation
Ex Ante Valuation                 $13.34                   0.8178
                                                         (0.0183)**
Ex Post Valuation                 $11.94
ex ante and ex post correlation   0.6389

Pleasantly surprised              16.4%                    4.2537
                                                         (0.4657)**
Grew on me                        16.5%                    4.7717
                                                         (0.4656)**
Familiar before I                 21.8%                    0.2707
bought
                                                          (0.4921)
Guessed right                     11.5%                    0.1277
                                                          (0.5110)
Disappointed from                 9.5%                    -5.5276
start
                                                         (0.5782)**
Grew tired of it                  31.7%                    -5.2951
                                                         (0.5028)**
Released in 99                                                                   -3.1906
                                                                               (0.7635)**
Released in 00                                                                   -1.7907
                                                                                (0.7534)*
Released in 01                                                                   -1.7723
                                                                                (0.7931)*
Released in 02                                                                   -0.0587
                                                                                 (0.8038)
Constant                                                   1.6733                 0.3375
                                                         (0.5214)**              (0.6831)
Observations                                                1209                   1209
R-squared                                                   0.74                   0.03
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                            42
Table 12: Album Depreciation for Major Artists
                                                       Familiar                       Got
                          adjusted Pleasantly Grew      before Guessed Disappointed tired of
artist                  depreciation surprised on me    got it  right   from start      it   N
RED HOT CHILI
PEPPERS                    31.3%     30.0%    43.3%    26.7%    10.0%     0.0%      13.3%   30
BEATLES, THE               26.2%     25.9%    22.2%    33.3%    0.0%      0.0%      22.2%   27
JONES, NORAH               17.4%     35.3%    58.8%    11.8%    5.9%      11.8%     11.8%   17
U2                          9.8%     18.8%    43.8%    18.8%    6.3%      6.3%      18.8%   16
LINKIN PARK                 9.8%     37.0%    14.8%    29.6%    7.4%      7.4%      14.8%   27
DION, CELINE                9.7%     18.8%    0.0%     25.0%    12.5%     12.5%     31.3%   16
COLDPLAY                    6.3%     25.0%    27.8%    27.8%    22.2%     0.0%      8.3%    36
2 PAC                       1.9%     10.7%    25.0%    21.4%    7.1%      0.0%      42.9%   28
EMINEM                      0.7%     22.9%    21.4%    21.4%    8.6%      0.0%      31.4%   70
SOUNDTRACK                  0.0%     28.3%    23.9%    19.6%    6.5%      6.5%      23.9%   45
DOORS, THE                 -1.2%     12.5%    12.5%    25.0%    12.5%     6.3%      37.5%   16
MATTHEWS, DAVE
BAND                       -5.2%     7.1%     19.0%    26.2%    14.3%     19.0%     26.2%   42
MOBY                       -6.2%     5.9%     5.9%     47.1%    5.9%      17.6%     17.6%   17
MAYER, JOHN                -8.7%     31.3%    25.0%    18.8%    6.3%      6.3%      25.0%   16
NELLY                     -17.2%     15.8%    21.1%    15.8%    5.3%      5.3%      31.6%   19
DESTINY'S CHILD           -20.2%     0.0%     6.7%     20.0%    20.0%     6.7%      46.7%   15
50 CENT                   -20.5%     17.4%    21.7%    17.4%    8.7%      0.0%      39.1%   23
'N SYNC                   -20.7%     4.8%     0.0%     4.8%     4.8%      14.3%     71.4%   21
AGUILERA, CHRISTINA       -21.6%     10.3%    0.0%     10.3%    13.8%     10.3%     55.2%   29
BLINK 182                 -23.0%     6.7%     13.3%    6.7%     6.7%      26.7%     46.7%   15
CAREY, MARIAH             -23.5%     0.0%     10.5%    26.3%    5.3%      31.6%     26.3%   19
BACKSTREET BOYS           -24.5%     0.0%     0.0%     17.6%    5.9%      11.8%     64.7%   17
DMX                       -24.8%     10.5%    5.3%     21.1%    10.5%     10.5%     52.6%   19
SPEARS, BRITNEY           -28.3%     0.0%     3.4%     6.9%     3.4%      3.4%      82.8%   29
JA RULE                   -48.4%     6.7%     0.0%     26.7%    0.0%      26.7%     40.0%   15
JAY-Z                     -52.4%     17.4%    0.0%     8.7%     17.4%     26.1%     34.8%   23
VA RIOUS                  -86.9%     10.0%    0.0%     5.0%     5.0%      10.0%     45.0%   15

                                                                                            618
Note: “depreciation” is log(adjusted ex post value/ex ante value). Artists appear in this
table if their albums appear 15+ times in the sample for survey 2.




                                             43
Table 13: Revenue and Welfare with and without Downloading
                                                                                   ex post
                                                           ex ante     ex post    valuation
                                        N         price   valuation   valuation   (adjusted)


did buy                                617        15       15.91       13.34       14.94

Downloaded, but:
 would buy if downloading
 were not feasible                     154        15       17.82       16.72       17.91

 would not buy                         438        Na       8.15        8.28         9.48


                                      No Downloading         Downloading    Change
                                      total per capita     total per capita Total per capita
Quantity sold                          771     8.38         617     6.71     -154   -1.67
Quantity Downloaded                     0        0          592     6.43      592
Quantity Consumed                      771     8.38        1209    13.41      438    4.76

Revenue                              $11,565     $126     $9,255       $101       -$2,310      -$25.1

CS and DWL (ex post valuations)
  Buyer CS                            $411       $4.47     -$37       -$0.40       -$448       -$4.87
  Downloader CS                        $0         $0      $6,910       $75.1      $6,910        $75.1
 CS total                             $411       $4.47    $6,873       $74.7      $6,462        $70.2
 DWL*                                $4,152      $45.1      $0          $0        -$4152       -$45.1

CS and DWL (ex ante valuations)
  Buyer CS                            $996       $10.82    $561        $6.10       -$434       -$4.72
  Downloader CS                        $0         $0.00   $6,314       $68.6       $6,314       $68.6
 CS total                             $996       $10.82   $6,875       $74.7       $5,880       $63.9
 DWL                                 $3,570      $38.80     $0         $0.00      -$3,570      -$38.8

Notes: Based on 92 individuals in survey 2 sample. We assume that the price of albums
is $15. Welfare calculations based on ex post valuation adjusted for depreciation. We
assume that a downloaded album would have been purchased if the consumer’s ex ante
valuation ≥ $15.
* DWL in this table excludes foregone welfare from albums that consumers are unwilling
to either purchase or download. See table 1 and the surrounding text.




                                            44
Figure 1: Shipments, 1993-2003

                                 CD Shipments

                 1000
                  900
   Units (mil)




                  800
                  700                           total
                  600                           certifications
                  500
                  400
                  300
                           3

                           4

                           5

                           6

                           7

                           8

                           9

                           0

                           1

                           2

                           3
                        199

                        199

                        199

                        199

                        199

                        199

                        199

                        200

                        200

                        200

                        200
                                   year




                                     45
Figure 2: Effects of Downloading on Welfare

1. single-price monopoly - the market before downloading




2. downloaders are low- valuation demanders




3. downloaders are high- valuation demanders




                                          46
Figure 3: Ex Ante Valuation (Demand) and Ex Post Valuation (Welfare)

                    50
Ex Ante Valuation




                    0
                         1                                             1215
                                           Ex Ante Rank


                    50
Ex Post Valuation




                     0
                         1                                              1210
                                              Ex Post Rank




                                         47
Figure 4: The Demand Curve and Ex Post Valuation
                      Ex Ante Valuation                             Ex Post Valuation

       50




        0
                1                                                                            1219
                                                 Ex Ante Rank
                    Ex Post Valuation                         Ex Ante Valuation

       50




        0
            0                                                                           50
                                          Ex Ante Valuation




                                            48
