NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TIEBOUT SORTING, SOCIAL MULTIPLIERS
AND THE DEMAND FOR SCHOOL QUALITY
Patrick Bayer
Fernando Ferreira
Robert McMillan
Working Paper 10871
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10871
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2004

We are grateful to Pat Bajari, Steve Berry, Sandra Black, David Card, Ken Chay, Dennis Epple, Caroline
Hoxby, Brian Jacob, David Lee, Tom Nechyba, Jesse Rothstein, Kim Rueben, Holger Sieg, Doug Staiger,
and Chris Timmins for valuable discussions. We also thank Pedro Cerdan and Jackie Chou for help in
assembling the data. This research was conducted at the California Census Research Data Center: our thanks
to the CCRDC, and to Ritch Milby in particular. Financial support for this project provided by the NSF under
grant SES-0137289, the Public Policy Institute of California, SSHRC Canada, and CAPES – Brazil is
gratefully acknowledged. Correspondence may be sent to: Patrick Bayer, 37 Hillhouse Avenue, Dept. of
Economics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06511, patrick.bayer@yale.edu, (203) 432-6292. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2004 by Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Tiebout Sorting, Social Multipliers and the Demand for School Quality
Patrick Bayer, Fernando Vendramel Ferreira, and Robert McMillan
NBER Working Paper No. 10871
October 2004
JEL No. I20, H41, R21
ABSTRACT
In many theoretical public finance models, school quality plays a central role as a determinant of
household location choices and in turn, of neighborhood stratification. In contrast, the recent
empirical literature has almost universally concluded that the direct effect of school quality on
housing demand is weak, a conclusion that is robust across a variety of research designs. Using an
equilibrium model of residential sorting, this paper closes the gap between these literatures,
providing clear evidence that the full effect of school quality on residential sorting is significantly
larger than the direct effect – four times as great for education stratification, twice for income
stratification. This is due to a strong social multiplier associated with heterogeneous preferences
for peers and neighbors; initial changes in school quality set in motion a process of re-sorting on
the basis of neighborhood characteristics that reinforces itself, giving rise to substantially larger
stratification effects.
Patrick Bayer
Department of Economics
Yale University
Box 208264
New Haven, CT 06520-8264
and NBER
patrick.bayer@yale.edu
Fernando Vendramel Ferreira
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1461 Steinberg Hall-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
fferreir@wharton.upenn.edu
Robert McMillan
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7 Canada
mcmillan@chass.utoronto.ca

1

INTRODUCTION
The notion that local public goods influence household location decisions has

been a key idea in local public finance at least since Tiebout’s seminal 1956 paper.
According to Tiebout, variation in packages of local public goods leads households to
“vote with their feet,” providing a primary driving force behind household sorting across
jurisdictions and neighborhood socioeconomic stratification. This idea has been central
to a more recent theoretical literature examining the effects of education policy in the
presence of household sorting.1 In that literature, changes in school quality often have
striking effects on neighborhood stratification as households resort across neighborhoods
in response. Further, equilibrium models of residential sorting prove particularly useful
in tracing many complex and otherwise difficult-to-predict effects of policy:2 effects
appear in general equilibrium that are often not apparent from a partial equilibrium
perspective.3
At the same time, a growing recent empirical literature has almost universally
concluded that the effect of school quality on the demand for schools and their
corresponding neighborhoods is quite small. Strikingly, this conclusion is robust across a
wide variety of research designs including: (i) examining differences in housing prices
along school assignment boundaries or as school assignments are changed over time;4 (ii)

1

Important examples include work by Benabou (1993, 1996), Fernandez and Rogerson (1996, 1998), and
Nechyba (1999, 2000). Foundational papers by Epple, Filimon and Romer (1984, 1993) focus on
conditions needed to prove existence of equilibrium in multi-community models that incorporate voting.
2
Influential research by Epple and Romano (1998) uses an equilibrium approach to study education market
equilibria that involve households choosing between public and private schools. While the housing market
is abstracted from, this work has proved useful in an empirical context, generating predictions that are
largely supported by the data - see Epple, Figlio and Romano (2004).
3
The work of Fernandez and Rogerson (1996) and Nechyba (2000) graphically demonstrates the
importance of accounting for household mobility when assessing the effects of education policy.
4
Black (1999) pioneered the use of school assignment boundary fixed effects, estimating that a schoollevel standard deviation in average test score is associated with approximately a 2 percent increase in house

1

estimating the heterogeneity in willingness to pay for school quality using a model of
residential sorting;5 (iii) examining the academic performance of winners versus losers
following randomized school choice lotteries;6 and (iv) examining how student
performance varies with measures of school district enrollment concentration across
metropolitan areas.7 Thus taken at face value, there appears to be a gap between the
central conclusion of the recent empirical literature and the emphasis placed on schoolrelated sorting in the long theoretical tradition in local public finance.
This gap may not be as large as it appears at first glance. The focus of most of the
empirical papers has been to isolate the direct effect of school quality on demand by
controlling carefully for the correlation of school quality with the characteristics of peers
and neighbors as well as other unobserved neighborhood attributes. In so doing, these
same studies have also made it clear that households place a high value directly on the
characteristics of peers and neighbors.8 The existence of such strong preferences for
peers and neighbors, however, raises the possibility that a change in school quality may
also have a sizeable indirect effect on demand as households move in response to any
changes in peer and neighbor characteristics induced by the initial change in school
quality. The full effect of a change in school quality on demand will be larger than the

value. Kane, Staiger, and Riegg (2004) report almost an identical result using boundary fixed effects. This
latter paper also reports results based on changes in school assignment, although these are less conclusive.
5
Using the methodology presented in this paper, Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2003) incorporate school
district boundary fixed effects in estimating a model of residential sorting, returning an estimated mean
marginal willingness to pay for a standard deviation increase in average test score of approximately 2
percent of house value; they also find evidence of heterogeneity around this mean, as well as strong
preferences relating to the characteristics of neighbors.
6
Cullen, Jacob, and Levitt (2003) find little evidence that winners of randomized lotteries perform better in
the schools that they subsequently select than losers who do not have the same degree of choice.
7
Rothstein (2003) finds little evidence that sorting is related to school rather than peer characteristics.
8
For example, in most of the empirical studies just referenced, estimates of the demand for school quality
fall substantially when the authors control carefully for the sociodemographic characteristics of peers or
neighbors. This suggests that much of what initially appears to be evidence of strong demand for school
quality is more properly attributed to the demand for the characteristics of peers or neighbors.

2

direct effect identified in the literature when (i) there is considerable heterogeneity in the
demand for school quality, and (ii) households have strong preferences for the
characteristics of their neighbors, leading the initial sorting to be reinforced.
Given the possibility of a strong social multiplier of this type, the goal of this
paper is to re-examine estimates of the demand for school quality through the lens of an
equilibrium model of residential sorting. In particular, we present estimates of the effect
of school-related sorting on neighborhood stratification by income and education,
comparing a partial equilibrium measure that accounts for only the direct effect of school
quality on stratification with a general equilibrium measure that also permits additional
resorting as neighbors change. This exercise also informs our understanding of the nature
of demand in the education marketplace more generally, providing for example a clear
indication of the strength of market forces. If the estimated demand for school quality
were as inelastic as the direct effects reported in the empirical literature suggest, one
would certainly conclude that Tiebout-type sorting provides at most limited competitive
pressure for schools, as a sizeable improvement in quality on the part of a school would
have only a small effect on its demand. If the general equilibrium impact of a change in
school quality on sorting is substantially larger than this direct effect, however, the
competitive pressure induced by Tiebout-type sorting would be greater as well.9
To estimate the importance of school-related sorting on residential stratification,
we follow the methodology developed in Bayer, Ferreira and McMillan (2003).10 In
particular, we estimate a model of residential sorting using detailed Census data on a
9

Hoxby (2000) indicates that Tiebout sorting has a substantial impact on the competitiveness of the
education marketplace, with metropolitan areas that afford more Tiebout choice having more productive
public schools.

3

large (1-in-7) sample of households in the San Francisco Bay Area in 1990.11 These data,
available on a restricted basis at Census Research Data Centers throughout the country,
specify the Census block in which each household lives, thereby characterizing each
household’s residential location very precisely both in terms of the characteristics of its
neighbors and, through data from outside sources, other neighborhood attributes
including information related to schools and school assignment.
The availability of individual-level data linked to such precise geographic
indicators makes it possible to estimate a very flexible model of residential sorting,12 both
in terms of the structure of the model itself and in the way we use the data to estimate it.
Our empirical specification allows household location decisions to be influenced by a
large number of factors – school quality, consumption, housing quality and quantity,
fixed neighborhood attributes, endogenous characteristics of neighbors, distance to work
– and allows the demand for each of these factors to be affected by a household’s own
characteristics, including education, income, race, and family structure. The data also
make it possible to incorporate the empirical strategy of examining variation along school
district boundaries extending the work of Black (1999); as we show below, this permits
the estimation of the full set of the model’s parameters in a manner that deals with an
important and pervasive endogeneity problem associated with the correlation of both
10

This previous paper sets out the model and estimation procedure in detail, describing, for example, the
relationship between the identification of the broader sorting model used here and the hedonic price
regressions commonly estimated in this literature.
11
Given California’s finance system, in which local jurisdictions have almost no control over the level of
local taxation or spending on public goods including schools, this should provide a lower bound on the
importance of school-related sorting in other states.
12
A number of recent papers have estimated equilibrium sorting models. The first paper in this new
empirical literature, by Epple and Sieg (1999), develops an estimator for the sorting model of Epple,
Filimon and Romer (1984, 1993), used for example by Sieg et al. (2004) to explore the general equilibrium
impacts of air quality improvements in the Los Angeles Basin. See Ferreyra (2003) and Walsh (2004),
Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2004b) and Timmins (2003) for other applications using equilibrium sorting
models.

4

school quality and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics with unobserved
neighborhood characteristics.
In line with other estimates in the literature, our estimate of the mean marginal
willingness to pay for school quality is reasonably small, on the order of 2 percent of
house value for a one standard deviation increase in school quality. An important feature
of our approach is that it also permits the recovery of a broad set of preference parameters
that are heterogeneous across different types of household, revealing that households
have strong and very heterogeneous preferences for the characteristics of their neighbors.
When combined with the underlying heterogeneity in the demand for school quality,
these strong social interactions in the location decision are exactly the sort of preferences
under which the general equilibrium effect of an exogenous change in school quality on
neighborhood stratification can be substantially greater than the partial equilibrium effect.
Given these parameter estimates, the primary economic analysis of the paper
quantifies the impact of school-related sorting on neighborhood stratification. Here, we
use an intuitive simulation approach, solving for a new equilibrium in a counterfactual
environment that eliminates household preferences for school quality from the location
decision. This provides a characterization of the way the metropolitan area would look in
a world in which sorting on the basis of public school quality played no role whatsoever.
Our general equilibrium results show that school quality is an important driving force
behind stratification: if school quality were eliminated as a determinant of household
locations, stratification would decline by over 30 percent on the basis of education and by
around 25 percent on the basis of income. These findings contrast with the partial
equilibrium predictions of the model that consider only the direct effect of eliminating

5

school quality from the location decision, not allowing the subsequent changes in
neighborhood sociodemographic compositions to feed back into household utility
functions. Such partial equilibrium predictions give rise to only modest reductions in
education and income stratification – of the order of 8-10 percent. Taken together, these
findings are supportive of the earlier applied theory literature: changes in school quality
can be expected to have significant effects on neighborhood stratification in equilibrium,
effects that are much larger than the estimated direct effects of demand for school quality
might suggest.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: a model of residential sorting is
presented in the next section. Section 3 discusses the estimation procedure. Section 4
describes the restricted-access Census micro data, Section 5 presents estimation results,
and Section 6 presents the general equilibrium simulation results. Section 7 concludes.

2 A MODEL OF RESIDENTIAL SORTING
This section describes an equilibrium model of a self-contained urban housing
market in which households sort themselves among the set of available housing types and
locations.13 The model consists of two key elements: the household residential location
decision problem and a market-clearing condition. While it has a simple structure, the
model allows households to have heterogeneous preferences defined over housing and
neighborhood attributes in a very flexible way; it also allows for housing prices and
neighborhood sociodemographic compositions to be determined in equilibrium.

13

More details concerning the model described here can be found in Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2003)
and Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2004a).

6

The Residential Location Decision. We model the residential location decision of each
household as a discrete choice of a single residence from a set of house types available in
the market. The utility function specification is based on the random utility model
developed in McFadden (1973, 1978) and the specification of Berry, Levinsohn, and
Pakes (1995), which includes choice-specific unobservable characteristics.

Let Xh

represent the observable characteristics of housing choice h, including characteristics of
the house itself (e.g., size, age, and type), its tenure status (rented vs. owned), and the
characteristics of its neighborhood (e.g., school, crime, land use, and topography). We
use the notation capital letter Zh to represent the average sociodemographic
characteristics of the corresponding neighborhood, writing it separately from the other
housing and neighborhood attributes to make explicit the fact that these characteristics
are determined in equilibrium. Let ph denote the price of housing choice h and, finally,
let dhi denote the distance from residence h to the primary work location of household i.
Each household chooses its residence h to maximize its indirect utility function Vhi:

(1)

Max Vhi = α iX X h + α Zi Z h − α ip p h − α di d hi + ξ h + ε hi .
(h)

The error structure of the indirect utility is divided into a correlated component associated
with each housing choice that is valued the same by all households, ξh, and an individualspecific term, εih. A useful interpretation of ξh is that it captures the unobserved quality
of each housing choice, including any unobserved quality associated with its
neighborhood.

7

Each household’s valuation of choice characteristics is allowed to vary with its
own characteristics, zi, including education, income, race, employment status, and
household composition.

Specifically, each parameter associated with housing and

neighborhood characteristics and price, αij, for j ∈ {X, Z, d, p}, varies with a household’s
own characteristics according to:

R

(2)

α ij = α 0 j + ∑ α rj z ri ,
r =1

with equation (2) describing household i’s preference for choice characteristic j.
This specification of the utility function gives rise to a horizontal model of sorting
in which households have preferences defined distinctly over each choice characteristic
including both school quality and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics.14 This
contrasts with vertical models, which restrict households to have preferences over a
single locational index, thereby constraining households to have the same preference
ordering across locations.15

The additional flexibility of the horizontal model is

especially relevant for this paper as it is the magnitude of the heterogeneity in preferences

14

The horizontal specification also captures the geography of the urban housing market very naturally,
allowing households to have preferences over neighborhoods depending on the distance from their
employment locations. This gives rise to variation in the aggregate demand for housing in various
neighborhoods throughout the metro area, thereby increasing equilibrium housing prices in neighborhoods
near employment centers.
15
It is important to point out that this flexible feature of our model is made possible because we abstract
from issues related to local politics. As Epple, Filimon, and Romer (1993) note, incorporating local politics
into models of residential sorting requires restrictions to be placed on preferences in order to guarantee the
existence of an equilibrium. Important recent papers by Epple and Sieg (1999) and Epple, Romer and Sieg
(2001) estimate equilibrium models that include voting over the level of public goods, restricting
households to have shared rankings over a single public goods index. We view our model as having a
comparative rather than absolute advantage over the papers in this line of the literature, better suited for an
institutional setting such as that which holds in Californian, where Proposition 13 leaves almost no
discretion over property tax rates or the level of public goods spending at the local level.

8

for neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics that will determine the extent to
which the initial stratification induced by the variation in school quality across the
metropolitan area is reinforced by additional sorting due to preferences for one’s
neighbors.

Characterizing the Housing Market. As with all models in this literature, the existence
of a sorting equilibrium is much easier to establish if the individual residential location
decision problem is smoothed in some way. To this end, we assume that the housing
market can be fully characterized by a set of housing types that is a subset of the full set
of available houses, letting the supply of housing of type h be given by Sh. We also
assume that each household observed in the sample represents a continuum of households
with the same observable characteristics, with the distribution of idiosyncratic tastes εih
mapping into a set of choice probabilities that characterize the distribution of housing
choices that would result for the continuum of households with a given set of observed
characteristics.16
Given the household’s problem described in equations (1)-(2), household i
chooses housing type h if the utility that it receives from this choice exceeds the utility
that it receives from all other possible house choices - that is, when

(3)

16

Vhi > Vki

⇒ Whi + ε hi > Wki + ε ki

⇒ ε hi − ε ki > Wki − Whi

∀ k≠h

For expositional ease and without loss of generality, let the measure of this continuum be one.

9

where Wih includes all of the non-idiosyncratic components of the utility function Vih. As
the inequalities in (3) imply, the probability that a household chooses any particular
choice depends in general on the characteristics of the full set of possible house types.
Thus the probability Pih that household i chooses housing type h can be written as a
function of the full vectors of housing and neighborhood characteristics (both observed
and unobserved) and prices {X, Z, p, ξ}:17

(4)

Phi = f h ( z i , Z, X, p, ξ )

as well as the household’s own characteristics zi.
Aggregating the probabilities in equation (4) over all observed households yields
the predicted demand for each housing type h, Dh:

(5)

Dh =

∑P

i
h

.

i

In order for the housing market to clear, the demand for houses of type h must equal the
supply of such houses and so:

(6)

Dh = S h , ∀ h ⇒

∑P

i
h

= Sh

∀h.

i

17

For the purposes of characterizing the equilibrium properties of the model, we include an individual’s
employment location in zi and the residential location in Xh.

10

Given the decentralized nature of the housing market, prices are assumed to adjust in
order to clear the market. The implications of the market clearing condition defined in
equation (6) for prices are very standard, with excess demand for a housing type causing
price to be bid up and excess supply leading to a fall in price. Given the indirect utility
function defined in (1) and a fixed set of housing and neighborhood attributes, Bayer,
McMillan, and Rueben (2004a) show that a unique set of prices (up to a scale) clears the
market.
When some neighborhood attributes are endogenously determined by the sorting
process itself, we define a sorting equilibrium as a set of residential location decisions
and a vector of housing prices such that the housing market clears and each household
makes its optimal location decision given the location decisions of all other households.
In equilibrium, the vector of neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics along with
the corresponding vector of market clearing prices must give rise to choice probabilities
in equation (4) that aggregate back up to the same vector of neighborhood
sociodemographics.18 Whether this model gives rise to multiple equilibria depends on
the distributions of preferences and available housing choices as well as the utility
parameters. In general, it is impossible to establish that the equilibrium is unique a
priori.

However, estimation of the model does not require the computation of an

equilibrium nor uniqueness more generally, as we describe in the next section. We
discuss the issue of uniqueness further in the context of the counterfactual simulations in
Section 6 below.

18

Bayer, McMillan, and Rueben (2004a) establish the existence of a sorting equilibrium as long as (i) the
indirect utility function shown in equation (1) is decreasing in housing prices for all households; (ii)
indirect utility is a continuous function of neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics; and (iii) ε is
drawn from a continuous density function.

11

3 ESTIMATION
Estimation of the model follows a two-stage procedure closely related to that
developed in Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). This section outlines the estimation
procedure; a rigorous presentation is contained in Bayer, Ferreira, and McMillan (2003)
and included in a technical appendix. It is helpful in describing the estimation procedure
to first introduce some notation. In particular, rewrite the indirect utility function as:

(7)

Vhi = δ h + λih + ε hi

where
(8)

δ h = α 0 X X h + α 0Z Z h − α 0 p ph + ξ h

and
(9)

⎛

K

⎞

⎛

⎠

⎝ k =1

K

⎞

⎛

⎠

⎝ k =1

K

⎞

⎛

⎠

⎝ k =1

K

⎞

λih = ⎜⎜ ∑ α kX z ki ⎟⎟ X h + ⎜⎜ ∑ α kZ z ki ⎟⎟ Z h − ⎜⎜ ∑ α kp z ki ⎟⎟ p h − ⎜⎜ ∑ α kd z ki ⎟⎟d h .
⎝ k =1

⎠

In equation (8), δh captures the portion of utility provided by housing type h that is
common to all households, and in (9), k indexes household characteristics. When the
household characteristics included in the model are constructed to have mean zero, δh is
the mean indirect utility provided by housing choice h. The unobservable component of

δh, ξh, captures the portion of unobserved preferences for housing choice h that is
correlated across households, while εhi represents unobserved preferences over and above
this shared component.

12

The first step of the estimation procedure is equivalent to a Maximum Likelihood
estimator applied to the individual location decisions taking prices and neighborhood
sociodemographic compositions as given,19 returning estimates of the heterogeneous
parameters in λ and mean indirect utilities, δh.

This estimator is based simply on

maximizing the probability that the model correctly matches each household observed in
the sample with its chosen house type.

In particular, for any combination of the

heterogeneous parameters in λ and mean indirect utilities, δh, the model predicts the
probability that each household i chooses house type h. We assume that εhi is drawn from
the extreme value distribution, in which case this probability can be written:

(10)

Phi =

exp(δ h + λˆih )

∑ exp(δ

k

+ λˆik )

k

Maximizing the probability that each household makes its correct housing choice gives
rise to the following quasi-log-likelihood function:

(11)

~
l=

∑∑ I
i

i
h

ln( Phi )

h

19

Formally, the validity of this first stage procedure requires the assumption that the observed location
decisions are individually optimal, given the collective choices made by other households and the vector of
market-clearing prices and that households are sufficiently small such that they do not interact strategically
with respect to particular draws on ε. This ensures that no household’s particular idiosyncratic preferences
affect the equilibrium and the vector of idiosyncratic preferences ε is uncorrelated with the prices and
neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics that arise in any equilibrium. For more discussion, see the
Technical Appendix.

13

where Iih is an indicator variable that equals 1 if household i chooses house type h in the
data and 0 otherwise. The first stage of the estimation procedure consists of searching
~

over the parameters in λ and the vector of mean indirect utilities to maximize l . Notice
that the quasi-likelihood function developed here is based solely on the notion that each
household’s residential location is optimal given the set of observed prices and the
location decisions of other households.

The Endogeneity of School Quality and Neighborhood Sociodemographic
Composition. Having estimated the vector of mean indirect utilities in the first stage of
the estimation, the second stage of the estimation involves decomposing δ into
observable and unobservable components according to the regression equation (8).20 In
estimating equation (8), important endogeneity problems need to be confronted. To the
extent that house prices partly capture house and neighborhood quality unobserved to the
econometrician, so the price variable will be endogenous. Estimation via least squares
will thus lead to price coefficients biased towards zero, producing misleading
willingness-to-pay estimates for a whole range of choice characteristics. This issue arises
in the context of any differentiated products demand estimation and we describe the
construction of an instrument for price in the Technical Appendix.
A second identification issue concerns the correlation of neighborhood
sociodemographic characteristics Z and school quality with unobserved housing and
neighborhood quality, ξh.

To properly estimate preferences in the face of this

endogeneity problem, we adapt a technique previously developed by Black (1999).

14

Black’s strategy makes use of a sample of houses near school attendance zone
boundaries, estimating a hedonic price regression that includes boundary fixed effects.
Intuitively, the idea is to compare houses in the same local neighborhood but on opposite
sides of the boundary, exploiting the discontinuity in the right to attend a given school.
There are, however, good reasons to think that households will sort with respect
to such boundaries. Thus, while boundary fixed effects are likely to do a good job of
controlling for differences in unobserved fixed factors, neighborhood sociodemographics
are likely to vary discontinuously at the boundary. In this way, the use of boundary fixed
effects isolates variation in both school quality and neighborhood sociodemographics in a
small region in which unobserved fixed features, (e.g., access to the transportation
network) are likely to vary only slightly, thereby providing an appealing way to account
for the correlation of both school quality and neighborhood sociodemographics with
unobservable neighborhood quality.
We incorporate school district boundary fixed effects when estimating equation
(11). In particular, we create a series of indicator variables for each Census block that
equal one if the block is within a given distance of each unique school district boundary
in the metropolitan area (e.g., Palo Alto-Menlo Park).21 We show the variation in school
quality and neighborhood sociodemographics at school district boundaries in the next
section after first describing the basic features of the dataset.

20

Notice that the set of observed residential choices provides no information that distinguishes the
components of δ. That is, however δ is broken into components, the effect on the probabilities shown in
equation (10) is identical.
21
A number of empirical issues arise in incorporating school district boundary fixed effects into our
analysis. A central feature of local governance in California helps to eliminate some of the problems that
naturally arise with the use of school district boundaries, as Proposition 13 ensures that the vast majority of
school districts within California are subject to a uniform effective property tax rate of one percent.
Concerning the width of the boundaries, we experimented with a variety of distances and report the results
for 0.25 miles, as these were more precise due to the larger sample size.

15

4

DATA
The analysis conducted in this paper is facilitated by access to restricted Census

microdata for 1990.

These restricted Census data provide the detailed individual,

household, and housing variables found in the public-use version of the Census, but also
include information on the location of individual residences and workplaces at a very
disaggregate level. In particular, while the public-use data specify the PUMA (a Census
region with approximately 100,000 individuals) in which a household lives, the restricted
data specify the Census block (a Census region with approximately 100 individuals),
thereby identifying the local neighborhood that each individual inhabits and the
characteristics of each neighborhood far more accurately than has been previously
possible with such a large-scale data set.
We use data from six contiguous counties in the San Francisco Bay Area:
Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin, San Mateo, San Francisco, and Santa Clara. We focus on
this area for a number of reasons. First, this geographic area is reasonably self-contained,
and is sizeable along a number of dimensions, including over 1,100 Census tracts, and
almost 39,500 Census blocks, the smallest unit of aggregation in the data. The sample
consists of 242,100 households. More importantly, the use of data from California makes
it reasonable to use school district rather than school attendance zone boundaries in the
analysis. In particular, Proposition 13 ensures that local jurisdictions have almost no
discretion over property tax rates or the level of public good spending including school
spending. In this way, unlike almost anywhere else in the country, one would not expect
much variation in property values across school district boundaries to arise due to

16

differential property tax rates in California. This same feature the public finance system
may also diminish the overall strength of Tiebout-type sorting in California, as
households are not free to select different tax rates and local public goods packages in
each jurisdiction. For this reason we expect our analysis to generally provide a lower
bound on the importance of school-related sorting relative to other states.
The Census provides a wealth of data on the individuals in the sample – race, age,
educational attainment, income from various sources, household size and structure,
occupation, and employment location. In addition, it provides a variety of housing
characteristics: whether the unit is owned or rented, the corresponding rent or ownerreported value,22 number of rooms, number of bedrooms, type of structure, and the age of
the building.

We use these housing characteristics directly, and also construct

neighborhood variables, such as neighborhood racial, education and income distributions,
based on the households within the same Census block group (a Census region containing
approximately 500 housing units). We merge additional data describing local conditions
with each house record, constructing variables related to crime rates, land use, local
schools, topography, and urban density.

For each of these measures, a detailed

description of the process by which the original data were assigned to each house is
provided in a Data Appendix.

The list of the principal housing and neighborhood

variables used in the analysis, along with means and standard deviations, is given in the
first two columns of Table 1.

22

As described in the Data Appendix, we construct a single price vector for all houses, whether rented or
owned. Because the implied relationship between house values and current rents depends on expectations
about the growth rate of future rents in the market, we estimate a series of hedonic price regressions for
each of over 40 sub-regions of the Bay Area housing market. These regressions return an estimate of the

17

School Assignment and School Quality. While we have an exact assignment of Census
blocks to school districts, in the absence of comprehensive information about withindistrict school attendance areas, we employ the following approach for linking each
Census block to a school: For a given Census block, we calculate the distance to each
school in its district. We then first assign the Census block to the closest school within its
district.

Using this closest school assignment, we can then calculate a predicted

enrollment for each school (calculated by summing over the school-aged children in each
Census block assigned to a school) and compare this measure to the actual enrollment of
the school. To correct discrepancies in predicted versus actual enrollment, we then use
an intuitive procedure to adjust the assignment of Census blocks to schools so as to
ensure that predicted enrollments equal their actual counterparts in each school in each
district. We describe this procedure in detail in the Data Appendix; the results are not
sensitive to this adjustment.
As our measure of school quality, we use the average test score for each school,
averaged over two years.

Averaging helps to reduce any year-to-year noise in the

measure. When variables that characterize the sociodemographic composition of the
school or surrounding neighborhood are included in the analysis, the estimated
coefficient on average test score picks up what households are willing to pay for an
improvement in average student performance at a school holding the sociodemographic
composition constant. While the average test score is an imperfect measure of school
quality, it has the advantage of being easily observed by both parents and researchers and

ratio of house values to rents for each of these sub-regions and we use the average of these ratios for the
Bay Area, 264.1, to convert monthly rent to house value for the purposes of reporting results at the mean.

18

consequently has been used in most analyses that attempt to measure demand for school
quality.

Boundaries. Table 1 displays descriptive statistics for various samples related to the
boundaries. The first two columns report means and standard deviations for the full
sample while the third column reports means for the sample of houses within 0.25 miles
of a school district boundary.23 Comparing the first column to the third column of the
table, it is immediately obvious that the houses near school district boundaries are not
fully representative of those in the Bay Area as a whole. To address this problem, we
create sample weights for the houses near the boundary.24 Column 7 of Table 1 shows
the resulting weighted means, indicating that using these weights makes the sample near
the boundary much more representative of the full sample.
The fourth and fifth columns report means for houses within 0.25 miles of a
boundary, comparing houses on the high versus low average test score side of the each
boundary; the sixth column reports t-tests for the difference in means. Comparing these
differences reveals that houses on the high side cost $53 more per month and are assigned
to schools with test scores that are 43-point higher on average.25 Moreover, houses on
the high quality side of the boundary are much more likely to be inhabited by white
households and households with more education and income. These types of across-

23

We experimented with a variety of distances and report the results for 0.25 miles, as these were more
precise due to the larger sample size.
24
The following procedure is used: we first regress a dummy variable indicating whether a house is in a
boundary region on the vector of housing and neighborhood attributes using a logistic regression. Fitted
values from this regression provide an estimate of the likelihood that a house is in the boundary region
given its attributes. We use the inverse of this fitted value as a sample weight in subsequent regression
analysis conducted on the sample of houses near the boundary.
25
As described in the Data Appendix, we construct a single monthly price vector for all houses, whether
rented or owned.

19

boundary differences in sociodemographic composition are what one would expect if
households sort on the basis of preferences for school quality. While far less significant,
other housing characteristics do vary across the boundaries as well. Consequently, we
expect the use of boundary fixed effects to control for much of the variation in
unobserved housing and neighborhood quality, thereby giving rise to more accurate
estimates of preferences for neighborhood sociodemographics and school quality.26

5 PARAMETER ESTIMATES
Estimation of the full model proceeds in two stages. The first stage recovers
interaction parameters and a vector of mean indirect utilities; the second stage returns the
components of mean indirect utility. To give the reader a sense of the interplay between
the estimates of the demand for school quality and sociodemographic characteristics of
neighbors, we report results for two main specifications, which respectively exclude and
include variables that characterize the racial composition, average educational attainment,
and average income of the neighborhood (Census block group). To make the discussion
of these estimates more transparent, we transform the estimates so that they can be
described in terms of marginal willingness-to-pay measures (MWTP), reporting these
estimates in Tables 2-4.
Table 2 reports the implied measures of the mean MWTP for school average test
scores and other selected housing and neighborhood attributes for six specifications of the

26

In terms of the estimates related to neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics, the key point about
using school district boundary fixed effects rather than Census tract fixed effects is that in the boundary
case we have a clear sense of what fundamentally leads to the sorting of households across neighborhoods
within the region upon which the fixed effect is based. Because we control directly for that cause of the
sorting - schooling in this case - we are less concerned that the variation in sorting is related to variation in
unobservables within the region upon which the fixed effect is based.

20

mean indirect utility regression.27 Results are reported for the two main specifications,
which exclude and include neighborhood sociodemographic variables, respectively. For
each of these main specifications, results are reported for the full sample and for a sample
of houses within 0.25 miles of school district boundaries, with and without including
boundary fixed effects. In all cases, when the sample of houses is restricted to those
within 0.25 miles of a boundary, sample weights (as described in Section 4) are used in
order to make this sample as close to representative of the full sample as possible.
Comparing columns 1 and 2 or columns 4 and 5, it is clear that results are very similar
whether the full sample or the weighted sub-sample of houses near a school district
boundary is used.
The first three columns of Table 2 report results for specifications that exclude
neighborhood sociodemographics. In this case, the estimated mean MWTP for a one
standard deviation increase in school average test score declines from $123 to $82 in
monthly rent ($21,500 in house value) when boundary fixed effects are included in the
analysis. The final three columns report results for analogous specifications that include
neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics.

The coefficient on the average test

score in these specifications returns the average of what households are willing to pay for
a standard deviation increase in the average test score conditional on the
sociodemographic characteristics of the neighborhood, which are in most cases also
indicative of the sociodemographic characteristics of the local school. The estimated
MWTP for a one standard deviation increase in the average test score in this case

27

The specifications of the mean indirect utility regressions are reported in Appendix Table 1. The mean
MWTP measures reported in Table 2 are calculated by dividing the coefficient associated with each choice
characteristic by the coefficient on price.

21

declines to $26 in monthly rent ($6,900 in house value), which is approximately 2.4
percent of the average house price index for our Bay Area sample.28
These results make clear that much of what initially appears in the specification
without neighborhood sociodemographics to be a significant willingness on the part of
households to pay for school quality is instead more properly attributed to the
characteristics of neighbors or peers. That the resulting MWTP for school average test
scores is relatively small is exactly what one would expect if households have difficulty
inferring the quality of a school from published average test score data.29 That is, one
would expect households to place a relatively small weight on this measure when
choosing neighborhoods if the signal that the published average test score provided about
actual school quality were small relative to the noise that it contains related to differences
in the underlying composition of individuals taking the test. In fact, some of the weight
that parents place directly on neighborhood sociodemographics may result from a belief
that these provide a better indication than does the test score itself of the quality of the
education that their children will receive in the local schools, especially if parents
perceive peer effects to be important.
Before turning to the results related to heterogeneity in preferences, it is important
to point out that the final two columns of Table 2 also show the impact of including
boundary fixed effects on the estimates of mean preferences for neighborhood
sociodemographic characteristics.

Comparing these columns reveals the pattern of

results that one would expect if boundary fixed effects control in part for unobserved

28

This is very similar to the estimates of Black (1999) and Kane, Staiger, and Riegg (2004).
This is especially true in 1990, which pre-dates most concerted efforts on the part of states to provide
information to households about the quality of the local school. In many cases, such information simply
reflects that average test score anyway.

29

22

neighborhood quality and unobserved quality is positively correlated with neighborhood
income and education and negatively correlated with the fraction of non-white
households.30 Thus boundary fixed effects seem to be effective in controlling for fixed
aspects of unobserved neighborhood quality that are correlated with neighborhood
sociodemographics, and thus provide an attractive way of estimating preferences for both
school quality and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics in the presence of this
important endogeneity problem.

Heterogeneity in Willingness-to-Pay
The interaction parameters estimated in the first stage for the specifications that
exclude and include neighborhood sociodemographics, respectively, are reported in
Appendix Tables 2 and 3. These specifications correspond to the mean MWTP estimates
reported in columns 3 and 6 of Table 2, respectively. In each case, the model controls
simultaneously for the effect of each of a series of household characteristics (income,
education, race, work status, age, and household structure) on the marginal willingnessto-pay for a variety of housing and neighborhood attributes, including the average test
score of the local school. The model also captures the spatial aspect of the housing
market by allowing households to have preferences over commuting distance.31

30

The fact that the estimated coefficient on the average test score rises from $20 to $26 when boundary
fixed effects are included reflects that fact it is positively correlated with neighborhood income and
education and negatively correlated with the fraction of non-white households. Thus, the estimated
coefficient on the average test score tends to rise as the coefficients on these other variables change, as they
do in moving from column 5 to column 6 in Table 2.
31
We treat a household’s primary work location as exogenous, calculating the distance from this location to
the location of the neighborhood in question. MWTP estimates for other housing and neighborhood
attributes based on a specification without commuting distance are qualitatively similar except for variables
that are strongly correlated with employment access, such as population density.

23

Table 3 converts the estimates of the heterogeneity in MWTP for the average test
score into dollar terms. The two columns of the table report results for specifications that
exclude and include neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics, respectively. The
first row of this table reports the estimated mean MWTP for the change listed in each
column heading: for example, the first entry reports the $82 mean MWTP for a one
standard deviation increase in the average test score conditional on neighborhood
sociodemographics initially reported in column 3 of Table 2. The remaining rows report
the difference in MWTP associated with the comparison of household characteristics
shown in the row heading. Thus, the second row shows how a household’s MWTP
changes with an increase of $100,000 in income.
Analogously to the effect of including neighborhood sociodemographic variables
on the estimates of the mean MWTP reported in Table 2, including these variables
decreases the magnitude of the estimated heterogeneity in demand for school quality,
decreasing the coefficient associated with household income by 60 percent, with
education by 75 percent, and with race (which may proxy in part for wealth) by upwards
of 80 percent.

The estimates of the specification that includes neighborhood

sociodemographics also returns the expected positive additional MWTP associated with
the presence of school-aged children.

Table 4 reports analogous measures of the

heterogeneity in MWTP for selected housing and neighborhood attributes from the
specification that includes neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics, revealing for
example that increases in household income are typically associated with large increases
in the demand for housing attributes, and that college educated households are willing to
pay a substantial premium relative to less educated households to live with more

24

educated neighbors. Specifically, they are willing to pay around $59 per month more
than less educated households for a 10 percent increase in college-educated neighbors.
Not surprisingly, strong racial interactions are also at work in the housing market, leading
to significant sorting along this dimension as well.32
The pattern of heterogeneity revealed in Tables 3 and 4 is exactly the type of
preference structure that gives rise to a substantial social multiplier in considering the
effect of an exogenous school quality on neighborhood stratification. In particular, given
the heterogeneity in preferences for school quality, Asian and white households and
households with more education and income are generally more likely to sort into a
neighborhood following an increase in school quality there.

This initial effect on

neighborhood composition then gives rise to additional re-sorting according to the
preferences directly associated with neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics.
This additional re-sorting works to reinforce the initial changes, multiplying the effects of
the exogenous change in school quality up by a factor that may be sizeable given the
magnitude of the parameters associated with neighborhood sociodemographics.

6

SCHOOL-RELATED

SORTING

AND

NEIGHBORHOOD

STRATIFICATION
To explore the impact of school-related sorting on neighborhood stratification, we
now turn to the main economic analysis of the paper. In particular, given the set of
preference parameters estimated above, we simulate the housing market equilibrium in a
32

Note that the strength of the estimated racial interactions reported in Table 4 may reflect the presence of
centralized discriminatory practices in the market in addition to the direct preferences of households to live
with others of the same race. In this way, the counterfactual that we conduct below should be interpreted as

25

counterfactual world in which preferences for the average test score are set identically
equal to zero for all households. The resulting reductions in stratification of households
across neighborhoods on the basis of education and income provide measures of the
general equilibrium impact of school-related sorting on stratification. Before describing
these simulations in detail, however, we begin this section by discussing the pattern of
neighborhood stratification in the Bay Area as well as the corresponding measures
predicted by our model, providing a gauge of how well the model fits the data in this
dimension.

Initial Measures of Neighborhood Stratification.

To quantify the extent of

neighborhood stratification in the Bay Area, we use a series of simple measures based on
the average sociodemographic composition of the neighborhoods in which households
with given characteristics live.33 Using the underlying average exposure of households in
each education category to one another, for example, we measure the level of
neighborhood stratification by calculating the degree to which households with a high
school degree or less and a college degree or more, respectively, are ‘over-exposed’ (i.e.,
exposed to a fraction greater than the average for the Bay Area as a whole) to households
with the same education level.
To see these calculations more explicitly, consider the top panel (Panel A) of
Table 5, which constructs two measures of neighborhood stratification on the basis of
education using the sample of nearly a quarter of a million households. Households are
holding the structure of racial interactions constant, regardless of the source. See Bayer, McMillan, and
Rueben (2004b) for more discussion of this issue.
33
We define neighborhoods on the basis of (synthetic) school attendance zones, as described in Section 4.
Defining neighborhoods on the basis of alternative neighborhood definitions - Census block groups for

26

first assigned to one of three mutually exclusive education categories based on the
educational attainment of the household head - high school diploma or less, some college,
college degree or more.34 These individual education categories are given in the first
three column headings of the panel, while the fourth column considers all households.
Each column of Panel A gives the respective average neighborhood education
distribution for each type of household. The figures in the first column, for example,
imply that households with a high school degree or less live on average in neighborhoods
in which 41.2 percent of household heads (not counting the original household) have a
high school degree or less, 22.6 have had some college, and 36.2 have a college degree or
more.

The fifth column of Panel A reports the extent to which households are ‘over-

exposed’ to households in the same education category.

Thus, in the Bay Area,

households with a HS degree or less are exposed on average to 21.8 percent more
households with a HS degree or less than in the population as a whole. Similarly,
households with a college degree or more are exposed to 14.7 percent more households
with a college degree than in the population as a whole
Panel A of Table 6 reports analogous measures related to income stratification. In
this case, households are assigned to categories on the basis of income quintile. To
match the education categories as much as possible, we form three categories: the bottom
two quintiles, the middle quintile, and the top two quintiles. For our sample of 242,100
households, households in the bottom two income quintiles are exposed on average to
17.4 percent more households in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution than

example - tends to give rise to more marked residential stratification, primarily because block groups are
smaller geographic units.
34
In what follows, when we refer to households as having a college degree, this should be taken to mean
that the household head as identified in the Census has a college degree, and similarly for other categories.

27

are in the Bay Area as a whole, while the analogous figure is 18.1 percent for households
in the top 40 percent of the income distribution.
To provide a sense of how well the estimated model fits the data, Panel B of
Tables 5 and 6 reports the same pattern of average exposure rates based on the
predictions of the model.35 The model used to calculate the measures reported in Tables
5 and 6 is the full specification including neighborhood sociodemographics, which
corresponds to the MWTP estimates reported in column 6 of Table 2, column 2 of Table
3, and Table 4. Panel B has the same basic structure as the top panel, and the comparison
makes clear that our model predictions are reasonably close to the sample measures; on
average, the nine predicted exposure measures reported in each table are slightly more
than half a percentage point off from the sample measures. Thus our model does a very
reasonable job of matching stratification patterns in the data, even though the estimation
procedure does not fit neighborhood compositions directly.

These pre-simulation

predictions of the model play an important role in the analysis that follows, providing the
appropriate benchmark against which the equivalent measures generated in the
simulations should be compared.

Counterfactual Simulations – Computation and Basic Setup. The idea behind the
simulations that we conduct is intuitive: having estimated household preferences for the
average test score, along with other choice characteristics, we suppose (counterfactually)
that households no longer care about school average test scores when deciding where to

35

Specifically, the model provides predictions of the probability that each household occupies each housing
type in its choice set in equilibrium. These probabilities are aggregated up to the neighborhood level to
provide predicted neighborhood compositions, which can then be averaged by household education and
income for comparison with the calculations reported in Panel A.

28

live.

We then recalculate neighborhood compositions, generating new stratification

measures that correspond to those reported in Panels A and B of Tables 5 and 6.
The basic structure of the computation of the new equilibrium consists of a loop
within a loop. Having set the preference parameters associated with the average test
score to zero, we first calculate a new set of prices that clears the market; Berry (1994)
ensures that there is a unique set of market clearing prices up to scale. Using these new
prices and the initial sociodemographic composition of each neighborhood, we calculate
the probability that each household chooses each housing type, and aggregating these
choices to the neighborhood level, the corresponding predicted sociodemographic
composition

of

each

neighborhood.

We

replace

the

initial

neighborhood

sociodemographic measures with these new measures and start the loop again – i.e.,
calculate a new set of market clearing prices with these updated neighborhood
sociodemographic measures.

We continue this process until the neighborhood

sociodemographic measures converge. The household location decisions corresponding
to the final sociodemographic measures along with the vector of housing prices that
clears the market then represents the new equilibrium.36
Because our model is fundamentally static, this equilibrium should be viewed as
representing the way the housing market equilibrium in the Bay Area would look in a
36

As discussed in Section 2, uniqueness is not a generic property of our sorting model. Without this
property, it is sometimes difficult to justify counterfactual simulations corresponding to non-marginal
changes in the primitives of the underlying model. As argued by Debreu (1969), however, the property of
local uniqueness provides a coherent basis for conducting counterfactual simulations associated with a
marginal change in the model’s primitives. In this case, the results of the type of equilibrium
counterfactual simulations used here correspond to a series of GE comparative static measures estimated at
the current equilibrium. To alleviate concerns about the role of multiple equilibria in our analysis, we
repeated the calculations for a marginal change in the model’s primitives (a 5 percent reduction in the
magnitude of preference parameters associated with average test score). The results were qualitatively
similar to those reported here; we choose to report the results of a non-marginal change corresponding to
setting the test score preference parameters to zero because it corresponds more directly to the thought
experiment that we would like to carry out.

29

world in which school quality never mattered, rather than as the outcome if school quality
was suddenly eliminated as a factor in residential location decisions following some kind
of new policy.37

Accordingly, the difference between the level of neighborhood

stratification in the current state of the world and this new equilibrium represents a
measure of the general equilibrium effect of school-related sorting on neighborhood
stratification. In addition to this general equilibrium effect, we also report a partial
equilibrium effect that measures the initial predicted change in stratification following the
elimination in preferences related to the average test score. The partial equilibrium
effects reported below do not account for the reinforcing effects on stratification
associated with the additional re-sorting of households on the basis of sociodemographic
characteristics.

Counterfactual Simulations – Results. Having set the preference parameters associated
with average test score to zero, Panels C and D of Tables 5 and 6 present the predicted
pattern of neighborhood stratification under this counterfactual, reporting partial and
general equilibrium measures respectively. Panel C shows that the initial effect of setting
the preference parameters associated with the average test score to zero is an immediate
decline in the rate of over-exposure of households with a high school degree or less to
each other, falling from 23.7 percent to 21.2 percent. As the sixth column of Table 5
reports, this amounts to a 10.9 percent reduction in over-exposure. Similarly, households
with a college degree initially experience about a 6 percent decline in the rate at which

37

In general, incorporating dynamic behavior into an estimable model that allows for sorting on the basis of
neighborhood sociodemographics is very difficult; such a model has yet to be developed in the literature.
Also, our general equilibrium predictions are fully based on Tiebout assumptions - see Ferreira (2004) for
incorporating moving costs into the estimation of MWTP for housing amenities.

30

they are over-exposed to one another. Panel C of Table 6 reports a similar set of partial
equilibrium results for income stratification, with the rate of over-exposure of households
in the bottom and top 40 percent of income distribution respectively to households in the
same part of income distribution falling by 10-12 percent.
These partial equilibrium predictions capture the direct effect of eliminating
preferences for the average test score, holding constant the initial sociodemographic
composition of each neighborhood.

Thus, in the current state of the world, these

measures provide a clear sense of how much less stratified the metropolitan area would
be if direct preferences over school average test scores (holding neighborhood
composition constant) were eliminated.

Given the magnitude of the heterogeneous

preferences for the characteristics of one’s neighbors estimated above, however, the
resulting changes in neighborhood sociodemographic compositions will in turn be
reinforced by additional re-sorting in response to these sociodemographic changes. In
particular, in the subsequently less stratified world, differences in preferences for
neighborhood characteristics simply have a smaller role in the location decision of each
household, thereby leading to even less stratification.
Starting with the initial change in neighborhood compositions following the
elimination of preferences for school average test scores, Panel D of Tables 5 and 6
reports the levels of neighborhood stratification once a new equilibrium has been
reached.

As the corresponding stratification measures make clear, the full general

equilibrium effect of eliminating preferences for school quality is substantially greater
than the partial equilibrium effect. The rate of over-exposure of households with a high
school degree or less to one another, for example, falls from 23.7 percent to 14.5 percent

31

- a 38.8 percent decline.

Similarly, the rate of over-exposure of college educated

households to one another falls by over 25 percent. The comparable numbers for income
stratification also average over 25 percent.38
In sum, the general equilibrium measures of the reduction in stratification
following the elimination of preferences for school average test scores are almost four
times greater than the comparable partial equilibrium measures for education
stratification and more than two times greater for income stratification. The especially
strong general equilibrium effect for education stratification can be linked to the
underlying coefficient estimates. As Table 4 indicates, households with a college degree
are willing to pay substantially more than those without a college degree to live with
college-educated neighbors.

Thus the initial decline in neighborhood stratification

induced by the elimination of preferences for test scores has an especially strong
subsequent effect on residential sorting on the basis of education.
As mentioned in Section 5, it is important to point out that some of the weight
placed directly on neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics as opposed to average
test scores in the utility function may be related to inference issues related to school
quality. That is, parents may perceive sociodemographic characteristics to provide a
better indication of school quality than the average test score itself. In this case, in
conducting the counterfactual simulations above, one would want to simultaneously
eliminate the preference parameters that multiply school average test scores and reduce
the magnitude of the parameters associated with neighborhood sociodemographic
characteristics. This would serve to increase both the partial and general equilibrium
38

The results of this analysis are not sensitive to the measures of stratification used here. Qualitatively
similar reductions in stratification, for example, were obtained using less aggregate groupings of

32

estimates of the portion of stratification attributable to school-related sorting. While the
difference between the general and partial equilibrium results would be smaller in this
case, the central point that we make in this paper would be strengthened: the full impact
of school-related sorting on neighborhood stratification is substantially greater than a
narrow examination of the direct estimates of the demand for school average test scores
would suggest.

7

CONCLUSION
In recent years, the empirical literature in the economics of education has reached

a consensus that the direct effect of school quality improvements on household demand is
relatively small, while the demand for peers and neighbors explains a great deal of
observed sorting across schools and neighborhoods. This paper considers the economic
content of this consensus, demonstrating that the full effect of school-related sorting on
neighborhood stratification is in fact substantially greater than direct estimates of demand
for school quality would seemingly imply. This much greater general equilibrium effect
comes about precisely because certain households place such an important weight on the
characteristics of their neighbors when choosing where to reside and where to send their
children to school. Thus sorting directly related to neighborhood sociodemographic
characteristics works to reinforce any stratification initially induced by exogenous
variation in school quality.
To quantify the magnitude of this general equilibrium effect, we estimate a
flexible model of residential sorting using restricted Census data that provide the precise
residential locations of nearly a quarter of million households.

These data permit

individuals by income and education. Those calculations are available from the authors upon request.

33

flexibility both in the model itself (we estimate a horizontal model of sorting that includes
many housing and neighborhood attributes and allows the demand for each of these
attributes to vary with a wide set of household characteristics) and in the way that we use
the data to estimate it.

Here, we incorporate the boundary fixed effects approach

pioneered by Black (1999) in estimating the parameters of our broader sorting model.
The estimated model becomes a powerful tool for conducting general equilibrium
counterfactual simulations, providing an intuitive way to estimate the full impact of
school-related sorting on neighborhood stratification.
Consistent with the recent empirical literature, we estimate that households are
willing to pay an average of only about 2 percent in house price for a one standard
deviation increase in school average test scores. At the same time, there is heterogeneity
in willingness to pay for improvements in quality; and further, households have strongly
heterogeneous preferences for the characteristics of their neighbors; college-educated
households, for example, are willing to pay substantially more than others for an increase
in the fraction of college-educated households in their neighborhood.

Using the

estimated model, we then calculate measures of neighborhood stratification in a
counterfactual environment in which household preferences related to school average test
scores are set identically equal to zero.

The results of this exercise reveal that school-

related sorting explains roughly 25 percent of the neighborhood stratification on the basis
of income and 30 percent on the basis of education. These full general equilibrium
effects are on average four times greater than corresponding partial equilibrium measures
in the case of education stratification and twice as great in the case of income. Partial
equilibrium measures consider only the direct effect of eliminating preferences related to

34

school quality - that is, do not allow for additional re-sorting in response to the resulting
changes in neighborhood sociodemographic compositions.
Our findings indicate that the consensus reached in the empirical literature
regarding preferences for schools and neighbors is considerably more supportive of the
long theoretical tradition in local public finance related to Tiebout-type sorting than the
direct estimates of the demand for school average test scores might suggest. Schoolrelated sorting has quantitatively significant effects on neighborhood stratification once
important general equilibrium considerations are taken into account. Moreover, these
results also imply that the effect of Tiebout sorting on the competitiveness of the
education marketplace is substantially greater than direct estimates of the elasticity of
demand with respect to an exogenous change in school quality would imply. Again in
this case, the direct effect of a change in school quality on demand would be magnified
by the effect of this change on who sorts into the corresponding school and
neighborhood.

35

REFERENCES
Bayer, Patrick, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan (2003), “A Unified Framework
for Measuring Preferences for Schools and Neighborhoods,” Economic Growth Center,
Yale University Working Paper No. 872.
Bayer, Patrick, Robert McMillan, and Kim Rueben, (2004a), “An Equilibrium Model of
an Urban Housing Market,” unpublished manuscript, Yale University.
________, (2004b), “Residential Segregation in General Equilibrium,” Economic Growth
Center, Yale University Working Paper No. 885.
Benabou, Roland, (1993), “The Workings of a City: Location, Education, and
Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108(3), pp.619-652.
________, (1996), “Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth: Macroeconomic
Implications of Community Structure and School Finance,” American Economic Review,
86(3), 584-609.
Berry, Steven, (1994), “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,”
RAND Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 242-262.
Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes, (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market
Equilibrium,” Econometrica, Vol 63, pp. 841-890.
Black, Sandra, (1999), “Do Better Schools Matter? Parental Valuation of Elementary
Education,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999.
Cullen, Julie, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt, (2003), “The Effect of School Choice on
Student Outcomes: Evidence from Randomized Lotteries,” NBER Working Paper No.
10113.
Debreu, Gerard (1969), “Economies with a Finite Set of Equilibria,” Irving Fisher lecture
at the Brussels meeting of the Econometric Society, September, reprinted in
Mathematical Economics: Twenty Papers of Gerard Debreau, Cambridge University
Press, 1983.
Epple, Dennis, David Figlio, and Richard Romano, (2004), “Competition between
Private and Public Schools: Testing Stratification and Pricing Predictions,” Journal of
Public Economics 88, 1215-45.
Epple, Dennis, Radu Filimon, and Thomas Romer, (1984), “Equilibrium Among Local
Jurisdictions: Towards an Integrated Approach of Voting and Residential Choice,”
Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 24, pp. 281-304.

36

________, (1993), “Existence of Voting and Housing Equilibrium in a System of
Communities with Property Taxes,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, Vol. 23,
pp. 585-610.
Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano, (1998), “ Competition Between Private and Public
Schools, Vouchers, and Peer Group Effects,” American Economic Review 88(1): 33-62.
Epple, Dennis, Thomas Romer and Holger Sieg, (2001), “Interjurisdictional Sorting and
Majority Rule: An Empirical Analysis,” Econometrica, Vol. 69, No. 6., pp. 1437-1455.
Epple, Dennis and Holger Sieg, (1999), “Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local
Jurisdictions,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107, No. 4., pp. 645-681.
Fernandez, Raquel and Richard Rogerson, (1996), “Income Distribution, Communities,
and the Quality of Public Education.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, No. 1.,
pp. 135-164.
________, (2003), “Equity and Resources: An Analysis of Educational Finance
Systems,” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 111, no. 4.
Ferreira, Fernando V. (2004), “You Can Take It with You: Transferability of Proposition
13 Tax Benefits, Residential Mobility, and Willingness to Pay for Housing Amenities.”
Center for Labor Economics, University of California, Berkeley, Working Paper No. 72.
Ferreyra, Maria, (2003), “Estimating the Effects of Private School Vouchers in MultiDistrict Economies,” mimeo, Carnegie-Mellon University.
Hoxby, Caroline M., (2000) “Does Competition Among Public Schools Benefit Students
and Taxpayers?” American Economic Review, 90 (5), 1209-38.
Kane, Thomas, Douglas Staiger, and Stephanie Riegg, (2004) “Do Good Schools or
Good Neighbors Raise Property Values?” mimeo, University of California, Los Angeles.
McFadden, Daniel, (1978), “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location,” in eds.
Karlquist, A., et al., Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models, Elsevier NorthHolland, New York.
Nechyba, Thomas J., (1999), “School Finance-Induced Migration and Stratification
Patterns: the Impact of Private School Vouchers,” Journal of Public Economic Theory,
Vol. 1.
________, (2000), “Mobility, Targeting and Private School Vouchers,” American
Economic Review 90(1), 130-46.

37

Rothstein, Jesse, (2003), “Good Principals or Good Peers? Parental Valuation of School
Characteristics, Tiebout Equilibrium, and the Incentive Effects of Competition Among
Jurisdictions,” mimeo, Princeton University.
Sieg, Holger, V. Kerry Smith, H. Spencer Banzaf and Randall Walsh, (forthcoming)
“Estimating the General Equilibrium Benefits of Large Changes in Spatially Delineated
Public Goods,” International Economic Review.
Tiebout, Charles M., (1956), “A Pure Theory of Local Expenditures,” Journal of
Political Economy, 64: 416-424.
Timmins, Christopher (2003), “If You Can't Take the Heat, Get Out of the Cerrado...
Recovering the Amenity Cost of Non-Marginal Climate Change in Brazil,” mimeo, Yale
University.
Walsh, Randall (2004), “Endogenous Open Space Amenities in a Locational
Equilibrium,” CEA Working Paper No. 04-03, February.

38

Table 1. Full Sample, and School District Boundary Sub-Sample
Sample
Boundary/Weights
Observations

full sample

within 0.25 miles of boundaries
high test score side*
low test score side*
t-test for
13,348
14,610
difference in
(4)
(5)
means
Mean
Mean
((4) versus (5))

(1)
Mean

(2)
S.D.

actual sample
27,958
(3)
Mean

Housing/Neighborhood Characteristics
monthly house price
average test score
1 if unit owned
number of rooms
1 if built in 1980s
1 if built in 1960s or 1970s
elevation
population density
crime index
% Census block group white
% Census block group black
% Census block group Hispanic
% Census block group Asian
% block group college degree or more
average block group income

1,087
527
0.597
5.114
0.143
0.391
210
0.434
8.184
0.681
0.081
0.110
0.122
0.438
54,744

755
74
0.491
1.992
0.350
0.488
179
0.497
10.777
0.232
0.159
0.114
0.120
0.196
26,075

1,130
536
0.629
5.170
0.108
0.424
193
0.352
6.100
0.704
0.071
0.113
0.112
0.457
57,039

1,158
558
0.632
5.207
0.118
0.412
194
0.349
6.000
0.712
0.065
0.107
0.110
0.463
58,771

1,105
515
0.626
5.134
0.099
0.437
192
0.355
6.192
0.686
0.076
0.119
0.113
0.451
55,457

5.71
50.96
1.04
3.13
5.09
4.22
1.14
2.08
2.36
9.62
6.21
8.62
2.50
5.14
10.23

1,098
529
0.616
5.180
0.148
0.406
212
0.374
7.000
0.676
0.080
0.117
0.121
0.433
55,262

Household Characteristics
household income
1 if children under 18 in household
1 if black
1 if Hispanic
1 if Asian
1 if white
1 if less than high school
1 if high school
1 if some college
1 if college degree
1 if more than college
age (years)
1 if working
distance to work (miles)

54,103
0.333
0.076
0.109
0.124
0.686
0.154
0.184
0.223
0.291
0.147
47.607
0.698
8.843

50,719
0.471
0.264
0.312
0.329
0.464
0.361
0.388
0.417
0.454
0.354
16.619
0.459
8.597

56,663
0.324
0.066
0.111
0.112
0.706
0.141
0.176
0.222
0.294
0.166
47.890
0.705
8.450

58,041
0.322
0.062
0.102
0.114
0.717
0.134
0.177
0.222
0.295
0.172
48.104
0.702
8.412

55,405
0.325
0.070
0.119
0.110
0.696
0.147
0.175
0.223
0.294
0.161
47.699
0.709
8.492

4.20
0.54
2.69
4.54
1.06
3.86
3.12
0.44
0.20
0.18
2.46
1.99
1.28
0.82

55,498
0.336
0.076
0.115
0.121
0.682
0.152
0.183
0.225
0.286
0.155
47.660
0.701
8.490

242,100

weighted sample
27,958
(6)
Mean

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 report the mean and standard deviation for key variables for the full sample. Column 3 reports means for the sample of houses within 0.25 miles of a school district
boundary. Columns 4 and 5 report means on the high versus low test score side of boundaries. Column 6 provides a t-statistic for a test of whether the means reported in columns 4 and 5
are equal. Column 7 reports weighted means for the sample of houses within 0.25 miles of a school district boundary. Weights are constructed so as to make the boundary sample more
representative of the full sample and are described in the main text. In constructing columns 4 and 5, we assign each house in the full sample to the nearest school district boundary, noting
whether its local school has a higher test score than the school associated with the closest Census block on the other side of the boundary.

39

Table 2: Implied Mean MWTP Measures
Without Neighborhood Sociodemographics
Sample
Boundary Fized Effects
Observations

full sample
No
242,100
(1)

within .25 mile of boundaries
No
Yes
27,958
27,958
(2)
(3)

With Neighborhood Sociodemographics
full sample
No
242,100
(4)

within .25 mile of boundaries
No
Yes
27,958
27,958
(5)
(6)

average test score (in standard deviations)

126.08
(1.96)

122.89
(5.36)

81.53
(7.72)

20.17
(1.72)

20.19
(4.77)

26.22
(6.13)

1 if unit owned

209.76
(3.29)

178.37
(8.99)

184.54
(11.39)

165.38
(3.19)

150.77
(8.76)

161.05
(9.24)

number of rooms

148.98
(1.51)

149.36
(4.24)

138.71
(5.49)

122.03
(1.48)

121.12
(4.23)

118.93
(4.40)

1 if built in 1980s

129.93
(3.94)

74.74
(10.87)

106.17
(14.41)

99.69
(3.79)

85.50
(10.69)

95.55
(11.84)

1 if built in 1960s or 1970s

28.48
(2.78)

9.46
(8.03)

15.39
(10.48)

13.79
(2.67)

7.40
(7.71)

4.50
(8.51)

elevation (/100)

21.09
(0.81)

-4.82
(2.48)

46.46
(6.35)

-1.06
(0.75)

-18.04
(2.46)

12.83
(5.04)

-100.43
(4.23)

-153.53
(15.64)

-133.08
(23.85)

19.41
(4.30)

41.68
(15.76)

30.33
(20.09)

-2.95
(0.18)

-2.30
(0.70)

1.78
(2.20)

0.00
(0.20)

-1.39
(0.81)

1.96
(1.91)

% Census block group black

-324.67
(10.14)

-318.83
(32.15)

-267.08
(39.84)

% Census block group Hispanic

-4.42
(14.35)

18.06
(46.87)

138.95
(63.13)

% Census block group Asian

-97.39
(11.15)

-96.22
(37.39)

155.27
(55.73)

% block group college degree or more

286.02
(10.50)

206.02
(30.58)

137.71
(44.53)

average block group income

87.08
(1.25)

96.11
(3.86)

87.61
(4.00)
4.162

population density
crime index

F-statistic for boundary fixed effects

5.349

Note: Specifications shown in the table also include controls for land use (% industrial, % residential, % commercial, % open space, % other) in 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 mile rings around location and six variables that characterize the housing stock in each of these rings. MWTP measures are reported in terms of a
monthly house price. Standard errors are in parentheses.

40

Table 3. Heterogeneity in Marginal Willingness to Pay for School Average Test Score

Without Neighborhood
Sociodemographics in Model

With Neighborhood
Sociodemographics in Model

One Standard Deviation Increase in Average Test Score
Mean MWTP

81.53
(7.72)

26.22
(6.13)

Household Income (+$100,000)

40.45
(0.28)

15.66
(0.35)

Children Under 18 vs.
No Children

-11.90
(3.07)

7.10
(3.78)

Black vs. White

-93.84
(5.15)

-18.05
(7.50)

Hispanic vs. White

-40.75
(4.64)

-4.64
(5.80)

Asian vs. White

-9.08
(3.99)

5.79
(5.08)

College Degree or More vs.
Some College or Less

57.65
(3.46)

14.12
(4.24)

Householder Working vs.
Not Working

1.91
(3.16)

6.63
(4.02)

Age (+10 years)

1.02
(0.09)

0.86
(0.11)

Heterogeneity in MWTP

Note: The first row of the table reports the mean marginal willingness-to-pay for the change reported in the column
heading. The remaining rows report the difference in willingness to pay associated with the change listed in the row
heading, holding all other factors equal. Standard errors are in parentheses.

41

Table 4. Heterogeneity in Marginal Willingness to Pay for Select Housing and Neighborhood Attributes
Specification Includes Neighborhood Sociodemographic Charactersitics

House Characteristics
Own vs. Rent
+1 Room
Built in 1980s
vs. pre-1960

Neighborhood Sociodemographics
+10% Black vs. +10% Hisp vs. +10% Asian vs. +10% College
White
White
White
Educated

Blk Group
Avg Income
+ $10,000

Mean MWTP

161.05
(9.24)

118.93
(4.40)

95.55
(11.84)

-26.71
(3.98)

13.90
(6.31)

15.53
(5.57)

13.77
(4.45)

87.61
(4.00)

Household Income (+$100,000)

218.37
(7.13)

61.19
(1.70)

105.07
(7.62)

-15.32
(3.89)

7.73
(4.13)

-0.50
(2.54)

26.17
(2.18)

15.44
(1.13)

Children Under 18 vs.
No Children

-12.87
(6.67)

40.06
(1.80)

-24.52
(7.94)

10.38
(2.70)

15.03
(3.41)

12.17
(2.51)

-14.18
(2.15)

5.05
(1.06)

Black vs. White

-63.55
(13.25)

1.56
(3.40)

2.95
(16.38)

96.82
(3.62)

46.13
(5.75)

48.02
(4.84)

16.99
(4.40)

-0.45
(2.27)

Hispanic vs. White

-6.44
(9.53)

-14.14
(2.63)

-8.07
(12.00)

28.89
(3.68)

81.36
(4.01)

18.01
(3.81)

5.43
(3.19)

2.07
(1.41)

Asian vs. White

113.65
(8.96)

-32.92
(2.27)

43.94
(10.77)

27.74
(3.64)

21.95
(4.67)

92.49
(2.78)

-0.05
(2.91)

1.99
(1.41)

College Degree or More vs.
Some College or Less

33.83
(7.67)

4.50
(2.05)

42.06
(9.57)

8.34
(3.27)

-4.16
(3.94)

-12.70
(2.91)

59.29
(2.37)

3.66
(1.29)

Householder Working vs.
Not Working

42.72
(7.31)

3.69
(1.94)

60.60
(8.92)

-4.71
(2.88)

-2.17
(3.65)

-2.81
(2.82)

-12.62
(2.27)

3.88
(1.04)

Age (+10 years)

6.49
(0.21)

0.30
(0.06)

-2.07
(0.25)

-0.15
(0.08)

-0.56
(0.10)

-0.03
(0.08)

-0.12
(0.06)

0.11
(0.03)

Note: The first row of the table reports the mean marginal willingness-to-pay for the change reported in the column heading. The remaining rows report the difference in willingness to pay associated with the
change listed in the row heading, holding all other factors equal. Standard errors are in parentheses.

42

Table 5: Education Stratification Measures Based on Full Model With Neighborhood Sociodempographics
Panel A: Sample
Household Characteristic
Some Coll
Coll Deg or more
34.2
28.0
23.1
21.8
42.7
50.3

Neighborhood Education Composition
high school or less
some college
college degree or more

HS or less
41.2
22.6
36.2

Overall
33.8
22.3
43.8

Neighborhood Education Composition
high school or less
some college
college degree or more

Panel B: Pre-Simulation (Model's Predictions)
Household Characteristic
HS or less
Some Coll
Coll Deg or more
Overall
41.9
34.8
27.2
33.8
23.0
23.2
21.4
22.3
35.2
42.0
51.4
43.8

Neighborhood Education Composition
high school or less
some college
college degree or more

Panel C: Post-Simulation, Partial Equilibrium
Household Characteristic
HS or less
Some Coll
Coll Deg or more
Overall
41.0
35.0
27.7
33.8
23.1
23.2
21.3
22.3
35.9
41.8
51.0
43.8

Neighborhood Education Composition
high school or less
some college
college degree or more

Panel D: Post-Simulation, General Equilibrium
Household Characteristic
HS or less
Some Coll
Coll Deg or more
Overall
38.7
35.1
29.4
33.8
23.2
23.4
21.1
22.3
38.1
41.5
49.5
43.8

Over-Exposure to
Same Education Level
21.8%

Percent Reduction
in Over-Exposure

14.7%

23.7%
17.4%

21.1%

10.9%

16.3%

6.1%

14.5%

38.8%

12.9%

25.9%

Notes (Columns 1-4): The first four columns of each panel of the table report the average neighborhood education distribution for households with the characteristics
shown in the column heading. The first column, for example, shows the average education distribution in the neighborhoods in which households with a high school degree
or less reside. Panel A reports these measures for the sample; Panel B reports predicted measures using the estimated parameters of the model; Panels C and D report
measures based on a counterfactual simulation that sets preferences for the average test score identically to zero for all households. Panel C gives partial equilibrium
measures that account for only the initial re-sorting; Panel D reports general equilibrium measures, which are derived from a new equilibrium in which households are
allowed to re-sort on the basis of the new neighborhood sociodemographic compositions that follow the initial re-sorting induced by the elimination of preferences for
school quality.
Notes (Column 5-6): The fifth column of the table reports the extent to which households with a high school degree or less and a college degree or more are 'over-exposed'
to other households with the same education level, respectively. So, for example, the first entry of this column is formed as (41.2-33.8)/33.8. The final column shows the
percentage reduction in these measures in the simulation relative to the model's predictions, thus providing measures of the portion of neighborhood stratification on the
basis of education driven by school-related sorting.

43

Table 6: Income Stratification Measures Based on Full Model With Neighborhood Sociodempographics
Panel A: Sample
Household Income Quintile
3
4-5
39.8
33.1
20.9
19.7
39.3
47.3

Neighborhood Income Distribution
1st/2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th/5th Quintile

1-2
47.0
19.9
33.1

Overall
40.0
20.0
40.0

Neighborhood Income Distribution
1st/2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th/5th Quintile

Panel B: Pre-Simulation (Model's Prediction)
Household Income Quintile
1-2
3
4-5
Overall
46.0
41.0
33.5
40.0
20.5
20.5
19.3
20.0
33.5
38.6
47.2
40.0

Neighborhood Income Distribution
1st/2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th/5th Quintile

Panel C: Post-Simulation, Partial Equilibrium
Household Income Quintile
1-2
3
4-5
Overall
45.4
40.8
34.2
40.0
20.4
20.4
19.4
20.0
34.2
38.9
46.3
40.0

Neighborhood Income Distribution
1st/2nd Quintile
3rd Quintile
4th/5th Quintile

Panel D: Post-Simulation, General Equilibrium
Household Income Quintile
1-2
3
4-5
Overall
44.6
40.6
35.1
40.0
20.3
20.3
19.6
20.0
35.1
39.1
45.3
40.0

Over-Exposure to
Same Income Group
17.4%

Percent Reduction
in Over-Exposure

18.1%

15.0%
18.1%

13.4%

10.5%

15.8%

12.4%

11.5%

23.7%

13.3%

26.5%

Notes (Columns 1-4): The first four columns of each panel of the table report the average neighborhood income distribution for households with the characteristics shown
in the column heading. The first column, for example, shows the average income distribution in the neighborhoods in which households below the 40th percentile of the
income distribution reside. Panel A reports these measures for the sample; Panel B reports predicted measures using the estimated parameters of the model; Panels C and D
report measures based on a counterfactual simulation that sets preferences for the average test score identically to zero for all households. Panel C gives partial equilibrium
measures that account for only the initial re-sorting; Panel D reports general equilibrium measures, which are derived from a new equilibrium in which households are
allowed to re-sort on the basis of the new neighborhood sociodemographic compositions that follow the initial re-sorting induced by the elimination of preferences for
school quality.
Notes (Column 5-6): The fifth column of the table reports the extent to which households in the bottom and top 40 percent of the income distribution or more are 'overexposed' to other households in the same part of the income distribution respectively. So, for example, the first entry of this column is formed as (47.0-40.0)/40.0. The final
column shows the percentage reduction in these measures in the simulation relative to the model's predictions, thus providing measures of the portion of neighborhood
stratification on the basis of income driven by school-related sorting.

44

Appendix Table 1: Choice-Specific Constant Regressions
Without Neighborhood Sociodemographics
Sample
Boundary Fized Effects
Observations

full sample
No
242,100

within .25 mile of boundaries
No
Yes
27,958
27,958

With Neighborhood Sociodemographics
full sample
No
242,100

within .25 mile of boundaries
No
Yes
27,958
27,958

monthly housing price (/1000)

-10.23
(1.39)

-9.73
(1.13)

-11.34
(1.36)

-15.94
(1.71)

-15.97
(1.56)

-16.19
(1.69)

average test score (in standard deviations)

1.29
(0.02)

1.20
(0.05)

0.92
(0.01)

0.32
(0.03)

0.32
(0.08)

0.42
(0.01)

1 if unit owned

2.15
(0.03)

1.74
(0.09)

2.09
(0.01)

2.64
(0.05)

2.41
(0.14)

2.61
(0.01)

number of rooms

1.52
(0.02)

1.45
(0.04)

1.57
(0.01)

1.95
(0.02)

1.93
(0.07)

1.93
(0.01)

1 if built in 1980s

1.33
(0.04)

0.73
(0.11)

1.20
(0.02)

1.59
(0.06)

1.37
(0.17)

1.55
(0.02)

1 if built in 1960s or 1970s

0.29
(0.03)

0.09
(0.08)

0.17
(0.01)

0.22
(0.04)

0.12
(0.12)

0.07
(0.01)

elevation (/100)

0.22
(0.01)

-0.05
(0.02)

0.53
(0.01)

-0.02
(0.01)

-0.29
(0.04)

0.21
(0.01)

population density

-1.03
(0.04)

-1.49
(0.15)

-1.51
(0.03)

0.31
(0.07)

0.67
(0.25)

0.49
(0.03)

crime index

-0.03
(0.00)

-0.02
(0.01)

0.02
(0.00)

0.00
(0.00)

-0.02
(0.01)

0.03
(0.00)

% Census block group black

-5.18
(0.16)

-5.09
(0.51)

-4.32
(0.06)

% Census block group Hispanic

-0.07
(0.23)

0.29
(0.75)

2.25
(0.10)

% Census block group Asian

-1.55
(0.18)

-1.54
(0.60)

2.51
(0.09)

% block group college degree or more

4.56
(0.17)

3.29
(0.49)

2.23
(0.07)

average block group income

1.39
(0.02)

1.53
(0.06)

1.42
(0.01)

F-statistic for boundary fixed effects

4.545

3.963

Note: Specifications shown in the table also include controls for land use (% industrial, % residential, % commercial, % open space, % other) in 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 5 mile rings around location and six variables that characterize the housing stock in each of these

45

Appendix Table 2. Interaction Parameter Estimates - Model Without Neighborhood Sociodemographics

Average
Test Score
(+1 s.d.)
0.050
(0.004)

Monthly
House Price
(/1000)
0.121
(0.003)

1 if children under 18 in household

-0.190
(0.047)

1 if black

Household Characteristics
household income
(/10,000)

House Characteristics
Owner
Number of
Built in
Occupied
Rooms
1980s

Built in
1960-1979

Neighborhood Attributes
Elevation Population Crime Index
Density
(/100)
0.016
0.028
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.013)
(0.001)

Distance to
Work

0.305
(0.010)

0.074
(0.002)

0.142
(0.011)

0.038
(0.009)

-0.004
(0.001)

0.063
(0.065)

-0.102
(0.094)

0.544
(0.025)

-0.316
(0.112)

0.146
(0.083)

0.010
(0.022)

-0.740
(0.101)

0.015
(0.005)

0.036
(0.005)

-1.395
(0.080)

-0.941
(0.127)

-0.510
(0.167)

0.152
(0.044)

0.004
(0.211)

0.401
(0.144)

-0.062
(0.041)

-1.285
(0.159)

0.110
(0.007)

-0.023
(0.011)

1 if Hispanic

-0.642
(0.072)

0.168
(0.122)

-0.036
(0.130)

-0.268
(0.036)

-0.180
(0.164)

-0.157
(0.115)

-0.104
(0.040)

-0.155
(0.136)

0.050
(0.007)

0.014
(0.007)

1 if Asian

-0.167
(0.062)

0.315
(0.080)

1.765
(0.122)

-0.503
(0.031)

1.037
(0.145)

0.686
(0.108)

-0.015
(0.028)

0.941
(0.095)

0.030
(0.006)

0.003
(0.007)

1 if college degree or more

0.787
(0.053)

0.917
(0.071)

-0.032
(0.108)

-0.012
(0.029)

0.489
(0.135)

-0.045
(0.093)

0.225
(0.024)

-0.007
(0.111)

0.031
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.006)

1 if working

0.007
(0.049)

0.244
(0.067)

0.563
(0.103)

0.032
(0.027)

0.641
(0.125)

0.406
(0.086)

-0.048
(0.025)

-0.437
(0.097)

-0.027
(0.005)

-0.858
(0.008)

age (years)

0.015
(0.001)

0.010
(0.002)

0.090
(0.003)

0.004
(0.001)

-0.034
(0.004)

-0.009
(0.003)

0.003
(0.001)

-0.006
(0.003)

0.001
(0.000)

-0.001
(0.000)

Note: The parameters shown describe the elements of the utility function that interact household characteristics, shown in row headings, with choice characteristics, shown in column headings. Standard errors are in
parentheses.

46

Appendix Table 3. Interaction Parameter Estimates - Model With Neighborhood Sociodemographics

Average
Test Score
(+1 s.d.)
0.020
(0.005)

Monthly
House Price
(/1000)
0.121
(0.004)

1 if children under 18 in household

0.102
(0.058)

1 if black

Household Characteristics
household income
(+10,000)

House Characteristics
Owner
Number of
Built in
Occupied
Rooms
1980s

Built in
1960-1979

Neighborhood Attributes
Elevation Population Crime Index
Density
(/100)
0.010
0.011
-0.001
(0.002)
(0.017)
(0.001)

Neighborhood Sociodemographics
% Block
% Block
% Block % Blk Group Blk Group
Group Black Group Hisp Group Asian
College
Avg Income
-0.223
(0.060)

0.113
(0.064)

-0.009
(0.039)

0.385
(0.034)

0.012
(0.002)

Distance to
Work
(miles)
-0.004
(0.001)

0.002
(0.006)

1.594
(0.416)

2.294
(0.527)

1.857
(0.387)

-2.171
(0.331)

0.055
(0.016)

0.027
(0.005)

-1.106
(0.228)

0.045
(0.009)

14.874
(0.560)

7.082
(0.888)

7.371
(0.747)

2.607
(0.680)

-0.023
(0.035)

-0.010
(0.013)

-0.067
(0.045)

-0.128
(0.169)

0.005
(0.008)

4.435
(0.568)

12.471
(0.620)

2.757
(0.587)

0.830
(0.492)

0.011
(0.022)

0.012
(0.008)

0.457
(0.123)

-0.006
(0.033)

-0.053
(0.132)

0.006
(0.007)

4.236
(0.562)

3.330
(0.721)

14.060
(0.429)

-0.016
(0.449)

-0.022
(0.022)

0.012
(0.007)

0.588
(0.148)

0.106
(0.101)

0.031
(0.027)

0.486
(0.134)

0.022
(0.007)

1.279
(0.504)

-0.638
(0.607)

-1.935
(0.450)

8.986
(0.366)

0.009
(0.020)

0.009
(0.007)

0.021
(0.030)

0.897
(0.138)

0.425
(0.096)

0.023
(0.028)

-0.515
(0.125)

-0.019
(0.007)

-0.712
(0.444)

-0.335
(0.563)

-0.434
(0.436)

-1.931
(0.350)

0.033
(0.016)

-0.896
(0.009)

0.003
(0.001)

-0.033
(0.004)

-0.010
(0.003)

0.003
(0.001)

-0.011
(0.003)

0.001
(0.000)

-0.022
(0.013)

-0.085
(0.016)

-0.005
(0.013)

-0.018
(0.010)

0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.000)

0.303
(0.011)

0.076
(0.003)

0.144
(0.012)

0.028
(0.009)

0.231
(0.075)

-0.238
(0.103)

0.582
(0.028)

-0.399
(0.122)

0.095
(0.092)

0.051
(0.025)

-0.947
(0.127)

-0.282
(0.116)

0.143
(0.170)

-1.006
(0.205)

0.002
(0.053)

0.027
(0.253)

0.577
(0.184)

-0.068
(0.052)

1 if Hispanic

-0.077
(0.089)

0.204
(0.139)

-0.138
(0.147)

-0.246
(0.041)

-0.147
(0.185)

-0.248
(0.131)

1 if Asian

0.072
(0.078)

0.558
(0.095)

1.633
(0.138)

-0.571
(0.035)

0.612
(0.166)

1 if college degree or more

0.200
(0.065)

0.501
(0.079)

0.428
(0.118)

0.006
(0.032)

1 if working

0.093
(0.062)

0.272
(0.074)

0.604
(0.113)

age (years)

0.013
(0.002)

0.011
(0.002)

0.097
(0.003)

Note: The parameters shown describe the elements of the utility function that interact household characteristics, shown in row headings, with choice characteristics, shown in column headings. Standard errors are in parentheses.

47

APPENDICES FOR “Tiebout Sorting, Social Multipliers and the Demand for School Quality” by
Patrick Bayer, Fernando Ferreira, and Robert McMillan
This document contains two appendices for the paper “Tiebout Sorting, Social Multipliers and the Demand
fro School Quality.” A Data Appendix documents the sources for the data and the construction of variables
used in the analysis. An Estimation Appendix provides a full description of the estimation procedure used
in our analysis, discussing a number of important details that we abstract from in the main text in to
streamline that presentation.
DATA APPENDIX
1. Census Variables
House Prices. Because house values are self-reported, it is difficult to ascertain whether these prices
represent the current market value of the property, especially if the owner purchased the house many years
earlier. Fortunately, the Census contains other information that helps us to examine this issue and correct
house values accordingly. In particular, the Census asks owners to report a continuous measure of their
annual property tax payment. The rules associated with Proposition 13 imply that the vast majority of
property tax payments in California should represent exactly 1 percent of the transaction price of the house
at the time the current owner bought the property or the value of the house in 1978. Thus, by combining
information about property tax payments and the year that the owner bought the house (also provided in the
Census in relatively small ranges), we are able to construct a measure of the rate of appreciation implied by
each household’s self-reported house value. We use this information to modify house values for those
individuals who report values much closer to the original transaction price rather than current market value.
In our study most households list the purchase price of their house rather than an estimated market value
for their house. Thus if two identical houses were found in the census data but one was last sold in 1989
and one was last sold in 1969 we find on average the listed market price of the more recently sold house is
on average 15 percent higher than the other house.
A second deficiency of the house values reported in the Census is that they are top-coded at
$500,000, a top-code that is often binding in California. Again, because the property tax payment variable
is continuous and not top-coded, it provides information useful in distinguishing the values of the upper tail
of the value distribution. We find that top-coding was fairly predominant in the Bay Area and that higher
top-codes may be useful to gain a better understanding of house prices in expensive markets like California
or New York.
The exact procedure that we use to adjust self-reported house values is as follows. We first
regress the log of self-reported house value on the log of the estimated transaction price (100 times the
property tax payment), and a series of dummy variables that characterize the tenure of the current owner:
(A1)

log( V j ) = α1 log( T j ) + α2 y j + ωj

where Vj represents the self-reported house value, Tj represents the estimated transaction price, and y j
represents a series of dummy variables for the year that the owner bought the house. If owner-estimated
house values were indeed current market values and houses were identical except for owner tenure, this
regression would return an estimate of 1 for α1 and the estimated α2 coefficients would indicate the
appreciation of house values in the Bay Area over the full period of analysis. If owners tend to underreport
house values, especially when they have lived in the house for a long time, the estimated α2 parameters will
likewise underreport appreciation in the market. In this way, the estimated α2 parameters represent a
conservative estimate of appreciation. Given the estimates of equation (2), we construct a predicted house
value for each house in the sample and replace the owner-reported value with this measure when this
predicted measure exceeds the owner-reported value. In practice, in order to allow for different rates of
appreciation in different regions of the housing market, we conduct these regressions separately for each of
the 45 Census PUMA (areas with at least 100,000 people) in our sample and allow appreciation to vary
with a small set of house characteristics within each PUMA. In this way, the first adjustment that we make
to house prices is to adjust owner-reported values for likely under-reporting.
The adjustment to top-coded house prices uses the same approach, using the information on
property taxes that are continuous and not top-coded. Using estimates of equation (2) based on a sample of

houses that does not include the top-coded house values, we construct predicted house values for all topcoded houses. This allows us to assign continuous house values for top-coded measures.
Reported Rental Value. We next examined questions of reported monthly rents. While rents are
presumably not subject to the same degree of misreporting as house values, it is still the case that renters
who have occupied a unit for a long period of time generally receive some form of tenure discount. In
some cases, this tenure discount may arise from explicit rent control, but implicit tenure discounts generally
occur in rental markets even when the property is not subject to formal rent control. Thus while, this will
not lead to errors in the answering of the listed census question it may lead to an inaccurate comparison of
rents faced by households if they needed to move. In order to get a more accurate measure of the market
rent for each rental unit, we utilize a series of locally based hedonic price regressions in order to estimate
the discount associated with different durations of tenure in each of over 40 sub-regions within the Bay
Area.
In order to get a better estimate of market rents for each renter-occupied unit in our sample, we
regress the log of reported rent Rj on a series of dummy variables that characterize the tenure of the current
renter, y j , as well as a series of variables that characterize other features of the house and neighborhood Xj :
(A2)

log( R j ) = β1 y j + β2 X j + υ j

again running these regressions separately for each of the 45 PUMAs in our sample. To the extent that the
additional house and neighborhood variables included in equation (3) control for differences between the
stock of rental units with long-term vs. short-term tenants, the β1 parameters provide an estimate of the
tenure discount in each PUMA.1 In order to construct estimates of market rents for each rental unit in our
sample, then, we inflate rents based on the length of time that the household has occupied the unit using the
estimates of β1 from equation (2). In this way, these three price adjustments bring the measures for rents
and house values reported in the Census reasonably close to market rates.
Calculating Cost Per Unit of Housing Across Tenure Status. Finally, in order to make owner- and
renter-occupied housing prices comparable in our analysis we need to calculate a current rental value for
housing. Because house prices reflect the expectations about the future rents for the property they
incorporate beliefs about future housing appreciation. To appropriately deflate housing values – and
especially to control for differences in expectations about appreciation in different segments of the Bay
Area housing market – we regress the log of house price (whether mo nthly rent or house value) Πj on an
indicator for whether the housing unit is owner-occupied o j and a series of additional controls for features
of the house including the number of rooms, number of bedrooms, types of structure (single-family
detached, unit in various sized buildings, etc.), and age of the housing structure as well as a series of
neighborhood controls Xj :
(A3)

log( Π j ) = γ 1 o j + γ 2 X j + η j

We estimate these hedonic price regressions for each of 40 sub-regions (Census Public Use
Microdata Areas - PUMAs) of the Bay Area housing market. These regressions return an estimate of the
ratio of house values to rents for each of these sub-regions and we use these ratios to convert house values
to a measure of current monthly rent.
2. External Data
We next discuss the additional variables we have added to the Census data to provide a more
nuanced understanding of the neighborhood characteristics that affect house prices and residential location
decisions. These data sets are linked to census blocks and can be used to determine the appropriateness of
the questions and sampling techniques used. This additional data includes:
1

Interestingly, while we estimate tenure discounts in all PUMAs, the estimated tenure discounts are substantially
greater for rental units in San Francisco and Berkeley, the two largest jurisdictions in the Bay Area that had
formal rent control in 1990.

School and School District Data. The Teale data center in California provided a crosswalk that matches
all Census blocks in California to the corresponding public school district. We have further matched
Census blocks to particular schools using a variety of procedures that takes account of the location (at the
block level) of each Census block within a school district and the precise location of schools within the
district using information on location from the Department of Education. Other school information in these
data include:
• 1992-93 CLAS dataset provides detailed information about school performance and peer group
measures. The CLAS was a test administered in the early 1990s that will give us information on
student performance in math, literature and writing for grades 4, 8 and 10. This dataset presents
information on student characteristics and grades for students at each school overall and across
different classifications of students, including by race and education of parents.
• 1991-2 CBEDS (California Board of Education data sets) datasets including information from the
SIF (school information form) which includes information on the ethnic/racial and gender makeup of students, PAIF – which is a teacher based form that provides detailed information about
teacher experience, education and certification backgrounds and information on the classes each
teacher teaches, and (LEP census) a language census that provides information on the languages
spoken by limited-English speaking students.
Procedures for Assigning School Data. While we have an exact assignment of Census blocks to school
districts, we have only been able to attain precise maps that describe the way that city blocks are assigned
to schools in 1990 for Alameda County. In the absence of information about within-district school
attendance areas, we employ the alternative approaches for linking each house to a school. The crudest
procedure assigns average school district characteristics to every house falling in the school district. A
refinement on this makes use of distance-weighted averages. For a house in a given Census block, we
calculate the distance between that Census block and each school in the school district. We have detailed
information characterizing each school and construct weighted averages of each school characteristic,
weighting by the reciprocal of the distance-squared as well as enrollment.
As a third approach we simply assign each house to the closest school within the appropriate
school district. Our preferred approach (which we use for the results reported in the paper) refines this
closest-school assignment by using information about individual children living in each Census block their age and whether they are enrolled in public school. In particular, we modify the closest-school
assignment technique by attempting to match the observed fourth grade enrollment for every school in
every school district in the Bay Area. Adjusting for the sampling implicit in the long form of the Census,
the 'true' assignment of houses to schools must give rise to the overall fourth grade enrollments observed in
the data.
These aggregate numbers provide the basis for the following intuitive procedure: we begin by
calculating the five closest schools to each Census block. As an initial assignment, each Census block and
all the fourth graders in it are assigned to the closest school. We then calculate the total predicted
enrollment in each school, and compare this with the actual enrollment. If a school has excess demand, we
reassign Census blocks out of its catchment area, while if a school has excess supply, we expand the
school's catchment area to include more districts.
To carry out this adjustment, we rank schools on the basis of the (absolute value of) their
prediction error, dealing with the schools that have the greatest excess demand/supply first. If the school
has excess demand, we reassign the Census block that has the closest second school (recalling that we
record the five closest schools to each Census block, in order), as long as that second school has excess
supply. If a school has excess supply, we reassign to it the closest school district currently assigned to a
school with excess demand. We make gradual adjustments, reassigning one Census block from each
school in disequilibrium each iteration. This gradual adjustment of assignments of Census blocks to
schools continues until we have 'market clearing' (within a certain tolerance) for each school. Our actual
algorithm converges quickly and produces plausible adjustments to the initial, closest-school assignment.
Land use. Information on land use/land cover digital data is collected by USGS and converted to
ARC/INFO by the EPA available at: http://www.epa.gov/ost/basins/ for 1988. We have calculated for each
Census block, the percentage of land in a 1/4, 1/2,1, 2, 3, 4 and 5-mile radii that is used for commercial,

residential, industrial, forest (including parks), water (lakes, beaches, reservoirs), urban (mixed urban or
built up), transportation (roads, railroad tracks, utilities) and other uses.
Crime data. Information on crime was drawn from the rankings of zipcodes on a scale of 1-10 on the risk
of violent crime (homicide, rape or robbery). A score of 5 is the average risk of violent crime and a score
of 1 indicates a risk 1/5 the national average and a 10 is 10 or more times the national average. These
ratings are provided by CAP index and were downloaded from APBNews.com.
Geography and Topography. The Teale data center in California provided information on the elevation,
latitude and longitude of each Census block.

ESTIMATION APPENDIX
Estimation of the model follows a two-stage procedure closely related to that developed in Berry,
Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995). It is helpful in describing the estimation procedure to first introduce some
notation. In particular, we rewrite the indirect utility function as:
(A4)

Vhi = δ h + λih + ε hi

where
(A5)

δ h = α 0 X X h + α 0Z Z h − α 0 p ph + ξ h

and

(A6)

 K

 K

 K

 K

λih =  α kX z ki  X h +  α kZ z ki  Z h −  α kp z ki  p h −  α kd z ik d h .
 k =1

 k =1

 k =1

 k =1


∑

∑

∑

∑

In equation (A5), δh captures the portion of utility provided by housing type h that is common to all
households, and in (A6), k indexes household characteristics. When the household characteristics included
in the model are constructed to have mean zero, δh is the mean indirect utility provided by housing choice
h. The unobservable component of δh , ξh , captures the portion of unobserved preferences for housing
choice h that is correlated across households, while εh i represents unobserved preferences over and above
this shared component.
The estimator is a two-stage procedure. The first stage selects the heterogeneous parameters λh
and mean indirect utilities δh that maximize the probability that the model correctly predicts each
individual’s location decision conditional on the full set of observed housing and neighborhood attributes,
including those endogenously determined. Formally, the validity of this first stage requires two
assumptions: that the observed location decisions are individually optimal, given the collective choices
made by other households and the vector of market-clearing prices, and that households are sufficiently
small such that they do not interact strategically with respect to particular draws on ε. This latter
assumption ensures that households can each effectively integrate out the idiosyncratic preferences of all
others when making their own location decisions and so that no household’s particular idiosyncratic
preferences affect the equilibrium. Thus the vector of idiosyncratic preferences ε is uncorrelated with the
prices and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics that arise in any equilibrium.
In essence, the first-stage of the estimation procedure is equivalent to a Maximum Likelihood
procedure that treats housing prices and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics as exogenous from
the individual’s point-of-view.
Importantly, the assumption that prices and neighborhood
sociodemographic characteristics are uncorrelated with the vector of idiosyncratic preferences ε does not
imply that they are uncorrelated with the full error term, as we explicitly allow for a portion of unobserved
preferences, ξ, that is correlated with price and endogenous neighborhood characteristics in equilibrium.
This correlation is addressed in the second stage of the estimation procedure, in which the vector δ
estimated in the first stage is decomposed into components.

Operationally, for any combination of the heterogeneous parameters in λ and mean indirect
utilities, δh , the model predicts the probability that each household i chooses house type h. We assume that
εh i is drawn from the extreme value distribution, in which case this probability can be written:
(A7)

ˆi
Phi = exp(δ h + λ h )

∑ exp(δ

k

+ λˆik )

k

Maximizing the probability that each household makes its correct housing choice gives rise to the following
quasi-log-likelihood function:
(A8)

~
l=

∑∑ I
i

i
h

ln( Phi )

h

where Ii h is an indicator variable that equals 1 if household i chooses house type h in the data and 0
otherwise. The first stage of the estimation procedure consists of searching over the parameters in λ and

~

the vector of mean indirect utilities to maximize l . Notice that the quasi-likelihood function developed
here is based solely on the notion that each household’s residential location is optimal given the set of
observed prices and the location decisions of other households.
The Mechanics of the First Stage of the Estimation. Intuitively, it is easy to see how this first stage of
the estimation procedure ties down the heterogeneous parameters – those involving an interaction of
household characteristics with housing and neighborhood characteristics. If more educated households are
more likely to choose houses near better schools in the data for instance, a positive interaction of education
and school quality will allow the model to fit the data better than a negative interaction would. What is less
intuitive is the way the vector of mean indirect utilities is determined. To better understand the mechanics
of the first stage of the estimation, it is helpful to write the first-order conditions related to δh :
(A9)

~
∂l

= ∑ ∂ ln(Ph )
i

∂δ h

i ∈h

+ ∑ ∂ ln(Ph )
i

∂δ h

i∉h

∂δ h

(

)

(

)

( )

= ∑ 1 − Phi + ∑ − Phi = S h − ∑ Phi = 0
i ∈h

i∉h

i

It is apparent that the quasi-likelihood function is maximized at the vector δ that forces the sum of the
probabilities that each observed individual chooses each house type to equal the total supply of such
houses:

∑ (P ) = S
i
h

i

h

∀ h . That this condition must hold for all house types results from a fundamental

~

trade-off in l . In particular, an increase in any δh raises the probability that each household in the sample
chooses house type h. While this increases the probability that the model correctly predicts the choice of
the households that actually reside in houses of type h, it decreases the probability that all of the other
households in the sample make the correct choice. Thus the first stage of the estimation procedure consists
of choosing the interaction parameters that best match each individual with their chosen house, while
ensuring that total predicted demand equals supply for each house type.
For any set of interaction parameters (those in λ), a contraction mapping can be used to calculate
the vector δ that solves the set of first order conditions:

∑ (P ) = S
i
h

i

contraction mapping is simply:

(A10)


δ ht +1 = δ ht − ln 


∑ P̂

i
h

i


S h 


h

∀ h . For our application, the

where t indexes the iterations of the contraction mapping. Using this contraction mapping, it is possible to
solve quickly for an estimate of the full vector δˆ even when it contains a large number of elements,
thereby dramatically reducing the computational burden in the first stage of the estimation procedure.2
Notice that while we have not explicitly enforced the market clearing conditions derived above,
the conditions that result from maximizing the quasi-likelihood function with respect to δ are identical to
the market-clearing conditions shown in equation (6) in the main text. Thus, there is a clear duality
between the equilibrating role of prices in our characterization of equilibrium in the housing market and the
way that the vector of mean indirect utilities is determined as a result of maximizing the likelihood that
each household chooses its appropriate house conditional on prices and housing and neighborhood
attributes.
The Second Stage. Having estimated the vector of mean indirect utilities in the first stage of the
estimation procedure, the second stage involves decomposing δ into observable and unobservable
components according to equation (A5).3 Because households sort across locations based in part on the
portion of housing and neighborhood quality unobserved by the researcher, housing prices, average test
scores, and neighborhood sociodemographic characteristics are almost certainly correlated with ξh and
consequently the corresponding endogeneity problems must be confronted. We describe the use of
boundary fixed effects to address the endogeneity of average test scores and neighborhood
sociodemographic characteristics in the main text.
To deal with the correlation of price and unobserved housing/neighborhood quality, ξh , we
instrument for price. The particular instrument that we develop takes advantage of an inherent feature of
housing markets: that the demand for a house in a particular neighborhood is affected not only by the
features of the neighborhood itself but also by the availability of alternative houses and neighborhoods in
the wider region. For example, neighborhoods that possess certain amenities that are unique or difficult to
replicate will command higher prices in equilibrium, partly because of this scarcity. The exogenous
attributes of houses and neighborhoods at a reasonable distance from a particular neighborhood serve as
suitable instruments for price, as the attributes of these more distant neighborhoods affect equilibrium
prices but not the utility derived from living in the neighborhood.4
In practice, the precision of the estimation is improved significantly when the logic of this IV
strategy is used to construct a single variable that approximates the optimal instrument. In particular, we
construct an instrument by solving for the vector of prices that would clear the market when only
exogenous features of houses and neighborhoods are included in the utility function. This instrument
captures the portion of housing price variation attributable to the distribution of the exogenous features of
houses and neighborhoods throughout the region, summarizing this information in a single variable.
A couple of additional practical items are worth describing. First, the construction of the
instrument requires an initial conjecture as to the parameters associated with exogenous housing and
neighborhood attributes. We obtain such an initial conjecture for the parameters of the mean indirect utility
equation by making a reasonable guess as to the price coefficient and then estimating equation (11) via
OLS, bringing the price term to the left hand side of the equation. Using the resulting coefficients on X
from this regression along with those obtained in the first stage, we then calculate the vector of housing
prices that clears the market,

p̂ * (X h , Zi ) , setting ξh =0 for all h, and including only exogenous choice

It is worth emphasizing that a separate vector δ is calculated for each set of interaction parameters – and at
the optimum, this procedure returns the quasi-ML estimates of the interaction parameters and the vector of
mean indirect utilities δ .
3
Notice that the set of observed residential choices provides no information that distinguishes the
components of δ . That is, regardless of the way δ is broken into components, the effect on choice
probabilities is the same.
4
Put another way, for most individuals, the relevant extent of the housing market is much larger when they
are searching for a house (they might live, for example, to the north, south, east, or west of their job
location) than when they actually choose a residence, in which case the characteristics of houses on the
opposite side of town likely have only a minimal direct impact on utility. It is the fact that a much broader
set of houses is in play during the search process that implies that the characteristics of the housing stock on
the other side of town will influence equilibrium prices.
2

characteristics in the model.5 In the results reported below, we include a full set of controls for the
characteristics of a house and its neighborhood as well as five variables that describe land use6 and six
variables that describe the housing stock7 in each of the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 mile rings around the house. In
this way, the additional information embedded in our instrument derives from the exogenous features of the
housing stock and land use in a region beyond five miles from the house in question.8
Characterizing the Housing Market – A Practical Issue. A final practical issue for estimation concerns
the way the choices that characterize the housing market should be defined. This modeling decis ion
essentially corresponds to an assumption regarding the way demand for particular houses in the market is
determined. The trade-offs implicit in the required assumption can be seen using a simple example:
Consider a city neighborhood with two types of housing structures, one of which is more prevalent than the
other, with all houses in the neighborhood selling for the same price. To simplify this discussion, further
assume that households have identical tastes. In this case, if we characterized the choice set as the two
types of structure, we would infer that the more prevalent structure provided higher mean direct utility; this
is necessary to explain why more households choose that structure given equal prices. If, on the other
hand, we characterized the housing market by randomly drawing a subset of the houses in the
neighborhood, we would infer that all of the houses in the neighborhood offered the same utility. We do
not see any strong a priori for making one of these choices versus the other. Moreover, given that any
definition of ‘type’ would be based only on the limited characteristics observed in the data, we adopt the
second option described above, simply characterizing housing types as the 1-in-7 random sample of the
houses observed in our Census dataset. This characterization also facilitates comparisons with the hedonic
price regression literature; with this characterization of the choice set, a hedonic price regression
corresponds to estimating mean preferences under the assumption of no heterogeneity in household tastes.9
Asymptotic Properties of the Estimator. As described in McFadden (1978), an attractive aspect of the
underlying IIA property for each individual is that we can estimate the model using only a sample of the
alternatives not selected by the individual. This permits estimation despite having many alternatives – i.e.,
many distinct house types. More generally, our problem fits within a class of models for which the
asymptotic distribution theory has been developed. In this sub-section, we summarize the requirements
necessary for the consistency and asymptotic normality of our estimates and provide some intuition for
these conditions.
In general, there are three dimensions in which our sample can grow large: H (number of housing
types), N (number of individuals in the sample), or C (number of non-chosen alternatives drawn for each
individual). For any set of distinct housing alternatives of size H and any random sampling of these
alternatives of size C, the consistency and asymptotic normality of the first-stage estimates (δ, θλ) follows
directly as long as N grows large. This is the central result of McFadden (1978), justifying the use of a
random sample of the full census of alternatives. Intuitively, even if each household is assigned only one
5

To obtain the final estimates reported in the paper, we repeat this procedure using the estimated
parameters from the initial estimation to construct a new price instrument for the next iteration. While
using such an iterative process is not necessary to ensure consistency, in practice it ensures that the final
estimates are not sensitive to our initial conjecture of the coefficient on price. For this reason, we believe
that this iterative procedure is likely to be more efficient than applying the procedure once, but we do not
have a proof of this.
6
That is: percent industrial, percent commercial, percent residential, percent open space, and percent other.
7
The housing stock variables are: percent owner-occupied single family homes with 7 rooms or more;
percent owner-occupied single family homes with less than 7 rooms; percent renter-occupied single family
homes; percent renter-occupied units in large apartment buildings; percent of units in small apartment
buildings; percent other.
8
In first-stage price regressions, this instrument, which is derived entirely from the exogenous
characteristics of the alternatives and the distribution of household characteristics in the population, adds
significantly to the predictive power of these regressions. In each specification, the optimal price
instrument is strongly predictive of price, over and above the set of variables included directly in X,
increasing the R2 of each regression by approximately 4 percentage points.
9
Nothing theoretically prevents estimation of the model under an alternative assumption concerning
housing choices.

randomly drawn alternative in addition to its own choice, the number of times that each house type is
sampled (the dimension in which the choice-specific constants are identified) grows as a fixed fraction of
N.
If the true vector δ were used in the second stage of the estimation procedure, the consistency and
asymptotic normality of the second-stage estimates θδ would follow as long as Hà ∞.10 In practice,
ensuring the consistency and asymptotic normality of the second-stage estimates is complicated by the fact
the vector δ is estimated rather than known. Berry, Linton, and Pakes (2002) develop the asymptotic
distribution theory for the second stage estimates θδ for a broad class of models that contains our model as a
special case, and consequently we employ their results. In particular, the consistency of the second-stage
estimates follows as long as Hà ∞ and N grows fast enough relative to H such that H log H N goes to
zero, while asymptotic normality at rate

H follows as long as H 2 N is bounded. Intuitively, these

conditions ensure that the noise in the estimate of δ becomes inconsequential asymptotically and thus that
the asymptotic distribution of θδ is dominated by the randomness in ξ as it would be if δ were known.
Given that the consistency and asymptotic normality of the second stage estimates requires the
number of individuals in the sample to go to infinity at a faster rate than the number of distinct housing
units, it is important to be clear about the implications of the way that we characterize the housing market
in the paper. In particular, we characterize the set of available housing types using the 1-in-7 random
sample of the housing units in the metropolitan area observed in our Census dataset. Superficially, this
characterization seems to imply that the number of housing types is as great as the number of households in
the sample, which appears at odds with the requirements for the establishing the key asymptotic properties
of our model.
It is important to note, however, the housing market may be characterized by a much smaller
sample of houses, with each ‘true’ house type showing up many times in our large sample. Consider, for
example, using a large choice set of 250,000 housing units, when the market could be fully characterized
by 25,000 ‘true’ house types, with each ‘true’ house type showing up an average of 10 times in the larger
choice set. On the one hand, the 250,000 observations could be used to calculate the market share of each
of the 25,000 ‘true’ house types, with market shares averaging 1/25,000 and the second stage δ regressions
based on 25,000 observations. On the other hand, separate market shares equal to 1/250,000 could be
attributed to each house observed in the larger sample and the second stage regression based on the larger
sample of 250,000. These regressions would return exactly the same estimates, as the former regression is
a direct aggregation of the latter. What is important from the point-of-view of the asymptotic properties of
the model is not that the number of individuals increases faster than then number of housing choices used
in the analysis, but rather that the number of individuals increases fast enough relative to the number of
truly distinct housing types in the market. That the number of distinct housing types in the market grows at
a rate slower than the number of households seems plausible.

10

This condition requires certain regularity conditions. See Berry, Linton, and Pakes (2002) for details.

