                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CURRENCY INCONVERTIBILITY, PORTFOLIO
                  BALANCE AKD RELATIVE PRICES




                     Jorge Braga de Macedo




                     Working Paper No. 1087




              NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                       Cambridge MA 02138


                           March 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #1087
                                                   March 1983


                CURRENCY INCONVERTIBILITY, PORTFOLIO BALANCE

                              AND RELATIVE PRICES



                                   Abstract

     This paper analyzes regimes of currency inconvertibility in the frame-

work of a simple general equilibrium model where an officially-traded good,

a smuggled good and a non-traded good are produced and consumed by residents,

who hold domestic and foreign currency in their portfolios. It is shown that

stability requires the effect of relative prices on demand for traded and

non-traded goods to dominate their effect on asset demands and that a once-

and-for-all devaluation does not change the currency substitution ratio.

To the extent that the monetary authorities wish to change the currency

composition of private financial wealth, a crawling peg is therefore the

appropriate instrument. The direction of change depends on the nature of

expectations about relative asset returns. Under perfect foresight, an

increase in the rate of crawl increases the currency substitution ratio

whereas, if expectations are static, it reduces it.




                                 Jorge Braga de Macedo
                                 Woodrow Wilson School
                                 Princeton, N. J. 08544
                                 Ph: (609) 452-6474
1.   Introduction

     The development of private international financial intermediation has

led to an unprecedented growth of trade in assets taking place not only

among industrialized countries but also spreading to semi—industrialized and

even to some less developed countries. This has provided channels for

individuals and organizations to build up foreign exchange balances, so that

they can diversify their portfolios across assets denominated in different

currencies. In response, many governments have attempted to recapture foreign

exchange by offering special advantages to certain types of transactions,

namely the ones where evasion of exchange controls would be easier, like

tourist services and migrants' remittances. Nevertheless, in many countries

with inconvertible currencies, "blackt' markets for foreign exchange have

developed to the point that the relative price between domestic and foreign

money that is determined in these markets may have a greater effect on

private capital flows than the "official" rate, with obvious repercussions

on. the balance of payments problem of the country in question.

     Restricting the ability to convert national currency into foreign exchange

may involve a restriction on international trade, which would therefore tend

to promote factor mobility and trade in assets.    Also, even though the
                                      —2—



definition of convertibility in the Articles of Agreement of the IMF

only refers to current account transactions, in a world of capital

mobility and flexible exchange rates among major currencies, black

markets for "convertible" currencies will develop when policies toward

current account transactions are divorced from policies with respect to

capital account transactions.

    In this paper, the fruitfulness of the portfolio approach to the

determination of the black market rate in situations of currency incon—

vertibility is suggested in Section 1 by a simple dynamic partial

equilibrium portfolio model. Section 2 develops a portfolio balance

model of a small open economy with three goods and two assets. One good

is traded in the official foreign exchange market, another is smuggled

through the black market, and the third is non—traded.' On the other hand,

private financial wealth is composed of domestic and foreign money. Section

3 shows how the temporary equilibrium of the model determines the two

relative prices, where the relative price of the two traded goods is also

the black market premium. Section 4, in turn, shows how equilibrium

determines the long—run equilibrium values of the asset stocks. After

analyzing the perfect foresight path of a simplified version of the model

in Section 5, the paper ends with a brief conclusion.
                                       -3.-




2.   A dynamic partial equilibrium model of the black market for foreign exchange

     Consider a country whose residents are not authorized to hold foreign

assets, but who nevertheless allocate their financial wealth between domestic

and foreign currency. If foreigners do not hold the inconvertible domestic

currency in their portfolios, then, the domestic currency price of foreign

currency in the black market will be such that the existing stock is willingly

held. Furthermore, the only way for domestic residents to acquire foreign

currency is through the underinvoicing or smuggling of exports and through

the overinvoicing of imports. Under a fixed official exchange rate and in

the absence of endogenous reported capital flows and errors and omissions,

as well as interest payments on unrecorded capital flows, the two balances

will give the change in the stock of foreign currency of the private sector

and the central bank respectively. Assuming that the relevant "elasticities

condition" holds, on the other hand, will imply that an increase in the black

market (official) exchange rate will improve the unreported (reported) trade

balance. If the shares traded through each market also respond to the black

market premium, the black market (official) rate will also deteriorate the

reported (unreported) trade balance, but by less.2 Under these conditions,

the difference between output and expenditure      which equals the sum of the

two trade balances -   will   be lowered by the increase in either one of the

exchange rates.

     Ignoring the monetary consequences of the reported trade deficit, this

system can be illustrated by a variant of the Kouri (1983) diagram, as in

Figure 1. The left panel shows the instantaneous determination of the black

market exchange rate, given demand for foreign currency and no expected

change in relative returns, along a rectangular hyperbola PP. Under a

perfect foresight, demand for foreign currency will increase when the

black market rate depreciates, constraining its initial value for a
                                     -4-




 given stock of foreign currency F to e', on the saddle path S (below the

 corresponding initial value under static expectations, e0). For a given offi—

 cial exchange rate,     (< e), the left panel of Figure 1 plots the unreported

 trade surplus in foreign currency, B (which equals to the increase in F) as

 well as the exogenous reported trade deficit, —.     Assuming a stronger effect
 of the black market rate on B, the - locus will have a steeper slop and the

 total trade balance   will be upward sloping. For simplicity assume that B is

 zero initially but that the unreported trade balance equilibrium associated

 with the given official exchange rate is e*. If the associated reported deficit

    is corrected by a devaluation of the official exchange rate to its long—run

 equilibrium level, j, the three schedules will shift up and intersect on the

vertical axis at a point where, by choice of units,   e =   . The   implications of
the offical devaluation differ depending on the expectations formation mechanism.

 If expectations are static, the black market exchange rate will gradually

depreciate from e0 to e1 as the stock of foreign assets decreases from
                                                                       F0 to
F1. If expectations are rational the black market
                                                    rate jumps from e to e.
and thengradually depreciates to the same long-run value, If the official

devaluation generates an increase in the demand for foreign assets from

PP to PP, furthermore, the black market rate will overshoot to
                                                               e2(e under
perfect foresight) and gradually appreciate as the stock of foreign assets

increases to F.

     This analysis remains applicable when the official exchange rate, rather

than being fixed, is set by the central bank according to the "acceleration

hypothesis", so that it depreciates at a rate given by the rate of the re-

ported trade balance over the stock of foreign assets of the central bank.3

To analyze the effect of an exogenously given rate of crawl, however, the
                                   -5-




                               Figure 1


                   Partial equilibrium analysis

                       of the black market rate




                —i -                                  P2
                  /B1
                                         e
                                             2
                         —B0             e1
e1 = e1                                                                S,
                                                                        2
                                   B0


                                         e0
e0 >e
        0

                                         e*
                                                                                St
                                                                            P    0




                                                 F1        F0F2   F*
            B
                                          -6-



 trade    balances have to respond to the black market premium rather than to

 the levels of the two rates and this is best handled in the general equili-

 brium framework of the next section.


 3.     A three-good two-asset model of currency inconvertibility

        While some basic features of the black market for foreign exchange can

be derived from a straightforward extension of the Kouri (1983) partial

equilibrium analysis, as done in the previous section, the interaction between

the   private and official valuation of foreign exchange, on the one hand, and
the role of the black market premium as a relative price, on the other, call
for a general equilibrium approach. In the model presented below, two
relative prices are endogously determined, the black market premium and the

relative price of non-traded goods. To sharpen the analysis, we will neglect

the role of the black market premium emphasized in the previous section,

namely determining whether a transaction will go through the official or

the black foreign exchange market. Here there are exports and imports which

either always traded through the official market, or always smuggled. Their

prices in foreign currency are, in obvious notation, XO'
                                                                      XB and P.
Assuming further that the given factors of production are fully employed, we

specify the five excess-supply functions for goods in terms of the vector

of domestic currency prices, P, and financial wealth, W.


        (1)    X.(P) - D.   (P,W) = ES.   (P,W) i = XO, MO, XB, NT,


where            =
                     xo MO    XB MB NT

      The elimination of the direct effect of asset returns on the demand for

goods, as well as of the income effect is designed to simplify the analysis.4
                                                -7-




For the same reason, demands for domestic money M and foreign exchange F

depend on the expected rate of change of the black market exchange rate, ,

as a measure of the real returns differential when nominal returns are zero,5

on the vector of goods prices and on wealth.


     (2)          eF =    f(,    P, W)

     (3)          M =m(              )




     (4)          W =M+eF

     The domestic money stock, in turn, is made up of domestic credit, C —

interpreted      as lump-sum transfer from the government — and the stock of

foreign assets of the (government), central bank FG, valued at the official

exchange rate:


        (5)       M= C+FG

     This formulation takes as given the money multiplier or, equivalently,

assumes a stock demand for high—powered money.

     Going       back to the excess-supply functions for goods, and expressing
                                                                        6
them in       terms of the price of the official export goo4 P0 = eP0      we get,

from zero homogeneity in prices and wealth:

        (1')       X. -      = ES        (p,



where              p =
                          P/P0
                                 =
                                           23
                     = w/pxo

        The four relative prices which are the components of the p vector can

be expressed in terms of the terms-of-trade in the official and black

markets, the black market premium and the relative price of non-traded goods:
                                                              -8-


                  *   *
        t.1    = P ./P .
                  Xl mi     i     =   0,   B



           =
                XB'XO) ;o1xB?                  =    e/
        q =
                NT'XO

 If the terms of trade are given to the domestic economy, t0 and tB as well

 as PQ/P8 are exogenous and can be set to one by choice of units.

        Asset demands are linear homogenous in prices and wealth,7 while the

neglect of the effect of relative asset returns on the demand for goods

implies that f =                  in (2) and (3) above. We can therefore substitute for
                           -in
the demand for domestic money by using the wealth constraint and write port-

folio balance as:


        (2')       pF =    f(),       p, q,         +   pF)

where                =



     We    also assume that the market for non-traded goods always clears:


     (6)           XNT(p, q) = D(p,                q, W)


     Given       asset stocks and the terms of trade, (2') and (6) determine the
two endogenous relative prices p and q.                             To   the extent that the official
exchange rate is fixed, or that its rate of change is determined by the

monetary authorities, furthermore, temporary equilibrium involves the adjust-
ment of e and NT            In    fact, given (6), it is clear that temporary equilibrium

requires e and NT to move at the rate of crawl, so that p and q are constant.

    Now excess supply for traded goods equals the accuinlation of foreign

currency by the central bank and the private sector through the reported and
                                                 -9-.




unreported trade balances respectively. We will allow for exogenous reported

capital flows, whose amount in foreign currency is T, an outflow. Then we

write foreign asset accumlation as:

                       =        (ESXB + ESMB/tB) = B(p, q,
          (7)
                           XB
                                 *
          (8)        F + T                                   =
                                                                 B(p,   q,
                                P0 (ESxo + ESMO/to)

          It is clear from (7) that when F = 0 in steady-state equilibrium, B               0

so that the excess-supply of smuggled goods is zero. The relationshipsof the

reported trade balance to the change in domestic real money balances,                   stil.l


needs to be specified. Given (5), it will, require assumptions about credit

creation and the rate of crawl. Since we do not explicitly introduce a

government sector, there is only the endogenous source of money creation, the

excess supply of the official traded good. The exogenous components are the

reported capital flows, domestic credit creation, which are both transfers,

and capital gains on central bank reserves associated with changes in the

official exchange rate, to the extent that a fraction -y thereof induces

credit creation and 1 - y goes into central bank net-worth forever. We can

then write:



          (9) =+                -T
where                  =   - [ + (1     -   y)    ]
                                                         -

          It    is clear from (9) that if y =           0, as usually assumed,8 the expression
in square brackets equals one and                 becomes the real increase in domestic

credit creation as a proportion of the money stock. Notice also that if

y =   1   and P;0 is given,          becomes inversely proportional to the real money

stock, so that its level only enters through
                                         - 10.-




        Finally, we specify for the moment an adaptive expectation formation

 mechanism based on the level of the premium, so that


         (10)      =



        We will refer below to the perfect foreign assumption



        (11)



        Using (10) in (6), setting P0 = 1 by choice of units and expressing

 (2') and (6) as implicit functions of asset stocks and relative prices, we

can   express   the temporary equilibrium of the system as:


        (12)     A(p, q, 1, F, z) = pF -   f   = 0



        (13)    N(p, q, l, F, z) = ESNT = 0


where              =
                       XB'Xo   tB t0) is a vector of exogenous relative prices.


4. porary equilibrium
        By log differentiation of (12) and (13) we solve the system for the two

endogenous relative prices, as a function of asset stocks and the vector

of exogenous prices. Denoting the matrix of (positive) elasticities of the

f function and semi-elasticities of the N function with respects to z by II,
          9
we get,


                                                          -1+a
        (14)                                                               +flz
                       -
                           2
                                     q            (1 -               \F


where           a = pF/W is the share of foreign assets in wealth;
                                              — 11—




               =           is       the elasticity of demand for foreign assets with

             respect to real wealth;

             x is the positive elasticity of expectations relative to the

             premium; 61(62 63) is the positive elasticity of demand for

             foreign assets with respect to the premium (the relative price

             of non-traded goods, relative returns), e.g. 6
                                                                      2
                                                                          =
                                                                                       IP
                                                                                                ;
                                                                                  Lf        L

             C = —C Ti;
              1        1        3


                   =   -WN/W        is the positive semi-elasticity of the excess supply

             of non-traded goods with respect to real wealth;


               ( ) is
              12           the positive semi-elasticity of the excess supply of

             non-traded goods with respect to the premium (the relative price

             of non-traded goods), e.g. v = -p N/3p - p N/Bp
                                                      1   2     2    3        3



     It is clear from the left-hand-side of (14) that in q, q space the slope

of the N schedule is iffiambiguously positive whereas the A schedule could

slope downward if the valuation effect were weaker than the sum of the wealth

effect and the relative price effect (net of the regressive expectation effect).



                           f/
Put another way, as the premium increases, demand of foreign assets increases

by less. Since a =                   and    is the total elasticity of money demand

with respect to the premium, we can write this condition as:


     (15)    —>        1




     If condition (15) is met, the premium varies inversely with the currency

ratio valued at the official rate, F/'4, and with a coefficient less than one,

so that if the premium increases, we know that the currency ratio valued at
                                     —12--




the black market rate, pF/M, will also increase. If marginal and average

currency shares are the same (n =   1),   furthermore, condition (15) puts the

share of domestic money in wealth as an upper bound on the premium elasticity,

net of expectations effects.

     In a partial equilibrium framework where price and wealth effects are

neglected, then, the A schedule would be horizontal.       JTn general, to the

extent that relative price effects are stronger on the flow demand for goods

than on the stock demand for assets, the slope of the A schedule will be less

than the slope of the N schedule. To the extent that          < 1      -


furthermore,   the slope will be less than the ray through the origin OR, as

drawn in Figure 2, where temporary equilibrium obtains at T. It is clear

from the Figure that an exogenous increase in i    (not   due to a decrease in p),

by only moving up the A schedule, increases p by more than it increases q so

that the new equilibrium is at T. This result holds independently of the

slope of the A schedule.

     The effects of changes in asset stocks are also straightforward. If the

slopes are as drawn, then the determinant      of the Jacobian in (14) is positive

and domestic monetary expansion will increase both relative prices while an

increase in foreign money will decrease them. To see this solve (14) for

given z and write:




     (:14')                          H
                                     LJ
                                                            -13-



where
               M (v2 1 6) (l                            -       ) n/Li;
                   =
                        (v2        +
                                        (1E2h)     (1 -          c)    /L


                               +          (1   -                 (1    - c) /L

                        -          +               (1       -    cn) IA

               A        2(l -                  )-                      +         >0

               h   =
                        v2/l       -       is the marginal currency ratio


                                       is the ratio of the wealth semi-elasticity of excess

               supply of non-traded goods to the wealth elasticity of demand

               for foreign assets.


Note that F <          requires that the own                       price    effect dominate the demand for

non-traded goods or that the marginal currency ratio be sufficiently small.

It is clear from Figure 2, though, that if A moves up and N to the right or

conversely the new intersection might be the left or to the right of OR,

depending on the relative sizes of                                and       and F and     respectively.

Under our assumption that the slope of of the A schedule is less the p/q,

the   dominance of the "own" effect in the non-traded-- goods market has to be
sufficienty strong for

        (16)       >       + w1 (1 —               c    +
                                                                62).

       If condition (16) holds, asset stocks will always have a stronger effect
on p than on q, so that after an increase in domestic (foreign) money the

system will move to TM (TF), to the left (right) of OR. If condition (16)

does not hold, then                <       (as in T1') but it would still be the case that
      >   II if:
                          -14-




                     Figure 2

            Short-run   effect of various

    disturbances under regressive expectations




                                   N
p
                                            p/q
                                             R


                            T



                                                  A


                            T
                             0




0
                                                      q
                                                        -15-




        (17)                           +
                  v2 >   v1 + (c1          E2) 1h

        The effect of changes in the exogenous relative prices are easy to

 ascertain. The matrix n          is   given by


                          r1
        (18)     II =
                                   -
                         [:1
where            EB (c0) is the elasticity of the demand for foreign assets with

                 respect to p3 (p1), respectively the inverse of the relevant terms

                 of trade;


and
                 \ (v0) is       the semielasticity of N with respect to
                                                                                        p(p1).


      It is clear from the substitution of (18) into (14) and the use of

Cramer's rule that an increase in XB'XO (which always appears multiplied by

p) increase p and q while increase in tB or t0 decrease p and q. The effect

on p will be stronger if V2            is      sufficiently large. Tne exact condition for

the increase in the terms of trade t, i = B, 0 to lower p/q is stronger than

(16) if \'./E.    is    large:


      (19)       V2
                      > aw + v +               (1   -          -     -

      The condition for the increase in T                      to   increase p/q is weaker than (19):


      (20)       V2
                      > aw1 +       (1     -   o.ii +     3TF -    c)
      To consider the effect of a once-and-for-all devaluation of the official

rate, notic that it increases the demand for foreign currency by 1 -                             - £2
and increases excess demand for non-traded goods by                            -   - w1,
                                                                           2               so that the
                                                - 16-




black market exchange rate and the price of non-traded goods rise. It can,

however, be shown that if L > 0 they will necessarily rise by less, so that

p and q fall. In fact, p/q will fall and the new equilibrium will be on or

below OR if condition (16) holds. An official devaluation would thus bring

the system from T to TF in Figure 2, just like when the stock of foreign

money increases. Note, finally, that an increase in the equilibrium ratio

of foreign money to wealth lowers the slope of the N schedule and increases

the slope of the A schedule.


5.   Steady-state equilibrium

     Still assuming regressive expectations about the change in the black

market rate, we investigate the properties of steady-state equilibrium,

defined by constant asset stocks                =       and F   F*. These are such that,

aside from portfolio balance and equilibrium in the non-traded goods market,

there is zero excess supply of the smuggled good, so that B                    0 and therefore,

zero excess supply for the official traded good as well,                  =   0.   Asset accumu-

lation can thus be represented by solving out for p and q in the excess supply

function for traded goods. We express it as:


     (21)    M =    (, F) +                -T

     (22)    F=B (m, F)

     According to (21), when           =   0, domestic real money balances will not remain
constant. Setting        = 0       in (9) above, we obtain a relationship between domes-

tic credit creation, the reported capital outflow and the rate of crawl which

has to be satisfied for the reported trade balance to imply a constant real

domstic money stock. It can be written as:


     (23)    ë = (C -   'T)    I    (N -   yFG)
                                         -17-




According to (23) the rate of crawl is determined by the difference between

the exogenous domestic credit creation and reported capital outflow,

over the money stock net of the fraction of central bank reserves which

induces credit creation. Thus if, as usually assumed, y          0, the rate of

crawl will be lowest. If, conversely all capital gains are monetized, the

denominator reduces to C.

        If (23) holds, then the only net source of increase in domestic real

money balances is indeed the excess-supply of the officially traded good:


        (21') f=

suppose now that both         and T are zero but that the rate of crawl is determined

by the "acceleration hypothesis "described in Section 2 above. Then (21')

does not hold and we have instead:


        (21")        = (1 +


        The   two specifications have the same linear approximation. We wiii choose
(21') for simplicity and      will analyze the effect of an increase in domestic

credit   creation from a value which is exactly offset by    the rate of crawl

along the lines of (23). Under these conditions we can write the linear
appoximation of the system around long run equilibrium in matrix form:




         N\
(25)            1=


              )
                                                -18-




where         ()        is   the positive semi—elasticity of the reported (unreported)

              current account with respect to the premium, e.g. lf = —pB/Bp

              1:1(p)    is the positive semi—elasticity of the reported (unreported)

              current account with respect to the relative price of non—traded

              goods, e.g. i        = —qB/q

              3(w) is the positive semi—elasticity of the reported (unreported)

              current account with respect to real wealth, e.g.                    = —WB/W

and                 '             ,q    are defined in (l4).




        The determinant of the Jacobian in (25) is given by:


(26)          DET =
                        [w1l(fp4)          + V2(ü)+(A))      +
                                                                 (v1+aw1)(w—p)]

         It   is dear from (26) that if the reported and unreported current

account have the same response to wealth and the relative price of the non—

traded good(so that           A        and p =      ii)   the determinant will be positive:


(26')          DET =                        +             > 0
                        (l-a)(f+7r)[T1w1


        Under the same simplifying assumption, and if in addition n = 1                   ,   the
trace will be given by:


(27)          —TR =
                        [v2(l-)    + 1c2j(+) + w —
                                                                 w1[E2(+w)
                                                                             -
                                                                                 p(l--1)] .
        Note that even when              is at the upper bound given by condition 15),

and the term in p vanishes, if
                                                2          and      are large relative to €2
and       ,   the   expression in (27) will be positive and the system will be stable

The condition for the own          effect   on the unreported current account to be negative
                                             -19-



(B/F      <
              0) is of course stronger than (27). It requires that the direct

premium effect dominate the effect of the relative price of non—traded goods

and wealth:



   (28)        [2(1_a) +               > cw(2&1—\.1C2) + i[i(l—a) +
                           OLW1E2ITF                                  cLwlr])
    On the cross effects in (25), the one on the reported current account

(aB/F) is positive because               and F are negative and       !PFI > 1. For
     > 0 , however we need




                                  [(v21v1E2) +
                              >                     1] +
  (29) T(1-a)[v2-c2w1}


 which is stronger than (28), but nevertheless plausible if V2 and Tr are

 large enough relative to w and

      Under these conditions, the qualitative properties of steady-state

 equilibrium will basically be the same as in a similar model without non-

 traded goods and can be stated briefly.10 It can be shown that                 not sur-

 prisingly — an increase in the demand for foreign assets will increase h,

 the currency substitution ratio, while a once-and-for-all devaluation of

 the official rate will leave it unchanged. The effect of an increase in —

which can be interpreted when y = 0 and T = 0 either as an increase in

domestic credit creation               or a decrease in the rate of crawl —     is   less

immediate and hinges more crucially on expectations formation mechanisms to

the extent that a change in the rate of crawl changes relative asset returns

in the steady-state, when the black market premium is constant. Taking the

total differential of the system from a situation where S =            0,   we can express

it as:
                                                           - 20.-




                  1-       a                              -(1 -     a)n     1-
                                                                                                     [o I
                           +:w                             (1 - a):
       (30)
                  :'                              -:2
                  it   +                          -ij      (1 - a)w                     j

               - + cw                                                                   HI
              L
                                                  —ti      (1   -   a)w      ctw

                                                                                        LL  F          0



       The determinant of the Jacobian in (30) simplifies to:


       (31)       DET =        -(1      -   a) [ (w         -         +           + ir) - w(ir - p)J

       Assuming that the expression in square brackets in (31) is positive,

and   using   Cramer?s rule, we find that an increase in S is likely to decrease

p and q, decrease               and increase F. The net effects on h and p/q                               are

given by:


       (32)                =   [1   -
                                        a(l   +
                                                   2)] (2w - w1)-2c2(v1w + rw1)-( - 1) (p1                    +




       (33)                    (1 -                     - v1)   -   w1(it + p)]
                  Md3


       Under the assumption about the relative size of the parameters used so

far, one would expect h to increase and                               to decrease in response to an

increase in 5.          Thus an increase in domestic credit creation increases the

currency substitution ratio and causes an appreciation of the real black

markets rate (measured) in terms of non-traded goods). Conversely, an

increase in the rate of crawl reduces h and increases                                           The former effect

is reversed when the expected increase in the premium generates an increase

in the demand for foreign assets, as shown in the next Section.
                                                 -21-




6.      The implications of perfect foresight

        The well-known portfolio models of flexible exchange rates with non-

traded goods of Kouri (1975) and Calvo and Rodriguez (1977) assume that

expectations about relative returns are continuously realized. Using (11)

in (2') and inverting the portfolio balance equation, we obtain a differen-

tial equation for the black market rate:


        (34)       e =   f        (p. q, i, F)


        While several methods of solution have been tried, the simpliest in

this case is to solve out for q, whose rate of change is given by the rate

of crawl, and express the system in terms of p. M and F.                    Taking a linear

approximation around steady-state equilibrium, where p =               1   by choice of

units, we write the system in matrix form as:


                                                 E)/E -(1 - a)/c           (1-            -




        (35)
               /


                         j=
                                  -(+Q      +)           -(1 -   5)Q          -           -M

                                       Q                 -(l-a)                       \FF
                                                                                          F


where                     n +     c2
                     =


                         w +


                     =w       +



     The determinant of the matrix in (31) is unambiguously positive and

equal to (1 -      a)(T +          )/c3, so that the system has the positive root asso-

ciated with the black market premium and two negative roots, associated with
                                      —22—




the asset stocks. Equilibrium is thus a saddle-point. Suppose now that

the rate of crawl increases. In steady-state the premium is constant, so

that the rate of depreciation of the black market rate was to increase.

This makes foreign currency more attractive and therefore raises the

currency substitution ratio. Because of (24), the rate of change of domes-

tic credit creation also increases.

     We can represent equilibrium in state-space in a similar fashion to

the right panel of Figure 1 above by assuming that   =    at   all times, so that

we plot the loci where p = 0 and F = 0 as in Figure 3)2 Steady-state equilibrium

obtains at F0. Asssuming that    is fixed, this differs from Figure 1 above

because the reported current account is always in balance and because the

unreported current account responds to wealth. As a consequence of the

wealth effect, the locus where F = 0 is upward sloping rather than horizontal.

The effect of an increase in the demand for foreign assets is now a smaller

jump in e, followed by a continuous appreciation of the black market rate

along with the perfect foresight path to F1. Conversely, the effect of an

exogenous increase in the foreign demand for the smuggled good is a downward

shift in the F = 0 locus, which leads to a jump appreciation in e and a

continuous appreciation along the new perfect foresight path to F2.
               -23-




           Figure 3


         Steady-state
effect of various disturbances

   under perfect foresight




                                 f?i
                                     -24-



Conclusion

     This paper has analyzed regimes of currency inconvertibility using the

portfolio approach to exchange rate determination, summarized (in a partial

context) in Section 1. We showed that the effect of relative prices on the

demand   for traded and non-traded goods had to dominate their effect on
asset demands. It was also shown under what conditions the steady-state
properties   of the model were the same as the ones of a similar model with-

out non-traded goods. In particular, the result that continuous changes in

the official rate (a crawling peg) are necessary to change the currency

composition of private financial wealth, continues to hold. The direction

of the effect is different, however, under the assumption of perfect

foresight, because the increase in the rate of crawl implies an increase

in the expected rate of change of the black market rate, given that the

premium is constant in the long-run.
                                       -25-


                                      NOTES


 *   Earlier   versions were presented at INSEAD, Fontainebleau (France), at the

Third Latin American Regional Conference of the Econometric Society in

Mexico City (Mexico) and at the 95th Meeting of the American Economic

Association in New York. I am grateful to the participants, especially

Ana   Martirena-Mantel    and Sweder van Wijnbergen, for comments. Remaining

errors are my own.


1.     Empirical applications to Portugal and Egypt are in Macedo (1982a,

       Essay III) and Macedo (1982b), respectively. Note that in Blejer (1978),

       the existence of a non-traded good is required for the black market

       rate to vary. A critical survey of his paper and of other black market

       literature is in Macedo (1981).


2.     The exact conditions are worked Out in Macedo (1982a, Essay II). On the

       portfolio approach to dual exchange rates see references ibid.


3.     See Kouri (1983).


4.     On the income effect in this model, see Macedo (1981. p. 35 note 13).

       In general, see Buiter and Eaton (1981).


5.     This applies to relative real returns in the case of constant expenditure

       shares. See Macedo (1981, p. 36 note 14).


6.     The results could also be presented in terms of a price index. See note 9 below.


7.     This contrasts with the assumption in Macedo (1982b). See, however,

       Macedo (1981 and 1982a, p. 66 note 16 and p. 111).


..     See, however, the addendum to Johnson (1976) and Macedo (;1981a, p. 67

       note 18).
                                         -26-




9.   If a price index IIP.3' was used the         E.       terms, call them , would     be

     subtracted by the weighted wealth effects (1 -                 a)r   times   +    for
           and 85 for
                        E2 e.g.   c. = c1 — (83        +
                                                           8+)   (1 -   o)n and similarly
     for      and


10. See the analysis in Macedo (l982a, p. 67-68).


11. The real appreciation is emphasized in Macedo (l982b).


12. This is somewhat arbitrary but finding the eigenvalues of the matrix

     in (35) did not prove immediate and three-dimensional
                                                                             phase diagrams
     are not easy to interpret either.
                                       -27—


                                    References

Blejer, N. (1978), Exchange Restrictions and the Monetary Approach to the

    Exchange Rate, in J. Frenkel and H. Johnson eds., The Economics of

    Exchange Rates, Adison—Wesley.

Buiter, W. and J. Eaton (1981), On the almost total adequacy of Keynesian

    Balaice of Payments Models, American Economic Review, September.

Calvo, C. and C. Rodriguez (1977), A Model of Exchange Rate Determination

    Under Currency Substitution and Rational Expectations, Journal of

    Political Economy, June.


Johnson, H. (1976), The Monetary Approach to Balance of Payments Theory,

    J. Frenkel and H. Johnson, eds., The Monetary Approach to the Balance

    of Payments, London, Allen & Unwin.


Kouri, P. (1975), Essays in the Theory of Flexible Exchange Rates, Thesis,

    MIT, chapter II.


___________ (1983), Balance of Payments and the Foreign Exchange Market:
    A Dynamic Partial Equilibrium Model, in J. Bhandari and B. Putnam (eds.),

    The International Transmission of Disturbances under Flexible Exchange

    Rates, MIT Press.


Macedo, J.   (1981), Currency Inconvertibility, Portfolio Balance and Relative

    Prices, Research Program in Development Studies, Woodrow Wilson School,

    Princeton University, Discussion Paper no. 98, August.


_________(1982a), Portfolio Diversificaiton and Currency Inconvertibility:

    Three Essays in Interntional Monetary Economics, Lisbon (Portugal);

    Universidade Nova de Lisboa


_________ (1982b), Currency Diversification and Export Competitiveness: A Model
    of the TMDutch   Disease:   in Egypt, Journal   of   Development Economics, December.
