NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE COST OF NOMINAL INERTIA IN NNS MODELS
Matthew B. Canzoneri
Robert E. Cumby
Behzad T. Diba
Working Paper 10889
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10889
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

We would like to thank (without implicating) Gary Anderson, Harris Dellas, Martin Eichenbaum, Luca
Guerrieri, Christopher Gust, Dale Henderson, Peter Ireland, Jinill Kim, Eric Leeper, Andrew Levin, David
Lopez-Salido, Eric Swanson, and Martin Uribe for helpful discussions. We thank Douglas Laxton for
introducing us to Dynare, and Michel Juillard for helping us use it. We would also like to thank seminar
participants at Bonn University, Boston College, the European Monetary Forum, the European Central Bank,
the Bank of England, and (especially) the Federal Reserve Board. The views expressed herein are those of
the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Matthew B. Canzoneri, Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad T. Diba. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Cost of Nominal Inertia in NNS Models
Matthew B. Canzoneri, Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad T. Diba
NBER Working Paper No. 10889
November 2004
JEL No. E3
ABSTRACT
We calculate the welfare cost of nominal inertia in a New Neoclassical Synthesis model with wage
and price stickiness, capital formation, and empirically estimated rules for government spending and
the cental bank's interest rate policy. We calibrate our model to U.S. data, and we show that it
captures many aspects of the U.S. business cycle. Moreover, our model is capable of generating the
kind of volatility that has been observed in the efficiency gaps emphasized by Erceg, Henderson and
Levin (2000) and Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2002). We also highlight some of the empirical
shortcomings of the model; in particular, demand side shocks appear to be either missing or
improperly modeled. We calculate the cost of nominal inertia under two specifications of monetary
policy. The bottom line is that, under our preferred specification of monetary policy, the model
implies a conservative estimate of the cost that is twenty to sixty times larger than Lucas's (2003)
estimate: the "average" household in our model would be willing to give up one to three percent of
consumption each period to be free of the effects of wage and price stickiness. Wage inertia appears
to be the major source of these welfare costs.
Matthew B. Canzoneri
Georgetown University
canzonem@georgetown.edu
Robert E. Cumby
Georgetown University
School of Foreign Service
Washington, DC 20057-1045
and NBER
cumbyr@georgetown.edu
Behzad T. Diba
Georgetown University
dibab@georgetown.edu

1. Introduction
The New Neoclassical Synthesis (NNS) is characterized by monopolistic competition, wage
and/or price stickiness, and demand determination of output and employment.1 The NNS has been
used to revisit the central issues of stabilization policy, and a number of theoretical insights have
emerged. Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) showed that smoothing output – which was strongly
emphasized in traditional Keynesian analyses – can lower household welfare in a model driven by
productivity shocks. A number of papers have shown that the tradeoffs for monetary policy can
depend on the type of nominal inertia that is postulated. For example, King and Wolman (1999)
showed that there was no inflation - output tradeoff in a model with staggered price setting;
subsequently, Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) (EHL) showed that an inflation - output tradeoff
can emerge in a model with both staggered wage setting and staggered price setting.2
Are these theoretical insights of any practical relevance? An important challenge hanging
over this new literature is Lucas’s (2003, page 1) claim that the macroeconomic stabilization
problem has been solved: “Taking U.S. performance over the past 50 years as a benchmark, the
potential for welfare gains from better long-run, supply side policies exceeds by far the potential
from further improvements in short-run demand management.” Calibrating an ingeniously simple
model to the U.S. data, Lucas argued that a typical American household would only be willing to
give up one twentieth of one percent of consumption each period to be free of all fluctuations in
consumption about trend, no matter how the fluctuations were generated.
1

Goodfriend and King (1997) outlined the New Neoclassical Synthesis, and gave it the
name. Woodford (2003) provides a masterful introduction to this class of models. Clarida, Gali
and Gertler (1999) provide an early guide to the implications for monetary policy; Canzoneri,
Cumby and Diba (2003) discuss more recent contributions to the literature on monetary policy.
2

stability.

Blanchard (1997) noted early on that wage rigidity would modify the argument for price

-2In this paper, we will argue that the theoretical insights from NNS models may be of
considerable practical importance, and that there may well be room for improvement in demand
management policies. And in so doing, we will provide alternative – and generally much larger –
estimates of the welfare cost of U.S. business cycles.
NNS models typically envision a production economy with complete consumption risk
sharing. In such an environment, it is natural to associate the welfare cost of nominal rigidity with
variations in the gap between the marginal product of labor (MPL) and the marginal rate of
substitution (MRS) between consumption and leisure. EHL motivated their analysis in this way,
but the welfare losses they found were quite small, suggesting that the variations in this gap
generated by their model were also small. By contrast, Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2002)
(GGLS) developed empirical proxies for the MRS - MPL gap, and found that the gap was much
more volatile than output.3 GGLS did not present a model, so it was not clear that an NNS model
could generate the gap volatility that they observed in the data.
There are at least two possible interpretations of the contrasting results of EHL and GGLS.
Productivity shocks are the only source of uncertainty in EHL’s model, and the monetary policies
that EHL consider are all reasonably good in NNS models that are driven by productivity shocks;
in particular, their policies do not fall into the trap described by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997).
So, one interpretation is that U.S. monetary policy was quite a bit worse than the policies EHL
studied, or that the EHL model is missing some of the shocks that have caused the MRS - MPL gap

3

GGLS calculated the MRS-MPL gap by plugging U.S. data into a gap derived from a
standard utility function. GGLS also found that movements in the MRS-MPL gap were closely
associated with movements in the gap between the MRS and the real wage. Hence, they argued
that wage rigidity played an important role in the gap’s volatility.

-3to fluctuate in the U.S. data. The second interpretation has already been alluded to: NNS models
may simply be incapable of generating the volatility in the gap that GGLS found in the data.4
In this paper, we study the welfare cost of nominal inertia in an NNS model with wage and
price stickiness, capital accumulation, and empirically estimated rules for government spending and
the cental bank’s interest rate policy. We calibrate our model to fit quarterly U.S. data, and we show
that our model captures many aspects of the U.S. business cycle. Moreover, we show that our model
is capable of generating most of the volatility in the MRS - MPL gap that has been observed in the
data. We also discuss some of the model’s shortcomings. In particular, demand side shocks seem
to be either absent or incorrectly modeled; or equivalently, productivity shocks seem to be doing
more than they should in the model. Finally, we calculate welfare – with and without nominal
rigidities – using a second order approximation to both the model and the welfare function. The
difference between the two is what we call the cost of nominal inertia.
Our estimate of the cost of nominal inertia depends crucially on what we assume about the
Frisch elasticity of labor supply; an inelastic labor supply reflects a rapidly increasing marginal
disutility of work, and this in turn implies large utility costs for fluctuations in work effort. RBC
models have to assume a highly elastic labor supply curve – much more elastic than estimates
coming from the labor economics literature – to generate the volatility in hours worked that is
observed in the data. In our NNS model, wages are inertia ridden and the work effort is demand
determined. The elasticity of notional labor supply is essentially a free parameter in our model; its

4

Of course, any business cycle model can ‘explain’ the MRS-MPL gap by allowing for
sufficiently large preference shocks. The question we address here is whether an NNS model –
with wage rigidity, but no preference shocks – can explain the observed volatility in the gap.

-4value has little to do with the model’s ability to fit moments in the data.5 Consequently, we can
choose the parameter to conform with the labor economists’ estimates, and this will be seen to result
in rather large welfare costs for business cycles.
Our estimate of the cost of nominal inertia also depends importantly on what we assume
about the central bank’s interest rate policy. The interest rate rule we use to characterize monetary
policy has lagged interest rates, inflation, an output gap, and a residual (which we call the interest
rate shock). In estimating the rule, we define the output gap to be the difference between actual
output and the CBO’s estimate of potential output.6 The interest rate rule and its estimation are quite
conventional, but it is not clear how the rule should be interpreted in our NNS model: there is no
CBO (or Federal Reserve) in the model to provide estimates of potential output. So, we consider
two specifications of monetary policy in our model simulations: in what we will call the ‘good’
policy rule, the output gap is defined as the difference between actual output and the flexible
wage/price output (as defined by Neiss and Nelson (2003)); in the ‘bad’ policy rule, the output gap
is defined as the difference between actual output and output in the non-stochastic steady state.
As might be expected, our new estimates of the welfare cost of nominal inertia are much
smaller under the ‘good’ policy rule than under the ‘bad’ policy rule. This is what the work of
Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) would suggest: smoothing output is not good policy in a model
where productivity shocks play a very significant role. However, it is not clear that the Federal
Reserve has been able to implement anything close to the ‘good’ policy rule, since estimating
5

We have learned (in private conversation) from Frank Smets, that the Bayesian
estimation procedure used in Smets and Wouters (2003) is also essentially silent on the value of
the Frisch elasticity.
6

Both output figures are measured as logarithms of real per-capita GDP.

-5potential output is very difficult in practice. And indeed, we will show that our model ‘fits’ the data
better with the ‘bad’ policy rule; for this reason, we take it to be our benchmark case.
The bottom line of our welfare calculations is as follows: Using the ‘bad’ policy rule, we
conservatively estimate the cost of nominal inertia to be twenty to sixty times larger than Lucas’s
(2003) figure: the ‘average’ household in our model would be willing to give up one to three percent
of consumption to be free of the effects of wage and price stickiness. We also find that wage inertia
is the primary source of this welfare cost. Using the ‘good’ policy rule, our model implies a cost that
is only a quarter the size – one to three quarters of a percent of consumption. These numbers are
much larger than Lucas’s estimate (1/20 of one percent), but they are clearly less worrisome. If the
‘good’ policy rule is an accurate description of monetary policy, then our results are not inconsistent
with Lucas’s basic claim: the demand management problem may have been largely solved. If on the
other hand the ‘bad’ rule is a better description of monetary policy in practice, then there would
appear to be considerable room for improvement. We are inclined to accept the latter view, based
upon the way in which the model fits the data under the two specifications of monetary policy.
The rest of our paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we describe our NNS model.
Calvo-style wage and price contracts create inefficiencies that interact with inefficiencies due to
monopolistic competition to produce what we call the welfare cost of nominal inertia. In Section
3, we discuss the implications of our benchmark model. We explain how we calibrated the model,
and we demonstrate that the model is capable of replicating some of the basic features of the U.S.
business cycle. We also identify some weakness in our modeling effort. Finally, we derive a welfare
measure that is closely related to Lucas’s, and we calculate the welfare cost of nominal inertia under
the benchmark (or ‘bad’) interest rate rule. In Section 4, we perform two robustness exercises. We

-6show how our positive and normative results depend upon assumptions about the degree of wage
and price inertia, and upon our specification of monetary policy. In the conclusion, Section 5, we
will argue that our ‘good’ policy rule is far from ‘optimal’, and that the room for improvement in
demand management is therefore far greater than the difference between the costs of nominal inertia
under our ‘good’ and ‘bad’ policy rules.

2. An NNS Model with Price and Wage Inertia and Capital Formation
Like other NNS models, our model is characterized by optimizing agents, monopolistic
competition, and nominal inertial. It is most closely related to the models of Erceg, Henderson and
Levin (2000) and Collard and Dellas (2003): as in Collard and Dellas (2003), we allow for capital
accumulation, and we calculate second order approximations to both the model and the welfare
function; and as in Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000), we allow for both wage and price inertia.7
Staggered price setting leads to a dispersion in the firms’ prices that creates an inefficiency in household consumption decisions, and staggered wage setting leads to a dispersion in the households’
wages that creates an inefficiency in firm hiring decisions. Our purpose here is to get an idea of the
magnitude of these inefficiencies in NNS models.
2.1. Firms’ price setting behavior –
There is a continuum of firms indexed by f on the unit interval. Each firm rents capital Kt-1(f)
at the rate Rt, hires a labor bundle Nt(f) (to be defined below) at the rate Wt (also defined below), and
produces a differentiated product using the Cobb-Douglass technology

7

Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) employ the Linear-Quadratic approach pioneered by
Julio Rotemberg and Michael Woodford; see Woodford (2003).

-7(1) Yt(f) = ZtKt-1(f) Nt(f) -1,
where 0 < < 1, and Zt is an economy wide productivity shock. Zt follows a simple auto regressive
process – log(Zt) = log(Zt-1) +

p,t

; our estimation of this process is described in Appendix B. The

firm’s cost minimization problem implies8
(2) Rt/Wt = [ /(1- )](Nt(f)/Kt-1(f)),
and the firm’s marginal cost can be expressed as (see Appendix A)
(3) MCt(f) = [ (1- )(1- )]-1Rt Wt1- /Zt.
The modeling of monopolistic competition is now standard in the NNS literature. The first
step is to derive a demand curve for each firm’s product. Following Chari, Kehoe and McGrattan
(2000), we assume the artifice of a competitive ‘bundler’: the bundler acquires the firms’ products
Yt(f), paying the prices Pt(f), and assembles a composite product
(4) Yt = [ 10Yt(f)(

p-1)/ p

df]

p/( p-1)

,

p

> 1,

which the bundler then sells to households and the government, as either a consumption good or
capital. The constant elasticity aggregator, (4), reflects household and government preferences; so,
the bundler chooses the same combination of the firms’ products that the households’ and the
government would, and the bundler’s demand for the output of firm f is equal to total demand.9 Cost
minimization (and the zero profit condition) implies that the bundler’s price is
(5) Pt = [ 10Pt(f)1- pdf]1/(1- p),
and the bundler’s demand for the product of firm f is
8

Kt-1(f) is the firm’s demand for capital in period t. The aggregate capital stock is
predetermined at the beginning of the period t, hence the dating of the subscript.
9

For a fuller discussion of this, and equations (5) and (6) that follow, see Canzoneri,
Cumby and Diba (2003).

-8(6) Ydt(f) = (Pt /Pt(f)) pYt.
The bundler’s price, Pt, can be interpreted as the aggregate price level.
Following Calvo (1983), firms set prices in staggered ‘contracts’ of random duration. In any
period t, each firm gets to announce a new price with probability (1- ); otherwise, the old contract,
and its price, remains in effect.10 With this scheme, the average duration of a price contract is (1- )-1
periods (quarters, in what follows).
If firm f gets to announce a new contract in period t, it chooses a new price P*t (f) to maximize
the value of its profit stream over states of nature in which the new price is expected to hold:
(7) Et

j =t

)j-t j[P*t (f)Yj(f) - TCj(f)],

(

where TC(f) is the firm’s total cost,

is the households’ discount factor, and

j

is the households’

marginal utility of nominal wealth (to be defined below). The firm’s first order condition is
(8) P*t =
where

(PBt/PAt),

p

p

=

(9) PBt = Et
(10) PAt = Et
As

p

/(

j =t

p

)j-t jMCj(f)Pj pYj =

(

j =t

- 1) is a monopoly markup factor, and

(

)j-t jPj pYj =

EtPBt+1 + tMCt(f)Pt pYt

EtPAt+1 + tPt pYt

0, all firms reset their prices each period (the flexible price case), and P*t (f)

the markup is positive (

p

MCt(f). Since

p

> 1), output will be inefficiently low in the flexible price solution.

2.2. Households’ wage setting behavior and capital accumulation –
There is a continuum of households indexed by h on the unit interval. Each household
supplies a differentiated labor service to all of the firms in the economy. Once again, we assume the

10

We set steady state inflation equal to zero. But, our results would be the same if we let
the contract price rise with a non-zero steady state rate of inflation; see EHL (2000).

-9artifice of a competitive bundler: the bundler acquires the households’ labor services Lt(h), paying
the wages Wt(h), and assembles a composite labor service
(11) Nt = [ 10Lt(h)(

w-1)/ w

dh]

w/( w-1)

,

w

> 1,

which the bundler then supplies to firms at the wage rate Wt. The constant elasticity aggregator,
(11), reflects the firms’ production technology; so, the bundler chooses the same combination of
household labor services that the firms would, and the bundler’s demand for the labor of household
h is equal to the total demand. Cost minimization (and the zero profit condition) implies that the
bundler’s wage is
(12) Wt = [ 10Wt(h)1- wdh]1/(1-

w)

,

and the bundler’s demand for the labor of household h is
(13) Ldt(h) = (Wt/Wt(h)) wNt.
The utility of household h is
(14) Ut(h) = Et

=t

-t

[(1- )-1C (h)1- - (1+ )-1L (h)1+ ],

where Ct(h) is the household’s consumption of Yt, and the second term on the RHS reflects the
disutility of work.11 is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. Lucas (2003) focused much of his
attention on this parameter, arguing that the welfare cost of fluctuations in consumption are
negligible unless

is incredibly high. We will restrict ourselves to log utility ( = 1), and focus

attention on , which will be an important parameter in determining the welfare costs of nominal

11

The utility function (and budget constraint below) should also include a term in real
money balances, but we follow much of the NNS literature in assuming that this term is
negligible. Since we specify an interest rate rule for monetary policy, there is no real need to
model money explicitly.

-10inertia.12
The budget constraint of household h is
(15) Et[

t,t+1

Bt+1(h)] + Pt[Ct(h) + It(h) + Tt] = Bt(h) + Wt(h)Ldt(h) + RtKt-1(h) + Dt(h)

where the first term on the LHS is a portfolio of contingent claims; It is the household’s investment
in capital, Tt is a lump sum tax (used by the government to balance its budget constraint each period),
and the last three terms on the RHS are the household’s wage, rental and dividend income.13 The
household’s capital accumulation is governed by
(16) Kt(h) = (1 - )Kt-1(h) + It(h) - ½ [(It(h)/Kt-1(h)) - ]²Kt-1(h),
where is the depreciation rate, and the last term is the cost of adjusting the capital stock.
Household h maximizes utility, (14), subject to its budget constraint, (15), its labor demand
curve, (13), and its capital accumulation constraint, (16). We begin with the wage setting decision.
Following Calvo (1983), households set wages in staggered ‘contracts’ of random duration. In any
period t, each household gets to announce a new wage with probability (1- ); otherwise, the old
contract, and its wage, remains in effect. The average duration of a wage contract is (1- )-1 periods.
If household h gets to announce a new contract in period t, it chooses the new wage
(17) W*1+
t
where

w

w

=

=

13

/(

w

(18) WBt = Et

12

(WBt/WAt),

w

-1) is a monopoly markup factor, and

w

j =t

(

)j-tNj1+ Wj

w(1+ )

=

EtWBt+1 + Nt1+ Wt

w(1+ )

,

Our welfare results are not very sensitive to changes in the value of

between 1 and 4.

Bt+1(h) is the number of (period t+1) dollar claims in the portfolio, contingent on a
given state’s occurring; t,t+1 is the stochastic discount factor (the price of a dollar claim divided
by the probability of the state); and Et is an expectation over all the states of nature. For a
concise discussion of state contingent claims, see Chapter 3 of Cochrane (2001).

-11(19) WAt = Et
where

j

j =t

(

)j-t jNjWj

w

=

EtWAt+1 + tNtWt w,

is the household’s marginal utility of nominal wealth (to be defined below). As

households get to reset their wages each period (the flexible wage case), and W*t (h) =

0, all

Nt / t; that

w

is, the wage is a markup over the (dollar value of the) marginal disutility of work. Since the markup
is positive (

> 1), the labor supplied will be inefficiently low in the flexible wage solution. Note

w

that 1/ is the Frisch (or constant t) elasticity of labor supply; this parameter will play a prominent
role in the next section.
When wages are sticky ( > 0), wage rates will generally differ across households, and firms
will demand more labor from households charging lower wages. Our model is inherently one of
heterogeneous agents, but our assumption of complete contingent claims markets makes households
identical in terms of their consumption and investment decisions.14 In equilibrium, aggregate
consumption will be equal each household’s consumption and to per capita consumption – Ct =
1
0

Ct(h)dh = Ct(h) 10dh = Ct(h) – and the same is true of the aggregate capital stock. So, we can write

the equilibrium versions of the households’ first order conditions for consumption and investment
in terms of aggregate values:
(20) 1/PtCt = t,
(21) Et[

t+1

(22) tPt =
(23)

t

where

/ t] = Et[

t

-

t

= Et{
t

and

14

t+1

t

] = (1+it)-1

t,t+1

[(It/Kt-1) - ],
Rt+1 +

[(1- ) - ½ [(It+1/Kt) - ]² + [(It+1/Kt) - ](It+1/Kt)} ,

t+1

are the Lagrangian multipliers for the households’ budget and capital accumulation

The FOC for Bt+1(h) is: t,t+1 = t+1(h)/ t(h), where t(h) is the marginal utility of wealth.
All households face the same discount factor, t,t+1; so, if all households have the same initial
wealth, t(h) = t for all h. First order conditions for Ct(h), It(h) and Kt(h) are identical for all h.

-12constraints, and it is the return on a ‘risk free’ bond.15
2.3. The aggregate price and wage levels, aggregate employment and aggregate output –
The aggregate price level can be written as
(24) Pt = [ 10Pt(f)1- pdf]1/(1-

p)

=[

j =0

(1- ) j(P*t -j(f))1- p]1/(1- p),

since the law of large numbers implies that (1- ) j is the fraction of firms that set their prices t-j
periods ago, and have not gotten to reset them since. It is straightforward to show that
p
(25) Pt1- p = (1- )P*1+ (Pt-1)1- p.
t

Similarly, the aggregate wage (defined by equation (12)) can be written as
(26) Wt1-

w

= (1- )W*1t

w

+ (Wt-1)1- w.

These calculations illustrate the beauty of the Calvo scheme for wage and price setting.16 It allows
us to convert the aggregate wage and price levels – complicated integrals over households and firms
– into infinite sums, which can then be converted into non-linear difference equations that the
computer can solve. This trick will be used below to calculate various wage, price and employment
dispersion terms.
In Appendix A, we show that aggregate output can be written as
(27) Yt = ZtKt-1 Nt1- /DPt,
where Nt = 10Nt(f)df is aggregate employment, Kt-1 = 10Kt-1(h)dh = 10Kt-1(f)df is the aggregate capital
stock, and DPt =

1
0

(Pt/Pt(f)) pdf is a measure of price dispersion across firms; DPt can be written as

15

Consider a bond that costs 1 dollar in period t and pays 1+it dollars in all states of
nature in period t+1. 1 = Et[ t,t+1(1+it)] (see Chapter 3 of Cochrane (2001)); so, 1/(1+it )=
Et[ t,t+1].
16

The ugliness of the Calvo scheme is that there is some probability that any given wage
(or price) contract may last for a very long period of time.

-13(28) DPt = (1- )(Pt/P*t (f)) p + (Pt/Pt-1) pDPt-1.
It should be noted that Nt(f) is the firm’s demand for a composite labor service (defined by the
aggregator (11)). So, our definition of aggregate employment – Nt =

1
0

Nt(f)df – is not the simple

sum of individual household’s work efforts. Similarly, our definition of aggregate output Yt (defined
in equation (4)) is not the simple sum of firm’s outputs, and our aggregate price level Pt (equation
(5)) does not correspond exactly to measured CPI. Nevertheless, in the empirical work that follows,
we will identify Nt, Yt and Pt with the aggregate employment, output and price levels in the data.17
The inefficiency due to price dispersion can be seen in equation (27). Each firm has the same
marginal cost (equation (3)); so, consumers should choose equal amounts of the firms’ products to
maximize the consumption good aggregator (4) for a given resource cost. If prices are flexible (
= 0), then Pt(f) = Pt for all f, and this efficiency condition will be met; if prices are sticky ( > 0),
then product prices will differ, and consumption decisions will be distorted. This distortion is
manifested in equation (27). If prices are flexible, DPt = 1 and aggregate output is maximized for
a given labor input; if prices are sticky, DPt > 1 and output will be less for a given labor input.
2.4. Monetary and fiscal policy –
Monetary policy and government spending are given empirical specifications; we make no
claim that these policies are optimal in any normative sense. We use a standard interest rate rule to
describe monetary policy:
(29) it = 0.222 + 0.824it-1 + 0.35552
where

t

17

t

+ 0.032384(output gap)t +

i,t

,

= log(Pt/Pt-1) and the standard error of the interest rate shock,

i,t

, is .00245. We estimated

Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) show that, to a first order of approximation, the
difference between our aggregators and a simple linear sum is just a constant. Therefore, the
distinction does not matter for the standard deviations we calculate below.

-14this rule over the Volcker and Greenspan years (1979.3 - 2003.2); Appendix B outlines our
estimation procedure and gives our data sources. Here it is important to note that for estimation
purposes we define the output gap to be actual GDP minus the Congressional Budget Office’s
‘potential’ GDP.18
As noted in the introduction, the interest rate rule and its estimation are quite conventional,
but it is not clear how the rule should be interpreted in our NNS model. There is no CBO in the
model to provide estimates of potential output. So, we will consider two specifications of monetary
policy in our model simulations. Our benchmark case will be what we have called the ‘bad’ policy
rule, where the output gap is defined as the difference between actual output and output in the nonstochastic steady state. The alternative is a ‘good’ policy rule, where the output gap is defined as the
difference between actual output and output that would prevail in the flexible wage/price solution
(as defined by Neiss and Nelson (2003)). We have taken the ‘bad’ policy rule as our benchmark
since (as we shall see) the model explains some aspects of the data better with it.
We use an auto regressive process for government spending:
(30) log(Gt) = + 0.973log(Gt-1) +

g,t

,

where the intercept term, , is chosen to make G/Y = 0.20 in the steady state, and the standard error
of the fiscal shock,

g,t

, is about 0.01; see Appendix B.

2.5. Welfare –
Our measure of welfare is
(31) Ut = Et

=t

where Ct (=

1
0

18

-t

[log(C ) - (1+ )-1AL ],

Ct(h)dh = Ct(h) for all h) is per capita consumption, and ALt =

1
0 t

L (h)1+ dh is the

Both variables are measured in real percapita terms, and expressed in logarithms.

-15average disutility of work. If wages are flexible ( = 0), then Wt(h) = Wt for all h, and firms hire the
same amount of work from each household; ALt = 10Lt(h)1+ dh = Lt(h)1+

1
0

dh = Lt(h)1+ for all h. In

this special case, households are identical, and our measure of welfare, Ut, reduces to individual
household utility Ut(h) (defined by equation (14)).
If wages are sticky ( > 0), then there is a dispersion of wages that makes firms hire different
amounts of work from each household. This creates an inefficiency similar to the inefficiency due
to price dispersion: the composite labor service used by firms – Nt =
not be maximized for a given aggregate labor input

1
0 t

L (h)(

w-1)/ w

dh]

w/( w-1)

– will

1
0 t

L (h)dh. This distortion in firms’ hiring

decisions manifests itself in the AL term in equation (31). In appendix A, we show that
(32) ALt = Nt1+ DWt
(33) DWt = (1- )(W*t (h)/Wt)where DWt =

1
0

(Wt(h)/Wt)-

w(1+ )

w(1+ )

+ (Wt-1/Wt)-

w(1+ )

DWt-1.

dh is a measure of wage dispersion, analogous to DPt for prices.

In summary, nominal inertia creates two distortions in our model: Calvo-style price setting
creates a price dispersion – captured by DPt – that distorts households’ consumption decisions, and
Calvo-style wage setting creates a wage dispersion – captured by DWt – that distorts firms’ hiring
decisions. These distortions interact with the distortions created by monopolistic competition to
create what we call the ‘welfare cost of nominal inertia’. In the next section, we solve our model
numerically to get an idea of the quantitative magnitude of this cost.

3. Implications of the Benchmark Model
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2001) showed that a more elaborate NNS model was
capable of explaining the persistence of monetary shocks exhibited by U.S. data; subsequently,

-16Smets and Wouters (2003) added a rather large number of shocks to their model and showed that
an NNS model could replicate many aspects of the U.S. business cycle. Here, we show that a
stripped down NNS model, with only a few easily measured shocks, is capable of capturing some
basic features of the data. We also show that the model captures much of the volatility of the
efficiency gaps emphasized by EHL and GGLS. Once this is established, we use the model to
measure the welfare cost of various kinds of nominal inertia. Finally, we discuss some of the ways
in which our model may be deficient, and how these deficiencies may affect our welfare calculations.
It should be noted that we are using the ‘bad’ interest rate rule (where the output gap is
defined as actual output minus steady state output) in all of the model simulations reported in this
section; we have taken the ‘bad’ policy rule as our benchmark case. In the next section, we will
show what happens to the model’s fit, and to our estimate of the cost of nominal inertia, if instead
we use the ‘good’ interest rate rule (where the output gap is defined as actual output minus flexible
wage/price output).
3.1. Matching Model Moments with Moments in the Quarterly U.S. data –
Table 1 specifies the parameters we use in our benchmark calibration. In Appendix B, we
discuss our choice of parameter values, our estimation of the interest rate rule and the stochastic
processes for productivity and government spending, and our data. Here, we focus attention on just
three parameters: 1/ , the Frisch (or constant

t

) elasticity of labor supply; , the autoregressive

parameter in the stochastic process for productivity; and , the standard deviation of the innovation
in the productivity process.
The Frisch elasticity will be important in our welfare analysis: as explained in the introduction, low values of 1/ imply high costs of nominal inertia. Empirical estimates of the Frisch

-17elasticity range from 0.05 to 0.35.19 So, our benchmark specification – 1/ = 0.33 – is quite
conservative for the purposes of our welfare analysis. In what follows, we will consider a range of
values for 1/ – 0.14, 0.20, 0.33 and 1.00 – corresponding to = 7, 5, 3 and 1; all are conservative
in the sense that they in the upper half of the estimated range and beyond.
The persistence and volatility of productivity shocks will also be important in our welfare
analysis: high values of and

imply high costs of nominal inertia. As explained in Appendix B,

we have three different estimates of the productivity process, each of which has some merit. Our
benchmark is ( , )2 = (0.930, 0.008), which comes from an estimate of the 1960 - 2002 data (with
a linear trend). Our alternative estimates are ( , )3 = (0.979, 0.007), which comes from King and
Rebelo’s (1999) review of RBC models, and ( , )1 = (0.843, 0.007), which comes from an estimate
of the 1980 - 2002 data (again, with a linear trend).20
Table 2 compares results from our calibrated model with quarterly data from the U.S.
economy. The model’s variables are expressed as log deviations from a non-stochastic steady state.
The U.S. data are also in logs, and both the model data and the actual data have been HP-filtered.
We used Dynare (see Juillard (2003)) to calculate the model’s steady state, to find a first order
approximation, and to calculate the moments reported in Table 2. The table reports results for our
benchmark value of 1/ (0.33) and the alternative values of 1/ (1, 0.20 and 0.14), and for the U.S.
data. Beginning with the row for output and the column headed 1/ = 0.33, 0.014 is the model’s
standard deviation of output; it is slightly smaller than the standard deviation of output in the data,
19

See Bayoumi, Laxton and Pesenti (2003) and Gali, Gertler and Lopez-Salido (2002) for
a discussion of these studies.
20

This data period corresponds to the one for our interest rate rule. The two data periods
produced very similar estimates for the government spending process; see Appendix B.

-180.016, which is given in the last column. Proceeding to the row for consumption and the column for
1/ = 0.33, 0.839 is the ratio of the standard deviation of consumption to the standard deviation of
output in the model, and 0.962 is the correlation between consumption and output. These are close
to the corresponding statistics in the data. The following three rows provide the same statistics
(standard deviations relative to the standard deviation of output and correlations with output) for
investment, hours and real wages.21 The model comes fairly close to matching the data for all these
variables, except that real wages and output are more positively correlated in the model than they are
in the data.22
More to the point for us, Table 2 suggests that the value of 1/ has almost no effect on the
model’s moments. Real Business Cycle models need a very elastic labor supply curve to generate
the employment volatility that is observed in the data; 1/ = 4 is not unusual in that literature.23
Employment and output are demand determined in NNS models, and workers may be off their
notional labor supply curves. Thus, we do not need an elastic labor supply to match the volatility
of employment; we can let 1/ conform to the empirical estimates.
The rows for inflation, wage inflation and the nominal interest rate in Table 2 alert us to
potential weaknesses in the model, weaknesses that may play a role in the welfare analysis that
follows. The relative volatilities of price inflation and particularly wage inflation in the model are
substantially less than they are in the data. Moreover, the nominal interest rate, price inflation and

21

We set the adjustment cost coefficient to make the model’s standard deviation of
investment relative to the standard deviation of output virtually identical to the corresponding
ratio, 3.12, in the data.
22

This is in contrast to a familiar criticism of an earlier generation of sticky wage models
on the grounds that they imply counter-cyclical variation in the real wage.
23

See for example King and Rebelo (1999).

-19wage inflation are all negatively correlated with output in the model; by contrast, the interest rate and
price inflation are positively correlated with output in the data, while wage inflation is essentially
uncorrelated with output. All of these facts suggest that the model may be missing some shocks, or
that the shocks that have been included may not have been modeled correctly. We will return to this
issue later in Sections 3.3 and 4. Once again, however, the value of 1/ hardly seems to matter for
the model’s fit.
The row for the output gap in Table 2 reflects the fact that we are using the ‘bad’ monetary
policy rule in our initial model simulations: the output gap is defined as actual output minus steady
state output; so, the gap has the same standard deviation as output, and it is perfectly correlated with
output. The interesting thing to note here is that the output gap in the data – output minus the CBO’s
‘potential’ output – comes very close to matching these statistics. This suggests that the CBO’s
measure of potential output (which was used in the estimation of the policy rule) is essentially
detrended output.
The work of Erceg, Henderson and Levin (2000) and (especially) Gali, Gertler and LopezSalido (2002) suggests that we may also be able to test our model against the data in a way that is
more directly related to welfare. Economic efficiency requires that the marginal rate of substitution
(MRS) between consumption and work be equal to the marginal product of labor (MPN). Figure 1,
which is borrowed from GGLS, illustrates this efficiency gap. n1 would be employment under
perfect competition, n2 is the flexible wage/price solution, and nt is the solution with nominal
inertia. Neglecting constant terms,
(34) gapt = log(MRSt) - log(MPNt) = log(Ct) + log(Nt) - [log(Yt) - log(Nt)],
The efficiency gap can be partitioned into a wage gap,

-20(35) wgapt = log(MRSt) - log(Wt/Pt) = log(Ct) + log(Nt) - log(Wt/Pt),
and a price gap,
(36) pgapt = log(Wt/Pt) - log(MPNt) = log(Wt/Pt) - [log(Yt) - log(Nt)].
GGLS calculate the volatility of these gaps, using U.S. data, and make inferences about the cost to
welfare that this volatility implies. The overall gap is very volatile, and GGLS claim that the welfare
cost of U.S. business cycles is high.
Table 3 shows the volatility in these efficiency gaps, both in our model and in the U.S. data.
The first number in each cell is the standard deviation of the gap; the second number is the
correlation between the gap and output. Our NNS model is capable of generating much of the
volatility that is observed in the data.24 The wage gap is much more volatile than the price gap,
suggesting that it is the major source of the welfare costs, as GGLS claim.
3.2. Measuring the welfare cost of nominal inertia –
Let Vt be the value function for aggregate welfare in period t. In light of (31), Vt is given by
(37) Vt = log(Ct) - (1+ )-1ALt + Et[Vt+1].
In this section, we use Dynare to calculate a second order approximation of Vt under various
assumptions about nominal inertia and other key parameters in the model. Assuming state variables
are at their deterministic steady state values at time 0, let V0( , ) represent aggregate utility for an
economy with a given type of nominal inertia (characterized by

and ).25 The welfare cost of

nominal inertia in this economy is
24

Our results support GGLS’s claim that the observed gaps can be explained without
giving an important role to labor supply shocks at business cycle frequencies.
25

The list of state variables depends on the type of nominal inertia present; for notational
simplicity, we have suppressed any reference to state variables in the definition of the V function.

-21(38) CC( , ) = V0(0, 0) - V0( , ).
CC is a cardinal number, and its units are hard to understand. However, following Lucas
(2003), we can interpret CC as something that does have comprehensible units. Lucas, in his basic
thought experiment, asked how much consumption households would be willing to give up to be free
of observed fluctuations in consumption. Let E0
{CA,j}, let E0
E0

j =0

j

j =0

j

j =0

j

CA,j1-r be the utility of actual consumption

CT,j1-r be the utility of trend consumption {CT,j}, and let

((1+ )CA,j)1-r = E0

j =0

j

CT,j1-r.

solve the equation

is Lucas’s measure of the welfare cost of fluctuations in

consumption; it is the percentage of consumption that households would give up each period to get
{CT,j} in place of {CA,j}. How big is ? Calibrating this simple model to U.S. consumption data,
Lucas argued that is only about one twentieth of one percent of consumption (for values of r less
than 4). An implication of Lucas’s ingeniously simple calculation is that the welfare cost of nominal
inertia – which is after all not the only source of fluctuations in consumption – must be small indeed.
As we shall see, our NNS model suggests otherwise.
Our household utility function includes work effort (or leisure), and our model is inherently
one of heterogeneous agents. So, it is not obvious how to compare our utility calculations to Lucas’.
However, we have already defined an “average” utility function, (31), and we have assumed a log
specification for the utility of consumption. So, our CC( , ) can be interpreted as the percentage
of consumption households would on average be willing to give up to be free of a particular type of
nominal inertia, assuming that the work effort is held constant.
To see this, let {Cj*} and {ALj*} be consumption and the average disutility of work in the
flexible wage/price solution, let {Cj} and {ALj} be consumption and the average disutility of work
in the solution with nominal inertia, and let solve:

-22(39) V0(0,0) = E0

j =0

j

[log(Cj*) - (1+ )-1ALj*] = E0

= /(1- ) + E0

j =0

j

j =0

j

[log((1+ )Cj) - (1+ )-1ALj]

[log(Cj) - (1+ )-1ALj] = /(1- ) + V0( , )

or
(40) = (1- )[V0(0,0) - V0( , )] = .01*[V0(0,0) - V0( , )],
for our assumed value of . Our CC( , ) = 100* , which expresses the costs as percentages of
consumption (instead of fractions).
Table 4 presents the consumption cost of our benchmark type of nominal inertia – ( , ) =
(0.67, 0.75). In our benchmark parameterization – 1/ = 0.33 and ( , )2 – the cost is 1.03% of
consumption. Recall that 1/ = 0.33 is at the upper end of the range of empirical estimates for the
Frisch elasticity of labor supply. If we use a value closer to the middle of the estimated range – 1/
= 0.14 – the cost of nominal inertia is 2.13% of consumption; if we use a values at the bottom of the
range, the cost goes up to 5 or 6%. If we keep the benchmark elasticity of labor supply, but use a
productivity process typical of the RBC literature – ( , )3 – the cost is 6 or 7%.
In summary, our NNS model conservatively estimates the cost of nominal inertia to be
between 1 and 3% of consumption each period. The costs would certainly seem to be significant.

3.3. Which shocks are important in the model? Is something missing? –
As noted above, our model fails to match the data in a number of potentially important ways.
It may be possible to address some of the model’s failures by adding shocks and modeling features
that have been used in earlier work.26 However, the negative correlations between (wage and price)
26

For example, Smets and Wouters (2003) introduced several shocks, including shocks to
wage and price setting behavior, that may improve the model’s ability to replicate the observed
volatilities of wage and price inflation. Our model also lacks the features used by Christiano

-23inflation and output, and between the nominal interest rate and output, that are generated by the
model suggest an absence of demand side shocks.27 In conventional Keynesian models (like the ISLM model) an increase in aggregate demand (a shift of the IS curve) raises output and interest rates,
and leads to inflationary pressures. Such a demand shock would bring our model closer to matching
the positive correlations observed in the data.
Table 5 would seem to confirm these suspicions. It shows a variance decomposition for the
model’s shocks – the productivity shock,
spending shock,

; the interest rate shock, i; and finally the government

p

. The productivity shock and the interest rate shock each explain about half of

g

the variation in output, consumption, and investment. The interest rate shock explains most of the
variation in employment and wage inflation, and the productivity shock explains most of the
variation in the real wage rate and price inflation. Clearly, these two shocks play a major role in the
welfare calculations of the last section. By contrast, the government spending shock explains very
little of the variation in any variable of interest.
The impulse response functions in Figure 2 show what a government spending shock does
in our model. Output and inflation go up, causing the central bank to raise the nominal and real
interest rates, and investment is crowed out. All of this is consistent with the evidence from the
VARs found in Blanchard and Perotti (2001), Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2002) and elsewhere.
However, consumption is also crowed out in our model, and this is not consistent with the evidence

Eichenbaum and Evans (2001) to generate persistence. Adding more persistence to wage and
price inflation could help increase their standard deviations.
27

The strong negative correlation between the interest rate and output in our model is
also present when we eliminate the nominal rigidity (by setting and equal to zero), and
therefore the effect of demand shocks.

-24from the VARs.28
To summarize, wage and price inflation are less volatile in our model than they are in the
data, and their correlations with output are negative in the model, but not in the data. Interest rates
in our model have a strong negative correlation with output, while the corresponding correlation in
the data is positive. Moreover, as we noted in Section 3.1, real wages are more positively correlated
with output in the model than they are in the data. The impulse response functions in Figure 2
suggest that the government spending shock should help with all of these problems, but the variance
decompositions in Table 5 suggest that government spending shocks are not having much effect in
our model. All of these facts suggest that the model may be missing some important demand side
shocks, or that government spending shocks have not been modeled correctly; or put in a different
way, productivity shocks may be playing a more important role than they should.

4. Two Robustness Exercises
Here, we consider two variants of the model that was analyzed in the last section. We show
how each variation affects the model’s fit, and how each variation affects our estimate of the cost
of nominal inertia. First, we experiment with the degree of nominal inertia. Since our benchmark
model does not generate enough variability in wage and price inflation, it seems natural to ask how
our results would change if we lowered the degree of nominal rigidity. We also assess the relative
importance of wage and price rigidities for welfare. Second, we experiment with the monetary
policy rule. In particular, we show how our results would change if we switched to the ‘good’
interest rate policy (where potential output is represented by the natural rate of output). We also try
28

RBC models have the same difficulty; see Fatas and Mihov (2000a, b).

-25eliminating the interest rate shocks.
4.1. Changing the degree of nominal rigidity
In the benchmark calibration, the Calvo parameters are set at

= .67 and

= .75; the

average durations of price and wage contracts are, respectively, three and four quarters. As
explained in Appendix B, these settings are standard in the literature. However, Table 2 shows that
the volatility of price and (especially) wage inflation is too low in the benchmark calibration. Table
6 reports the same calibration exercise, but with the Calvo parameters ( and ) set equal to 0.5;
that is, we reduce the average duration of both price and wage contracts to two quarters.
Lowering the degree of nominal inertia helps with some of the problems noted in Table 2,
but it also creates some new problems. Specifically, Table 6 shows that the model now generates
enough variability in price inflation. Wage inflation becomes more variable than it was in Table 2,
but is still less variable than in the data. The correlation between wage inflation and output is now
consistent with the data. Price inflation and interest rates are still negatively correlated with output,
which is not consistent with the data. And other aspects of the model’s fit deteriorate somewhat;
most notably, hours worked now have less volatility than in the data.
Table 7 presents the consumption costs of different degrees of nominal inertia, under the
conservative benchmark assumption that the Frisch elasticity is 1/ = 0.33, and under the more
typical estimated value of 1/ = 0.14. The first row of Table 7 is taken from Table 4; it is the cost
of nominal inertia in our benchmark case – ( , ) = (0.67, 0.75). The second row gives the cost of
the wage and price inertia specified in Table 6 – ( , ) = (0.50, 0.50). The costs are now about half
of what they were in the benchmark case, but they are still quite large compared to Lucas’s (2003)
figures. In particular, for 1/ = 0.14, which is in the middle of the range of estimates from the labor

-26literature, the cost of nominal inertia is still about one percent of consumption.
The third and forth rows of Table 7 examine the relative importance of wage and price
rigidities for welfare. The third row gives the cost of price inertia with flexible wages – ( , ) =
(0.67, 0); and the last row gives the cost of wage inertia with flexible prices – ( , ) = (0, 0.75).
Wage inertia appears to be much more costly than price inertia.29 This result is consistent with the
fact that the volatility of the wage gap in Table 3 is much larger than the volatility of the price gap.
4.2. Changing the Monetary Policy Rule
As noted in the introduction, Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) have shown that a policy of
smoothing output can lower household welfare in a model that is driven by productivity shocks. We
have already noted that productivity shocks play an important role – perhaps too important a role –
in our NNS model. Consequently, our benchmark interest rate rule (which defines the output gap
as the difference between actual output and steady state output) might be expected to do poorly in
terms of welfare; that is why we have called it the ‘bad’ policy rule. Here, we show how a switch
to the ‘good’ policy rule (which defines the output gap as the difference between actual output and
the flexible wage/price output) affects the model’s fit and our estimate of the cost of nominal inertia.
In a similar fashion, one might question our interpretation of the residuals in the estimated
policy rule. We have treated them as interest rate shocks. An alternative interpretation would be that
these deviations from the structural part of the rule represent the Federal Reserve’s use of other
indicator variables, and that treating the residuals as shocks paints an overly pessimistic view of
monetary policy during this period. So, we will also show how eliminating the interest rate shock
29

In fact, in the presence of wage inertia, price inertia appears to be welfare improving.
There are a number of distortions in our NNS model. Eliminating just one – price inertia – need
not increase welfare.

-27affects the model’s fit and our estimate of the cost of nominal inertia.
Table 8 reports the consumption costs of nominal inertia for the ‘good’ and ‘bad’ policy
rules, with and without the interest rate shock. The interest rate shock does not seem to play a major
role in generating the large consumption costs reported in Table 4, but our benchmark definition of
the output gap does. Under the ‘good’ monetary policy rule, consumption costs are about a quarter
of what they were in the benchmark case; with the interest rate shock, they are however still five to
ten times larger than Lucas’s (2003) figure of 1/20th of one percent.
In assessing the cost of nominal inertia, it is clearly important to distinguish between the
‘good’ and ‘bad’ policy rules. One way of doing this is to ask which rule makes the model fit the
data better. Table 9 compares the model’s fit under the ‘good’ policy rule and the ‘bad’ policy rule,
with the interest rate shock in each case. (Neither rule does well without the interest rate shock; the
volatility of employment, for example, falls by half.) The fit deteriorates somewhat as we go from
the benchmark (or ‘bad’) interest rate policy to the ‘good’ interest rate policy. Most notably, the
‘good’ policy’s output gap does not perform as well as the ‘bad’ policy’s gap; it does not fluctuate
enough, and it’s correlation with output is not strong enough. Here again, this may be an indication
that productivity shocks play too important a role in the model.

5. Conclusion
In this paper, we specified a rather rudimentary NNS model with price and wage inertia,
capital formation, and estimated rules describing monetary and fiscal policy. We showed that the
model was capable of capturing some features of the U.S. business cycle. However, we also argued
that productivity shocks were playing too important a role, or equivalently, that demand side shocks

-28were either missing or improperly modeled; moreover, the model may exhibit too much nominal
inertia, especially in wage inflation. These are issues for future research.
We have already summarized our basic results in the introduction: Using the ‘bad’ policy
rule, we estimated the cost of nominal inertia to be twenty to sixty times larger than what Lucas
(2003) found: the ‘average’ household in our model would be willing to give up one to three percent
of consumption each period to be free of the effects of wage and price stickiness. If the persistence
of productivity shocks is increased to levels used in the RBC literature, or if the elasticity of labor
supply is taken from the lower end of the microeconomic estimates, the costs are doubled. We also
found that wage stickiness is the primary source of this welfare cost. Using the ‘good’ policy rule,
the cost is however only a quarter the size: one to three quarters of a percent of consumption. These
costs are still considerably higher than Lucas’s figure (1/20 of one percent), but they are clearly not
as alarming. If the ‘good’ policy rule is an accurate description of monetary policy, then our NNS
model is broadly consistent with Lucas’s claim; there would not appear to be much room for further
improvement in demand management policy. If on the other hand the ‘bad’ rule is a better
description of monetary policy in practice, then there would appear to be considerable room for
improvement.
As stated in the introduction, we are inclined to accept the latter view, based upon the way
in which the model fits the data under the two specifications of monetary policy. We therefore
regard the difference between the consumption costs of nominal inertia under the ‘good’ and ‘bad’
policy rules as a rather conservative estimate of the room for improvement in demand management
policy.
The estimate is conservative since we have not made any attempt to find, or even charac-

-29terize, the optimal monetary policy rule in our NNS model. We strongly doubt that the optimal rule
will look much like what we have called the ‘good’ policy rule. Recent theoretical work by Benigno
and Woodford (2004) suggests that the optimal rule will also include a wage inflation term, and
recent numerical simulations of our own (Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (2004)), suggest that this
wage inflation term can have a very important effect on welfare. So, our estimate of the room for
improvement in demand management policy is probably quite conservative.30
Two other issues are worth mention before closing. The first is that firms and workers
probably derive some benefit from nominal inertia. Why else would they engage in it? Our model
does not address the factors that give rise to nominal inertia, and it may therefore overstate the
benefits of eliminating it. The second issue – which may well be related to the first – is that our
model assumes wage stickiness matters. Goodfriend and King (2001) question the relevance of
observed wage inertia on theoretical grounds: “... there is a fundamental asymmetry between product
and labor markets. The labor market is characterized by long term relationships where there is
opportunity for firms and workers to neutralize the allocative effects of temporarily sticky nominal
wages. ... (However), spot transactions predominate in product markets where there is much less
opportunity for the effects of sticky nominal prices to be privately neutralized.” On the other hand,
a growing empirical literature suggests that wage inertia helps NNS models explain the U.S. data:
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2001) found that wage stickiness helps explain persistence in
the effects of monetary shocks, and Smets and Wouters (2003) showed that wage stickiness also

30

Central banks already devote considerable resources to predicting potential output; it
may be difficult in practice to obtain much improvement along these lines. Responding to wage
inflation (in addition to price inflation) is clearly feasible.; the potential for improvement along
these lines deserves more research.

-30helps explain other features of the data.

-31References:
Bayoumi, Tamim, Douglas Laxton and Paolo Pesenti, “When Leaner Isn’t Meaner: Measuring
Benefits and Spillovers of Greater Competition in Europe,” mimeo, 2003.
Benigno, Pierpaolo and Michael Woodford (2003), “Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy: A
Linear-Quadratic Approach,” forthcoming in Mark Gertler and Kenneth Rogoff (eds.),
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003.
______________, (2004) “Optimal Stabilization Policy When Wages and Prices are Sticky: The
Case of a Distorted Steady State,” forthcoming in Jon Faust, Athanasios Orphanides and
David Reifschneider, eds. Models and Monetary Policy: Research in the Tradition of Dale
Henderson, Richard Porter, and Peter Tinsley.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow, “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,”
NBER working paper #9069, 2002.
Blanchard, Olivier, “Comment” on Goodfriend and King, “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the
Role of Monetary Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 1997, p. 289 - 293.
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Roberto Perotti, “An empirical characterization of the dynamic effects of
changes in government spending and taxes on output,” Mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, November, 2001.
Blinder, Alan S. (1994), “On Sticky Prices: Academic Theories Meet the Real World,” in N.
Gregory Mankiw (ed) Monetary Policy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 117-150.
Calvo, Guillermo, “Staggered Prices in a Utility Maximizing Framework,” JME, 12, 1983, p. 383398.
Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby and Behzad Diba, “Recent Developments in the Macro-

-32economic Stabilization Literature: Is Price Stability a Good Stabilization Strategy?”, in Altug
Sumra, Jagjit Chadha and Charles Nolan (eds.), Dynamic Macroeconomic Analysis: Theory
and Policy in General Equilibrium, Cambridge University Press, 2003.
___________, “Notes on Monopolistic Competition and Nominal Inertia, July 31, 2002. (Available
for a limited time on Matthew Canzoneri’s Web Page.)
___________,“Should the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve Be Concerned About
Fiscal Policy?”, in Proceedings of a Conference on Rethinking Stabilization Policy, Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 2002.
Chari, V. V., Patrick J. Kehoe and Ellen R. McGrattan, Sticky Price Models of the Business Cycle:
Can the Contract Multiplier Solve the Persistence Problem?, Econometrica 68, no. 5,
September 2000, pg. 1151-1179.
Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans, “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic
Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” NBER Working Paper #8403, July 2001.
Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gali and Mark Gertler, “The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian
Perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1999.
Cochrane, John, Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press, Princeton and Oxford, 2001.
Collard, Fabrice and Harris Dellas, “Inflation Targeting,” mimeo, 2003.
Erceg, Christopher, Dale Henderson, Andrew Levin, “Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered
Wage and Price Contracts”, JME, 46, 2000.
Fatas, Antonio and Ilian Mihov (2000a), “Fiscal policy and business cycles: An empirical
investigation,” mimeo, INSEAD.
Fatas, Antonio and Ilian Mihov (2000b), “The effects of fiscal policy on consumption and

-33employment: Theory and Evidence,” mimeo, INSEAD.
Gali, Jordi and Mark Gertler (1999), “Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 44, 195-222.
Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler, and David Lopez-Salido, “Markups, Gaps, and the Welfare Costs of
Business Fluctuations,” NBER Working Paper #8850, March 2002.
Goodfriend, Marvin and Robert King, “The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary
Policy,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press, 1997, pg. 231-283.
___________, “The Case for Price Stability,” NBER working paper # 8423, 2001.
Juillard, Michel, “Dynare: A Program for Solving Rational Expectations Models,” CEPREMAP,
2003. (www.cepremap.cnrs.fr/dynare/)
King, Robert, and Sergio Rebelo, “Resuscitating Real Business Cycles,” in (Ch. 14) Taylor, John
and Michael Woodford (eds), Handbook of Macroeconomic, Volume 1B, Elsevier, 1999,
Amsterdam.
King, Robert and Alexander Wolman, “What Should the Monetary Authority Do When Prices are
Sticky?”, in John Taylor (ed), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago Press, 1999.
Lucas, Robert, “Macroeconomic Priorities,” American Economic Association Presidential Address,
American Economic Review, V. 93, No. 1, March, 2003, 1-14.
Neiss, Katharine S. and Edward Nelson, “The Real-Interest-Rate Gap as an Inflation Indicator,”
Macroeconomic Dynamics, 7(2), April 2003, pg. 239-262.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1997), “An Optimization Based Econometric
Framework for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,” in Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J.
Rotemberg (eds) NBER Macroeconomics Annual 297-346.

-34Sbordone, Argia (2001), “An Optimizing Model of U.S. Wage and Price Dynamics,” working paper,
Rutgers University.
Smets, Frank and Raf Wouters, “An Estimated Stochastic Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of
the Euro Area,” ECB Working Paper #171, August, 2002.
__________, “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE Approach,” mimeo,
May, 2003.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (1999), “Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S. Macroeconomic
Time Series,” in Taylor, John B. and Michael Woodford (eds), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1A, Elsevier, 1999, Amsterdam. 3-64.
Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson (2002), “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?”, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 159-218.
Taylor, John, “Staggered Price and Wage Setting in Macroeconomics,” in John Taylor and Michael
Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol, 1B, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
B.V., 1999, p. 1009-1050.
Woodford, Michael, Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, 2003.

Table 1: Parameters for the Benchmark Calibration
1/
0.33

p

0.930

0.008

Source: see Appendix B.

0.67

0.75

7

w

7

0.025

8

0.25

0.99

-35Table 2: The Benchmark Calibration of the Model
std

1/ = 1

1/ = 0.33

1/ = 0.20

1/ = 0.14

actual data

Output

0.014
1.000

0.014
1.000

0.014
1.0000

0.014
1.000

0.016
1.000

Consumption

0.832
0.963

0.839
0.962

0.840
0.961

0.840
0.961

0.799
0.871

Investment

3.112
0.990

3.133
0.992

3.111
0.992

3.118
0.992

3.122
0.893

Hours

0.965
0.633

0.972
0.635

0.972
0.636

0.972
0.636

0.894
0.857

Real wage

0.497
0.577

0.497
0.553

0.493
0.547

0.500
0.543

0.470
0.243

Inflation

0.259
-0.381

0.259
-0.389

0.257
-0.391

0.257
-0.391

0.357
0.330

Wage
Inflation

0.084
-0.212

0.077
-0.270

0.076
-0.284

0.076
-0.290

0.375
0.020

Interest rate

0.203
-0.998

0.203
-0.998

0.201
-0.998

0.201
-0.998

0.253
0.333

Output gap

1
1

1
1

1
1

1
1

0.962
0.965

cor

Notes:
1. Both model data and actual data are in logarithms, and have been HP-filtered.
2. Model data was generated by Dynare, using 1st order approximations.
3. Actual data are computed using a sample of 1960:1 to 2003:2.
4. Standard deviations for the y column are the first number in each cell. For other columns
standard deviations relative to standard deviation of output are the first numbers in each cell.
As both n and w are for the nonfarm business sector, we normalize their standard deviations
by the standard deviation of real GDP of the nonfarm business sector.
5. Correlations with output are the second number in each cell.
6. The benchmark calibration uses the ‘bad’ monetary policy rule.

-36-

Table 3: The Benchmark Calibration of the Efficiency Gaps
std

model
mrs-mpl
gap

model
wage
gap

model
price
gap

data
mrs-mpl
gap

data
wage
gap

data
price
gap

1/ = 1

0.025
0.580

0.022
0.741

0.008
-0.188

0.029
0.730

0.028
0.844

0.011
-0.230

1/ = 0.33

0.053
0.611

0.050
0.689

0.008
-0.196

0.064
0.807

0.063
0.862

0.011
-0.230

1/ = 0.20

0.082
0.659

0.078
0.705

0.008
-0.151

0.099
0.826

0.098
0.862

0.011
-0.230

1/ = 0.14

0.110
0.623

0.106
0.661

0.008
-0.198

0.134
0.834

0.133
0.861

0.011
-0.230

correlation

Table 4: Consumption Cost of the Benchmark Wage and Price Inertia, CC(0.67, 0.75)
( , )1 =
(0.843, 0.007)

( , )2 =
(0.923, 0.0086)

( , )3 =
(0.979, 0.007)

1/ = 1

0.15

0.47

1.39

1/ = 0.33

0.28

1.02

3.54

1/ = 0.20

0.42

1.57

5.71

1/ = 0.14

0.55

2.11

7.88

1/ = 0.10

0.58

2.94

11.15

1/ = 0.05

1.46

5.72

22.19

-37Table 5: Variance Decomposition for benchmark parameters (in percent)
p

consumption
investment
output
hours
real wage rate
inflation
wage inflation
interest rate
marginal cost
real rental rate
mrs-mpl gap
wage gap
price gap

54.94
45.95
52.30
9.12
98.87
94.94
78.09
49.59
85.09
22.43
9.65
6.45
87.07

i

g

39.75
53.75
47.60
90.70
1.09
5.06
21.81
50.38
14.90
77.45
90.32
93.52
12.92

5.31
0.30
0.10
0.18
0.04
0.00
0.10
0.02
0.01
0.12
0.03
0.04
0.01

Note: model output is HP-filtered.

-38Table 6: Calibration with Less Nominal Inertia ( =
std

= 0.5 )

1/ = 0.33

1/ = 0.14

actual data

Output

0.014
1.000

0.014
1.000

0.016
1.000

Consumption

0.840
0.964

0.860
0.962

0.799
0.871

Investment

3.118
0.990

3.042
0.991

3.122
0.893

Hours

0.743
0.634

0.741
0.630

0.894
0.857

Real wage

0.597
0.757

0.601
0.754

0.470
0.243

Inflation

0.354
-0.363

0.357
-0.376

0.357
0.330

Wage
Inflation

0.153
0.044

0.154
0.010

0.300
-0.005

Interest rate

0.194
-0.994

0.196
-0.998

0.256
0.349

Output Gap

1
1

1
1

0.962
0.965

correlation

Notes:
1. Both model data and actual data are in logarithms, and have been HP-filtered.
2. Model data was generated by Dynare, using 1st order approximations.
3. Actual data are computed using a sample of 1960:1 to 2003:2.
4. Standard deviations for the y column are the first number in each cell. For other columns
standard deviations relative to standard deviation of output are the first numbers in each cell.
As hours, real wages, and nominal wage inflation are for the nonfarm business sector,
we normalize their standard deviations by the standard deviation of real GDP of the nonfarm
business sector.
5. Correlations with output are the second number in each cell.
6. This calibration uses the ‘bad’ monetary policy rule.

-39Table 7: Consumption Costs with Alternative Degrees of Wage and Price Inertia
1/ = 0.33

1/ = 0.14

CC(0.67, 0.75)

1.02

2.11

CC(0.50, 0.50)

0.45

0.95

CC(0.67, 0)

0.13

0.22

CC(0, 0.75)

1.13

2.40

Note: The productivity process, the monetary rule, and other parameters are the benchmark
specifications.

Table 8: Consumption Costs with Alternative Policies
( Benchmark Wage/Price Inertia and Productivity Shocks)
1/ = 1

1/ = 0.33

1/ = 0.14

Policy 1

0.47

1.02

2.11

Policy 2

0.43

0.92

1.92

Policy 3

0.12

0.23

0.46

Policy 4

0.07

0.14

0.26

Notes:
Policy 1 (the ‘bad’ policy rule):
it = 0.824 it-1 + (1 - 0.824) [ -log( ) + 2.02 t + 0.184 ( yt - y ) ] + i,t,
y is output in the non-stochastic steady state
Policy 2 (the ‘bad’ policy rule, no shock):
it = 0.824 it-1 + (1 - 0.824) [ -log( ) + 2.02 t + 0.184 ( yt - y ) ]
y is output in the non-stochastic steady state
Policy 3 (the ‘good’ policy rule):
it = 0.824 it-1 + (1 - 0.824) [ -log( ) + 2.02 t + 0.184 ( yt - yf,t ) ] + i,t,
yf,t is potential output calculated using the level of employment
and the capital stock of the corresponding economy with no nominal rigidity
Policy 4 (the ‘good’ policy rule, no shock):
it = 0.824 it-1 + (1 - 0.824) [ -log( ) + 2.02 t + 0.184 ( yt - yf,t ) ]
yf,t is potential output calculated using the level of employment
and the capital stock of the corresponding economy with no nominal rigidity

-40Table 9: The Model Calibration under Alternate Interest Rate Rules (for 1/ = 0.33)
std

c

inv

y

n

w

inf

output
gap

Policy 1

0.839
0.962

3.133
0.992

0.014
1.000

0.972
0.635

0.497
0.553

0.259
-0.389

1
1

Policy 3

0.846
0.976

3.044
0.993

0.018
1.000

0.808
0.817

0.368
0.608

0.143
-0.444

0.593
0.808

actual data

0.799
0.871

3.122
0.893

0.016
1.000

0.894
0.857

0.470
0.243

0.357
0.330

0.962
0.965

cor

Notes:
1. Policy 1 is the ‘bad’ policy rule, with interest rate shock.
2. Policy 3 is the ‘good’ policy rule, with interest rate shock.

Figure 1: Welfare Gaps

-41Figure 2: Model’s IRF for a Government Spending Shock
g o v e r n m e n t s p e n d in g

x 10

-3

5

4

8

3 .5

x 10

-5

x 10

3

3

4

2 .5

2

0

20

2

40

0

ou tp u t

1

40

0

20

x 10

-3

- 1 .5

- 1 .5

-2

-2

0

20

- 2 .5

40

6
-4

x 10

-4

20

40

in f la t io n

0

3

-1

x 10

-5

2
1

4

2

0

re a l w a g e

e m p lo y m e n t

40

-1

-1

40

20
c o n s u m p t io n

- -03 .5
x 10

2

0

- 0 .5

0

-4

0

20
in v e s t m e n t

4

x 10

4

-5

6

2

x 10

r e a l in t e r e s t r a t e

n o m in a l in t e r e s t r a t e

10

-2

0

20

40

-3

0
0

20

40

-1

0

20

40

-42Appendix A: Derivations.
Here, we provide derivations for some of the expressions that were asserted in the main text.
A1: The firm’s marginal cost (equation (3) in the text) –
Firm f chooses Kt-1(f) and Nt(f) to minimize total cost
(A1.1) TCt(f) = RtKt-1(h) + WtNt(f) s.t. Yt(f) = ZtKt-1(f) Nt(f)Ignoring time subscripts and the firm index, the FOC’s for this minimization imply
(A1.2) R/W = [ /(1- )](N/K)
Using this condition in the production function, Y = ZK N1- , it is straight forward to see that
(A1.3) K = (Y/Z)[(W/R) /(1- )]1- and N = (Y/Z)[(W/R) /(1- )]So, total cost can be written as
(A1.4) TC = RK + WN = (Y/Z){R[(W/R)( /(1- ))]1- + W[(W/R) /(1- )]- }
= (Y/Z){R W1- [ /(1- )]1- + W1- R [ /(1- )]- }
= (Y/Z)(R W1- ){[ /(1- )]1- + [ /(1- )]- } = (Y/Z)(R W1- )/[ (1- )(1- )]
and marginal cost can be written as equation (3) in the text.
A2: Aggregate output (equations (27) and (28) in the text) –
Using (A1.3), and the demand curves for the firms output (equation (5) in the text)
aggregate employment of the labor bundle can be written as
(A2.1) Nt =
where DPt

1
0

Nt(f)df = (1/Zt)[(Rt/Wt)(1- )/ ]

1
0

Y(f)tdf = (1/Zt)[(Rt/Wt)(1- )/ ] YtDPt

1
0

(P(f)t/Pt)- pdf. Or equivalently, the aggregate output is

(A2.2) Yt = [ /(1- )] Zt(Wt/Rt) Nt/DPt = Z{[ /(1- )](Wt/Rt)Nt} Nt1- /DPt
Using (A1.2), the aggregate capital stock can be written as
(A2.3) Kt-1 =

1
0

K(f)t-1df = (Wt/Rt)[ /(1- )] FN(f)t = (Wt/Rt)[ /(1- )]Nt.

-43In light of (A2.3), (A2.2) becomes
(A2.4) Yt = ZtKt-1 Nt1- /DPt,
which is equation (27) in the text.
Recalling that (1- ) j is the fraction of firms that reset their prices t-j period ago, and have
not gotten to reset them since,
(A2.5) DPt =

1
0

(Pt(f)/Pt)- pdf = Pt

= Pt p(1- )

j =0

j

p 1
0

(Pt(f)- pdf = Pt p[

(1- ) j Pt-j*(f)- p]

j =0

Pt-j*(f)- p] = Pt p(1- )Pt*(f)- p + Pt p(1- )

= (1- )(Pt/Pt*(f)) p + (Pt/Pt-1) p[Pt-1 p(1- )
p

[Pt-1 p(1- )

= (1- )(Pt/Pt*(f)) p + (Pt/Pt-1)

p

DPt-1

j

Pt-j*(f)-

p

j+1

Pt-j-1*(f)- p]

j =0

= (1- )(Pt/Pt*(f)) p + (Pt/Pt-1)

j =1

j =0

j

Pt-j-1*(f)- p]

which is equation (28) in the text.
A3: Aggregate disutility of work (equations (30) and (31) in the text) –
Recalling that Ldt(h) = (Wt(h)/Wt)- wNt, and that (1- )

j

is the fraction of households that

reset their wages t-j period ago, and have not gotten to reset them since,
(A3.1) ALt =
DWt =

1
0

1
0 t

L (h)1+ dh = Nt1+

(Wt(h)/Wt)-

w(1+ )

1
0

(Wt(h)/Wt)-

w(1+ )

dh = Nt1+

j =0

(1- ) j(W*t -j(h)/Wt)-

w(1+ )

dh represents wage dispersion (analogous to DPt above), then

(A3.2) DWt = (1- )[(W*t (h)/Wt)= (1- )[(W*t (h)/Wt)= (1- )(W*t (h)/Wt)-

w(1+ )

w(1+ )

w(1+ )

+

j =1

j

(W*t -j(h)/Wt)-

+ (Wt-1/Wt)-

+ (Wt-1/Wt)-

w(1+ )

w(1+ )

j =1

j

w(1+ )

(W*t -j(h)/Wt-1)-

DWt-1.

So finally, we have equations (30) and (31) in the text:
(A3.3) ALt = Nt1+ DWt
(A3.4) DWt = (1- )(W*t (h)/Wt)-

w(1+ )

+ (Wt-1/Wt)-

w(1+ )

]

DWt-1.

w(1+ )

]

.

-44Appendix B: Choosing Parameters for the Benchmark Calibration.

I. Estimated Parameters.

Interest rate rule: A substantial literature suggests that monetary policy during the Volker and
Greenspan eras can be well described by an interest rate rule of the form,

it =

0

+

i + (1- 1)

1 t-1

2

t

+ (1- 1)

3

(yt - y*t) +

i,t

,

We use nonlinear least squares to estimate the interest rate rule from 1979:3 - 2003:2 and obtain,

0

1

2

3

0.222

0.824

2.020

0.184

(0.288)

(0.046)

(0.342)

(0.090)

i

2.44x10-3

Standard errors are in parentheses. Details on all data series are found below.

Productivity: We take the deviation of the log of total factor productivity, zt, from an estimated linear
trend and estimate the autoregression, zt =

zt-1 +

p,t

over two sample periods. The first,

1960:1 - 2003:2, yields our benchmark parameterization. The second, 1979:3 - 2003:2, we use for
sensitivity analysis. We chose a longer sample to estimate our benchmark processes for productivity
because of our concern that shorter samples might be excessively influenced by cyclical factors. The
shorter sample, which coincides with the sample used to estimate the interest rate rule, is used for

-45sensitivity analysis because the evidence in Stock and Watson (2002) suggests that several
macroeconomic time series have become less volatile since some time around 1980.

Sample
1960:1 - 2003:2

p

0.923

8.61x10-3

(0.027)
1979:3 - 2003:2

0.843

6.74x10-3

(0.055)

Government Purchases: As with productivity, we take the deviation of the log of government
purchases from an estimated linear trend and estimate the autoregression, gt =

+ ggt-1 +

g,t

. Using

the same two samples, we obtain,

Sample
1960:1 - 2003:2

g

0.973

g

1.00x10-2

(0.015)
1979:3 - 2003:2

0.973

9.31x10-3

(0.023)

We then set the constant term in this process so that the model produces a value of G/Y = 0.20 in
the steady state.

-46II. Other Parameters

: Firms reset prices each quarter with probability 1- , so that the mean time between price changes
is (1- )-1. Taylor (1999) surveys a large literature and concludes, “price changes and wage changes
have about the same average frequency – about one year.” This would suggest that we set = 0.75.
His conclusion is consistent with the results reported in Gali and Gertler (1999) and Spordone
(2001). More recently, Begnino and Woodford (2003) state that survey evidence suggests prices are
set slightly less frequently than twice a year, which would suggest using a value for

close to 0.5.

Bils and Klenow (2002) report evidence that consumer prices are adjusted on average considerably
more frequently than once a year. Like Rotemberg and Woodford (1997), we set

= 0.67 so that

prices are set on average once each three quarters. This value has the advantage of lying between
other values chosen in the literature and is consistent with Blinder’s (1994) survey evidence.

: Workers reset wages each quarter with probability 1- , so that the mean time between wage
changes is (1- )-1. We follow the evidence surveyed in Taylor (1999) and set

= 0.75 so that wages

are reset annually on average.

: We set the elasticity of substitution across goods,

p

marginal cost,

p

=

p

= 7, so that the markup of price over

/( p-1) is about 17 percent. Estimates of the markup reported in the literature

p

vary across sectors from about 11 percent to 23 percent. See Bayoumi, Laxton, and Pesenti (2003).
Although the evidence suggests that the15 percent markup used by Rotemberg and Woodford (1997)
is a reasonable value for the U.S. manufacturing sector, the evidence cited in Bayoumi, Laxton, and

-47Pesenti indicates that markups outside of manufacturing are higher. As a result we selected a value
in the middle of the range of values in Bayoumi, Laxton, and Pesenti.

: We set the elasticity of substitution across workers,

w

/(

w

w

= 7, so that the wage markup,

w

=

-1) is about 17 percent. This is based on evidence on inter-industry wage differentials

w

discussed in Bayoumi, Laxton, and Pesenti (2003).

: We set the capital share to be 0.25. Prices are set so that P =

MC, and marginal cost can be

p

written as the ratio of wages to the marginal product of labor. Thus P =
(1- ) =

p

[WN/(1- )Y] and

[WN/PY]. The labor share of compensation (compensation of employees plus two-thirds

p

of proprietors’ income relative to GDP - indirect business taxes) in U.S. data averaged about twothirds between 1960:1 - 2003:2. With a markup of about 17 percent, this suggests a value of

=

0.25.

: We set

= 0.025 so that 2.5 percent of the capital stock depreciates each quarter. This value is

widely used in the literature. When combined with our value of and our steady state calibration
of G/Y = 0.20, this assumption yields steady state values of I/Y = 0.15 and C/Y = 0.65.

: We set the capital adjustment cost parameter,

= 8.0, in order to match the relative volatilities

of investment and output as closely to the data as possible.

: We set the discount factor,

= 0.99.

-48III. The Data

G: Real government consumption and gross investment per capita. Real government consumption
and gross investment is from NIPA Table 1.2 and population is from NIPA Table 8.7.

I: Real fixed investment per capita. Real fixed investment is computed as the ratio of fixed
investment to the implicit price deflator for fixed investment. Fixed investment is from NIPA Table
1.1, the implicit deflator for fixed investment is from NIPA Table 7.1, and population is from NIPA
Table 8.7

i: Effective Federal Funds rate from the historical data from Federal Reserve Release H.15. They
are reported in percent per annum. Before running the regressions for the interest rate rule, we
divided by 1200 to convert to a decimal amount per month.

K: Real nonresidential fixed assets. We follow Stock and Watson (1999) in constructing our
measure of the capital stock. We begin by computing real nonresidential fixed assets by taking the
ratio of nonresidential fixed assets to the implicit deflator for fixed investment. This yields an
annual series for fixed capital. We create a quarterly series by interpolating using the quarterly
values for real fixed investment.

N: Hours worked per capita. We take hours worked from the BLS index of aggregate hours worked
in the nonfarm business sector from historical data from Table 2 of the BLS Productivity and Cost
releases. Population is from NIPA Table 8.7.

-49: Inflation, computed as log(Pt/Pt-1), where Pt is the CPI-U.

W: Real hourly compensation. We take real hourly compensation for the nonfarm business sector
from historical data from Table 2 of the BLS Productivity and Cost releases. Nominal wages are
computed by multiplying real wages by the nonfarm business deflator.

y: Real per capita GDP, taken from NIPA Table 8.7.

y*: Per capita potential GDP. We use the Congressional Budget Office’s estimate of potential GDP.
The data are from Backup Data for Table 2-5, Key Assumptions in CBO’s Projection of Potential
GDP (By calendar year) The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2004-2013, January 2003
and are posted on the CBO web site. Population is from NIPA Table 8.7.

z: Total factor productivity, computed as zt = ynfbt - log(Kt) - (1- ) log(Nt). The log of real GDP
in the nonfarm business sector (ynfb) is from NIPA table 1.8. In computing total factor productivity,
we use aggregate hours worked, rather than aggregate hours worked per capita.

