                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                AGED-CARE SUPPORT IN JAPAN:
                               PERSPECTIVES AND CHALLENGES

                                            Olivia S. Mitchell
                                              John Piggott
                                           Satoshi Shimizutani

                                          Working Paper 10882
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10882


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




Mitchell is a Research Associate of the NBER; International Foundation of Employee Benefit Plans
Professor of Insurance and Risk Management; and Executive Director of the Pension Research Council and
Director of the Boettner Center at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania. Piggott is Professor of
Economics and Director of the Centre for Pensions and Superannuation, University of New South Wales.
Shimizutani is an associate professor of Economics at Institute of Economic Research, Hitotsubashi
University. Funding for this research was provided by the Economic and Social Research Institute, the
Pension Research Council and Boettner Center at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and
the Australian Research Council. Without implicating them, we acknowledge helpful assistance and
suggestions from Yutaka Kosai, Naomi Miyazato, Haruko Noguchi, Junichi Sakamoto, Naonori Yakura,
Takeshi Yamaguchi, and seminar participants at the ESRI. This paper was presented at the 2004 International
Forum of the ESRI, Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, Tokyo. The authors retain full responsibility for
all views contained herein. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Olivia S. Mitchell, John Piggott, Satoshi Shimizutani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Aged-Care Support in Japan: Perspectives and Challenges
Olivia S. Mitchell, John Piggott, Satoshi Shimizutai
NBER Working Paper No. 10882
November 2004
JEL No. H53, H55, I11, I18, I38

                                           ABSTRACT

This study explores economic aspects of the market for long term care (LTC) with a special focus

on Japan. First, we describe the LTC system in Japan as presently implemented, and we highlight

some aspects of the program that are novel and potentially of interest to other countries seeking

models for long-term care provision. Next, we discuss alternative projections of Japanese LTC

utilization and costs. Finally, since Japan appears likely to experience important shortfalls in LTC

in the future, we discuss whether such services might be more efficiently organized and financed

under alternate forms of provision.

Olivia S. Mitchell
3641 Locust Walk, 304 CPC
Department of Insurance & Risk Management
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

John Piggott
School of Economics
University of New South Wales
Sydney 2052, Australia
j.piggott@unsw.edu.au

Satoshi Shimizutani
Institute of Economic Research
Hitotsubashi University
2-1 Naka, Kunitachi-shi
Tokyo, Japan 189-8603
sshimizu@ier.hit-u.ac.jp
              Aged-Care Support in Japan: Perspectives and Challenges
                  “Veneration of the elderly – a central tenet of both Eastern and Western religious
                 and cultural traditions – obliges family and society to maintain and enhance the
                 well-being of those who are old, particularly if they need assistance.” Garber
                 (1999:166)


        As global aging progresses, experts have begun to express concern regarding the extent and cost of

medical and social services that might be absorbed by a rapidly growing older population. It is in this

context that long-term care (LTC) benefits become an important public policy issue with extraordinary

fiscal implications as the world ages. This paper explores the topic of aged-care support in Japan, seeking

to both help explain the status quo and also to evaluate implications for the future. Of Japan’s 127 million

people, almost one-fifth are currently age 65+; the fraction of the elderly, thus defined, is therefore half

again as high as in the US, with 290 million people and 12% elderly, and Australia, which has 19.7 million

people and 13% elderly (USCIA, 2003).1 As populations age, there is increasing need for medical care for

the frail. Currently, in Japan, around 4% of the elderly live in nursing homes, a proportion similar to the US

(AHCA, 2003; Ikegami and Yamada, 1996).

        We begin by describing the LTC system in Japan as presently implemented, and in doing so, we

highlight some aspects of the program that are of interest to analysts seeking new models for long-term care

provision. Next, we discuss alternative projections of aggregate Japanese LTC utilization and costs.

Following this, we devote some attention to regional differences in entitlement and utilization rates, which

will potentially require important cross-subsidization flows in years to come. Finally, since Japan appears

likely to experience important future shortfalls in LTC, we discuss possible roles for private provision of

LTC insurance services. Economic aspects of the market for LTC insurance are our main emphasis.

Defining Long Term Care

        Though the term “long-term care” is widely used, there is no single agreed-on definition of the


1
  In Japan, of the 127 million people, elderly men made up 9.9 million and elderly women 13.8 million; in the US of
the 290 million, men were 14.9 million and women 21 million; and of the 19.7 million Australians, elderly men totaled
1.1 million and elderly women 1.4 million (USCIA, 2003).
                                                                                                             2



concept. Medical experts such as Alan Garber (1996) equate the LTC concept with ongoing medical care,

particularly that which is designed to comfort those who “suffer from the disabling effects of diseases and

injuries that medical treatment can neither cure nor fully relieve” (p. 143). Similarly, health economists

such as Edward Norton (2000: 957) emphasize care provided to those with chronic medical conditions who

require medical and palliative care. On the other hand, health services researchers such as Nelda McCall

(2001: 3) propose a more expansive notion, one that encompasses a “continuum of medical and social

services designed to support the needs of people living with chronic health problems that affect their ability

to perform everyday activities.” A broad approach to LTC is also taken by healthcare management

specialists such as Pratt (1999: 6) who identifies LTC according to the users of these services. Those he

defines as people who are physically or mentally dependent on others, and who consequently require health,

social, personal, and other services for a sustained period of time.

        Since experts differ in what they mean by LTC, it is not surprising that LTC providers are many and

diverse, and the product mix included in LTC varies by country and over time. Of course, the traditional

nexus of support for the elderly and disabled throughout history has been the family, with multigenerational

households exchanging goods and services in a mutual support system. People lacking that option were

forced to turn to “poorhouses” financed by charities and other welfare organizations (Pratt, 1999). In the

last 50 years, however, many developed countries experienced dramatic fertility declines and rising

longevity which contributed to rapid population aging. Combined with a more mobile population, these

facts produced a sharp fall in multigenerational co-resident households, making it increasingly difficult for

the relatively small working-age cohort to care at home for its long-lived and needy elderly

parents/grandparents.

        Partly in response, governments in many developed nations have begun to establish, finance, and

otherwise support nursing homes, often seen as the institutions most closely associated with the notion of

long-term care. Yet the range of services and institutions today associated with LTC is much wider,

including the following (Pratt, 1999: 21-22):

        •   Nursing Facilities: Also known as nursing homes, these are residential institutions licensed by
                                                                                                                       3



             government agencies that provide room and board as well as nursing care and some therapeutic
             services. In the US, a further distinction is made between Subacute Care facilities which are
             very high-level and usually short-stay nursing facilities; Skilled Nursing Facilities (SNF)
             which deliver intensive nursing services (e.g. IV treatments, occupational and physical therapy)
             over longer periods of time; and non-skilled nursing facilities which provide long-term and
             lower-level medical intervention.2
         •   Assisted Living/Residential Care facilities: This category of residential caregiving facility
             accepts people requiring assistance with both regular and instrumental activities of daily living.
         •   Adult Day Care services: These are non-residential programs providing consumers with meals,
             social and educational activities, and supervision.3
         •   Home Health Care services: Generally these offer consumers services in their own homes for a
             few hours a week, including a dietary consultation, a modest level of nursing attention, and
             some therapy. 4
         •    Hospice Care: Support is offered by trained but often volunteer staff for those in the final
             stages of a terminal illness.

         Experts often propose that these services and facilities should be thought of as arrayed along a

so-called “continuum” of care. In the ideal case, a customer’s case would be managed in a coherent and

integrated way, and this care would be paid for without gaps. It is worth emphasizing, however, that in

practice the institutions and entities which provide care deemed useful and/or necessary for the physically

and mentally dependent often are not integrated in a comprehensive way, either in terms of services or

financing. Furthermore, even today, much of the care for the long-lived and needy elderly is still provided

informally by relatives in both the developed and developing world (McCall, 2001).

Aged-care Provision in Japan

         The current LTC system in Japan is a relatively recent addition to the country’s mandatory national

health care system established in 1961. Under the Japanese national healthcare plan, individuals are

assigned coverage for medical care based on their job or residential location (Ikegami and Campbell, 1999).

Each employer or municipality (prefecture) then must offer mandatory healthcare coverage financed by


2
  In many countries, people are classified as being “severely disabled” if they cannot execute at least two of the five
Activities of Daily Living (ADLs; Weiner et al., 1994: 5). ADLs involve the ability to bath, dress, eat, maintain
continence, self-toilet, and transfer in and out of bed. The typical US nursing home resident requires help with at least
4 (ADLs), which makes it extremely difficult for them to remain in their own homes even with home care (MetLife
2003). In the US, 4.5% of people 65+ were in a nursing home in 2000 (MetLife 2003), but the percentage rose rapidly
with age: 18% of those 85+ were in a nursing home. Nursing home costs in 2002 in the US cost $50-60,000 annually,
just for room and board (MetLife 2003).
3
  A simplified list of the so-called Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs) includes preparing meals, doing
housework, taking medication, shopping, using transportation, managing money, and using the telephone (Powell,
1999).
                                                                                                                4



premiums levied on household heads (in the case of the community-based plans), or shared half by

employers and half by employees (for company-based plans; Ikegami, 2003). Self-employed workers are

required to pay the entire healthcare premium themselves. National fee schedules are set by the government

and apply to all providers in Japan; medical care providers are further prohibited from balance billing

(Ikegami, 2003). In 2002, for instance, fees for medical procedures were cut by the central authority by

1.3% overall, and by 5-30% for some services such as CT scans and MRIs. Drug fees are also set centrally

and were reduced 5% in 2002; drug competition is permitted only as long as prices are below the

centrally-set fee (Ikegami, 2003).

        When citizens reach retirement age, they are required to join the Citizens’ Health Insurance plan

(CHI), a decentralized system providing various levels of home care and also institutional care. As part of

this system and particularly from 1973 on, the frail elderly were entitled to free hospitalization even if they

did not require intensive medical care; as a consequence, by 1993 the elderly accounted for almost half of

all hospital beds and one-third stayed for more than one year (Campbell and Ikegami, 2000). This

phenomenon, termed “social hospitalization,” was the target of reform under the Gold Plan of 1989 and

revised in 1994. Under this initiative, the central government instituted efforts to boost the number of

nursing home slots, adult day-care centers, and home health aid providers. At the same time, municipalities

were given a key role in setting eligibility standards and determining who was entitled, in keeping with

public assistance philosophy. It represented a formal acknowledgement that care for the frail elderly was a

problem of growing national consequence.

        The present Japanese LTC program was introduced in 2000, with four key objectives enunciated by

the Japan Ministry of Health, Labor, and Welfare (JMHLW, 2003a). First, the approach sought to reduce

the burden of home care of the elderly, a burden traditionally borne by women. In other words, this

program represented a major shift in the responsibility for elderly care away from the family, and toward

the state (Campbell and Ikegami, 2000). Second, the new system sought to make more transparent the


4
 In the US, paid home care services were used by 28% of people 50-64 needing help with ADLs, and 48% of those
age 75-84 (MetLife 2003). Hourly rates for home health aides averaged $18/hour in 2003 (MetLife 2003).
                                                                                                               5



relationship between benefits received and premiums paid. Third, the new program was designed to

integrate what had been a vertically-divided system of health, medical, and welfare services operating

relatively independently, so as to provide a means by which customers would receive comprehensive

services from a variety of institutions of their choice. Fourth, by separating long-term care from health

insurance coverage, the new insurance program sought to reduce the number of “social hospitalization”

cases where elderly were hospitalized simply because of a lack of viable alternatives.

Program Benefits

           Focusing first on system benefits under the Japanese public LTC system, the program is explicitly

intended to provide both in-home services (at-home care) and also services at facilities (institutional care).5

All persons age 65+ are eligible, along with people age 40-64 with health-related disabilities. Eligibility is

determined based on condition, rather than income and/or assets, and it must be reevaluated every six

months (Campbell and Ikegami, 2000).

           To receive LTC benefits, an individual must undergo a lengthy and information-intensive

disclosure process, beginning with application to an expert committee which collects extensive information

and applies a computer algorithm to 85 data inputs, including the applicant’s income, assets, and health

information (Ikegami, 2003). Facilities-based services are offered only to customers who are certified by

the LTC expert committee as needing such care based on health status. These committees must make a

screening determination based on the opinions of doctors within 30 days of application (Campbell and

Ikegami, 2000). Though standards for long-term care requirement certification are intended to be nationally

uniform and objectively determined, in fact, each municipality appoints its own examiner group comprised

of physicians and other care providers. It is worth noting that municipal government officials having budget

responsibilities do not serve on these examiner committees, which may diminish incentives for cost-cutting

(Campbell and Ikegami, 2000).

           At the time a person is certified in need of LTC, he is further determined as falling into one of



5
    Unless otherwise noted this discussion is adapted from JMHLW (2003).
                                                                                                                      6



health condition groupings identified as Care Levels 1-5, versus “support required.” 6 Benefit entitlements

correspond to each care level, though services provided may vary across regions. On the whole, long-term

care “welfare” facilities mainly focus on the consumer’s activities of daily living, while health facilities are

mainly oriented toward rehabilitation. LTC medical facilities are mainly health-care delivery institutions.

As an example, the financial value accorded to in-home benefits and home-visit outpatient services varied

in 2003 from ¥62,000- ¥358,000/month, and for short-stay service, people are entitled to 7-42 days in a

facility every 6 months. Facility benefits are determined according to the level of long-term care required.

After the municipality board assesses the customer’s eligibility and level of care needed, he is referred to a

care manager who then consults with the customer as well as the patient’s doctor. After the customer

approves the care plan, the care services actually delivered; customers are permitted to switch care

managers at will.

         Two types of services are offered under the LTC program. In-home services include a variety of

offerings including (1) home-visit/day services (home-visit long-term care, home-visit bathing, home-visit

rehabilitation, day rehabilitation (day care), home-visit nursing care, day service, welfare devices leasing);

(2) short-stay service/short-stay care; (3) in-home medical care management counselling; (4) care service

for the elderly with dementia; (5) care service provided in for-profit private homes for the elderly; (6)

allowance for purchase of welfare devices; and (7) allowance for home renovation (handrails, removal of

level differences, etc.). Services at facilities are described according to three types of nursing homes: (1)

long-term care welfare facilities for the elderly (special nursing homes for the elderly); (2) long-term care


6
  The categories of care are as follows: the first or lowest care level category is the so-called “Support Required”
condition; here the consumer lives independently but requires any assistance for Instrumental Activities of Daily
Livings (IADLs) such as taking medication and phone calls. Above this, five levels of “Care Required” are
distinguished, all of which require that the consumer cannot live independently but requires care in basic Activities of
Daily Lives (ADLs). Care Level 1 is defined as having more IADLs than the “Support Required” category; this
individual would require partial care for daily living and care for IADL. Care Level 2 is defined as having additional
need for help with ADLs in addition to the problems defined above. Care Level 3 requires more help with both IADLs
and ADLs than Care Level 2 and the individual would require total care. Care Level 4 is defined as having all
previously described conditions along with worse functioning in the ADL area; such an individual would find it
difficult to live without care. Care Level 5 is defined as finding it impossible to live without care, and having worse
ADLs than Care Level 4. To ensure uniformity of certification, primary judgment is based on estimating a consumer’s
required “minutes of care” required per day as well as other indicators of dementia. These are described as typical
requirements for each care level: Care Required: 25-32 minutes; Care Level 1: 32-50 minutes; Care Level 2: 50-70
                                                                                                                   7



health facilities for the elderly; and (3) long-term care medical facilities for the elderly. The last type also

includes sanatorium-type wards as well as wards for elderly patients with dementia, and hospitals with

enhanced long-term care service provision. Medical care, per se, is not included in the LTC program but

instead is offered under the national healthcare system.

        Rates for all covered LTC services are set by the JMHLW and are based on the units concept. The

Ministry has allocated a given number of "units" to particular services, where a unit varies with the service

involved and by region (taking into account some degree of regional wage differentials of service

providers). A unit’s value is currently set at about ¥10; this will be revised every three years. For example,

231 units are associated with home-help service care ranging from 0.5-1 hour (as of April 2003), regardless

of the actual level of care administered. This means that the price of home-help service in a typical area is

¥2,310. The number of units assigned to institutional care depends on the customer’s required care level.

For example, in a typical long-term care welfare facility, 959 units per day are allocated to a Care Level 5

case, and 677 units are associated with a day in a Care Level 1 environment. Further detail on the unit

allowances for different types of care is provided in Table 1, arrayed by the condition of the elderly person.

Program Financing

        Turning to financing, the Japanese public LTC system is operated as a pay-as-you-go program,

financed by both earmarked premiums levied on insured persons and general tax revenue. Half of the

program costs are paid by premiums assessed on workers (age 40+) and their employers as well as retirees

(deducted from their public pensions); these premiums are collected by municipalities.7 Workers under the

age of 40 do not currently pay premium taxes into the LTC system.

        It is worth emphasizing that the LTC premiums are means-tested: for example, the “basic”

premium is ¥3,293/month for “Category 1” individuals (JMHLW, 2003), but it is higher for other

categories of individuals. Category 1 individuals must be age 65+, among whom some are exempted from

municipal taxes by virtue of having very low income; the group also includes those on public assistance,


minutes; Care Level 3: 70-90 minutes; Care Level 4: 90-110 minutes; Care Level 5: Over 110 minutes.
7
  A recent study by Komamura and Yamada (2004) offers evidence that much of the employer’s contribution is also
                                                                                                                8



people with confirmed disability, and widows and widowers whose total income in the previous year is less

than 1.25 million yen. Category 2 persons are those age 40-64 who are insured by the national health

insurance system. A Category 2 individual having income under ¥2.5 million annually pays a LTC

premium of 1.25 times the “basic” amount, while an individual with income over that threshold must pay a

premium set at 1.5 times the “basic” amount.8 Premiums also vary across municipalities; after setting

premium levels in 2000 and revising them in 2003, the expectation is that premiums will be revised every

three years going forward.

        Annual LTC expenditures in 2002 totalled ¥5.2 trillion (AJFNHIO, 2002). This is composed of

premiums worth just over half of a percent of workers’ annual earnings covering about one-third of the total

program cost (Campbell and Ikegami, 2000). Premiums paid by the elderly (age 65+) cover 17% of the

program’s costs, and the rest of the costs are paid by the central government (25% of the cost), prefectures

(12.5%), and municipalities (12.5%).

        In addition to premiums, eligible consumers must pay additional out-of-pocket amounts for LTC

services and care. An eligible person must pay a 10% co-insurance amount for each insured service. For

instance, if home-help service care is priced at ¥2,310 per hour, the customer would pay ¥231 for that

service and the municipality pays the rest. The customer is also responsible for meal charges when in a

nursing home. These co-pays are set by service and type of care, and vary depending on the consumer’s care

level but not his income level. After spending up to a threshold, the consumer is responsible for 100% of

any additional costs until hitting a stop-loss threshold called the “high-cost long-term care service limit.”

Above that threshold, additional expenses incurred by the consumer are covered by the LTC program at

100%.

        The stop-loss threshold is reduced for low-income consumers, in some cases by more than half.9 In

2003, for instance, a Care Level 3 consumer faced an out-of-pocket limit for care services of 26,750


paid for by workers, shifted to employees in the form of lower wages.
8
  In addition, these premiums may be exempted and/or reduced “at times of emergencies” according to the JMHLW
website.
9
  An old-age welfare pension recipient has an out-of-pocket limit of ¥15,000/month; a municipal tax-exempted
                                                                                                                9



units/month, with one unit equal to ¥10. In other words, he was eligible to use care services worth ¥267,500

in a month simply by paying ¥26,750. For meals, the standard charges amounted to ¥23,400/mo (or

¥780/day). If the cost of services consumed exceeded this limit, the consumer would have to pay for all the

additional services, up to an out-of-pocket maximum of ¥37,200/month for a non means-tested consumer.

After that point, all additional costs would be paid by the system.

Public LTC Service Utilization and Cost Projections

        To evaluate how the public component of Japanese LTC may evolve over time as the population

ages, it is useful to assess models of utilization and cost projections. In Japan, as elsewhere, LTC

projections are fraught with uncertainty. Often analysts take existing utilization patterns and multiply then

by population projections, though this can result in imperfect projections because of changes in demand due

to subsidized care. There may also be changes in demand if copays and deductibles are raised, or if the

existence of the LTC system contributes to the rehabilitation and recovery from illness and injury. In

addition, some experts project substantial declines in future utilization rates as a result of more resilient

older populations. For instance Fries (1980) contended in a controversial but influential paper that

“[e]xtension of adult vigor far into a fixed life span compresses the period of senescence near the end of

life.” Subsequent research offers additional empirical support of this view including Lubitz et al. (2003)

who suggests that longer lifespans may not necessarily boost healthcare spending per capita. In any event,

future morbidity declines will probably not offset much of the cost increases attributable to the rise in the

fraction of the population that is elderly (Garber, 1999).

        The All-Japan Federation of National Health Insurance Organizations (AJFNHIO, 2003) estimated

that 3.7 million persons were certified as in need of some LTC in 2003. Of these, only 2.7 million received

care, with at-home care users totalling 2 million (58%) and institutional care users totalling 0.7 million

(20%). Projections of possible future LTC need and utilization are offered by the Japanese Ministry of

Health, Labor, and Welfare (JMLHW), which relies on methodology developed by the Research Group on

Elderly Care and Support Systems for Autonomous Living (the precise methodology has not yet been


person’s limit is ¥24,600/month; and a regular taxpayer has a limit of ¥37,200/month.
                                                                                                                10



explicated formally so the resulting estimates are quasi-official). It is known that the office estimated the

number of demented elderly for every five years going forward, from 2005 to 2045, and it also estimated

government net expenditures (aka “Evaluation Payments”) for 2005, 2015, and 2025.

        Kishida (1998) estimated the number of elderly needing care using a different model, and it

indicated far more shortfalls than found by the MLHW. Relying on 1993 incidence rates from the MLHW,

he concluded that more people would require care over time than the government estimated. In fact, by

2020 he estimated that the number needing care would rise to 4.8 million (assuming a 3% annual growth

rate) and that the population needing care would grow until 2030. He used the “current” unit costs of LTC

in these projections, and obtained overall net cost estimates higher than the JMHW’s 1995 estimates: the

Ministry had forecast costs of ¥4.2 trillion for 2000, while Kishida’s projections totalled ¥8.5 trillion. In

addition to differences in projected numbers of users, Kishida took a more comprehensive view of cost; he

included living expenses for elderly and imputed a value to the care provided by family members to the

elderly (no breakdown was provided, however, of exactly comparable numbers).

        Table 2 assembles some future projections of elderly eligibles and costs of LTC in Japan. These

rely on historical data for the number of elderly requiring LTC in Japan during the 1990s (see Table 3). Of

course, utilization patterns could well be higher since the current LTC program only went into effect in

2000; in view of population aging and likely increased demand for LTC services, an extrapolation of

historical trends may underestimate future LTC costs. Table 4 reports the official projections of the number

of elderly expected as of 2025 as well as the number of frail, bedridden, weak, and those expected to need

LTC services at that point.

        Using these numbers, one may try to bound the range of estimates for aggregate LTC costs in Japan

by 2025. On the assumption that care prices remain constant over time and that the share of users does not

change, total costs would rise by virtue of population aging alone from ¥5.2 trillion currently to reach ¥9

trillion (AJFNHIO, 2002). If, instead, at-home and institutional user prices are fixed, but the share of

at-home users rises at historical rates, projected expenditures would exceed ¥10 trillion. Further, allowing

both the number of at-home users and the price of home care (but not institutional care) to rise at historical
                                                                                                                   11



rates would boost total estimated costs to ¥26 trillion. Finally, the estimates would be much higher if both

price and utilization rates for institutional users were projected to rise at historical rates. Microeconomic

panel data will be required to refine these projections, permitting the development of statistical transition

matrices between health status categories influencing healthcare utilization and cost patterns.10

Regional Differences in Dependency, Capacity, Utilization and Costs

         One interesting aspect of the Japanese LTC system is that some aspects are highly centralized,

while others are quite decentralized. The central government requires that LTC services can only be

provided by non-profit nursing homes and hospitals, whereas home-care services may also be provided by

private for-profit firms. Prices of services and units of care are also set by the central government. Each

municipality – of which there are 3,200 – then decides which people are eligible for what kinds of care.11

Municipalities set premium levels for LTC at the local level, and they also collect premiums from workers

and retirees in their locales. And finally, the “insurance carriers” of this long-term coverage are the

municipal governments which in turn approve the care providers. In the case of at-home care, these include

local government service organizations and non-profit outfits and more recently, for-profit firms. Since fees

are set centrally, providers are intended to compete based on quality of care, though it is not yet known

whether consumers and their families are able to judge, and act on, the information provided.

         A consequence of this “decentralized yet centralized” approach is that there are important regional

differences in provision and capacity. Each community has different income and age structures, which

results in sharply different utilization patterns by region, as is shown in Figure 1 and Table 5, derived from

data provided by the All-Japan Federation of National Health Insurance Organizations (AJFNHIO, 2003).12

While the percentage of elderly as a fraction of the Japanese working-age population (defined as 15-64)

averages 31%, this dependency ratio varies across prefectures from a low of 19% to a high of 43%. Also

there are substantially different concentrations of elderly requiring services across the country, meaning


10
   In the US, for example, Robinson (1996) has developed transition matrices that differ by age and sex, using panel
data on the elderly for the period 1982-1989.
11
   Some municipalities are allowed to form a union to operate the LTC scheme jointly.
12
   These figures are derived from Statistics Bureau (2003).
                                                                                                              12



some local areas are more likely to confront serious financing problems than others. For example, elderly

entitled to LTC services amount to only 4% of the working-age population overall, and 14% of the elderly

population. Nevertheless the range is again large, from 2 to 7% of the working-age group, and from 12 to

18% of the elderly. Figure 1 groups the 47 Japanese prefectures by region, and the graphic makes clear that

there is substantial regional unevenness in terms of where the elderly live, with higher concentrations in the

southern regions of the nation and lower rates in the Kanto region. Entitlement ratios, on the other hand, are

more even suggesting some implicit rationing.

        Evidently the elderly in Japan, as in many other nations, are not dispersed evenly across the land.

This is, in part, because many elderly remained behind in the rural sector when their children moved to the

cities in search of work. In the future, the elderly may become increasingly concentrated in a few

prefectures: for instance, Doteuchi (2003) suggests that the largest growth in elderly populations will be

concentrated in the nation’s top major metropolitan areas, particularly Tokyo and Osaka. Such

concentration would raise concerns, since elderly urban housing is often crowded and of low-quality, it may

be ill-suited for those with physical limitations, and it may be inappropriate for those needing frequent

services and attention.13

        Another important point to note is the substantial differences in terms of LTC capacity across

regions, particularly regarding the number of beds available in institutions. Figure 2 and Table 5 indicate

that beds per 1000 elderly average 32 overall, with a high of 50 and a low of 22; the ratio of beds to eligible

elderly averages 238 per 1000, but the low is 169 and the high is 319. Interestingly, the capacity is highest

per capita in the Chubu region, and also in the south of the country (AJFNHIO, 2003).

        Utilization ratios are also of interest, insofar as they reflect regional differences which will likely

translate into uneven cost patterns across the nation. Figure 3 indicates the regional variability in

institutional care users per elderly, which averages a 3% rate overall, with a range from 2 to 5%. The

highest is observed in Okinawa. An even larger range is observed for at-home care users, where the national

average of 8% covers the 5-10% range. Here too, it appears that utilization rates are lowest in the Kanto
                                                                                                              13



region, and highest in the south of the country, particularly Miyazaki.

           A related consideration regarding the current decentralized LTC system is that it appears to be

suffering excess demand for its services. Kishida (2002: 269) wrote that “since LTC insurance was initiated,

there has been a sharp increase in applications to these special skilled nursing homes, and waiting periods of

6 months to one year are not unusual.” Asahi Shinbun (2003) reported that a survey of prefectural

governments found over 200,000 elderly people were on waiting lists seeking entrance to special care

homes, among the subset of offices keeping records (only 27 of the 47 responded with data). The latter

article also found substantial shortfalls in 2001: residences for those 65+ who could not care for themselves

were operating at 97 percent capacity, and the national capacity was only for 314,000 residents in total.

Ikegami (nd) indicated a substantial rise in the fraction of the elderly population certified as needing care

over time, from 10.5% in 2000 to 14.1% in 2002, higher than the 12% ratio used for planning purposes. Of

those certified, the percentage actually receiving benefits rose from 76.1% in 2000 to 77.8% by 2002, with

the remainder waiting to be accepted in institutional facilities. These figures suggest that as the population

becomes more aware of the benefits available, demand will rise.

           If Japanese LTC services were priced in such a way that they reflect economic scarcity, the

economist would expect that capacity differentials would result in higher fees across regions of the country.

Yet prices are not set by markets; rather, the government sets national service fees and alters these only

every three years. This results in a very low degree of variability in fees per user across the country (Figure

4), with the average institutional charge per user of institutional services totalling about ¥ 43,000 annually

and at-home care fees for homecare users amounting to about ¥11,000 annually. Standard deviations

around these numbers are quite small, on the order of ¥900-1,000. This confirms that substantial differences

in utilization and capacity are not reflected in regional fee differentials.

           It must also be noted that regional disparities are also influencing the revenue side of the program.

Ikegami (2003) has argued that high levels of joblessness contributed to lower LTC system revenues,

particularly in the prefectures hardest hit by the long Japanese recession. Furthermore, the poor elderly


13
     Of course this may still be preferred to remote rural dwellings.
                                                                                                                 14



participants pay no premiums, due to either evasion or waivers (currently about 40% of the total), and this

group is not necessarily evenly spread across the country, either. Consequently, there is increasing

awareness of the need for geographic cross-subsidization, and the federal government has promised that

5% of the program’s budget will be used to adjust for differences in municipalities' financial capabilities.

Multivariate Analysis

        To further analyze observed cross-sectional fee and utilization patterns, we next turn to a

multivariate analysis of the determinants of LTC entitlement and utilization patterns across Japanese

prefectures. Three dependent variables are selected for analysis: elderly LTC entitlement rates, utilization

rates for institutional care, and utilization rates for at-home care. These are available at the prefectural level,

and we relate them to a set of explanatory variables also measured at the prefectural level: population

density, wages of care-givers, and local care capacity.14 Our goal is to evaluate, in particular, whether

entitlement and utilization rates vary with population density; are higher in rural vs urban areas; are

responsive to proxies for care prices; and vary with capacity indicators. The particular functional form we

use is as follows:

        Dep Var it = f(Densityit, Healthcare salaries, Area income, Capacityit,)

where i refers to the prefecture, and t refers to the year of the data (2000 and 2001 prefectural-level data

were used in the analyses). Density refers to the number of residents in that prefecture (per km squared);

healthcare salaries represent earnings plus bonuses in the healthcare sector by prefecture; area income

refers to the monthly average earnings (including bonuses) by prefecture; and capacity refers to the ratio of

long-term care and hospital beds to the number of elderly.

        Results appear in Table 6, where we first control only on density, healthcare sector salaries, and

income; thereafter, we add a set of capacity regressors. Focusing on column (1), we note that entitlement

rates are significantly higher in more densely populated areas, holding other things constant, which

contradicts a common perception that rural areas have higher percentages of elderly who are eligible for


14
  The prefectural area and population statistics are available at JMPMPAPT (2003). The price per person of
institutional and at-home care is derived from JMHLW (2003).
                                                                                                                   15



LTC. The finding may indicate that the urban elderly can remain independent more readily, due to reliance

on friends, neighbors, and offspring, than can their rural counterparts. We also see that entitlement rates are

significantly lower in areas with higher wages for healthcare sector workers, suggesting that entitlement

decisions may respond to costs of providing the care. Entitlement rates are also significantly lower in

prefectures with higher incomes, which may proxy for better health among the well-off, or it may also

reflect a negative income effect: that is, those who can afford it are more likely to avoid LTC. These

findings suggest that efforts to project future demand for LTC should take into account not only growth

rates of the elderly population, but also the likely impact of future increases in income and care costs. The

results also indicate that eligibility rates are higher, the greater fraction of the population age 75+; this is

reasonable in view of higher disability rates among the more elderly. Column (2) indicates that these

findings are robust to the inclusion of capacity indicators, captured here by the number of LTC and hospital

beds per 1000 elderly. It is interesting that LTC bed availability is positively and significantly associated

with entitlement patterns, but non-LTC bed availability is not statistically significant.

        The empirical relationship between at-home and institutional utilization rates is reported in

Columns 3-6. Focusing first on the at-home care equations, Columns 3 and 4 suggest that, again, more

densely populated areas have higher utilization rates for home care. There is a strong and significant

negative relationship between healthcare salary levels and LTC utilization, ceteris paribus, which implies

that utilization responds to the price of care. Area income is negative (though less statistically significant),

which may reflect the fact that higher-income eligibles face a higher cost of care (are less subsidized) than

lower-income eligibles. After controlling on bed capacity, utilization proves to be positively associated

with LTC beds, but not with regular hospital bed capacity. Columns 5-6 report our analysis of institutional

utilization rates, where many of the patterns just reported are reiterated. In more urban areas, institutional

care utilization rates are positive, as is the effect of higher percentages of people age 75+. While healthcare

sector earnings are less statistically significant, income levels in the prefecture remain negative. LTC
                                                                                                                         16



utilization is positively and strongly related to LTC bed capacity, while non-LTC bed capacity is not. 15

Socially versus Privately-Provided LTC: The Arguments

       There is an ongoing and contentious debate in the literature over who should pay for long-term care and

how it should be delivered.16 Some believe that private-sector insurers can develop and market insurance

products that efficiently provide the needed protection against the possibly catastrophic costs associated

with having to go into a nursing home. Others take the position that LTC insurance cannot be provided in a

competitive market, arguing that a governmental entity is required to mandate and perhaps provide LTC in

a national social scheme.

       Many who favor the social insurance approach argue that LTC should be provided via a central delivery

system paid for by mandatory premiums (taxes dedicated to the LTC program). Proponents of social

provision offer several arguments to support their case:

       a) They contend that consumers are underinformed of the risks and costs associated with LTC, so they
          must be protected from failing to purchase LTC insurance;
       b) A private LTC insurance market suffers from adverse selection: people who know they require care
          would tend to buy insurance coverage, driving up premiums for the rest of the population and
          destroying the risk pool;
       c) A private LTC market suffers from moral hazard: people might overuse LTC services if they had
          insurance, driving up premiums and producing a market breakdown;
       d) LTC costs are often catastrophic and many people cannot afford to buy insurance to cover them;
          and
       e) It is unfair to require the elderly to sell their homes and spend down all their assets if become frail.

Of course, economists may agree that market failures exist, but many would contend that these could be

addressed by making private markets work better, rather than requiring the government to offer a

centralized LTC system. For instance, misinformed consumers could be better apprised of LTC costs,

enhancing demand for privately-provided insurance products. In other cases, such as adverse selection,

mandating participation in a LTC system could help preserve the risk pool without having the government

provide these services centrally. In order to combat moral hazard, however, so people do not overutilize

care, it may be necessary to establish strict requirements for care provision as well as deductibles and

co-insurance. And finally, the equity arguments (d and e above), could imply some need for vouchers or


15
     We do not control on area-specific eligibility rates in this equation since these depend on capacity constraints.
                                                                                                              17



low-income subsidies: here again, however, the government need not set prices nor dispense services

directly.

           By contrast, those who stress the need for market approaches to LTC emphasize several distinct

arguments to support their case, including the following:

       a) People might be able to self-finance LTC by saving for their own old age, by liquidating private
          assets (including housing equity) to cover costs, or by receiving care from their families (which
          many elderly would prefer);
       b) Privately purchased LTC insurance coverage would permit tailoring of care to consumers’
          particular needs and wishes, better than a single menu offered by government;
       c) Observed low demand for private LTC might be the result of “crowd out” – that is, consumers may
          believe that government “safety net” programs will care for them if they become indigent, so they
          fail to make private provision;
       d) Government care, perceived as “free,” would boost inefficient utilization, whereas
          privately-purchased insurance might mitigate this tendency with deductibles and co-insurance;
       e) Subsidized government provision can cause inefficiencies in both the labor and the LTC markets,
          and evasion associated with redistributive taxation.

In other words, a market-based approach to LTC provision would propose that private provision could be

more efficient than a government at establishing prices and quantities of long-term care services sold. Some

concerned that the poor could end up without care would likely favour a voucher system, so that a minimum

level of care could be provided to destitute consumers requiring LTC. On the other hand, resulting low

benefits and restrictions on access would mean that most consumers would still have to pay for care at

prices reflective of economic resource costs. Such an approach, if combined with mandatory participation,

would still embody some inefficiencies, but it could offer consumers incentives to seek lower-cost

alternatives and to undertake more self-provision, either through saving or insurance, than would be the

case otherwise.

Prospects for Private LTC Insurance in Japan

           In view of the catastrophic nature of LTC expenses, it is interesting that the private insurance

market plays such a small role in Japan, as well as in many other developed nations. For instance, Garber

(1999) argues that the “most striking feature” of the US health care system is its failure to develop much of

a private insurance sector. Only one in five married couples deemed to be able to afford private LTC


16
     See for example Garber (1999), Pratt (1999), and McCall and Korb (2001).
                                                                                                             18



insurance in the US, for instance, is adequately protected against this risk in retirement (Merlis, 2003).

Many attribute this shortcoming to the pervasive influence of public programs such as Medicare and

Medicaid, which tend to crowd out privately-provided LTC insurance (Doerpinghaus and Gustavson, 2002).

The wealthy tend to self-insure, leaving the middle class as the group potentially most interested in private

LTC coverage. It is widely believed, however, that this middle group thinks that their LTC will be met

through Medicare (which is not correct), so hence they do not purchase individual policies. Better

marketing by insurers could correct this misinformation, but this has not happened to date to any large

degree.

Future Demand for Private LTC Insurance in Japan

          Several factors will influence Japanese demand for LTC in future years.These include

developments in health care and technology, and changes in length of time during which the elderly

population experiences periods of frailty. Their net impact on LTC demand is difficult to predict. Perhaps

the greatest unknown is how attitudes in Japan will continue to evolve given what is widely recognized as

a fundamental change in the society’s approach to care for the elderly. On the one hand, establishing an

entitlement-oriented LTC program in Japan will surely make it possible for older persons to accept services

without social stigma. On the other hand, demand for LTC may not grow as quickly as the elderly

population. This is what has occurred in the US due to falling disability rates in the older population. Indeed,

reduced elderly morbidity may mean that more people are able to care for their spouses in a nonmarket

setting, thus reducing the demand for institutional LTC (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2003). In addition,

levels of wealth will surely influence the demand for care, by directly shaping older consumers’ ability to

pay for care, and indirectly by influencing younger workers’ ability to pay for rising premiums associated

with the national mandatory system.

          Another key factor affecting the demand for LTC will be the attractiveness of these services to

elderly consumers, particularly institutionalization, as compared to the alternatives of at-home care or

residential living of some other sort (Pauly, 1990). In other words, people may be less likely to opt for

institutionalization if attractive and low out-of-pocket cost substitutes are available. The medical literature
                                                                                                                 19



on this topic is discouraging, since it suggests that home care is not a particularly effective substitute for

nursing home care. One well-designed experimental program in the US, known the Channeling

Demonstration project, showed that assigning expert case managers to help frail customers remain in the

community increased costs and patient satisfaction, but did not forestall health deterioration, nursing home

admission, or death (Garber, 1999:148). From a quality-adjusted perspective, then, the economics

profession has concluded that the price elasticity for nursing facilities among the very ill is fairly small. On

the other hand, some aspects of nursing home demand do appear to be price-sensitive, particularly among

those in nursing facilities for short stays (Garber and MaCurdy, 1992).

        In Japan's case, a variety of price elasticities for different types of institutional care were evaluated

by Noguchi and Shimizutani (2002), who examined the determinants of exit and reentry from medical

facilities (requiring substantial medical input), versus welfare facilities (providing room and board, but little

medical intervention). Using a unique dataset on Japanese nursing homes from Kaigo Service Shisetsu

Zigyousho Chousa (Survey on Care Service Providers) conducted by the government in 2000, they showed

that a one percentage point rise in consumers’ cost of care increased their probability of returning home by

only 0.04 percentage points from long-term welfare facilities. The estimates were much larger, 3.7

percentage points, for exits from health facilities. It is also interesting that they found large price elasticities

with respect to re-hospitalization probabilities: a one percentage point increase in consumer costs cut

re-entry to a health care facility by 3.3 percentage points, and by 1.9 percentage points to a medical care

facility. Evidently, at-home care is a substitute for some institutional care, but care in medical institutions is

complementary for nursing home care. It is also apparent that the elderly in relatively lower care levels,

who face higher self-burden in the event of needing long-term care, also tend to be re-hospitalized if they

lack family members with whom they can live. Consequently, policies that address the residential patterns

of those who are “socially hospitalized” in Japan could well focus on that category of elderly consumers.

Finally, the research study found that the price elasticity with respect to duration of stay in nursing homes is

-1.7 percentage points for long-term care welfare facilities, and -1.8 percentage points for health facilities.

These rather large elasticities imply that price policy may be effective in inducing clients to reduce
                                                                                                             20



consumption of institutional care in favor of at-home care.

        Another issue of relevance in this arena is whether people prefer public and/or nonprofit care

providers, versus for-profit providers. In the Japanese context, Noguchi and Shimizutani (2003) found that

40% of the providers of at-home care are situated in the for-profit sector. Evidently, the introduction of

public LTC insurance in Japan did not foreclose the entrance of profit-oriented firms to the at-home

services market. The evidence also suggested that households with higher care needs were more likely to

choose a nonprofit provider. This is partly in response to the legal requirement that these firms are the only

ones permitted to provide medical and institutional care, and also a result of the fact that nonprofits were

early participants in the marketplace, having been permitted to operate prior to the LTC reform. While

for-profit providers are therefore disadvantaged, the study found that households with greater knowledge of

supplier choices were more likely to select for-profit firms as caregivers. This suggests that, over time,

greater information about the positive aspects of the for-profit firms will render the at-home care market

more competitive.

Future Supply of Private LTC Insurance in Japan

        The supply of private LTC is deeply influenced by the probability of adverse selection. To some

extent, underwriting in private markets should reduce adverse selection, but it is important to note that the

assessment technology remains in its infancy (Garber, 1996). Of course, mandating LTC coverage

mitigates the problem of adverse selection in the purchase of the insurance, but it does not help in terms of

service utilization. Asymmetric information remains a concern regarding who needs the benefits: it is

expensive and difficult to assess each person’s case individually. There is some interesting recent research

finding no positive correlation between LTC insurance purchase and the probability of entering a nursing

home; indeed, Finkelstein and McGarry (2003) find that those who purchased LTC insurance in the US

were more cautious and less likely to go into a nursing home, than those without coverage. For this reason,

their research suggests that LTC insurance prices may not be unduly influenced by actuarially unfair

selection, which eases the policy concerns about market failure.

        There is increasing interest in developing approaches to measure the quality of care given in
                                                                                                             21



nursing homes and other LTC institutions. Carpenter et al. (2001) discussed five indicators for evaluating

quality in the US context: falls by patients per month, the presence of pressure ulcers, fecal incontinence,

restraint use, and social interaction with others. They reported that Japan had very low rates of pressure

ulcers, while US homes had very good rates of social interaction but also high rates of falls and restraints.

These authors proposed that all nursing homes be encouraged to gather data on these and other performance

measures, and that insurers link outcomes to reimbursement patterns.

        Further information on the quality differentials between for-profit versus public sector and

nonprofit providers in the home-care marketplace in Japan is provided by Shimizutani and Suzuki (2002).

That study reported that for-profit firms appear to have less experienced and trained staff, but the

differences could be explained by the age of the business. Not surprisingly, younger firms had somewhat

less experienced staff, but they also proved to have better information processing systems, better handling

of accidents and emergencies, and better hygiene practices. Controlling on service quality, they reported

that public providers cost slightly less, but newer firms were more efficient than older providers. These

findings therefore confirm that competition contributes to improving the quality and efficiency of the

market for at-home LTC services.

        There may also be other reasons for why insurers have moved slowly into the LTC marketplace in

the developed world. One issue is that there is inevitably substantial and fundamental uncertainty regarding

the future paths of diseases, medical breakthroughs, and technological advances. Each of these could

dramatically change future life expectancies, life years in frail condition, and consequent LTC costs. Also,

the existence of LTC insurance may induce moral hazard: that is families may find it easier to “unload”

their relatives to nursing homes, (recall the concept of “social hospitalization” mentioned above). Both

factors help explain why private LTC policies in the US have had daily and lifetime (and sometimes

financial) caps on coverage offered. In the past, many private policies did not guarantee renewability either,

though this may be changing of late. And researchers have noted that private LTC policies are often not

price indexed, meaning that the consumer remains at risk for out-of-pocket expenses over the long term.

Perhaps most importantly, private policies have tended to be silent regarding what they will pay if the
                                                                                                             22



government were to dramatically change its policies regarding medical care coverage, out of pocket

requirements, spend-down policies, and other related support. Such uncertainty on the consumer’s part

regarding the ultimate value of the private insurance surely serves to depress demand, and also depress

offerings on the supply side.

        In the Japanese context, some have talked about expanding the market for privately-financed

medical care but several obstacles currently appear to impede expansion. Balance-billing by providers is

currently not permitted, nor are investor-owned hospitals (Ikegami, 2003). Further, the government

currently limits private insurance benefits to the provision of at-home care. Until private firms are permitted

to operate nursing homes for the elderly, it is unlikely that market answers to the LTC challenge will be

successful (Go, 2003). At-home care services are not thus restricted, but public funding or tax subsidies are

not allowed to finance them. For this reason, private firms are at a substantial disadvantage vis a vis

government-run operations.

        Prior to the introduction of the public LTC program, private LTC insurance was not very widely

sold in Japan. A key problem facing private insurers was adverse selection, due to the difficulty of

measuring peoples’ true health status. Now that the public LTC program has taken on the role of

determining care needs and implied care levels required, this may make it easier for private insurers to

predict and price risks.

        Thus far, the niche for private LTC insurance in Japan has been mainly complementary to the

public LTC program. One source of demand is for care if required before age 65, since the public program

focuses on the elderly. Another possible source of demand would be for gap cover to meet the co-pays

required by the public program – namely, the 10% of the service costs that the consumer must bear under

the program.

        There are signs that interest in private LTC is growing in Japan. For instance, the share of those

with LTC insurance contracts in 2003 was 16% of those who purchased life insurance, more than a

doubling of the rate only three years before (7%; Japan Institute of Life Insurance, 2003). Providers of

private LTC currently include private life insurance companies (e.g. Nippon Life Insurance Company);
                                                                                                                      23



private property and casualty insurance companies; the National Mutual Insurance Federation of

Agricultural Cooperatives (Zenkyoren); and the Postal Life Insurance Service of the Japan Postal system.

As a rule, the insurance policies stipulated rather severe thresholds for disability, such as the condition of

being bed-ridden or diagnosed as demented for more than a six-month period. For instance, a consumer

who becomes bedridden for over six months after age 50 may receive ¥1.8 million for ten years, under a

policy offered by Sumitomo Life Insurance Company. Recently, however, there has been product

innovation in this market, expanding the definition of the conditions required to receive benefits. For

example, a policy sold by Sumitomo Life Insurance Company provides an income benefit if care is required

for at least 30 days; another provider, American Family Insurance Company, pays benefits to consumers

who are certified by the government as entitled to Care Level 1 or 2.

Potential Policy Responses

         When thinking about potential policy responses to challenges in the Japanese LTC environment, it

is useful to remember that government providers in other countries have often underestimated the demand

for subsidized care when launching a new system. For instance, Pratt (1999) notes that when the US

government established public support for LTC under the Medicare and Medicaid programs, it assumed

that then-current utilization rates would continue, but demand proved to be far greater than anticipated. If

rationing continues to be a problem, either the government will have to raise mandatory premiums or other

taxes to pay for enhanced benefits, or the market for private LTC insurance will have to be opened up.

         When the publicly-provided elderly insurance program was introduced in 2000, the medical care

system was also reformed to curtail the extent of social hospitalization, a major cause of rationing and

increasing medical costs. That reform reduced officially-set prices for hospitalization applied to a “specific

patient”, defined as an elderly person who remained in the same medical institution more than 90 days

(except for several specific diseases).17 This decreased reward for medical institutions motivated them to

discharge elderly patients after 90 days of care. According to the Survey on Patients by JMHLW, the


17
  For example, a typical rate for hospitalization for an elderly is 1,107 unit (1unit=10 yen) per day but it decreased to
928 units and this amount also included basic treatment (inspection, drug use, injection etc).
                                                                                                               24



average number of days in hospitals and clinics for the elderly age 65+ was 58.9 days in 1998, but this

diminished to 53 days in 2002 (60.9 days in 1999, and 55.1 days for hospitals only). Average

hospitalization days fell for all ages from 39.3 (1998) to 37.9 (2002) (or 41.8 to 40.1 for hospitals only), the

decrease was larger for the elderly.

          Yet we cannot conclude that those new policies completely erased “social hospitalization” and

eliminated rationing. One reason is that the downward trend in average hospitalization days for the elderly

started during the 1980s, prior to the new policies. Another is that after 90 days some hospitals are alleged

to engage in a form of “musical chairs,” discharging one set of patients but admitting a different groups’

clients in order to reset the 90-day clock. To this end, some have proposed the development of private LTC

insurance policies sold through benefit plans offered by employers. In the past, US employers have

exhibited little interest in subsidizing this form of insurance directly (Weiner et al., 1994), but the 1996

Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) allows employer-paid premiums to be

excluded from workers’ salaries for tax purposes, and benefits are nontaxable up to a limit of actual LTC

expenses (Rappaport and Stanger, 1997). Additionally, US legislators have recently introduced bills to

make LTC insurance premiums tax deductible to employees who purchase the private insurance via an

employer-based flexible benefits or “cafeteria” plan. These are plans where workers are granted by their

firms a fixed dollar amount which then they can allocate across a range of benefit offerings. In addition, the

proposed bill would grant a tax credit of $3,000 per year to families who provide LTC services to relatives.

Both provisions have an estimated revenue cost to the government of $30B over the next decade (Rovner,

2003). Whether that or another legislative initiative will pass is unclear, but it does seem that tax subsidies

for LTC purchase are likely in the future.

        Another approach that would use the workplace as a nexus for LTC provision would be to permit

workers to use their mandatory LTC premiums to purchase private coverage, perhaps of a catastrophic-only

sort. Contracting out in this fashion would give workers the responsibility of shopping around for LTC

coverage, and it would also offer the advantage of lower costs and more competitive products for those of

working age. This approach would also be consistent with the national policy objective of enhancing
                                                                                                            25



opportunities for female labor supply (Shimizutani, Suzuki, and Noguchi, 2004). On the other hand, to the

extent that the current government program is simply a pay-as-you-go tax-and-transfer system, rather than

an insurance program with actuarially-fair premiums and reserves, allowing some workers to contract out

would likely exacerbate financing problems for the portion of the program supporting the elderly.

        One concern with tax incentives for LTC care is that they might be insufficient to induce low-wage

workers to purchase enough LTC coverage. Nevertheless, rising costs of government financed-care have

prompted a move to private market provision of care in several countries, including the UK, Germany,

Australia, and Sweden (Go, 2003). Though not-for-profit providers have traditionally dominated the

market in Europe, LTC services are increasingly being provided by for-profit companies in the US and the

UK.

         A proposal receiving attention in many aging nations is to combine private LTC insurance with

annuity products, which would potentially boost the market for both annuities and LTC cover. For instance,

Spillman et al. (2001) and Murtaugh et al. (2001) propose an arrangement whereby a privately-sold life

annuity product provides monthly payments that rise in the event that the insured party is certified as

chronically and permanently disabled. For example, at retirement the annuity would begin paying

$1,000/month to the purchaser, but the cash payment would rise to $2,000/mo if the participant was

certified to need help with at least two ADLs (after a one-month waiting period), or if he were certified as

having been cognitively impaired (for a minimum of 90 days). Other formulas could also be envisioned, of

course. The proposal’s appeal is that the two-tiered coverage –longevity protection due to the annuity, plus

a step-up in cash benefits if disabled – may attract more buyers than would a simple life annuity or a simple

LTC scheme. This would be expected to reduce the potential for adverse selection which otherwise has

been seen as a major obstacle to annuity sales (Brown et al. 1999). Indeed, in the Japanese context, the

Postal Saving System has a product of this sort on offer.

        Providing the elderly with cash benefits instead of service benefits does give consumers a wider

range of choices than the current service-based approach embodies. Yet it is interesting that in Japan, a

voucher system or cash benefit was discussed and rejected in the late 1990s (Campbell and Ikegami, 2000).
                                                                                                            26



The major concerns were that providing cash might not afford needed relief to (mainly female) caregivers

of the elderly, and also that offering cash might induce substantial increases in demand. Further, it appears

that policymakers felt that shortages of formal care would best be met by provision of new service facilities.

To this day, these facilities are still constructed with heavy capital subsidies from the public sector.

Consequently, government policy still tends to discourage innovative privately-sold forms of LTC

including assisted living, group homes, and graduated retirement care communities. LTC service benefits

have also been limited to room and board coverage and have not been integrated with medical care benefits.

This limits providers’ incentives to manage residential, medical, and rehabilitative needs in a coherent and

systematic fashion. Finally, problems may arise if people are discharged from LTC institutions due to

reaching their charge limits while still in need of medical care.

        It should be noted that there are advantages to the Japanese system of providing service instead of

cash benefits, with means-tested premiums, co-pays, and out-of-pocket limits. One is that consumers are

actually quite well protected against catastrophic LTC costs. This is in sharp contrast with private LTC

insurance packages on offer in the US, which pay the LTC consumer a specified daily dollar benefit over a

specified and limited number of years. The US format has the advantage of limiting insurers’ liability, but it

does mean that elderly patients may be left without coverage after exhausting the privately-financed benefit.

This in turn would lead them to have to draw down other assets, sell their houses, and/or rely on Medicaid,

the public plan for the indigent.

        A different approach to LTC would rely on dependents, particularly children, to bear a larger share

of LTC costs among the elderly. A tactic adopted in New Zealand and China is to mandate that offspring of

working age must support their own needy parents. This could be combined with an insurance-based

approach such as in Singapore, where private insurance coverage could be purchased by working-age

children for their elderly families (Lee 2003). A different method of risk-pooling would be to require all

workers, including those under the age of 40, to pay premiums for mandatory LTC insurance purchase, as

suggested for Japan by Campbell and Ikegami (2000). The idea here is that the risk pool is relatively

homogeneous early in life, while more and more people at older ages would fail underwriting criteria if they
                                                                                                              27



waited to purchase LTC insurance later. For example, in US data, 89% of people age 40-44 could meet LTC

underwriting criteria, but only 68% of those age 70-74 are healthy enough to meet the screens (Merlis,

2003).

         An indirect way to have families “pay” for LTC would be to facilitate the development of reverse

mortgages (RMs) for the elderly. These products can permit an elderly homeowner to borrow against the

value of his house to enhance his current consumption, perhaps by retrofitting the home to make it suitable

for elderly living. The lender receives no interest or principal payments until the homeowner dies or

vacates his home, at which time the residence is sold and the proceeds used to repay his loan. RMs may be

attractive to the elderly because they are permitted to remain in their homes until death, and in exchange,

they benefit from additional retirement income. An important feature of a RM loan is that it is

“non-recourse,” so that the borrower’s other assets cannot be accessed by the lender to cover loan

repayment (Mitchell and Piggott, 2003). In this event, turning home equity into liquid form enhances a

retiree’s ability to obtain LTC services while remaining out of the hospital. This is particularly key in the

Japanese context since elderly Japanese appear to have housing equity that is some 50 percent larger than

their US counterparts. Of course, taking an RM does have the effect of shrinking retirees’ estates.18

Conclusions and Directions for Future Research

         Our review of long-term care in the Japanese context has drawn out several interesting aspects of

the system that was launched in 2000. For historical reasons, health care continues to be paid for and

delivered by the separate national health insurance system. Thus the Japanese approach to LTC has

emphasized the provision of at-home (nonmedical) services, as well as room and board for those requiring

institutionalization. The Japanese LTC system is a rather complex tax-and-transfer scheme, supported by

mandatory but means-tested premiums levied on workers and retirees by local governments, as well as

general tax revenue from central and local governments. Benefit eligibility is determined by local boards

appointed by municipalities, but fees for benefits are set at the national level. For-profit competition is

permitted in the at-home care arena, but in the medical and institutional care arenas only non-profits and
                                                                                                              28



government providers are allowed.

           Our analysis has identified several upcoming challenges and clouds on the horizon. The best

available projections suggest that LTC costs in Japan will grow substantially in the future, a fact that will be

a central focus of the 2005 LTC system review. Clearly the aging population will drive up demand for LTC,

but our analysis also suggests that rising incomes and bed capacity will drive demand up and further boost

costs. The current system does integrate deductibles, copays, and caps, all of which do curtail demand and

hence expenditures somewhat, but continuing substantial subsidies for LTC will surely boost future

utilization rates beyond simple population projections. As a result, rationing has already emerged and it will

likely become even more widespread, which in turn is likely to contribute to political stress as the

population ages. Cost pressures and evasion problems will potentially also require extending the mandatory

premiums to workers under age 40 who are not currently included in the system.

           Another issue we have raised is the fact that the centralized-but-decentralized system tends to do

little to smooth regional disparities in the concentration of elderly and frail elderly. Some

cross-subsidization does occur by means of the central government, but it is unclear how policies will

respond to future regional and national LTC shortages. Additional research is required to help separate the

roles of demand and supply for LTC entitlement and utilization patterns, though our analysis indicates (a)

that demand is sensitive to income and prices; and (b) the municipalities may not be the most efficient

decision locus to handle the entitlement process, benefit determination, provision of care, and financing,

particularly given the efforts to standardize eligibility criteria.

           While the market for privately-sold LTC products is small, as yet, it does appear that demand has

grown over the last three years. Greater private provision of LTC insurance might be an appealing outcome

to the extent that the elderly have sufficient income/assets to purchase the coverage. Of course it does

depend on LTC consumers and their relatives becoming sufficiently well-informed about quality and price

of services to make the market function well. Development of national LTC quality standards for

institutional and at-home care services would facilitate consumer shopping for private LTC coverage. Less


18
     The UK has high buy-in prices for nursing home care for owner-occupiers.
                                                                                                              29



clear is the ability of private insurers to structure LTC policies that can both attract consumers and also

mitigate adverse selection. One possibility might be to sell employer-based policies to workers at younger

ages. Plan design features intended to limit moral hazard could logically draw on some already embodied in

the current public LTC system, including co-insurance, deductibles, and the determination of need by a

third party which is relatively free of conflicts-of-interest. In addition, privately provided LTC cash benefits

could be an attractive alternative to the current indemnity approach used by the government, which

provides services rather than cash. Last but not least, there may be a role for reverse mortgages in Japan, as

a means of financing services and provide care for an increasingly long-lived and numerous elderly

population.
                                                                                                           30




Bibliography
All-Japan Federation of National Health Insurance Organizations (AJFNHIO). 2003.
        http://www.kokuho.or.jp/
American Health Care Association (ACHA). “AHCA Announces National Nursing Home Week Theme
       and Dates.” Dec 9, 2003. http://www.ahca.org/news/nr031209a.htm
Asahi Shimbun. “233,000 Seniors in Limbo on Nurse Care.” Tokyo, Feb. 6, 2003.
       http://www.asahi.com/english/politics/K2003020600237.html
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, James Poterba, and Mark Warshawsky. The Role of Annuity Markets in
       Financing Retirement. MIT Press, 2001.
Campbell, John C. and Naoki Ikegami. The Art of Balance in Health Policy: Maintaining Japan’s
      Low-Cost Egalitarian System. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Campbell, John C. and Naoki Ikegami. “Long-term Care Insurance Comes to Japan.” Health Affairs, 19(3):
      26-39.
Carpenter, Ian, John Hirdes, and Naoki Ikegami. “Long-term Care: A Complex Challenge.” OECD
       Observer, December 2001.
       http://www.oecdobserver.org/news/printpage.php/aid/558/long_term_care:a_complex_challenge.
       html
Doerpinghaus, Helen and Sandra Gustavson. “Long-Term Care Insurance Purchase Patterns.” Risk
       Management and Insurance Review. 5(1) 2002:31-43.
Doteuchi, Akio. “Building a Welfare Infrastructure to Support Independent Living for the Aging
       Population.” In Aged-ing In Japan. Research Booklet, NLI Research Institute, AGHE Annual
       Conference, St. Petersburg. 2003. Tokyo: NLI Research Institute: 221-229.
Finkelstein, Amy and Kathleen McGarry. “Private Information and its Effect on Market Equilibrium: New
        Evidence from Long-Term Care Insurance.” NBER Working Paper, Sept. 2003.
Fries, James. “Aging, Natural Death, and the Compression of Morbidity.” New England Journal of
         Medicine. July 17, 1980. 303(3):130-135. http://content.nejm.org/cgi/content/abstract/303/3/130
Garber, Alan M. “To Comfort Always: The Prospects of Expanded Social Responsibility for Long-Term
        Care.” In Individual and Social Responsibility. Ed. V. R. Fuchs. Chicago: NBER and University of
        Chicago Press, 1996: 143-174.
Garber, Alan and Thomas MaCurdy. “Forecasting Nursing Home Utilization of Elderly Americans.” In
        Studies in the Economics of Aging. Ed. D. Wise. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press, 1994.
Garber, Alan M. and Thomas MaCurdy. “Predicting Nursing Home Utilization Among the High-Risk
        Elderly.” In David A. Wise, ed. Issues in the Economics of Aging. 1990. Chicago: Univ. of Chicago
        Press: 173-200.
Go, Kazuhisa. “The Introduction of Market Mechanisms for Long-Term Care Services.” In Aged-ing In
       Japan. Research Booklet, NLI Research Institute, AGHE Annual Conference, St. Petersburg. 2003.
       Tokyo: NLI Research Institute: 231-239.
Headen, Alvin E. “Economic Disability and Health Determinants of the Hazard of Nursing Home Entry.”
       Journal of Human Resources 1993. 28 (1): 88-110.
Ikegami, Naoki. “Japan’s Health Care System: Containing Costs in a Stagnant Economy.” Presentation for
       The Wharton School, October 2003.
Ikegami, Naoki. “Japan’s Long-Term Care Insurance Program: Making LTC an Entitlement.” Presentation
       for The Wharton School, no date.
                                                                                                         31



Ikegami, Naoki and John Campbell, eds. Containing Health Care Costs in Japan. Ann Arbor: Univ. of
       Michigan Press, 1996.
Ikegami, Naoki and John Campbell. “Health Care Reform in Japan: The Virtues of Muddling Through.”
       Health Affairs, May June 1999: 305-314.
Ikegami, Naoki and John Campbell. “Long-Term Care Insurance Comes To Japan.” Health Affairs 19(3),
       2000:26-39.
Ikegami, Naoki and Takeshi Yamada. “Comparison of Long-Term Care for the Elderly between Japan and
       the United States. In Ikegami, Naoki and John Campbell, eds. Containing Health Care Costs in
       Japan. Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press, 1996: 155-171.
Iwaisako, Tokyo, Olivia S. Mitchell, and John Piggott. “Strategic Asset Allocation in Japan: An Empirical
       Evaluation.” Presented at the 2004 ESRI International Conference, 2004. Tokyo.
Japan Institute of Life Insurance (JILI). 2003. “Survey on Life Insurance in FY 2003.”(in Japanese). Tokyo.
        http://www.jili.or.jp/cgi-local/ldall.cgi?ldpage=../pdf/h15zenkoku.pdf
Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. (JMHLW). 1993, 1996,1998. “Basic Survey on People's
       Life.” (Kokumin Seikatsu Kiso Chousa, in Japanese). Tokyo. 1993: not on internet.
        1999: http://www1.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/h10-ktyosa/index_8.html
        1996: http://www1.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/ksk/index.html
Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. (JMHLW), 2003(a). “Elderly Care in 2015: Establishing
       Elderly Care to Support Dignity of the Elderly.” (in Japanese) Tokyo.
       http://www.mhlw.go.jp/topics/kaigo/kentou/15kourei/index.html
Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. (JMHLW), 2003(b). "Standards on calculation of services
       costs approved at-home care services" (Sitei Kyotaku Service ni Yousuru Hiyou no Gaku no Santei
       ni kansuru Kijyun)
Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. (JMHLW), 2003(c) "Standards on calculation of services
       costs approved institutional care services" (Sitei Shisetsu Service tou ni Yousuru Hiyou no Gaku no
       Santei ni kansuru Kijyun)
Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. (JMHLW). 2002. “Long-term Care Insurance in Japan.”
       Tokyo. http://www.mhlw.go.jp/english/topics/elderly/care/index.html
Japan Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. (JMHLW). Various years. “Survey on Care Service
       Providers.” (Kaigo Service Shisetsu Jigyousho Chousa, in Japanese.) Tokyo.
       http://www.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/saikin/hw/kaigo/service00/index.html
Japan Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs and Posts and Telecommunications (JMPMHAPT).
       Statistics Bureau. 2003. “Land Area.” Tokyo. http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/nenkan/1431-01.
Japan Ministry of Public Management, Home Affairs and Posts and Telecommunications. (JMPMHAPT)
       Statistics Bureau. 2003. “Population Data.” Tokyo.
       http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/jinsui/index.htm
Japan National Institute of Population and Social Security Research. (JNIPSSR). 2003. “Population
       Projections for Japan: 2001-2050.” http://www.ipss.go.jp/index-e.html
Kampo. “Detailed Explanations of Individual Products/Basic Contracts.” Tokyo.
      http://www.kampo.japanpost.jp/osirase/report/disclo_e/3-2-1.html
Kishida, Hiroshi. “A Market Projection for Long-Term Care in Japan.” NLI Research Institute Bulletin No.
        116, 1998. Reprinted in Aged-ing In Japan. Research Booklet, NLI Research Institute, AGHE
        Annual Conference, St. Petersburg. 2003. Tokyo: NLI Research Institute: 241-237.
Kishida, Hiroshi. “Housing for Elderly Persons.” NLI Research Report May 2002. Reprinted in Aged-ing In
        Japan. Research Booklet, NLI Research Institute, AGHE Annual Conference, St. Petersburg. 2003.
                                                                                                         32



        Tokyo: NLI Research Institute: 269-277.
Komamura, Kohei and Atsuhiro Yamada. “Who Bears the Burden of Social Insurance? Evidence from the
     Japanese Health and Long-Term Care Insurance Data.” NBER WP 10339,March 2004.
Lakdawalla, Daris, and Tomas Philipson. “The Rise in Old-Age Longevity and the Market for Long-Term
      Care.” American Economic Review. March 2002. 295-306.
Lee, Karen. “LTC Insurance Providers Try To Come Up With New Twists.” Employee Benefit News. 2003.
       December. www.benefitnews.com/supplemental/detail.cfm?id=5385.
Lubitz, James, Liming Cai, Ellen Kramarow, and Harold Lentzer. “Health, Life Expectancy, and Health
        Care Spending Among the Elderly.” New England Journal of Medicine. 349:11, September 11,
        2003: 1048-1055.
McCall, Nelda, Ed. Who Will Pay for Long Term Care? Academy for Health Services Research and Health
       Policy. Chicago: Health Administration Press, 2001.
McCall, Nelda and Jodi Korb. “What Have We Learned from the Partnership for Long-term Care?” In Who
       Will Pay for Long Term Care? Ed. Nelda McCall. Academy for Health Services Research and
       Health Policy. Chicago: Health Administration Press, 2001: 149-184.
Merlis, Mark. “Private Long-Term Care Insurance: Who Should Buy It and What Should They Buy?”
        Report to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Menlo Park, CA: March 2003.
Metlife. The MetLife Market Survey of Nursing Home and Home Care Costs. Mature Market Institute
        Report. New York: MetLife, 2003.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and John Piggott. “Housing Equity and Senior Security.” Presented at the 2003 ESRI
        International Conference. 2003. Tokyo, Japan.
Mitchell, Olivia S. & John Piggott. “Unlocking Home Equity in Japan,” Journal of the Japanese and
        International Economies. Dec. 2004: 1-24.
Murtaugh, Christopher, Brenda Spillman, and Mark Warshawsky, “In Sickness and In Health: An Annuity
       Approach to Financing Long-Term Care and Retirement.” Journal of Risk and Insurance. 68(2):
       2001: 225-254.
National Center for Health Statistics. “US Nursing Homes Profiled in New Report”. June 19, 2002.
       http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/releases/00facts/nurshome.htm
Noguchi, Haruko and Satoshi Shimizutani. “The Determinants of Nursing Home Exit and the Price
      Elasticity of Institutional Care: Evidence from Japanese Micro-Level Data..” ESRI Discussion
      Paper 24, Tokyo, December 2002.
Noguchi, Haruko and Satoshi Shimizutani. “Earnings and Quality Differentials in For-Profit Long-Term
      Care: Evidence from Japan’s Long-Term Care Market.” ESRI Discussion Paper 17, Tokyo,
      December 2002.
Noguchi, Haruko and Satoshi Shimizutani. “A Long-term Projection of Demand for At-home Care Services
      in Japan” ESRI Discussion Paper 60, Tokyo, 2003.
Noguchi, Haruko and Satoshi Shimizutani. "Is Non-profit Status a Signal of Better Quality? Micro-level
      Evidence from Japan's At-home Care Industry" ESRI Discussion Paper 80, Tokyo, November
      2003.
Norton, Edward C. “Long Term Care”. Handbook of Health Economics. Vol. 1. Eds A.J. Culyer and J.P.
        Newhouse. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2000.
Ohkusa, Yasushi. “An Empirical Analysis of Actual Demand for Care Covered by the Long-term Care
       Insurance for Elderly: Estimation for Classified Household Types.” Quarterly of Social Security
       Research. (in Japanese) 38(1). 2002a: 67-73.
Ohkusa, Yasushi. “Price Elasticity of Actual Demand of Care for the Elderly.” Quarterly of Social Security
                                                                                                       33



       Research. (in Japanese) 38(3). 2002(b): 239-244.
Pauly, Mark. “The Rational Nonpurchase of Long-Term Care Insurance.” Journal of Political Economy.
        1990. 98(1): 153-168.
Powell, Alwyn. Actuarial Data Requirements for Continuing Care Retirement Communities. 1998.
        http://www.avpowell.com/docs/Actuarial%20Data%20Requirements%20for%20CCRCs,%20199
        8.pdf
Pratt, John R. Long-Term Care: Managing Across the Continuum. Gaithersburg, MD: Aspen Publications,
         1999.
Rappaport, Anna and Janice Stanger. “Postemployment Benefits: Financial Considerations in the
      Development of a Group Long-term Care Insurance Program.” Compensation and Benefits
      Management. Winter 1997:62-68.
Robinson, Jim. “A Long-Term Care Status Transition Model.” The Old-Age Crisis: Actuarial
       Opportunities. The 1996 Bowles Symposium. Georgia State University, Dept. of Actuarial Science:
       1996.
Rovner, Judith. “US Bill Would Encourage Long-Term Care Insurance.” Reuters, 5/15/03.
       www.reutershealth.com/archive/2003/05/15/eline/links/20030515elin015.html
Shimizutani, Satoshi and Noguchi, Haruko (2004) Kaigo Hoiku Service Sizyou no Keizai Bunseki (An
       Economic Analysis on Japanese Long-term and Child Care Markets), Toyo Keizai Shimpo Sha,
       Tokyo.
Shimizutani, Satoshi and Wataru Suzuki. “The Quality and Efficiency of At-Home Long-Term Care in
       Japan: Evidence from Micro-Level Data.” ESRI Discussion Paper 18, Tokyo, December 2002.
Shimizutani, Satoshi, Wataru Suzuki, and Haruko Noguchi. “Outsourcing At-Home Elderly Care and
       Female Labor Supply: Micro-Level Evidence from Japan’s Unique Experience.” ESRI Discussion
       Paper Series No. 93, Tokyo: ESRI, April 2004.
Spillman, Brenda, Christopher Murtaugh, and Mark Warshawsky, “Integration of the Life Annuity and
       Long-Term Care Insurance: Theory, Evidence, Practice, and Policy.” In Innovations for Financing
       Retirement, Eds. Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, and Olivia Mitchell. Philadelphia: The University of
       Pennsylvania Press, 2001.
Stucki, Barbara. “Insurers.” In Who Will Pay for Long Term Care? Ed. Nelda McCall. Academy for Health
        Services Research and Health Policy. Chicago: Health Administration Press, 2001: 97-112.
Suzuki, Wataru and Yasushi Ohkusa. “Empirical Analysis of the Market of Social Insurance for Elderly
        Care.” Quarterly of Social Security Research. (in Japanese) 36(3). 2000: 338-352.
US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). World Factbook. US Government, 2003.
      http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/geos/us.html#Intro
Wiener, Joshua, Laurel Hixon Illston, and Raymond J. Hanley. Sharing the Burden. Washington, D.C.:
       Brookings, 1994.
Yashiro, Naohiro, Takashi Oshio, Yasuhiro Terasaki and Masayuki Miyamoto. “ An Economic Analysis on
       Long-term Care Insurance.” Institute of Economics, Economic Planning Agency. Tokyo, 1996.
                                                                                                                    34



Figure 1. Dependency Ratios by Regio: Japanese Elderly and Entitled to LTC

 45%

                                           Elderly/working-age population
 40%


 35%


 30%


 25%


 20%                                             Entitled/elderly population


 15%
                                                                         Entitled/working-age population
 10%


  5%


  0%




          Miyazaki
             Miyagi
               Akita




             Tokyo




         Shizuoka

                Mie

              Kyoto
               Aichi




             Hyogo
         Hokkaido

              Iwate


        Yamagata




             Shiga



               Nara
       Wakayama
           Aomori




            Ibaragi
           Tochigi


             Chiba

       Kanagawa
           Niigata
          Toyama

              Fukui

          Nagano
                Gifu




             Tottori

         Okayama



          Kagawa


          Fukuoka
              Saga


                Oita


          Okinawa
       Yamaguchi



              Kochi
          Saitama




         Ishikawa




             Osaka




         Shimane




             Ehime
       Yamanashi




         Nagasaki



        Kagoshim
       Fukushima


          Gumma




        Hiroshima

       Tokushima




       Kumamoto
             Tohoku         Kanto             Chubu              Kinki          Chugoku   Shikoku          Kyusyu


Source: Authors’ calculations using data provided by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare; National Health
Insurance Association of Japan; and Statistics Bureau of Japan.
                                                                                                                   35



Figure 2. Institutional Care Capacity by Region in Japan

 350                                                                                                           60



 300                                                Beds/000 eligible (LHS)                                    50


 250
                                                                                                               40

 200

                                                                                                               30

 150

                                                                                                               20
 100                                                             Beds/000 elderly (RHS)


                                                                                                               10
  50



   0                                                                                                           0




          Miyazaki
             Miyagi
               Akita




              Tokyo




         Shizuoka

                Mie

              Kyoto
               Aichi




             Hyogo
         Hokkaido

              Iwate

        Yamagata




             Chiba

        Kanagawa




                Gifu
           Aomori




            Ibaragi
           Tochigi




           Niigata
          Toyama

              Fukui

          Nagano




              Shiga



               Nara
       Wakayama
             Tottori

         Okayama



          Kagawa


          Fukuoka
              Saga


                Oita


          Okinawa
       Yamaguchi



              Kochi
          Saitama




         Ishikawa




             Osaka




         Shimane




             Ehime
       Yamanashi




         Nagasaki



        Kagoshim
       Fukushima

          Gumma




        Hiroshima

       Tokushima




       Kumamoto
           Tohoku          Kanto            Chubu            Kinki        Chugoku    Shikok        Kyusyu


Source: Authors’ calculations using data provided by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare; National Health
Insurance Association of Japan; and Statistics Bureau of Japan.
                                                                                                                 36



Figure 3. Long-term Care Utilization Rates by Region in Japan

 12%



                                                     At-home care users/elderly
 10%



  8%



  6%
                                                           Institutional care users/elderly


  4%



  2%



  0%




          Miyazaki
             Miyagi
               Akita




              Tokyo




         Shizuoka

                Mie

              Kyoto
               Aichi




             Hyogo
         Hokkaido

              Iwate


        Yamagata




                Gifu



              Shiga



               Nara
       Wakayama
           Aomori




            Ibaragi
           Tochigi


             Chiba

        Kanagawa
           Niigata
          Toyama

              Fukui

          Nagano




             Tottori

         Okayama



          Kagawa


          Fukuoka
              Saga


                Oita


          Okinawa
       Yamaguchi



              Kochi
          Saitama




         Ishikawa




             Osaka




         Shimane




             Ehime
       Yamanashi




         Nagasaki



        Kagoshim
       Fukushima


          Gumma




        Hiroshima

       Tokushima




       Kumamoto
            Tohoku         Kanto             Chubu               Kinki          Chugoku       Shikoku   Kyusyu


Source: Authors’ calculations using data provided by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare; National Health
Insurance Association of Japan; and Statistics Bureau of Japan.
                                                                                                                 37



Figure 4. Long-term Care Fees by Region in Japan

        (000 Yen/yr)
 5000                                        Institutional Cost/Institutional Care User

 4500

 4000

 3500

 3000                                                       Total Cost/All Care Users
                At-home Cost/At-home Care User

 2500

 2000

 1500

 1000
                                                        Cost/Elderly
  500

    0




           Miyazaki
              Miyagi
                Akita




               Tokyo




          Shizuoka

                 Mie

               Kyoto
                Aichi




              Hyogo
          Hokkaido

               Iwate


         Yamagata




              Chiba

         Kanagawa




                 Gifu



               Shiga



                Nara
        Wakayama
            Aomori




             Ibaragi
            Tochigi




            Niigata
           Toyama

               Fukui

           Nagano




              Tottori

          Okayama



           Kagawa


           Fukuoka
               Saga


                 Oita


           Okinawa
        Yamaguchi



               Kochi
           Saitama




          Ishikawa




              Osaka




          Shimane




              Ehime
        Yamanashi




          Nagasaki



         Kagoshim
        Fukushima


           Gumma




         Hiroshima

        Tokushima




        Kumamoto
             Tohoku         Kanto             Chubu              Kinki          Chugoku   Shikoku    Kyusyu


Source: Authors’ calculations using data provided by Japan’s Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare; National Health
Insurance Association of Japan; and Statistics Bureau of Japan.
                                                                                              38



Table 1: Unit Costs for LTC Services (2000 ¥)
 At-home Care                                            Institutional Care
                                                Units                               Units
   Home-help services                                      LTC welfare
                                                           institutions
     Physical Assistance     < 30min.              231        Care level 1    per       677
                                                                              day
                             0.5-1 hour            402        Care level 2    per       748
                                                                              day
                             1-1.5 hours           584        Care level 3    per       818
                                                                              day
                             +30 min.               83        Care level 4    per       889
                                                                              day
     Daily Life              < 30min.              208        Care level 5    per       959
     Assistance                                                               day
                             0.5-1 hour            291
                             +30 min.               83     LTC health                   819
                                                           institutions
   Home-visit bathing        per time             1250        Care level 1    per       868
                                                                              day
   Home-visit                per day               550        Care level 2    per       921
   rehabilitation                                                             day
   Home-visit nursing                                         Care level 3    per       975
                                                                              day
     Provided by             <30min.               425        Care level 4    per      1028
     home-visit nurse                                                         day
     station
                             0.5-1 hour            830        Care level 5    per       830
                                                                              day
                             1-1.5 hours          1198
     Provided by             <30min.               343     LTC medical
     hospitals and clinics                                 institutions
                             0.5-1 hour            550        Care level 1    per       820
                                                                              day
                             1 -1.5 hours          845        Care level 2    per       930
                                                                              day
                                                              Care level 3    per      1168
                                                                              day
   Day services (operated jointly by                          Care level 4    per      1269
   institutions)                                                              day
      Support required       3 -4 hours            241        Care level 5    per      1360
                                                                              day
                             4 -6 hours            344
                             6 -8 hours            482
     Care Levels 1 or 2      3-4 hours             307
                             4 -6 hours            438
                             6-8 hours             614
     Care Levels 3, 4 or     3-4 hours             452
     5
                              4-6 hours            645
                              6-8 hours            903
   Day services (rehabilitation at LTC health
   services)
      Support required        3-4 hours            283
                                                                         39



                           4-6 hours              344
                           6-8 hours              482
   Care Levels 1 or 2      3-4 hours              307
                           4-6 hours              438
                           6-8 hours              614
   Care Levels 3, 4 or     3-4 hours              452
   5
                          4-6 hours              645
                          6-8 hours              903
Short Stay (operated independently: nurses are 1/3 of staff)
  Support required        per day                831
  Care level 1            per day                875
  Care level 2            per day                946
  Care level 3            per day               1016
  Care level 4            per day               1087
  Care level 5            per day               1157
Short Stay (operated jointly by institutions: nurses are 1/3 of staff)
  Support required        per day                797
  Care level 1            per day                841
  Care level 2            per day                912
  Care level 3            per day                982
  Care level 4            per day               1053
  Care level 5            per day               1123
                                                                                                                                                                                             40


Table 2. Projected LTC Costs in Japan (in trillion 2000 ¥)

A. Prior Estimates of National LTC Costs in Japan
                                                   1                         2                                 3                                                    4
1 Study Authors and Date                        JMHW                    Yashiro et.al                Noguchi & Shimizutani                                      JMHLW
                                                 (1996)                    (1996)                           (2003)                                               .(2003)
2 Projection Dates                          2000, 2010, 2025          2000, 2010, 2025                 2010, 2015, 2025                       # elderly with dementia: every 5 yrs to 2045
                                                                                                                                                        Costs: 2005, 2015, 2025

3 Coverage                                        # elderly                 # elderly                Costs of At-home Care                     # elderly with dementia (rank 2-5 & 3-5)
                                          # elderly requiring LTC # elderly requiring LTC          (i) Home visit and day care                       Total Evaluation Payments*
                                            # elderly bedridden       # elderly bedridden                 (ii) Short stay
                                         # physically weak elderly # physically weak elderly
                                         # elderly with dementia # elderly with dementia
                                                                          Total Costs
4 Estimated Patient Pool                  # eligible=5.2m (2025)    # eligible=3.7m(2010)                                                                        N.A.
                                               =16% of the elderly # eligible=4.9m(2025)
5 Estimated Cost per Patient                        N.A.                                                                                                         N.A.

6 Estimated Total Program Costs Projected           N.A.                2000: ¥10.3 Tr         (i) Home visit and day care; (ii) Short stay           Evaluation Payments Only*
                                                                        2025: ¥33.2 Tr         2010: ¥3.1Tr (i) and ¥0.3 Tr (ii)                           ¥6 Trillion (2005)
                                                                                               2015: ¥4.3 Tr (i) and ¥0.4 Tr. (ii)                        ¥12 Trillion (2015)
                                                                                               2025: ¥4.8 Tr (i) and ¥0.5 Tr. (ii)                        ¥20 Trillion (2025)
7 Estimated Program Costs as                        N.A.                                                                                                     1.5% (2005)
   Share of National Income                                                                                                                                  2.5% (2015)
                                                                                                                                                             3.5% (2025)
8 Additional Comments                       Official projections                                                                                       Quasi-official projections



Note: Evaluation Payments refer to payments made by the government, exclusive of the consumer’s out of pocket and deductible amounts.
                                                                                                                                 41


Table 2 (cont)
B. Alternative LTC Cost Projections
   1. Assumptions
   a) The number of elderly in 2025: 34.7 million▲
   b) The share of eligible out of total elderly: 5.6 million (34.7 million *(5.2/32.4=16.0%)) ►

   2. Projections
   Case 1: Costs per eligible person in 2001-2003 of ¥1.6M assumed for 2025. ▼
   Total Cost = 5.6 million * ¥1.6 Million (av. 2001-03) = ¥8.96 Trillion.

   Case 2-1: Adjusting only the number of users of at-home care
   Costs per institutional care user remain unchanged from 2001-2003 (about ¥4.3 million) ►
   Costs per at-home care user remain unchanged from 2003 level (= ¥1.24 million) ►
   Share of institutional care users set at 20.0% (vs 23.2% in 2001, 21.2% in 2002, and 20.0% in FY2003).►
   Share of at-home care users increases by 1.5% annually to 74.1 % in 2025 (was 55.1% in 2001, 57.0% in 2002 and 57.6% in 200
   Total Cost = ¥1.24 million * 5.6 million * 0.741 + ¥4.31million * 5.6 million * 0.200 = ¥9.97 trillion
   Case 2-2 Adjusting the number of uses of at-home care
   Costs per at-home care user set at ¥1.32 million ◄
   Total Cost = ¥1.32million * 5.6 million * 0.741 + ¥4.31million * 5.6 million * 0.200 = ¥10.30 trillion

   Case 3: Adjusting both the number of users of at-home care and cost of home care
   Costs per institutional care user remain unchanged from 2001-2003 level (about ¥4.3 million) ►
   Costs per at-home care user rise 6.7 % annually (actual 2001-03 growth rate) to attain ¥5.164 million in 2025.►
   Share of institutional care users set at 20.0% (vs 23.2% in 2001, 21.2% in 2002, and 20.0% in FY2003).►
   Share of at-home care user increases by 1.5% annually to attain 74.1 % in 2025 (was 55.1% in 2001, 57.0% in 2002, and 57.6%
   Total Cost = ¥5.164million * 5.6 million * 0.741 + ¥4.31million * 5.6 million * 0.200 = ¥26.26 trillion

   Notes:
   ▲ Based on the medium variant (JNIPSSR 2003).
   ►Based on JMHLW (2002).
   ▼Based on AJFNHIO (2003).
   ◄ Based on Noguchi and Shimizutani (2003).
                                                                                                                         42



Table 3. Historical Data: Elderly Persons (age 65+) in Japan Requiring Long-term Care

                                                       1993             1996           1998
                                   In Care             4.947            4.528          4.739
                                 Conf. to Bed          0.793            0.694          0.684
                                    Senile             0.917            0.794          0.807
                                     Frail             2.249            2.077          2.077
                                 Other Care            0.988            0.962          1.175

Source: JMHLW (various years) “Basic Survey on People’s Life”




Table 4: Current and Projected Number of Elderly Japanese Requiring LTC



Estimated Millions of Persons:                 2000 (est)      Source    2000 (actual)           Source    2025   Source


Elderly Persons                                    21.7          [a]             22                [b]     32.4    [g]

Elderly Persons Requiring LTC                       2.8          [a]            2.9       *        [c]      5.2    [g]

Elderly Bedridden                                   1.2          [a]            0.4        +       [d]      2.3    [g]

Physically Weak Elderly                            1.3           [a]            1.15       ++      [e]      2.6    [g]

Elderly with Dementia                              0.2           [a]            0.37       +++     [f]      0.4    [g]


Notes:
*In 2001
 +This figure includes only the number of bedridden in institutions and excludes those living in houses.
 ++ Care levels 3-5 only.
 +++Care levels 3-5 in institutions only.
Sources:
[a] JMHLW (2000). "Survey on Care Service Providers"
[b] JMPMHAPT (2003)
[c] AJFNHIO (2003)
[d] Kaigo Service Shisetsu Jigyousho Chousa
[e] AJFNHIO (2003)
[f] Kaigo Service Shisetsu Jigyousho Chousa
[g] JMHLW (2002)
                                                                                                         43



Table 5. Descriptive Statistics Regarding LTC Capacity, Utilization, and Costs in Japan


                                               Mean           Min           Max             SD
Panel A: Dependency Ratios
Elderly/Working-age population                 0.311         0.194          0.428          0.057
Entitled/Working-age population                0.043         0.020          0.066          0.012
Entitled/Elderly                               0.137         0.102          0.175          0.019
Panel B: Capacity
Beds/000 Elderly                              32.489        21.590         49.645          6.910
Beds/000 Eligible                            237.920        169.248       319.134         33.602
Panel C: Utilization Ratios
Institutional care users/Elderly               0.032         0.021          0.048          0.007
At-home care users/Elderly                     0.076         0.054          0.103          0.011
Panel D: Cost Per Person (000 Yen/Year in 2000)
Inst. Cost/Instit. Care Users           4327.696           4132.435       4643.209        114.177
At-home cost/At-home care users         1093.457           912.445        1297.436         88.821
Total Cost/Total Care Users             2041.579           1797.901       2449.080        136.837
Total Cost/Total Elderly                     220.591        159.787       321.980         35.893
Notes: Working-age=Age 15-64; Elderly=age 65+
Cost figures average 2001FY and 2002FY and are deflated by CPI
Sources: Authors' computations from data provided by the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japa
         National Health Insurance Association of Japan; and Statistics Bureau of Japan
                                                                                                                                     44



Table 6: Multivariate Regression Results for LTC Entitlement and Utilization Rates

(t stats in parens)
                                                   Entitlement Rate         Home Care Utilization Rate   Instit Care Utilization Rate
                                                  (%Pop 65+ Entitled to       (%Pop 65+ Utilizing Home
                                                      LTC/1000)                     Care/1000)           (%Pop65+UsingInstitCare/1000)
                                                    1              2           3                4             5               6
Population Density                               0.0067         0.0054      0.0038           0.0035        0.0010          0.0005
(000/km)                                         3.29**         3.05**      2.86**          2.5595**       1.000           4.532**

Healthcare Sector Earnings                       -0.0177        -0.0110    -0.0100          -0.0080       -0.0030          0.0004
(000 yen monthly, including bonus)               3.103**         2.26**    2.564**          2.0751**       1.441            1.169

Average Prefecture Earnings                      -0.0116        -0.0020    -0.0070          -0.0050       -0.0060         -0.0010
(000 yen annual, including bonus)                2.121**         0.488     1.8389*           1.208        3.3715**        2.6874**

Percent 75+                                      0.3450         0.2740     0.1570           0.1428         0.0999          0.0275
(Pop75+/TotalPop)                               2.5064**       2.0398**    1.7418*          1.378         2.3045**        3.3911**

LTC Bed Availability                                            0.1400                      0.0300                         0.0900
(00 LTC Beds/Pop75+)                                           4.3234**                     1.225                         45.658**

NonLTCHospital Bed Availability                                 0.0200                      0.0100                         0.0000
(00 NonLTCHospBed/Pop65+)                                       1.011                       0.324                          1.265

Constant                                          0.233          0.110       0.132           0.104          0.060           0.000
                                                  7.48**        2.928**     6.459**          3.606**       6.114**          0.076

R**2                                              0.410          0.581      0.296            0.306         0.463           0.986

Notes:
**Significant at 5% level
*Significant at 10% level
45
