NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DISENTANGLING THE IMPORTANCE
OF THE PRECAUTIONARY SAVING MOTIVE
Arthur Kennickell
Annamaria Lusardi
Working Paper 10888
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10888
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

We would like to thank Rob Alessie, Erich Battistin, Christopher Carroll, Jeffrey Dominitz, Eric Engen,
Michael Haliassos, Erik Hurst, Michael Palumbo, Jon Skinner, Steven Venti, and participants at the NBER
Summer Institute, the TMR Conference on Savings and Pensions, Evian, France, the 21st Arne Ryde
Symposium on Non-Human Wealth and Capital Accumulation, Lund, Sweden, the Ente Luigi Einaudi for
Monetary, Banking and Financial Studies, Rome, Italy, the plenary session at the 27th Conference of the
International Association for Research in Income and Wealth, Stockholm, Sweden, for suggestions and
comments. Any errors are our responsibility. Ryan Bledsoe and Amber Lytle provided excellent research
assistance. Lusardi acknowledges financial support from the Rockefeller Center at Dartmouth College. The
opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2004 by Arthur Kennickell and Annamaria Lusardi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Disentangling the Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive
Arthur Kennickell and Annamaria Lusardi
NBER Working Paper No. 10888
November 2004
JEL No. D91, E21, C21
ABSTRACT
We assess the importance of the precautionary saving motive by relying on a direct question about
precautionary wealth from the 1995 and 1998 waves of the Survey of Consumer Finances. In this
survey, a new question has been designed to elicit the amount of desired precautionary wealth. This
allows us to bound the amount of precautionary accumulation and to overcome many of the problems
of previous works on this topic. We find that a precautionary saving motive exists and affects
virtually every type of household. Even though this motive does not give rise to large amounts of
wealth for young and middle-age households, it is particularly important for two groups: older
households and business owners. Overall, we provide strong evidence that we need to take the
precautionary saving motive into account when modeling saving behavior.
Arthur Kennickell
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Mail Stop 180
Washington, DC 20551
arthur.kennickell@frb.gov
Annamaria Lusardi
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
alusardi@gsb.uchicago.edu

1. Introduction
One of the major innovations of the literature on consumers’ behavior has been the
theory of precautionary saving. This theory predicts that risk depresses consumption and
increases the accumulation of wealth. In some theoretical specifications, the precautionary
saving motive is the main reason to hold wealth. Is this true empirically? As illustrated in the
first sections of the paper, the empirical work on precautionary saving to date faces several
challenges, which ultimately make it very difficult to disentangle the quantitative importance of
this motive.
In our work, we adopt a new approach to study the importance of precautionary saving.
We rely on a question from the 1995 and 1998 waves of the Survey of Consumer Finances
(SCF95 and SCF98 hereafter), where respondents are asked to report directly their desired
amount of precautionary wealth. This subjective measure of precautionary accumulation allows
us to bound the size of the precautionary saving motive and to overcome many of the problems
of previous work on this topic.
We find that a precautionary saving motive exists and affects virtually every household.
Thus, models that rely on quadratic preferences or certainty equivalence are not a good
characterization of consumers’ behavior. But we also find that this motive does not give rise to
high amounts of wealth at the aggregate level. Desired precautionary wealth represents
approximately 8 percent of total net worth and 20 percent of total financial wealth in the
economy. However, we can identify two groups in the population for which the precautionary
saving motive is particularly important: older households/cohorts and business owners. These
groups alone account for the majority (65 percent) of total desired precautionary wealth. Close
examination of both groups suggests that not just income risk but also other risks should be
1

taken into account when modeling saving behavior. Because these groups play such a pivotal
role, analyses that include or exclude households close to or after retirement and/or business
owners are bound to deliver very different estimates of the precautionary saving motive.
Our work provides additional results to assess more accurately households’ behavior
toward saving. For example, we find there is great heterogeneity in precautionary accumulation,
much more than has been reported in previous work. Existing theoretical models need to be
enriched to account for the large differences in wealth holdings we observe even within the same
observable economic group or class of risk. Furthermore, we find that measures of
accumulation, such as liquid or financial net worth, are too restrictive and provide a rather
inaccurate account of the stock of resources households have available to buffer themselves
against shocks. In addition, our findings help explain both the behavior of families at the bottom
of the wealth distribution, where risk interacts with the presence of welfare programs, and the
behavior of families at the top of the wealth distribution, where business owners are very
prominent.
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we review some of the previous
literature on precautionary saving and discuss the problems associated with measuring risk and
precautionary wealth. We also outline other pitfalls of the empirical estimates of precautionary
accumulation. In Section 3, we describe our alternative approach based on a subjective measure
of precautionary wealth and provide our estimates. In Sections 4 and 5, we discuss our findings
and provide concluding remarks.

2

2. The Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive: Review of the Previous Literature
Theoretical intertemporal models of consumption/saving with income uncertainty predict that
precautionary wealth can explain a large share of total wealth accumulation.1 For example,
Skinner (1988) calculates that about half of household wealth can be explained by precautionary
savings due to income risk. Caballero (1991), Cagetti (2000), and Gourinchas and Parker (2002)
report similar results. However, the empirical evidence based on micro data yields mixed results.
Here we identify three sets of papers, which provide widely differing estimates. The first set,
which finds estimates in the lowest range, includes the empirical work of Skinner (1988) and
Dynan (1993). Looking across occupation groups to assess the effect of occupation-specific
risks, Skinner (1988) finds no evidence that households in riskier occupations save more.
Similarly, Dynan (1993) argues the empirical estimates of the coefficient of relative prudence
are too small to generate precautionary saving. The second set of papers, including Guiso,
Jappelli and Terlizzese (1992), Lusardi (1997, 1998, 2000), and Arrondel (2002), uses subjective
measures of income risk and find modest values for precautionary wealth–estimates range from
2 to 8 percent of total household wealth accumulation. The final set of papers, including
Dardanoni (1991), Engen and Gruber (2001), Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995), Carroll and
Samwick (1997, 1998), and Kazarosian (1997), finds that precautionary savings can explain a
sizable share of wealth. For example, according to Carroll and Samwick (1998), up to 50 percent
of the wealth of the median household consists of precautionary wealth.
This disturbingly large range of estimates makes it very hard to assess the importance

1

In our analysis, we concentrate mainly on wealth accumulation and we do not study the effect of the
precautionary saving motive on consumption, labor supply, or other aspects of economic behavior at the household or
aggregate level.

3

of the precautionary saving motive. Underlying these differences are various sources of data and
empirical methodologies. In addition, there are several conceptual issues that affect the ability of
the econometrician to estimate the precautionary saving motive as we discuss below. These
issues, particularly those related to the measurement of wealth and risk, led us to follow a
different approach to assess the importance of the precautionary saving motive, which is
reported in Section 3.

2.1 Pitfalls and Biases in Estimating the Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive
Most of the empirical work on precautionary saving has been focused on the estimation
of the following equation:

where Wh indicates wealth of household h, risk is a measure of the risk faced by household h, Yp
is permanent income, X is a set of controls for wealth including age, demographics, and other
household characteristics, and g and f indicate the functions to measure wealth and the
relationship between wealth and the right-hand-side variables respectively. The extent to which
wealth increases with risk forms the basis for estimating the importance of the precautionary
saving motive.
Several pitfalls and potential biases limit the empirical work using this specification. In
this section, we address eight such issues and discuss how they are likely to affect the estimates
of the importance of the precautionary saving motive. They guide our approach in finding
alternative ways to estimate the size of precautionary savings.
1: The measurement of wealth and risk
4

Which measure of wealth should be used in the estimation of precautionary
accumulation? This is one of the most critical issues in estimating precautionary savings. The
problem is that many components of wealth differ in terms of their liquidity, accessibility, and
suitability as collateral against borrowing, among other features. As mentioned in Browning and
Lusardi (1996), only under the certainty equivalence model, can we sum across components of
wealth. Thus, in a model with precautionary saving, different components of wealth are not
perfectly substitutable.
Some authors, such as Engen and Gruber (2001), Hrung (2000) and Alan (2004), have
simply considered a measure of liquid wealth (which includes mostly savings and checking
accounts, bonds, stocks and short-term debt) when estimating precautionary wealth. However,
liquid wealth is a very restrictive measure of accumulation since the large majority of US
households hold other assets in their portfolios (Kennickell, Starr-McCluer, and Sundén (1997)).
Moreover, households hold relatively little in liquid wealth. Typically, the largest asset among
households is housing equity. Given the development of home equity lines of credit, housing
wealth has become much more liquid than in the past. However, this development does not mean
that housing equity or real estate wealth can be taken as perfect substitutes for liquid assets.
There are often transaction costs associated with setting up such loans. In addition, if the house
is liquidated quickly, the sales price may be well below a longer-term market value (which
approximates what households are asked to report in wealth surveys).
Another large component of wealth, particularly for middle-age and older workers, is
designated retirement accounts, such as IRAs and Keogh plans and pension accounts like

5

401(k)s.2 While there are tax advantages in investing in these assets, the investment is not fully
accessible without incurring an early-withdrawal penalty until age 59½. Thus, one cannot simply
use the current market value of these assets (Poterba, (2003)). One component of wealth, that is
particularly hard to deal with is business equity. Although entrepreneurs are not a large portion
of the population, they hold as much as 40% of total wealth (Gentry and Hubbard (2004)).
Because such wealth is often hard to liquidate and may be difficult to leverage, it is not clear
how much of it might be relevant as precautionary wealth. Another important issue is how to
treat debt. Most households only need to service their debt. Thus, only the required loan
payments over some period need to be netted from assets, rather than subtracting all the short
and long term debt.
To summarize: the practice of assigning a weight of one or zero to the individual
components of wealth (the function g in the equation above) represents a crude and often
inappropriate way to measure household resources. Most importantly, it may lead to misleading
estimates of the extent of precautionary accumulation. The idea that precautionary savings may
explain a large amount of liquid assets becomes less useful in light of the fact that liquid assets
are only a small proportion of a potentially much larger pool of precautionary wealth for many
families.
As far as the measurement of risk is concerned, much of the empirical work on
precautionary saving has concentrated on one source of risk: income risk. Researchers have
modeled a household-specific stochastic process for income and estimated it using panel data.

2

See, among others, Poterba, Venti and Wise (1994). It is worth noting that such tax-preferred accounts
defer sometimes substantial amounts of taxes until the point when funds are removed from the accounts. Thus, as an
indication of future consumption possibilities, balances in these account are overstated.

6

The variance of earnings or non-capital income has then been used as a proxy for risk, as in the
third set of papers mentioned above that find evidence of sizable precautionary savings.
However, there are several shortcomings in this approach. First, it is difficult to distinguish
empirically between transitory income and measurement error. Second and more importantly,
workers may know more than the econometrician. What is calculated empirically as income
variation could potentially be well-known and insured against (Caballero (1991) and Browning
and Lusardi (1996)). In principle, subjective measures of income risk obviate many of the
problems with estimated income processes, but they often result in very low estimates of income
risk.
In addition to income, other risks can also affect household accumulation. Two that have
been investigated thus far are longevity risk and health risk, as in Davies (1981), Leung (1994),
Starr-McCluer (1996), Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995), and Palumbo (1999), among
others. These risks, in particular health, are also hard to measure directly, and we do not yet have
reliable subjective measures. This list does not exhaust the sources of risks that households can
face; interest rate or investment risk and also consumption risk (for example, the risk that
durable good break down and should be replaced quickly) can be important for households.
These risks are also very hard to measure.
2: Preferences
The extent of precautionary accumulation depends not just on risk, but also on
preferences regarding risk (Caballero (1990, 1991), Cagetti (2000), and Attanasio, Banks,
Meghir and Weber (1999)). Another key factor is the rate of time preference (Deaton (1991) and
Carroll (1992, 1996)). However, very few data sets include information on such preferences and
those that do show, for example, substantial variation in the coefficient of risk aversion (Barsky,
7

Kimball, Juster, and Shapiro (1997)). Assuming the same preferences across the sample can
yield, at best, imprecise estimates of the importance of precautionary saving.
Differences in preferences can have other important implications. Workers who are riskaverse may self-select into occupations (or even specific types of employers within industries)
that offer job security. If risk aversion is positively correlated with prudence, these workers may
also save more.3 In this case, there is a likely downward bias in the estimates of the
precautionary saving motive, as reported by Lusardi (1997, 2000) and Fuchs-Schündeln and
Schündeln (2003). Such selection might explain why Skinner (1988) finds no evidence of
precautionary savings when examining workers across different occupation groups.
3: Liquidity constraints
Precautionary accumulation is strongly affected by the presence of liquidity constraints.
To the extent that households can borrow, they may not need much wealth to shield themselves
against shocks. In fact, theoretical models of precautionary saving do not necessarily predict that
wealth will be (strictly) positive; it is possible that risk prevents households from going heavily
into debt, but they still do not hold positive amounts of wealth. In many models, there are
devices that implicitly or explicitly prevent such behavior. For example, some authors add
constraints that disallow negative wealth (Deaton (1992, chapter 6)). Others consider specific
characterizations of risk (Carroll (1992)). Differences in borrowing opportunities are very
relevant to assess the importance of the precautionary saving motive. However, individual
borrowing opportunities are largely unobservable in most data sets.
4: Other forms of insurance

3

See Kimball (1990), for an explanation of the role of prudence in models of precautionary saving.

8

Models of precautionary saving rely on the assumption that insurance markets are
imperfect or do not exist. While markets can be imperfect, individuals can insure against risk not
only by accumulating wealth but also through a network of family and friends or other informal
channels. If agents can receive help when they are hit by shocks, they do not need to amass much
precautionary savings. Thus, it is critical to differentiate those individuals who have access to
sources of help and support (Lusardi (1998, 2000)). Similarly, there exists insurance offered by
the government (unemployment benefits, health and disability insurance, etc). One complication
with public insurance in the US is that many welfare programs are means-tested. This creates a
strong disincentive to hold wealth, (Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995)). Consequently, even
households facing high risk, particularly those with low permanent income, may find it optimal
to hold very little wealth. Thus, there may be severe non-linearities in the relationship between
wealth and risk, which highlight the importance of choosing the correct functional form as
discussed next.
5: Functional forms
The relationship between wealth and risk (the function f) may display a non-linear shape
not only because of the behavior of households at the bottom of the wealth distribution, but also
because of the behavior of those at the top of the wealth distribution. Households at the top of
the distribution are disproportionately business owners, who may display different preferences
and face different risks or constraints than more typical households (Hurst and Lusardi (2004)).
The functional form chosen in many studies involves the logarithm of wealth, a
transformation which excludes a substantial fraction of the population (9 percent of households

9

had net worth of zero or below in SCF98).4 This exclusion is highly undesirable. That these
excluded households hold no wealth or are in debt may be related to features of the welfare
system, individual preferences, or a prior, substantial negative shock. It is hard to argue these
characteristics are not correlated with the precautionary motive. Indeed, some of these excluded
households are precisely those that may face high risks. As a result, samples with such
exclusions are very likely to suffer from a selectivity bias.
6: Macro and past shocks
While there has been an extensive discussion of the importance of macro shocks in the
estimation of Euler equations,5 this topic has been largely ignored in the estimation of
precautionary saving. It is, nevertheless, important in this context as well. Simply, it is not
possible to estimate the extent of precautionary accumulation using a single cross-section of
wealth data alone. The problem may be best understood with an example. Suppose that, because
of a national housing market bust, the wealth of homeowners was substantially reduced, but only
temporarily (the housing market recovers in the future and goes back to the original
equilibrium). Suppose further, as it is not unreasonable, that homeowners are less likely to face
high earnings risk. Simple regressions of total net worth on income risk lead to biased estimates
of the extent of precautionary accumulation. Similarly, during a recession, those households
facing high unemployment risk are also those more likely to be hit by shocks that deplete their

4

See Carroll, Dynan and Krane (2003) for an alternative functional form that does not exclude the zerowealth observations.
5

See the discussion in Browning and Lusardi (1996) and the references therein.

10

resources. Thus, some high risk households may have temporary low wealth and it is important
to account for past shocks (Carroll, Dynan and Krane (2003)).
7: Precautionary saving and portfolio choice
Risk affects not only wealth but also portfolio choice. Drèze and Modigliani (1972) show
that, unless income risk is perfectly insurable, consumption and portfolio decisions are not
separable. To date, however, most of the saving and portfolio choice models have been estimated
separately. A series of empirical papers has found that agents who face high earnings risk invest
less in stocks (Guiso, Jappelli and Terlizzese (1996), Haliassos and Bertaut (1995), and
Hochguertel (2003)). Additionally, business owners, although they hold large amounts of wealth,
are less likely to invest in publicly traded stocks (Heaton and Lucas (2000)). Stocks, however,
were one of the fastest growing components of wealth in the 1990s. Given the extraordinary
returns of the stock market in the 1990s, wealth is likely to be very high for households that have
invested in stocks. At the same time, many of these same households face low income risk.
Again, regressions of wealth on income risk may tell us little about the importance of the
precautionary saving motive. Estimates may be particularly sensitive to the inclusion or
exclusion of business owners in the sample.
8: Other motives to save
In addition to the precautionary motive, there are other motives to save, and it may be
difficult to disentangle them. For example, entrepreneurs are likely to face very high risk, and
thus, would be expected to save more. These households do hold a lot of wealth and mostly in
their business(es). However, business wealth may be the reward for work in the business
(sometimes as a partial substitute for a salary or pension), a shield against shocks, a current
valuation of future profits, or simply the price of independence in work. Similarly, it may be
11

hard to disentangle the precautionary saving motive from the bequest motive using wealth data
for older households. These households may wish to leave wealth to their heirs, but they may
retain their wealth until the end of life in case shocks hit or possibly as an instrument to ensure
the attention of the heirs. While many theoretical models of precautionary savings abstract from
these and other motives to save, such motives can play an important role empirically. Moreover,
the data needed to control for such factors are often not available.
A summary of the aforementioned issues and their effects on the empirical estimates of
precautionary wealth is reported in Table 1. Clearly, some of the problems are interdependent.
While their effects may not be equally important, almost all of them present problems for the
estimation of precautionary saving using current methods and existing data sets. As the last
column of the table outlines, the effects of these issues on the estimates of the precautionary
saving motive go in different directions. Thus, it is hard to determine whether current estimates
in the literature represent a downward- or upward- biased estimate of the true amount of
precautionary wealth.

3. An Alternative Approach: A Direct Measure of Desired Precautionary Savings
As the previous section shows, it is at best very difficult—sometimes impossible—to
estimate the extent of precautionary accumulation using the methods and types of data that have
prevailed in the existing literature. In this paper, we follow a different approach. We rely on a
question about precautionary wealth that one of the authors participated in designing for the
SCF. Our theoretical frame of reference is the ‘buffer-stock’ model, which we summarize below
as the foundation of the theoretical predictions we exploit in our work.

12

3.1 The “Buffer-Stock” Model of Saving
The theoretical model that has guided our empirical work is the “buffer-stock” model of
saving, as derived by Carroll (1996, 1997) and Deaton (1991). These authors consider an
intertemporal model of consumption behavior under uncertainty and show that, in their
specifications, consumers have a target wealth to income ratio. Consumers want to hold a
“buffer-stock” of wealth to insure against risk; when wealth goes below the target, saving will
increase, and when wealth is above the target, saving will decrease. As Carroll (1997) argues,
this is an appealing feature of the model and may well be aligned with the predictions of many
financial planners, who traditionally advise people to hold a certain ratio of wealth to long-run
income as precaution against shocks. Similarly and most importantly, Deaton (1992, pages 202203) shows the underlying maximization problem may be quite difficult to solve formally, but
simple rules can closely approximate the optimal behavior. Thus, it is not unrealistic to expect
households to be able to report the approximate size of the “buffer-stock” they wish to hold.
The model delivers predictions that can be tested empirically. First, the size of the
“buffer-stock” households want to hold is a positive function of risk. Not only is risk important,
but also preference parameters, such as the degree of impatience play a pivotal role. According
to the simulations of Carroll (1997), Carroll and Samwick (1998) and Deaton (1991), when
households are impatient, precautionary savings can be relatively small, particularly for younger
consumers and up to the age of 50. There is another important prediction: if there is no floor to
income, the target level of wealth chosen by consumers is strictly positive; consumers will not
let their wealth fall to zero, as there would otherwise be a chance that consumption goes to zero.6

6

This no-borrowing behavior has much to do with the assumption about preferences and the fact that the
utility function is of the CRRA form. If preferences were of the CARA form, consumers would be willing to let assets

13

As reported in Sections 2 and 2.1, a great deal of empirical work has attempted to assess
the importance of the precautionary saving motive. In this project, we follow a different
approach and ask respondents directly about the size of the stock of wealth they would like to
hold to shield themselves against shocks.

3.2 A Direct Measure of Precautionary Savings
The SCF95 introduced a new question intended to elicit the size of the “buffer-stock” that
households would like to hold.7 The exact wording of the question is as follows:

“About how much do you think you and your family need to have in savings for
unanticipated emergencies and other unexpected things that may come up?”

This question directly elicits the amount of desired “buffer-stock” savings and provides an
alternative way to bound the extent of precautionary accumulation. Much work was devoted to
pre-testing the question, assessing whether the question was understood, and identifying the
difficulty in answering.8 The exact wording of the question also merits consideration. First, the
reason for asking households what they “need to have in savings” rather what they have is that
be zero or negative.
7

This question has been retained in later waves of the SCF. This question has now been added to the 2003
Italian Survey of Household Income and Wealth.
8

This question is placed after a sequence of questions about saving and planning, and this context was
selected specifically to create the correct cognitive framework for respondents to focus on the intent of the question.
From the given responses, it appears that respondents did not have much difficulty with the question. In SCF95, only
about three percent of the respondents answered “don’t know” and were subsequently unable to provide even a range
of values upon probing by the interviewer.

14

their wealth may be out of equilibrium due to negative or positive shocks. The fact that some
households have zero or low actual wealth does not necessarily mean that they do not have a
precautionary saving motive; rather they may have faced past shocks. Second, the
phrase“unanticipated emergencies and other unexpected things that may come up” mirrors what
households most commonly report in open-ended SCF questions concerning current motives to
save. In SCF95, over 36 percent of participants gave such a response, as reported in the
appendix Table A1. In other surveys that collect similar information on saving motives, such a
“precautionary motive” is consistently the most frequently reported saving motive.9 “Unforeseen
events,”and “emergencies” are the descriptions respondents most often put forward when asked
about their motive to save. Third, this measure does not restrict attention to income risk only.
There are several advantages to this method. First, it allows us to obtain a householdspecific amount of desired precautionary accumulation directly, thus circumventing the problems
of unobservable preferences, borrowing possibilities, and informal or formal insurance schemes
(issues 2, 3, and 4 discussed in Section 2.1). Second, our method allows for risks beyond income
risk. Third, it measures the amount of “desired” (or equilibrium) precautionary savings rather
than the “actual” amount of savings. This is a substantial advantage, particularly in dealing with
households that have depleted their precautionary buffer of wealth as a result of past shocks

9

See Kennickell (1995). Alessie, Lusardi and Aldershof (1997) examine the motives to save in the Dutch
Socio-Economic Panel and report that the most frequently indicated motive to save is for “unforeseen events.” The
proportion of respondents choosing this motive remains high and constant over the life cycle. Similar findings are
reported when using the Dutch CentERdata panel. In this case, households are asked to report on a scale from 1 to 7
the importance of several motives to save. Of the listed 13 motives, the one that received the highest score was “save
as a reserve to cover unforeseen expenses.” Similarly, in the new German SAVE survey, households have to rate the
importance of 9 saving motives using a scale from 1 to 10. The motive that was considered most important by nearly
all families is “saving as a precaution for unexpected events” (see Börsch-Supan and Essig (2003) for detail).
Looking at data for Japan, Horioka, Yokot and Miyaji (1994) find that of the listed 12 motives to save, respondents
have chosen most often the precautionary saving motive which is indicated as: “for illness, disasters, and other
unforeseen expenditures.”

15

(issue 6). Finally, we avoid the problem of defining what measure of wealth is the appropriate
one for gauging the variation in precautionary savings across households (issue 1).
There are also disadvantages in working with such subjective questions. For example, the
question may turn out to be difficult for survey participants to understand and may be answered
imprecisely. In addition, respondents may consider only their preferences and not think of
budget constraints. They may also be led to think of current or small risks; alternatively, they
may consider every possible risk over their remaining life but fail to discount the future. Such
problems are not unique to our work; they also surface in the literature using subjective measures
of income risk. In the following sections, we provide a detailed evaluation of this question and
show that these data are not simply noise.

3.3 Some Descriptive Findings about Desired Precautionary Savings
Figure 1 reports the density of desired precautionary savings in the total sample using
data from SCF95.10 We first note that the reported amounts are concentrated in the range of
$5,000 to $10,000. However, a small proportion of households also reports very high amounts
of precautionary wealth. Thus, the precautionary saving motive can potentially rationalize high
amounts of wealth holdings as well. Figure 1 also shows there is much heterogeneity in saving
behavior, even when focusing on the precautionary saving motive alone.
In Figure 2, we overlap the densities of desired precautionary savings from the surveys in
1995 and in 1998 (in 1995 dollars). As the figure shows, the distributions of answers are
remarkably similar. This is what we expect empirically, given that it was a period in which

10

For a description of the SCF, see the data appendix.

16

unemployment risk was rather stable, and there were no major changes, at least at the aggregate
level, in health, longevity, or other risks. At the same time, household wealth increased
dramatically due to the very high returns in the stock market and housing market, which should
not have affected the amount of desired precautionary savings (as long as permanent income did
not increase sharply in that short time period). As mentioned in Section 2.1 (issues 6 and 7),
episodes in which increases in wealth are dominated by capital gains make it very difficult to
evaluate precautionary savings indirectly and underscore the importance of using subjective
measures of desired precautionary wealth. The distribution of this measure from two
independent cross sections supports a view that the data are more than just noise. Given the
close similarity of the two distributions, we pool the data from SCF95 and SCF98 in the
remainder of this paper (all dollar figures are reported in 1995 dollars).
To bring further credibility to our measure and to explain some of the heterogeneity in
the whole sample, we examine the distribution of desired precautionary savings across age for
each of three education groups: less than 12 years of education, 12-15 years of education, 16
years of education and higher.11 The distribution of desired precautionary savings generally
mirrors the distribution of wealth across education groups (Figures 3a-c). As reported by many
authors (particularly Bernheim and Scholz (1993) and Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995)), the
shape of the wealth distribution varies greatly by education; wealth is particularly low for those
with low education. Figure 3a confirms this fact. The distribution of desired precautionary
savings is low for the group with less than high school education, and the values remain low

11

In a simple cross-section, we cannot distinguish between age and cohort effects. Thus, when we consider
age we do not mean to characterize “age” versus “cohort” effects. To avoid confusion, we use both terms or simply
use the term “older sample” to characterize this group in the population.

17

across age groups. However, values increase overall as we move to groups with higher education
(Figures 3b-c). These values are much higher for households headed by people older than 50.
To address further the heterogeneity exhibited in these plots and to isolate the effects of
different types of risk, we split the population into three subgroups. A large fraction of
households at the top of the wealth distribution are business owners (Kennickell (2000), Gentry
and Hubbard (2004), Hurst and Lusardi (2004)). The risks such people face may often be quite
different from those faced by other households. To allow for more detailed investigation of these
risks, we consider a sample of business owners only, while we divide the remaining sample
between those in working years and those who are retired or close to retirement. The precise
definition of the groups is as follows: households that do not own a business and have an
employed head aged 25 to 61 (hereafter, “main sample”), households that do not own a business
and have a head aged 62 or older (hereafter, “older sample”), and households that own a business
in which they have an active management interest (hereafter, “business sample”).12 An
additional advantage of working with the SCF is that, since it over-samples wealthy households,
all these sub-samples, including the business owners, are of relatively large sizes (the number of
observations are 4,105, 1,634 and 2,236 for the main sample, the older sample, and the business
sample respectively). Note that these three groups face not only substantially different risks, but
also different types of constraints and preferences. These are important factors for assessing the
empirical importance of precautionary saving and, as mentioned in in Section 2.1 (issues 2-4), it
has been hard to account for them empirically. For example, business owners may be less averse

12

Three groups are omitted. First, we exclude households without business holdings and with a head under
the age of 62 who was not working at the time of the interview, and households with a head aged less than 25. These
groups were too small and heterogeneous to model with the available data.

18

to risk than respondents in other groups and may have self-selected into jobs with high risks,
while older households may be less likely to face liquidity constraints than young households or
business owners.
As the densities in Figure 4 indicate, desired precautionary savings is much larger and
values are more dispersed for older sample and the business sample than for the main sample.
Particularly for the business sample, the distribution has a long fat right tail. While the median
member of the main sample desires to hold $5,000 (mean of $11,000) in terms of precautionary
savings, the median household in the older sample wants much more— $7,600 (mean of
$29,000). The median desired precautionary holding of business owners is the largest at $10,000
(mean of $33,000).
To further underscore the differences in the three subsamples, we note that while the
main sample accounts for 50 percent of the population, it accounts for only 29 percent of total
desired precautionary savings. The older sample accounts for 24 percent of the population, but
41 percent of total desired precautionary savings; the business sample accounts for only 11
percent of the population, but 24 percent of total desired precautionary savings. Together, these
two latter groups account for as much as 65 percent of total precautionary savings. Overall, these
simple statistics indicate that the treatment of older households and business owners is likely to
play a pivotal role in estimating the precautionary saving motive. We return to this point in
Section 4.

3.4 Evaluating the Importance of Precautionary Savings
In this section, we report a more formal evaluation of the predictions of the theory and try
to assess the importance of the precautionary saving motive. We first examine the size of the
19

“buffer-stock” relative to various measures of actual wealth and then show that the measure of
desired precautionary savings reported by SCF respondents correlates with risks and other
determinants of wealth.
The comparison of desired precautionary savings and actual wealth is complicated by
the factors discussed in Section 2.1. First, some households may be away from their equilibrium
or target level of wealth because of prior shocks (issue 6). Second, the “correct” concept of
wealth to examine is dependent on a variety of preferences and institutional factors governing
the liquidity of various assets (issue 1). Because total net worth and financial net worth are the
two measures of wealth considered in the majority of the empirical studies on precautionary
savings, we begin by comparing these measures with desired precautionary savings.
The amount of desired precautionary savings is frequently larger than financial assets
(defined as the sum of net savings and checking deposits, savings bonds, stocks net of margin
loans, bonds, mutual funds, and the net cash value of life insurance). We find that financial
wealth is less than desired precautionary savings in 48 percent of cases in the main sample, 39
percent of cases among the older sample, and 36 percent for the business sample. When
considering total net worth (defined as financial assets with the addition of IRAs, other
retirement accounts, housing equity, other real estate, business equity and vehicles minus
associated debts, and the net value of miscellaneous assets and debts), the figures change
considerably. Net worth is below desired precautionary savings in 17 percent of cases in the
main sample, 14 percent in the sample of the older, and 5 percent among business owners.
Given all of the problems noted earlier in measuring wealth, we have also defined an
alternative measure of accumulation (“liquidable wealth” hereafter). We have summed financial
wealth and given a weight of 0.5 to home equity, other real estate, business equity, vehicles, and
20

other miscellaneous assets, and a weight of 0.3 to IRAs and other retirement assets, and only
subtracted 6 months of payments on loans except credit cards, and 0.2 of outstanding credit card
balances. While these weights are ad-hoc, they represent an attempt to take account of the
different liquidity and accessibility of household assets and liabilities. Desired precautionary
savings are higher than this alternate measure of wealth for 17 percent of observations in both
the main sample and among the older sample and 7 percent among the business sample.
How much of current wealth is the result of precautionary accumulation? The ratio of
total desired precautionary savings of all households over total wealth is 8 percent. The ratio
increases to close to 20 percent when considering only financial net worth. However, as
mentioned before, financial net worth represents a very limited measure of accumulation.
Relative to liquidable wealth, the ratio is 12 percent. Thus, although some values of desired
precautionary savings are quite large, the precautionary saving motive does not appear overall to
account for a very large fraction of observed household wealth. Moreover, because actual wealth
may be below its desired equilibrium level, the reported buffer-stock of savings may well
represent an upper bound to the size of precautionary wealth at any given time.
How large is the target that households wish to hold compared with permanent income,
which is the measure considered in theoretical models? In Figure 5, we consider this distribution
of the ratio of desired precautionary savings over permanent income in the full sample and
across the sub-groups.13 The relative size of the buffer-stock is overall fairly small when we

13

Permanent income is taken to be a measure of “normal” income reported by SCF respondents. This
question follows a sequence of questions on actual income. Each respondent was asked whether the total of all
components of their income for the preceding year, as summed by the interviewer’s computer, was unusually high or
low compared to normal. In this case, the respondent was asked for the figure that would be more usual. See
Kennickell (1995) for more details.

21

look at the full sample, but similarly to the measure of savings in levels, the distribution of the
ratio has a long fat right tail. The mean value indicates that households desire to hold 64 percent
of their normal income as a “buffer-stock,” but the median value is 14 percent. However, values
vary widely when we examine subgroups. In the main sample, the median desired “buffer-stock”
is 10 percent of normal income. Households in the older sample desire to hold much more: The
median value is 35 percent of normal income. Households in the business sample also want to
hold more than those in the main sample; their median value is 16 percent of normal income.
The evidence is also consistent with another prediction of the “buffer-stock” model. With
only very few exceptions, households desire to hold a positive stock of precautionary wealth to
insure against shocks. The fact that this stock is typically not very large–it ranges from 15 to 60
percent of permanent income for a large share of the population in working years that do not
own a business–is in line with the simulations of Caballero (1991). What our data further show is
that precautionary savings become sizable and important for two specific groups: business
owners and those older than 62. Other studies had emphasized the large wealth holdings of these
groups but without providing a link to the importance of the precautionary saving motive.
Clearly, it is hard to disentangle the size of precautionary accumulation, particularly for these
two groups, as wealth can serve more than one purpose. This is why it is important to ask
directly for the size of precautionary wealth.

3.5 A Multivariate Analysis of Desired Precautionary Savings
The objectives of our empirical analysis are four-fold. First, we aim to explain in more
detail the amount of precautionary savings reported by SCF respondents. Second, we examine
whether the desired amount of precautionary savings correlates with risk, which is the most
22

important prediction of the theory. Third, we aim to understand which types of risk people care
about. Fourth, we want to evaluate the findings in the previous literature and assess the
importance of the biases mentioned in section 2.1.
What influences the amount of precautionary savings? As reported in previous sections,
there are several factors. First, the main determinant of precautionary accumulation should be
risk and, in our work, we do not restrict attention to only one type of risk, but consider several
sources of risk (issue 1). Second, preferences are very important in shaping the amount of
precautionary savings (issue 2). Finally, the economic environment a family faces, for example
liquidity constraints or institutional factors such as the structure of the welfare system, can also
affect precautionary accumulation (issues 3, 4, and 5).
Our dependent variable is the log of desired precautionary savings. Since we have very
few zero (and no negative) values, our sample does not suffer from meaningful selection
problems. Rather than subtracting the log of permanent income (to express the ratio of desired
precautionary wealth to permanent income), we include this variable on the right hand side to
allow for the possibility that preferences might be non-homothetic. In order to explain desired
precautionary savings, we use a rich set of variables, as reported below.
Income risk and other controls
As mentioned before, we cannot simply use the variance of income as this measure suffers from
many problems. Most importantly, risk-averse workers can self-select into jobs with low income
variance. To overcome these issues, we follow the work of other researchers and use the state
level rate of unemployment as proxy for risk.14 Additionally, to capture income variation which

14

These are the variables used by Lusardi (1997) and Engen and Gruber (2001) in their instrumental
variables estimation. These instruments are valid insofar workers do not locate to states according to their degree of

23

is more individual-specific, we use a dummy for whether the respondent has a good idea of the
next year’s income. We control for macro shocks (issue 6) by adding to the regression a year
dummy and also the absolute deviation of predicted wages from actual wages divided by
predicted wages.15 We also use dummies for whether the income for the past year was above or
below a level the survey respondent considered “normal.”
Health risk and other controls
As in the case of income, it is very hard to measure this variable properly. Furthermore, we
cannot use information on whether households have health insurance since that variable is
clearly endogenous and can be related to precautionary savings because it proxies for common
preferences toward risk (Starr-McCluer(1996)). Studies such as Chandra and Skinner (2002)
show there is very high geographical variation in health costs, possibly reflecting differences in
utilization and quality of health care. Since even those who have health insurance have to pay
some out-of-pocket costs, we proxy for this risk by using the state-specific level of out-of-pocket
health costs. Those who live in higher-quality higher-cost states face a higher risk of paying for
some of their health problems. This is similar to the approach used to measure income risk.
Again, to use a measure which is more individual-specific, we also use information on whether
respondents foresee expenses for health care in the next 5-10 years. These expenses are
relatively far in the future; thus, they are likely to be uncertain. Since these variables could
potentially capture mean costs, we add current health status among our controls.

risk aversion.
15

The predicted wage is estimated using data in the Current Population Survey at the level of three-digit
occupation codes. Models were estimated conditioning on age, education, self-employment, sex, and race. Values
were predicted for the SCF observations using the estimated parameters.

24

Longevity risk and other controls
We proxy for this risk using the coefficient of variation of longevity. This variable is calculated
as the ratio of the standard deviation of life expectancy divided by the difference between
average life expectancy and the current age.16 The distribution of life expectancy is simulated for
each case using mortality probabilities conditioned on current age, race, and gender. In the
regressions, we also account for the reported value of expected longevity and current age.
Business risk and other controls
The measure of business risk (used for the business sample only) we use is the failure rate of
businesses of the same general type and age matched by state. Because the problem of selfselection can be particularly important for this group, the variance of income is not an
appropriate variable to use. We also consider whether the head and spouse work in the actively
managed business(es) owned by the family to proxy for lack of risk-sharing within the family.
Finally, we add to the regressions the number of businesses managed by the family as business
risk may be reduced by spanning different types of sectors and activities.
Preferences
To highlight the importance of preferences and account for the vast heterogeneity in
precautionary accumulation, we use a large set of controls. We control for several demographic
characteristics, such as age, education, race, marital status, number of children, family size, and
wealth dummies. We use wealth dummies (dummies for approximate quintiles of wealth) to
account for tastes for saving. Since wealth can be endogenous, we also present results without
the wealth dummies. Because it is important to account for behavior toward risk, we use

16

For a couple, we use the maximum value over the two people.

25

information on respondents’ willingness to undertake financial risk to proxy for risk aversion. In
addition, we use data on smoking behavior to proxy for impatience. Data on having a saving plan
and shopping for returns on saving and investments are used to proxy for attitudes toward saving
(Lusardi (2002)). To capture intertemporal substitution and prices, we also consider expectations
about interest rates in the next 5 years. Finally, we account for the intention of leaving bequests,
as this motive can interact with the precautionary saving motive (wealth accumulated for heirs
can also be used to insure against shocks).
Liquidity constraints
Liquidity constraints are proxied by several variables expressing the possibility of borrowing.
We follow the approach of Maki (2000) and Kennickell, Starr-McCluer and Surette (2000) and
use the variables reported in their work: a dummy for whether households own bank-type credit
cards, the ratio of annualized payments on all types of loans to total normal income, the ratio of
credit limit on all credit cards to normal income, the ratio of credit card debt outstanding over the
total credit limit on the family’s cards, and the interactions of these two latter variables with an
indicator for whether families have low income (income lower than $25,000).17 To consider as
well the supply of credit, we include the percentage of the local banking market (at the MSA
level) held by the four largest depository institutions.
Future expenses and other relevant variables
We use dummies for other future foreseeable expenses (mainly education and home expenses) in
the next 5-10 years to allow for variation in forward looking behavior and future commitments

17

The SCF reports information on whether households have been denied credit in the past or are discouraged
borrowers. We do not use these variables in our empirical work since we are interested in future rather than current or
past liquidity constraints.

26

which can also be uncertain. Additionally, we include a dummy for whether pension benefits are
considered to be adequate for retirement, since pensions can also insure against risk, particularly
longevity risk. In addition, we include a dummy for whether at least one parent is alive. This
variable may signal the possibility of receiving inheritances in the future, thus decreasing the
need to save.
We control for such an extensive set of variables for several reasons. First, our objective
is to describe and explain the data as much as we can, and we do so by exploiting the richness of
information offered in the SCF. Second, we aim to show that the proxies we use for risk are not
necessarily capturing something other than risk. Third and most importantly, we aim to
demonstrate that the data behave according to the predictions of the theory.
Our empirical findings are consistent with the findings of other works on savings. Most
importantly, we find that the reported measure of desired precautionary savings correlates with
risk(s), even after accounting for a large set of controls. It is also correlated with other
determinant of wealth in the expected way. These results are robust and do not depend on the
chosen empirical specification. We report the empirical estimates for risk in Table 2; the
complete set of estimates is reported in appendix Tables A2-A4. We summarize below the
empirical findings for each subsample.18

Main sample
For the main sample, we find that all measures of risk–income, longevity, and health–are
significant and correlate positively with desired precautionary savings (Table 2, second column).

18

Estimation was performed using robust regressions. All standard errors were corrected for the multiple
imputation of the SCF data (see Kennickell (1998)).

27

For example, those respondents who live in states with higher unemployment rates save more.
Those who have a good idea of next year income desire to accumulate less precautionary saving.
However, insofar as there is self-selection of workers into low-risk jobs that is not completely
addressed by our proxies for income uncertainty, the estimates are still biased downward
(Lusardi (1997, 2000) and Fuchs-Schündeln and Schündeln (2003)). Those who face higher
health and longevity risk also hold higher amounts of precautionary savings. We do not calculate
the economic significance of these estimates, as they may still suffer from the problems
discussed in section 2.1. Since we have a measure of precautionary savings already, we can look
at this measure directly to assess the size of precautionary wealth and we do not need to rely on
the coefficient estimates of risk.
Other variables have the expected sign and significance, confirming that our variable has
economic meaning (Table A2). As expected, the amount of desired precautionary savings
increases with permanent income. Evaluated at the 1995 population mean for this sample, for an
additional $1,000 of permanent income, households want to hold about an additional $221 in
precautionary wealth. Moreover, precautionary accumulation increases sharply with education,
even after accounting for wealth dummies. Thus, differences in precautionary wealth across
education groups documented in Figures 3a-c and in other studies (Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes
(1995), Lusardi (1998, 2000)) are still large even after accounting for many determinants of
wealth.
Moreover, we find that if pensions are adequate, precautionary accumulation is
substantially lower (about 4 to 5 percent lower). Planning is also important. Respondents who
have a saving plan report higher precautionary savings and so do those that search for the best
conditions on investment; work by Lusardi (2002) and Ameriks, Caplin and Leahy (2003) shows
28

that planning is a major determinant of wealth accumulation. Not only preferences, but also the
economic environment matters for precautionary savings. Respondents who are more likely to
face constraints (they report high loan payments or live in areas with a low concentration of
large banks) accumulate higher precautionary savings.
While most of the variables used in the empirical work move in the expected way, there
is still much unexplained variation. Again, this suggests that it is going to be difficult to find
evidence of precautionary savings in micro data by estimating the function reported in Section
2.1. First, there is a lot of heterogeneity in household behavior toward precautionary savings.
Second, people may care about many risks. Assessing the importance of the precautionary
motive by looking at only one source of risk can give a limited and perhaps misleading
assessment of the importance of the precautionary saving motive.

Older sample
It is important to focus attention on this group which accounts for such a disproportionate
share of precautionary savings. Not many studies have examined this group in isolation and we
know relatively little about the importance of precautionary savings among older people.
However, this group is often included in the samples used to estimate the precautionary saving
motive.
It is reassuring to note that, for this group, unemployment risk and income risk in general
are not significant (Table 2, third column). Many of these households are retired or on the verge
of retirement and, generally, income risk should not play an important role in explaining their
precautionary accumulation. As expected, two other risks are relevant: health and longevity risk.
Both variables are statistically significant.
29

As for the main sample, precautionary savings for older households increase with both
permanent income and education (Table A3). As before, differences are sizable across education
groups and precautionary savings are high particularly among those with a college degree or
more education. Other variables show the expected results. For example, the liquidity constraint
variables are overall not statistically significant. Older people/cohorts who have a bequest
motive accumulate more precautionary savings. As we discussed earlier, households who have a
bequest motive may hold on to their wealth until the end of life to potentially offset negative
shocks. There is however, more variation in desired precautionary savings among older
households/cohorts than we can measure with our simple proxies. While the two risks mentioned
above play a role, there are potentially more sources of risk that the older famlies care about and
would like to insure against. Modeling the saving behavior of this group is, therefore, likely to be
quite complex and require more detailed information on the risk factors facing older families.

Business sample
No one has studied this group in detail to assess the importance of the precautionary
saving motive, but according to our descriptive results presented earlier in this paper, this group
is very important for understanding wealth accumulation. To study business owners effectively,
we added several variables related to business risk. As mentioned before, we account for whether
both spouses work in the business and, thus, for lack of risk sharing within the household. We
also account for the number of businesses actively managed by the respondent or spouse (Table
2, fourth column). We also account for business size and type to account for the large
heterogeneity in business ownerships and whether the head or spouse has a MBA (Tables A4).

30

Overall, it is very hard to decompose the variation in desired precautionary holdings for
business owners with the available data; even basic demographic variables are not statistically
significant. The risk measures, such as unemployment and income risk, are significant and so are
some proxies for health risk, but, for example, the business failure risk variables are not
significant (Table 2). A variable that is strongly significant is the number of businesses owned
by the family and actively managed. Contrary to initial expectations, the higher the number of
businesses, the higher the precautionary savings. This perhaps is due to the fact that there is little
risk diversification in running more than one business; often owners of multiple businesses have
businesses in closely related areas.
Liquidity constraints matter for business owners and, consistent with theoretical
predictions, those that are more likely to face constraints hold higher amounts of precautionary
savings. Like the main sample, business owners that have adequate pensions report lower
precautionary savings.
This group is very important but also very difficult to study, largely because it is
seemingly so heterogeneous. Previous works that concentrate on earnings risk can do only a
crude job of capturing the importance of the precautionary saving motive when business owners
are included in the sample. On the other hand, they play a pivotal role in empirical work since
they hold large amounts of wealth.

3.6 Another Look at the Quantitative Importance of Precautionary Savings
In the previous section, we have shown that our measure of desired precautionary
savings is dependent on risk(s) and other expected factors. As mentioned in Section 2.1, it has
been difficult to measure risk other than income risk, often due to lack of data. Other studies that
31

have considered more than one source of risk have not clearly indicated the importance of
precautionary savings due, for example, to health or other shocks, perhaps with the exception of
Carroll and Samwick (1997). To provide insights on this matter, we exploit the information on
the motives to save reported in the SCF (the list of responses is reported in appendix Table A1).
The question about saving motives precedes that about desired precautionary savings (with a
number of questions about preferences and attitudes about saving in between). From the reported
saving motives, we are able to isolate four categories of precautionary savings related to
different types of risks:
1) Emergencies, “rainy days,” other unexpected needs, for “security” and independence;
2) Reserves in case of unemployment;
3) In case of illness, medical/dental expenses;
4) To have cash available on hand/liquidity; wise/prudent things to do.
As a simple way of inferring the quantitive importance of different types of risk, we
simply regress the ratio of desired precautionary savings to permanent income on these four
dummies using robust regressions (along with dummy variables to control for wealth). What
emerges from these simple regressions is that, relative to other risks, it is health risk that gives
rise to the largest amounts of precautionary savings overall (Table 3). This finding is consistent
with what was reported earlier, in particular for the older sample. On the other hand, earnings
(unemployment) risk, which is the risk that has been considered in the majority of the papers on
precautionary savings, does not account for high amounts of precautionary accumulation in the
total sample but, as expected, is more relevant in the main sample. Only a very small number of
respondents in the older and the business owner sample reported this motive as either their first

32

or second most important reason to save.19 Estimates are consistent with the recent work of
Carroll, Dynan and Krane (2003), which also finds small amounts of precautionary wealth to
insure against unemployment risk. Overall, what emerges again from these simple regressions is
that we need to move beyond earnings risk when modeling precautionary accumulation, in
particular when evaluating the quantitative importance of the precautionary saving motive in
comprehensive surveys that include all types of households.

4. Discussion
According to our findings a precautionary saving motive exists and affects the behavior
of households. However, the precautionary saving motive does not give rise to high amounts of
wealth, at least for the group of households who are in working years and do not own a business.
Simply stated, our data show that precautionary savings may account for as much as 8% of total
accumulation in the US. These estimates are similar to the upper range of values obtained in
studies of precautionary savings using subjective measures of risk. Our findings further indicate
that we need to move beyond earnings risk when modeling precautionary accumulation. Older
households play a very important role in explaining precautionary savings and for them, it is
very important to model health and longevity risks as well as other sources of risk (for example
“consumption” risk and other such emergencies). Health risk may also lead to sizable amounts of
precautionary accumulation. Thus, models that incorporate more than one source of risk are
likely to be better suited to modeling the behavior of households, particularly in samples that do
not concentrate on the young only.

19

However, it may be that some part of the health saving motive indirectly signals saving for lost wages during times
of ill health.

33

There is also another group that deserves close attention: business owners. Our work
shows that it is very hard to characterize their behavior well. There are several problems in
measuring properly the risk that these households face (not only income and business failure risk
but also, for example, interest rate risk). Most importantly, these households may self-select into
self-employment because of their risk tolerance or their perceptions of risk. Moreover, these
households are less likely to have pensions and to retire at age 62 or 65 (Hurst and Lusardi
(2004)). Our estimates suggest that it will be fruitful to study them in isolation. Alternatively,
models that include business owners should at least attempt to model more adequately their
differences with respect to other households.
Our results provide insights into previous empirical findings using the regressions that
were discussed in Section 2. For example, we can better understand the findings of Kazarosian
(1999) and Lusardi (1998, 2000), which examine older workers. They find that a precautionary
saving motive exists even for older households and, as this study also shows, older households
display a strong precautionary saving motive. We can also explain the finding of the well-cited
paper by Carroll and Samwick (1998), which shows that precautionary savings tend to become
more, rather than less, important with the addition of older respondents (older than 50). Our
findings can also explain another and potentially puzzling result of Carroll and Samwick (1998).
When farmers and self-employed are excluded from their sample, not only do the coefficient
estimates on income risk drop by 50 to 60 percent, but they are also no longer statistically
significant. As reported above, precautionary wealth is relatively small in the main sample, but it
becomes large for business owners. This group surely plays a pivotal role in the estimates of
precautionary savings.

34

Our results also provide insights into another important and puzzling finding: the lack of
annuitization among the older households. As many authors have shown, many retirees do not
annuitize their wealth. Furthermore, when given the option, many retirees choose lump-sum
payments rather than annuities for their retirement income (see Ameriks (2003) and the
references therein). If retirees face risks other than simply longevity, this behavior is reasonable.
Our data provide evidence that respondents in the older sample care about many sources of risk.
Similarly, it can explain why households do not use reverse mortgages (Venti and Wise (1991)).
If older households face the risk of incurring high expenses, for example large health expenses,
they may be reluctant to downsize or annuitize the value of their house. This result is consistent
with the work of Skinner (1996), which also emphasizes the importance of the precautionary
saving motive among older households.
Our findings are also in line with the work by Hubbard, Skinner and Zeldes (1995),
which shows that low-income and low-education families have little precautionary savings. As
the authors argue, this may be due to the existence of welfare programs. While households at the
bottom of the wealth distribution may face high risk, this risk interacts with means-tested welfare
programs in a nonlinear way. Finally, our findings are consistent with the evidence regarding
motives to save. As reported in many data sets, the precautionary saving motive is consistently
the most important motive indicated by respondents, and, as reported by Alessie, Lusardi and
Aldershof (1997), Kennickell (1995) and Samwick (1998), it remains strong among older
cohorts. However, as reported by Horioka, Yokota and Miyaji (1994), households indicating a
precautionary saving motive do not hold large amounts of wealth.
How important is the precautionary saving motive? Consistent with the findings of other
studies, our work shows that a precautionary motive exists and affects virtually every household.
35

Thus, models of savings that rely on certainty equivalence, preferences, or economic
environments that do not generate precautionary savings will not be able to characterize well the
behavior of US households. What this study further suggests is that this motive is very
heterogenous across the population, much more so than what has been found in previous work.
This difference may be because only a limited number of sources of risk have previously been
considered in the empirical literature and/or because it is hard to capture well empirically all the
complexities of precautionary accumulation, as discussed in Section 2. Income risk, in particular,
is likely to give rise to little precautionary accumulation, but other risks, such as health and
business risk, can lead to large amounts of precautionary accumulation.
For a large part of the younger population, our findings are consistent with studies using
subjective measures of risk in that the precautionary saving motive does not give rise to a lot of
wealth (Guiso, Jappelli and Terlizzese (1992), Lusardi (1998, 2000), Arrondel (2002)). Thus, we
believe that some of the initial large estimates of precautionary savings coming out of simulations
for the aggregate economy do not characterize well the behavior of the average or the median
household in the economy. Similar findings are reported in the recent theoretical work and
simulation results by Irvine and Wang (2001, page 234), which also state that “the overall wealth
stock in the economy is less influenced by income uncertainty than the existing theoretical
literature suggests.” Similarly, Laitner (2004) finds that, for plausible calibrations, precautionary
saving only adds 5-6% to aggregate wealth. However, our findings are also consistent with some
of the simulations of Carroll (1992) and Cagetti (2000). Households in these models display low
degrees of patience or low risk aversion. This leads to low amounts of accumulation, particularly
for low educated and young households. Although consistent with those predictions, our findings

36

further suggest that there is much more heterogeneity in the precautionary saving motive than
usually generated by these stylized models.
One of the novelties of our paper with respect to previous work is that we can identify two
groups in the population for which precautionary savings are really important: older households
and business owners. Consideration of business owners, a group that can account for a large
share of aggregate wealth, suggests that not just income risk, but also other risks should be taken
into account. The same holds for older households. In addition, it is likely that differences in
preferences and economic circumstances in these groups give rise to much of the observed
heterogeneity. Our subjective measure of precautionary savings can at least provide some bounds
to evaluate the importance of this motive among these distinct groups of households. Further
research on precautionary savings should give more attention to the behavior of these two groups
in the population.

5. Concluding Remarks
The estimation of the precautionary saving motive is a very complex task. There exist
many pitfalls and difficulties in assessing the empirical importance of this motive. One of the
major problems is how to measure accurately the amount of reserves people use to shield
themselves against risk. The commonly used measures of wealth have many problems, and much
more attention should be devoted to this important issue.
Our approach deviates from previous works and relies on a subjective measure of
precautionary savings provided in the SCF. This survey, by oversampling the wealthy, provides a
reasonably accurate account of the range of household wealth holdings. Beginning in 1995, the
SCF also provides a measure of desired precautionary savings, further enriching the information
37

currently available to study household behavior toward savings. We provide an extensive
evaluation of this measure. The underlying question was subjected to careful pre-testing as well as
post-survey evaluation. We show that the measure is consistent across time-periods; two
independent cross-sections in 1995 and 1998 give very much the same results. The decomposition
across groups shows that the features of the data accord with the theory. In particular, the shape of
the distribution of desired precautionary savings mimics that of wealth, but at a much lower level
than wealth. Finally, desired precautionary savings correlates with risk, permanent income,
liquidity constraints, and household preferences.
Our findings shed new light on the importance of precautionary savings. The precautionary
saving motive continues to be strong even among older households/cohorts. Thus, we need to
move beyond earnings risk when studying the importance of precautionary accumulation.
Moreover, the precautionary saving motive is very important for business owners and, for this
group as well, we need a more careful modeling of sources of risk. Given that older households
and business owners alone account for 65 percent of total precautionary accumulation, further
research on this topic should focus on these two groups of the population. Because the
heterogeneity seen in our data is large, it may be particularly important to enrich the description of
the economic environment, including accounting for imperfections in the financial and insurance
markets and the institutions that are already in place to insure against risk (e.g., welfare programs,
sources of support from family and friends).
The measure of desired precautionary wealth available in the SCF can substantially
enhance empirical work. For example, researchers interested in accounting for a measure of
precautionary accumulation can use this information rather than relying on traditional measures of
wealth. Furthermore, these data can be used to account for household-specific behavior toward
38

risk. There is little information in existing data sets on risk aversion, prudence, or the amount and
type of risks that households face; in principle, the subjective measure of precautionary wealth in
the SCF encompasses all such information. Thus, studies of portfolio choice, entrepreneurship, and
the labor market can benefit much from the availability of this information. These data can also
help yield better understanding of other questions concerning household saving behavior, such as
whether and how fast older households should decumulate wealth after retirement and what are the
most important motives for saving.

39

References
Alan, Sule (2004), “Precautionary Wealth and Portfolio Allocation: Evidence from Canadian
Microdata,” mimeo, York University, Canada.
Ameriks, John (2003), “How Do Retirees Go from Stocks to Flow?,” mimeo, TIAA-CREF
Institute.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin and John Leahy (2003), “Wealth Accumulation and the Propensity
to Plan,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 68, 1007-1047.
Alessie, Rob, Annamaria Lusardi and Trea Aldershof (1997), “Income and Wealth over the Life
Cycle: Evidence from Panel Data,” Review of Income and Wealth, 43, 1-32.
Arrondel, Luc (2002), “Risk Management and Wealth Accumulation Behavior in France,”
Economics Letters, 74, 187-194.
Attanasio, Orazio James Bank, Costas Meghir and Guglielmo Weber (1999), “Humps and Bumps
in Lifetime Consumption,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.
Barsky, Robert, Miles Kimball, Thomas Juster and Matthew Shapiro (1997), "Preference
Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
Retirement Survey," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 62, 537-579.
Bernheim, Douglas and John Karl Scholz (1993), “Private Saving and Public Policy,“ in James
Poterba (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, MIT Press, 73-110.
Börsch-Supan, Axel and Lothar Essig (2003), “Household Saving in Germany: Results from the
First SAVE Study,” NBER Working Paper n. 9902.
Browning, Martin and Annamaria Lusardi (1996), "Household Saving: Micro Theories and Micro
Facts," Journal of Economic Literature, 34, 1797-1855.
Caballero, Ricardo (1991), “Earning Uncertainty and Aggregate Wealth Accumulation,” American
Economic Review, 81, 859-871.
Caballero, Ricardo (1990), “Consumption Puzzles and Precautionary Savings,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 25, 113-136.
Cagetti, Marco (2000), “Wealth Accumulation Over the Life Cycle and Precautionary Savings,”
mimeo, University of Virginia.
Carroll, Christopher (1992), “The Buffer-Stock Theory of saving: Some Macroeconomic
Evidence,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 61-156.
40

Carroll, Christopher (1996), “Buffer Stock Saving: Some Theory,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins
University.
Carroll, Christopher (1997), “Buffer Stock Saving and the Life Cycle/Permanent Income
Hypothesis,”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1-55.
Carroll, Christopher and Andrew Samwick (1998), “ How Important is Precautionary Saving?”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 80, 410-419.
Carroll, Christopher and Andrew Samwick (1997), “The Nature of Precautionary Wealth,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 40, 41-71.
Carroll, Christopher, Karen Dynan and Spencer Krane (2003), “Unemployment Risk and
Precautionary Wealth: Evidence from Households’ Balance Sheets,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 85, 586-604.
Chandra, Amitabh and Jonathan Skinner (2002), “Geography and Health Disparities,” National
Academies of Sciences, Workshops on Ethnic Disparities in Aging Health, Washington, D.C. .
Dardanoni, Valentino (1991), “Precautionary Savings under Income Uncertainty: A CrossSectional Analysis,” Applied Economics, 23, 153-160.
Davies James (1981), “Uncertain Lifetimes, Consumption and Dissaving in Retirement,” Journal
of Political Economy, 89, 561-578.
Deaton, Angus (1991), “Saving and Liquidity Constraints,” Econometrica, 59, 1221-1248.
Deaton, Angus (1992), Understanding Consumption, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Drèze, Jacques and Franco Modigliani (1972), “Consumption Under Uncertainty,” Journal of
Economic Theory, 5, 308-35.
Dynan, Karen (199,), “How Prudent Are Consumers?,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 11041113.
Engen, Eric and Jonathan Gruber (2001), “Unemployment Insurance and Precautionary saving,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 47, 545-579.
Fuchs-Schündeln Nicola and Matthias Schündeln (2003), “Precautionary Savings and SelfSelection - Evidence from the German Reunification ‘Experiment,’” mimeo, Yale University.
Gentry, William and Glenn Hubbard (2004), “Entrepreneurship and Household Saving,”Advances
in Economic Analysis & Policy, 4(1), Article 8.

41

Gourinchas, Pierre Olivier and Jonathan Parker (2002), “Consumption Over the Life Cycle,”
Econometrica, 70, 47-89.
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli and Daniele Terlizzese (1996), “Income Risk, Borrowing Constraints
and Portfolio Choice,” American Economic Review, 86, 158-172.
Guiso, Luigi, Tullio Jappelli and Daniele Terlizzese (1992), “Earning Uncertainty and
Precautionary Saving,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 30, 307-338.
Haliassos, Michael and Carol Bertaut (1995), “Why Do So Few Hold Stocks?,” Economic Journal,
105, 1110-1129.
Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas (2000), “Portfolio Choice and Asset Prices: The Importance of
Entrepreneurial Risk,” Journal of Finance, 55, 1163-1198.
Hrung, Warren (2000), “Is Retirement an Important Motive for Saving? An Investigation of
Buffer-Stock Savings using Tax Panel Data,” mimeo, US Department of Treasury.
Hochguertel, Stefan (2003), “Precautionary Motives and Portfolio Choice,” Journal of Applied
Econometrics, 18, 61-77.
Horioka, Charles, Naoto Yokota, and Toshiyuki Miyaji (1994), “ Why Do People Save? An
Analysis of Motives for Household Saving in Japan,” Discussion Paper n. 350, Institute of Social
and Economic Research, Osaka University, Japan.
Hubbard, Glenn, Jonathan Skinner and Stephen Zeldes (1995), “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 360-399.
Hurst, Erik and Annamaria Lusardi (2004), “Liquidity Constraints, Household Wealth and
Entrepreneurship,” Journal of Political Economy, 112, 319-347.
Irvine, Ian and Susheng Wang (2001), “Saving Behavior and Wealth Accumulation in a Pure
Lifecycle Model with Income Uncertainty,” European Economic Review, 45, 233-258.
Juster, Thomas James Smith and Frank Stafford (1999), “The Measurement and Structure of
Household Wealth, Labour Economics, 6, 253-275.
Kazarosian, Mark (1997), “Precautionary Saving - A Panel Study,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 79, 241-247.
Kennickell, Arthur (2000) “An Examination of Changes in the Distribution of Wealth from 1989
to 1998: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Jerome Levy Economics Institute
Working Paper 307.

42

Kennickell, Arthur (1998), “Multiple Imputation in the Survey of Consumer Finances,”
Proceedings of the Section on Business and Economic Statistics, 1998 Annual Meetings of the
American Statistical Association, Dallas, Texas
Kennickell, Arthur (1995), “Saving and Permanent Income: Evidence from the 1992 SCF,”
mimeo, Board of Governors.
Kennickell, Arthur, Martha Starr-McCluer and Brian J. Surette (2000), “Recent Changes in U.S.
Family Finances: Results from the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances, Federal Reserve Bulletin,
1-29.
Kennickell, Arthur, Martha Starr-McCluer, and Annika E. Sundén (1997), “Family Finances in the
U.S.: Recent Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances,” Federal Reserve Bulletin, 1-24.
Kennickell, Arthur and Louise Woodburn (1999), “Consistent Weight Design for the 1989, 1992,
and 1995 SCFs, and the Distribution of Wealth,” Review of Income and Wealth, 45, 193-215.
Kimball, Miles (1990), “Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the Large,” Econometrica, 58,
53-73.
Laitner, John (2004), “Precautionary Saving Over the Lifecycle,” Michigan Retirement Research
Center Working Paper n. 83.
Leung, Siu Fai (1994), “Uncertain Lifetime, the Theory of the Consumer, and the Life Cycle
Hypothesis, Econometrica, 62, 1233-1239.
Lusardi, Annamaria (2002), “Explaining Why So Many Households Do Not Save,” mimeo,
Dartmouth College.
Lusardi, Annamaria (2000), “Precautionary Saving and the Accumulation of Wealth,” mimeo,
Dartmouth College.
Lusardi, Annamaria (1998), "On the Importance of the Precautionary Saving Motive," American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 88, 449-453.
Lusardi, Annamaria (1997), “Precautionary Saving and Subjective Earnings Variance, “
Economics Letters, 57, 319-326.
Maki, Dean (2000), “The Growth of Consumer Credit and the Household Debt Service Burden,”
mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Palumbo, Michael (1999), “Uncertain Medical Expenses and Precautionary Saving Near the End
of the Life Cycle,” Review of Economic Studies, 66, 395-421.
Poterba, James (2003), “Valuing Assets in Retirement Saving Accounts,” mimeo, MIT.
43

Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise (1994), "Targeted Retirement Saving and the Net
Worth of Elderly Americans," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 84,180-85.
Skinner, Jonathan (1996), “Is Housing Wealth a Sideshow?” in D. Wise (ed.), Papers in the
Economics of Aging, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Skinner, Jonathan (1988), “Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption and Precautionary Saving,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 22, 237-255.
Starr-McCluer, Martha (1996), “Health Insurance and Precautionary Savings, American Economic
Review, 86, 285-295.
Venti Steven and David Wise (1991), “Aging and the Income Value of Housing Wealth,” Journal
of Public Economics, 44, 371-397.

44

Table 1: Empirical Issues in Estimating the Importance of Precautionary Savings

#

Issues

Empirical
Implementation

Relevant papers that
face or address issue

Problems

Direction
of bias

1

Measurement
of wealth

Use financial
wealth

Hrung (2000)
Engen et al (2001)
Carroll et al (1998)
Alan (2004)

Very limited
measure of
accumulation

1

Measurement
of risk

Use subjective
measures of
income variance

Guiso et al. (1992)
Lusardi (1998)
Arrondel (2002)

Income variance is
very low

2

Preferences:
Risk Aversion

Use occupation
dummies as proxy
for risk

Skinner (1988)
Lusardi (1997)
Fuchs-Schundeln et
al. (2003)

Risk-averse
workers can selfselect into low risk
occupations

3

Liquidity
constraints

Use proxies for
constraints

Guiso et al. (1996)

Mostly unobservable

Imprecise
estimates

4

Other forms
of insurance

Use data on
sources of help
and support

Hubbard et al. (1995)
Lusardi (2000)

Mostly unobservable

Imprecise
estimates

5

Functional
form

Use logs

Carroll et al (1998)

Heavily selected
sample

6

Macro and
past shocks

Use proxies for
past shocks

Lusardi (1998, 2000)
Carroll, Dynan and
Krane (2003)

Both wealth and
income risk are
sensitive to the
business cycle

7

Portfolio
choice

Include stocks in
the measure of
wealth

Most papers

Those facing high
income risk should
invest less in
stocks

8

Other motives
to save

Entrepreneurs and
older households
are included in the
sample

Most papers

Interaction of
enterprise &
bequest with
precautionary mot.

Note: This table summarizes the empirical issues in estimating precautionary savings discussed in section 2.1 in the
text.

Table 2: Summary of Key Regression Estimates, by Sample Group.
Main sample

Older sample

Business Sample

Variables: risk and permanent income

Estimates (s.e.)

Estimates (s.e.)

Estimates (s.e.)

State unemployment rate

0.042 (0.020)**

0.011(0.042)

0.053(0.029)**

Respondent has good idea of next year’s
income

-0.124(0.044)***

-0.024(0.096)

-0.032(0.065)

State out-of-pocket health costs

-0.000(0.000)

0.000(0.000)

-0.000(0.000)

Future health expenditure

0.230(0.057)***

0.369(0.095)***

0.203(0.093)**

Longevity risk

3.043(0.759)***

5.409(1.660)***

1.140(1.856)

State failure rate of businesses of same
type & age

_

_

0.011(0.018)

Head works in actively managed firm
owned by family

_

_

-0.035(0.113)

Spouse works in actively managed firm
owned by family

_

_

0.003(0.073)

Family own 2 businesses they actively
manage

_

_

-0.042(0.082)

Family own more than 2 businesses they
actively managed

_

_

0.304(0.099)***

Log of permanent income

0.319(0.031)***

0.137(0.050)***

0.360(0.034)***

Preferences, liquidity constraints, future
expenses, and other controls

yes

yes

yes

Wealth dummies

yes

yes

yes

# of observations

4105

1634

2236

Note: This table summarizes the estimates of the regressions of desired precautionary savings (in logs) on the variables
measuring risk (income, health, and business risk) and permanent income. The full set of estimates is reported in
Tables A2-A4. Column 2 reports the estimates in the main sample, while columns 3 and 4 report the estimates in the
older sample and the business sample. “*”, “**, “***” indicate significance at the 10% , 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

Table 3: Precautionary Savings and Motives to Save

Variables

Full sample

Main sample

Older sample

Business sample

Constant

0.123***
(0.005)

0.097***
(0.003)

0.266***
(0.026)

0.159***
(0.022)

Emergencies

0.014***
(0.004)

0.010***
(0.004)

0.026
(0.026)

0.016*
(0.011)

Unemployment

0.018*
(0.014)

0.033***
(0.011)

-0.118
(0.120)

0.020
(0.038)

Health expenses

0.044**
(0.010)

0.018**
(0.009)

0.077**
(0.033)

0.001
(0.023)

Liquidity, wise/prudent
thing to do

0.019**
(0.011)

0.013
(0.012)

0.000
(0.046)

0.027
(0.024)

Wealth dummies

yes

yes

yes

yes

Note: This table reports the estimates from a regression of the ratio of desired precautionary savings over permanent
income on the dummies for the motives to save reported in the first column. All regressions include a set of wealth
dummies to account for household preferences. “*”, “**, “***” indicate significance at the 10% , 5% and 1% level,
respectively.

Data Appendix
The data used in this paper derive from the 1995 and 1998 cross-sections of the Survey of
Consumer Finances (SCF). The SCF is sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, and the data for the 1995 and 1998 surveys were collected by NORC, a national
organization for social science and survey research at the University of Chicago. The field period
ranged from approximately June through December of the survey years. All asset and liability
variables used in this paper are valued as of the time of the interview. All dollar values from the
1998 SCF have been adjusted to 1995 dollars using the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
In each of the two years of the SCF we use, there are about 4,300 participants. The original
sample comprises two random sub-samples. The first is an area-probability sample, which
accounts for about two-thirds of the participants. This part of the sample provides broad national
coverage of the population. The second part contains an over-sample of wealthy households.
Non-response to the survey is a substantial problem which is addressed through the weighting
design (Kennickell and Woodburn, 1999). For individual questions, non-response, or partial
response in the form of range information, is also a problem. The survey deals with this type of
non-response through multiple imputation (Kennickell, 1998), a technique that allows one to
account for the variability associated with non-response in model estimation. The standard errors
of all models presented in this paper are corrected for the imputation of the originally missing data.
See Kennickell, Starr-McCluer, and Sundén (1997), and Kennickell, Starr-McCluer and Surette
(2000) for more information on the SCF in 1995 and 1998.

Table A.1: Motives to Save in the 1995 SCF

Motives to save

Percentages in the
total sample

Emergencies, “rainy days,” other unexpected needs, for “security” and

36.2

independence
In case of illness, medical/dental expenses

6.3

Reserves in case of unemployment

2.4

Liquidity, to have cash available/on hand, wise/prudent thing to do

2.5

Retirement/old age

32.4

“To get ahead”, for the future, to advance standard of living

6.2

Children or grandchildren’s education, own or spouse education

18.2

For the children/family, “to help the kids out”

5.4

Buying own house, cottage, second house, home improvements/repairs,

11.5

to meet contractual commitments to pay off house
Buying a car, boat or other vehicle, buy durable household goods, to travel, take

17.6

vacations
Buying (investing in) own business/farm, equipment for business/farm

1.8

No reason, money “left over”

0.6

Don’t/can’t save, “have no money”

6.8

Other motives

7.4

Note: This table reports the frequencies of the responses to the following question in the 1995 SCF: “People have
different reasons for saving, even though they may not be saving all the time. What are your family’s most important
reasons for saving?” Percentages sum to more than 100 because some respondents provided more than one reason.

Table A2: Explaining Desired Precautionary Savings: Main Sample

Variables

Estimates (s.e.)

Estimates (s.e.)

State unemployment rate

0.032(0.020)*

0.042(0.020)**

Respondent has good idea of next year’s income

-0.120(0.045)***

-0.124(0.044)***

State out-of-pocket health costs

-0.000(0.000)

-0.000(0.000)

Future health expenditure

0.201(0.057)***

0.230(0.057)***

Longevity risk

2.903(0.762)***

3.043(0.759)***

Log of permanent income

0.486(0.028)***

0.319(0.031)***

Deviation from predicted wages

0.038(0.012)***

0.024(0.012)***

Income lower than normal

-0.044(0.054)

-0.022(0.053)

Income higher than normal

0.120(0.065)**

0.081(0.064)

Year dummy

0.094(0.074)

0.074(0.074)

Age

0.039(0.019)**

0.038(0.019)**

Age squared

-0.029(0.023)

-0.039(0.023)**

Expected years left to live (max of head or spouse)

-0.000(0.002)

-0.001(0.002)

Household has a bank-type credit card

0.160(0.057)***

0.131(0.057)**

Ratio of credit limit on all credit cards over permanent

0.267(0.079)***

0.247(0.076)***

Credit limit/perm income * low income (Y < 25,000)

-0.177(0.082)**

-0.182(0.078)***

Ratio of debt on all credit cards over total credit limit

-0.208(0.054)***

-0.129(0.054)***

Total credit card debt/total limit * low income (Y<25,000)

0.206(0.058)***

0.126(0.058)**

Annualized payments on total loans over income

0.092(0.033)***

0.066(0.034)**

Percent of local banking mkt held by four largest banks

-0.003(0.002)

-0.003(0.001)**

Household had education expenses in next 5-10 years

-0.044(0.047)

-0.051(0.047)

Household has home expenses in next 5-10 years

-0.063(0.044)*

-0.023(0.044)

Households has other expenses in next 5-10 years

0.126(0.145)

0.107(0.142)

-0.075(0.050)*

-0.053(0.049)

Risk and permanent income

Macro shocks

Age and longevity

Liquidity constraints

income

Future expenses

Risk preferences
Unwilling to take any financial risk

Willing to take above average risk for above average return

0.014(0.053)

-0.012(0.053)

Willing to take large risk for large return

-0.019(0.093)

-0.064(0.093)

The head or spouse smoke

-0.022(0.043)

-0.002(0.043)

Household has plan for saving

0.123(0.042)***

0.084(0.042)**

Degree of shopping for returns on saving and investment

0.032(0.015)**

0.022(0.015)*

Expected interest rates in the next 5 years

0.011(0.033)

0.031(0.032)

Adequacy of pensions/Social Securiy

-0.044(0.017)***

-0.050(0.016)***

It is import to leave an inheritance

0.072(0.039)**

0.047(0.039)

At least one parent is alive

0.029(0.070)

0.049(0.068)

High school degree

0.041(0.068)

0.064(0.068)

Some college

0.129(0.074)**

0.143(0.074)**

College and more than college

0.307(0.079)***

0.304(0.079)***

Nonwhite or Hispanic

0.001(0.068)

0.022(0.068)

Married

0.007(0.073)

0.012(0.073)

Separated or divorced

0.135(0.069)**

0.164(0.069)***

Widowed

0.254(0.133)

0.220(0.132)**

Dummy if there are children younger than 18

-0.151(0.064)***

-0.156(0.063)***

Dummy if there are children between age 18-24

-0.057(0.018)***

-0.048(0.018)***

Dummy if there are children age 25 or older

-0.042(0.029)*

-0.025(0.029)

Household size

0.038(0.024)*

0.036(0.024)*

Excellent health

0.080(0.044)**

0.066(0.043)*

Fair or poor health

-0.090(0.057)*

-0.075(0.057)*

Constant

0.880(0.529)**

2.408(0.541)***

Other preferences and attitudes toward savings

Demographics

Continuation
Other controls

Wealth dummies

no

yes

Note: This table reports estimates of the regressions of the log of desired precautionary saving on the variables listed in
the first column for the main sample. The number of observations is 4,105. “*”, “**, “***” indicate significance at the
10% , 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Table A3: Explaining Desired Precautionary Savings - Older Sample

Variables

Estimates (s.e.)

Estimates (s.e.)

State unemployment rate

0.017(0.042)

0.011(0.042)

Respondent has good idea of next year’s income

-0.008(0.098)

-0.024(0.096)

State out-of-pocket health costs

0.000(0.000)

0.000(0.000)

Future health expenditure

0.365(0.099)***

0.369(0.095)***

Longevity risk

5.410(1.728)***

5.409(1.660)***

Permanent income

0.317(0.050)***

0.137(0.050)***

Deviation from predicted wages

-0.003(0.027)

-0.001(0.026)

Income lower than normal

-0.097(0.149)

0.020(0.148)

Income higher than normal

0.256(0.153)**

0.194(0.150)*

Year dummy

-0.127(0.161)

-0.159(0.161)

Age

0.070(0.091)

0.040(0.089)

Age squared

-0.068(0.060)

-0.050(0.059)

Expected years left to live (max of head or spouse)

0.000(0.006)

0.004(0.006)

Household has a bank-type credit card

0.223(0.114)**

0.138(0.115)

Ratio of credit limit on all credit cards over permanent income

0.009(0.099)

-0.018(0.101)

Credit limit/perm income * low income (Y < 25,000)

0.030(0.099)

0.037(0.101)

Ratio of debt on all credit cards over total credit limit

-0.297(0.525)

0.040(0.533)

Total credit card debt/total limit * low income (Y<25,000)

0.128(0.522)

-0.148(0.530)

Annualized payments on total loans over income

0.126(0.211)

-0.028(0.208)

Percent of local banking mkt held by four largest banks

0.002(0.003)

0.003(0.003)

Household had education expenses in next 5-10 years

0.286(0.216)*

0.235(0.217)

Household has home expenses in next 5-10 years

0.191(0.155)

0.210(0.149)*

Households has other expenses in next 5-10 years

-0.140(0.257)

-0.128(0.248)

-0.164(0.099)**

-0.037(0.102)

Risk and permanent income

Macro shocks

Age and longevity

Liquidity constraints

Continuation
Future expenses

Risk preferences
Unwilling to take any financial risk

Willing to take above average or larger risk for above average

-0.032(0.132)

-0.040(0.130)

The head or spouse smoke

-0.024(0.109)

0.024(0.106)

Household has plan for saving

0.073(0.088)

0.040(0.087)

Degree of shopping for returns on saving and investment

0.077(0.032)***

0.062(0.031)***

Expected interest rates in the next 5 years

0.054(0.067)

0.070(0.065)

Adequacy of pensions/Social Securiy

-0.001(0.031)

0.003(0.030)

It is import to leave an inheritance

0.169(0.084)**

0.117(0.081)*

At least one parent is alive

-0.104(0.117)

-0.111(0.117)

High school degree

0.175(0.113)*

0.047(0.111)

Some college

0.385(0.135)***

0.282(0.131)**

College and more than college

0.602(0.140)***

0.431(0.135)***

Nonwhite or Hispanic

-0.662(0.168)***

0.519(0.165)***

Married

0.007(0.245)

-0.016(0.240)

Separated or divorced

-0.027(0.229)

0.140(0.232)

Widowed

-0.157(0.208)

-0.120(0.206)

Dummy if there are children younger than 18

-0.201(0.302)

-0280(0.295)

Dummy if there are children between age 18-24

-0.024(0.021)

-0.017(0.020)

Dummy if there are children age 25 or older

-0.058(0.063)

-0.050(0.064)

Household size

-0.057(0.125)

-0.044(0.123)

Excellent health

0.182(0.115)*

0.189(0.112)**

Fair or poor health

-0.142(0.091)*

0.055(0.088)

Constant

0.446(3.399)

2.594(3.339)

or large return
Other preferences and attitudes toward savings

Demographics

Continuation
Other controls

Wealth dummies

no

yes

Note: This table reports estimates of the regressions of the log of desired precautionary saving on the variables listed in
the first column for the older sample. The number of observations is 1,634. “*”, “**, “***” indicate significance at the
10% , 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Table A4: Explaining Desired Precautionary Savings - Business Sample

Variables

Estimates (s.e.)

Estimates (s.e.)

State unemployment rate

0.055(0.030)**

0.053(0.029)**

Respondent has good idea of next year’s income

-0.032(0.065)

-0.032(0.065)

State failure rate of businesses of same type and age

0.010(0.018)

0.011(0.018)

Head works in the actively managed firm owned by family

-0.025(0.114)

-0.035(0.113)

Spouse works in the actively managed firm owned by family

0.004(0.073)

0.003(0.073)

Family own 2 businesses they actively manage

-0.008(0.082)

-0.042(0.082)

Family own more than 2 businesses they actively manage

0.419(0.096)***

0.304(0.099)***

State out-of-pocket health costs

0.000(0.000)

-0.000(0.000)

Future health expenditure

0.184(0.093)**

0.203(0.093)**

Longevity risk

1.471(1.907)

1.140(1.856)

Log of permanent income

0.449(0.031)***

0.360(0.034)***

Deviation from predicted wages

0.048(0.016)***

0.043(0.015)***

Income lower than normal

0.037(0.094)

0.052(0.091)

Income higher than normal

0.160(0.088)**

0.123(0.090)*

Year dummy

0.008(0.125)

0.016(0.126)

Age

0.069(0.019)***

0.067(0.019)***

Age squared

-0.048(0.019)***

-0.049(0.019)***

Expected years left to live (max of head or spouse)

0.005(0.003)*

0.005(0.003)

Household has a bank-type credit card

0.007(0.129)

-0.002(0.129)

Ratio of credit limit on all credit cards over permanent

0.518(0.118)***

0.525(0.117)***

Credit limit/perm income * low income (Y < 25,000)

-0.493(0.117)***

-0.503(0.116)***

Ratio of debt on all credit cards over total credit limit

-0.011(0.010)

-0.012(0.010)

Total credit card debt/total limit * low income (Y<25,000)

0.435(0.401)

0.357(0.395)

Annualized payments on total loans over income

0.002(0.001)*

0.001(0.001)

Percent of local banking mkt held by four largest banks

-0.004(0.003)**

-0.004(0.003)*

Household had education expenses in next 5-10 years

0.067(0.078)

0.053(0.077)

Household has home expenses in next 5-10 years

0.004(0.081)

0.021(0.082)

Risk and permanent income

Macro shocks

Age and longevity

Liquidity constraints

income

Future expenses

Households has other expenses in next 5-10 years

-0.079(0.176)

-0.164(0.175)

Unwilling to take any financial risk

-0.067(0.103)

-0.067(0.102)

Willing to take above average risk for above average return

0.036(0.068)

0.020(0.068)

Willing to take large risk for large return

0.111(0.111)

0.073(0.110)

The head or spouse smoke

0.026(0.076)

0.033(0.076)

Household has plan for saving

0.026(0.062)

0.014(0.062)

Degree of shopping for returns on saving and investment

0.058(0.021)***

0.047(0.021)**

Expected interest rates in the next 5 years

0.015(0.048)

0.005(0.047)

Adequacy of pensions/Social Securiy

-0.048(0.021)**

-0.0490.021)***

It is import to leave an inheritance

0.109(0.066)**

0.071(0.066)

At least one parent is alive

-0.146(0.105)*

-0.131(0.103)

High school degree

-0.108(0.167)

-0.117(0.167)

Some college

-0.171(0.167)

-0.180(0.166)

College and other non-professional degrees

-0.020(0.166)

-0.066(0.166)

Head or spouse has MBA

0.213(0.137)*

0.172(0.135)

Head or spouse has other professional degree (JD, MD,..)

0.129(0.112)

0.133(0.111)

Nonwhite or Hispanic

-0.017(0.160)

0.037(0.159)

Married

-0.161(0.182)

-0.122(0.180)

Separated or divorced

-0.077(0.185)

0.184(0.265)

Widowed

0.175(0.270)

0.265(0.274)

Dummy if there are children younger than 18

-0.022(0.113)

-0.010(0.112)

Dummy if there are children between age 18-24

-0.002(0.024)

-0.000(0.024)

Dummy if there are children age 25 or older

-0.060(0.040)*

-0.046(0.040)

Household size

0.001(0.042)

0.004(0.041)

Excellent health

0.087(0.066)**

0.074(0.066)

Fair or poor health

0.034(0.107)

0.028(0.110)

Constant

1.238(0.807)*

2.359(0.817)***

Risk preferences

Other preferences and attitudes toward savings

Demographics

Other controls

Wealth dummies
Controls for business size and type

no

yes

yes

yes

Note: This table reports estimates of the regressions of the log of desired precautionary saving on the variables listed in
the first column for the business sample. The number of observations is 2,236. “*”, “**, “***” indicate significance at
the 10% , 5% and 1% level, respectively.

Figure 1: Density estimate of desired precautionary savings; 1995 SCF; 1995 dollars.

Figure 2: Density estimates of desired precautionary savings; 1995 and 1998 SCF; 1995 dollars.

Figure 3a: Conditional distribution of desired precautionary savings, by age of the head of the household; 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the distribution; sample with household heads having less than 12 years of
formal education; 1995 and 1998 SCF; 1995 dollars.

Figure 3b: Conditional distribution of desired precautionary savings, by age of the head of the household; 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the distribution; sample with household heads having 12 to 15 years of
formal education; 1995 and 1998 SCF; 1995 dollars.

Figure 3c: Conditional distribution of desired precautionary savings, by age of the head of the household; 10th,
25th, 50th, 75th, and 90th percentiles of the distribution; sample with household heads having 16 or more years of
formal education; 1995 and 1998 SCF; 1995 dollars.

Figure 4: Density estimate of desired precautionary savings; full sample, main sample, older sample, and
business sample; 1995 and 1998 SCF; 1995 dollars.

Desired Precautionary Savings

Figure 5: Density of the ratio of desired precautionary savings to normal income; full sample, main sample, older
sample, and business sample; 1995 and 1998 SCF.

