                      NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  TAX ANALYSIS IN AN OLIGOPOLY MODEL




                          Michael L. Katz

                          Harvey S. Rosen




                       Working Paper No. 1088




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138


                            March 1983




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program
in Taxation. Any Opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1088
                                                     March 1983




                   Tax Analysis in an Oligopoly Model



                                  ABSTRACT



     In this paper we analyze
                                taxation using the conjectural variations
model of oligopoly. We demonstrate the way in which the incidence
                                                                  of a
tax depends upon the pattern of firm interaction. The results
                                                              obtained
have important implications for
                                  the controversy surrounding the question
of whether a tax on
                      corporate income can be over—shifted. We also
                                                                      study
normative aspects of taxation. The focus here is on the errors that
                                                                     can
arise in excess burden calculations
                                    when incorrect assumptions on market
structure are made.




                                    Michael L. Katz
                                    Harvey S. Rosen
                                    Department of Economics
                                    Princeton University
                                    Princeton, New Jersey 08544
                                                                                1.




   1. Introduction

          Taxation usually is studied in models that postulate a
                                                                 perfectly
  competitive market structure.'
                                  Analyses that deviate from this rule tend to
  focus on the Opposite polar
                              case of monopoly. Given that the "in—between"

  situation__o1igopoly__j of major importance in western industrial
                                                                      countries,
 it might appear surprising that oligopoly has
                                                received such scant attention.
 Of course, at least as far back as Musgrave
                                              [1959], it has been recognized that
 the impact of a tax
                     may depend upon market structure.   There is no definitive
 model of oligopo1isj
                        behavior, however, and different stories can have quite
  different implications for tax
                                 shifting. The tendency has been to
 ignore oligopoly on the grounds
                                    that "anything can happen."
            Several models of oligopolistjc
                                              behavior recently have received
 considerable attention in the
                                  industrial organization literature.       In this
 paper we analyze taxation within the
                                         framework provided by one of the best-known
 of these, the conjectural
                             variations model.2 Although this
                                                                  approach certainly
 is not the unique solution
                              to "the" oligopoly problem, it is simple and
 encompasses a wide range of models,
                                       including monopolistic and competitive
behavior as special cases. In the framework of the conjectural
                                                                     variations model,
    are able tb demonstrate rigorously
                                         how tax incidence depends upon market
 structure. The results obtained have
                                      important implications for the controversy
surrounding the question of whether a tax
                                          on corporate income can be over—
shifted.

           In Section 2, we review the essential aspects of the conjectural

variations model. Section 3 shows
                                     how an industry's output, price and profits
are affected by the presence of a factor or output tax. It is demonstrated
                                                                             2.




that,under quite reasonable conditions, the imposition of a tax can lead

to an increase in industry profits. The normative analysis of taxation

in a conjectural variations model is discussed in Section LI. Our focus

is on the errors that can arise in excess burden calculations when incorrect

assumptions on market structure are made. In Section 5, we summarize our

results and discuss some implications for future research.



2. A Conjectural Variations Model of Oligopoly

         Consider an industry comprising n firms producing a homogeneous

product with a market inverse demand function PC']. Firm i produces x

units of output and incurs costs C[x.,t], where t is a tax parameter. The

firm's profits are

         a.

(2.1)   11 Cx.] =
              3.     PCx +      E x.]x. —   C[x.,t]
                                              1



         A given firm's output decision will depend upon its expectations

concerning the response of its rivals to any change in the firm's level of

production. We assume that all firms have identical "conjectural variations"

equal to cS .       That is, each firm believes that when it raises its output by

dx , the other firms will raise their output by a total of tSdx1

                          con
                   E .
(2.2)



where the superscript "con" denotes that it is the conjectured rather than

actual response.
                                                                                            3.



           Suppose that firm i's current level of output is ?
                                                                                      , and the rest
  of the industry produces           Z x .         Firm i's conjectured inverse demand

  function,     con[.] gives the price that the firm perceives will be associated

 with each level of its output, conditional on the current
                                                                                       levels of its
 output and the total output of the other firms:


           P
               con
                  [x.;
                         1.. .jo
                         o
                       x., E xli =
                                   -
                                       Fix.1   +       E
                                                                o
                                                               x. + cS(x. -    0
                                                                              x.)J.
                    1                              .       .3           1      1

 Each firm sets its level of output to maximize
                                                                      its profits, taking con[.]
 as the inverse demand function. In equilibrium, for each firm the conjectured

 change in profits due to a change in its output is equal to zero:

                         con
 (2.3) 0
                     1
                               Fix. ÷ x.J ÷ (1+)P'[x. +                         x.Jx. - C[x.,t].

        Because all firms have identical cost functions, we will restrict our

attention to symmetric equilibria (i.e., those equilibria in which
                                                                                           x =x
for all firms).3 The equilibrium
                                          condItion, eq. (2.3), may be written as


(2.L) P[nx] ÷ (l+S)P'[]x —           C[x,t]                0



The second order necessary condition for a firm's optimization problem is


                2(l+cS)P'[nx] +   (l+cS)2p"[nx]x            -
                                                                C[x,t]    < 0

The equilibrium level of output depends on the number of firms, the àonjectured

variation, and the level of taxes.
        This framework affords great flexibility in modelling firm behavior and

the degree of competition                within the industry. If S         —1, for example,,

each firm will perceive its demand curve to be flat. Eq. (2.'+) becomes

        PCnx] -   C[x,t]            0

and each firm will behave competitively, setting its output at a level where

price is equal to marginal cost. At the other extreme, if ô =                  n-i,   then

each firm has a conjectured inverse demand curve that is 1/n of the industry

curve. The equilibrium is characterized by

                  nxP'[nx]     -
        P[nx] +                        C[x,t]         0


the monopoly condition that market marginal revenue equal marginal cost.

The firirwi1l behave like a monopolist or joint profit maximizing cartel.4



3. The Output and Profit Effects of Thx Changes

        A shift in the tax parameter that affects marginal costs will in

general induce changes in the equilibrium levels of price, output, and profits.

In this section, we derive comparative statics results for these changes.

        Consider an infinitesimal change in the tax parameter. Totally

differentiating the equilibrium condition, eq. (2.1-i), we obtain

         {(n+1-i-S)P' +   (1+5)P"- Cxx} dx                - C
                                                                xt
                                                                  dt = 0

or

                               C
        dx                      xt
(3.1)
        d                                       - C
               (n+l-i-S)P' +       (l-i-cS)P"


         Marginal costs are assumed to be a nondecreasing function of the

level of taxes; C >        0       .    The uniqueness of the equilibrium implies that
                                                                                                5.




 the denominator of eq. (3.1) is negative. Thus,
                                                                              is negative. An
 increase in t leads to a fall in output and an increase in the market price.

            The tax change will alter profits through two effects: (1) the

 level of per-firm tax payments will change by                          and (2) the tax-induced

 shifts in price and output will change before-tax profits by

                            dx.
 (3.2) (P -        C)             +   x.


 Recalling that the equilibrium is symmetric, eq. (3.2) may be rewritten as


 (3.3) {P -        C    +   xnP'}

            From the first order condition for profit maximization, eq. (2.L1.),

we see that the change in before-tax profits, eq. (3.3), is zero for

6 =   n-i    and positive for all                6 <   n-i.   Intuitively, this result is clear.

When 6 =     n-i,      the oligopolists behave like a monopolist and x is set at

the joint profit maximizing level. Hence, the tax-induced change in output

has no first-order effect on profits. When                       6 <   n-i,   the firms' output

level is greater than the one at which joint profits are maximized. A tax

increase raisesmarginal costs and induces a reduction in the level of

output towards the joint profit maximizing level. The tax has the effect

of enforcing a collusive output restriction, and the tax increase leads to

higher before-tax profits.

            The net effect of a tax change on profits is determined by comparing

the increase in before-tax profits with the increase in tax payments:


        dTT'                                  dx -
(3.4)          z   {p   - C       +   xnP'}          Ct
                                                                                6.




Depending on the patterns of taxes, tastes, and technology, a tax increase may

lead to either a fall or rise in after-tax profits. The net effect cannot

be known a priori.

      To illustrate this point, consider Figure 1. Initially, the tax is set

at t0 and firm output is x0       .    The tax is raised to t 1   .   As a result, the

marginal cost curve shifts upward, and the equilibrium level of output declines

by (x0-x1), the amount given by eq. (3.1). Area tuwy represents the decline

in profits due to the reduction of profitable sales, x(P_C). Area qrts

represents the increase in profits due to the higher price charged for the

units sold after the tax is imposed, x1P. Note that ceteris paribus,

area qrts increases with C .           By eq. (3.1), higher values of ext imply

greater output contractions           and therefore greater values of



      Area xyvz represents the loss in profits due to the increase in tax payments,

C, which is equal to x1 multiplied by the change in average tax per unit of output.

Given that area tuwy is positive, we see that             > 0 only if the tax-induced

increase in price, LP ,   is   greater than the increase in the average per-unit

tax, C./x1 (i.e., area qrts must be greater than area xyvz). Because qrts moves

with ext , we can conclude that the greater the extent to which ext exceeds

C/x1, the more likely is              > 0


           While it is possible             that a tax increase will lead to an

   increase in after-tax profits, a natural question is whether such an outcome is

   plausible or is merely a theoretical curiosity. Economists often take

  linear demand curvand quadratic cost functions as approximations of actual

  demands and costs. When demands and costs have these forms,                may be

  positive for reasonable values of the parameters.
                                    7.




               FIGURE 1




Dollars




P[nx1]

                   U
P[nx ]
    0
                                  C[x,t1]


                                   C[x ,t]



                          P[nx]




          x
           1
                 xa           x
                                                                                   8.




            Suppose, for example, that the market inverse demand function is

                P[nx]       200 —   8(nx),
and each firm has a cost function

           C[x,t]    w(l+t)x2

where w is an index of factor prices. Such a cost function arises when

the tax is levied proportionately on all factor prices and production is

homothetic and homogeneous of degree 1/2.6             For the calculations, w was taken

to be equal to 1 and t equal to zero.

           Using eqs. (2.L), (3.1), and (3.4),the tax-induced changes in per—

firm output and after-tax profits were calculated for a duopoly under

several different conjectural variations. The results are presented in

Figure 2. When 6 =           -1,   each firm sets its price equal to marginal cost;

output is pushed beyond the joint profit maximizing level. Here, the increase

in before-tax profits due to the output restriction dominates the increase
              dfl1
in taxes; —-- > 0       .    In    this example, when firms have Cournot conjectures (6 =   0),
the direct effect of increased tax payments dominates;                 <   0   .   At

6 =   1,   the duopollsts act to maximize joint profits, and the oniy effect of

a tax rise on profits is the decrease due to the increase in tax payments.

           Recently, several authors have analyzed the notion of "consistenttt

or "rational" conjectures. Firms are said to have consistent conjectures

when, in equilibrium, the conjectured local responses are equal to the

true responses. For the case of duopolists with quadratic costs and a linear

demand curve, Bresnahan [1981] has developed a closed-form expression for

the consistent value of 6 .             Applying   his formula to our example the

consistent conjecture is approximately —0.61. For this conjecture
                                                     9.




                   FIGURE 2




              -1              -.61      0       1

 X2x        22.2              18.9    14.4    11.8
 P[2x]      22.2              48.5    76.9   105.9
 C[x,t]    123.5           89.6       59.2    34.6
U'         123.5          369.7      532.6   588.2

       2    —2.5          —1.8        —1.2    —0.7

            19.7          14.3         9.5     5.5

           123.5          89.6        59.2    34.6

d]11
           96.0           19.7       —22.8   —34.6
                                                                            10.




      19.7 > 0   .   Thus, the result that a tax increase can increase profits
does not rely on irrationality on the part of firms, at least in this narrowly

defined sense.

        Our example illustratthe shortcomings of attempting to analyze

oligopoly by looking at the polar cases of monopoly and competition. As

noted above, for monopoly, before-tax profits are not increased by the tax—

                                           =
induced reduction in output, and               -Ct <0. At the other pole, under
perfect competition free entry leads to                = 0.  In some oligopolistic
markets the change in profits due to a hange in taxes is positive and does

not fall between the values of           for the cases of monopoly and perfect

competition. Thus, it may be misleading to analyze taxation in an oligopolistic

market by interpolating the results for the two polar cases.

        This discussion of competition raises the question of entry in the

present model. In our analysis, we have taken the number of firms to be

fixed exogenously. One may think of the model in two ways. First, it can

be viewed as a short run analysis of a market in which capital stocks are

fixed. Second, it can be viewed as a long run analysis of a market in which

existing firms can adjust the levels of all productive inputs but sufficiently

high barriers exist to preclude the entry of new firms. Krzyzaniak and

                          2] suggested that a positive value of       was
Musgrave [1963 ,     p.
likely to be a short run phenomenon, in the sense that it depended on the

inability of firms to adjust their capital stocks. Our analysis indicates

that "over-shifting" can occur in the long run as well.
                                                                                       11.


   4.   Welfare Analysis

             It is well-kno that the presence of a pre-existing distortion

  complicates the welfare analysis of a tax.                Typically, monopoly is the
  only distortion induced by market structure that public finance economists

  study.7 In this section we discuss the errors that might be made in
                                                                                       estimating
  the excess burden of a tax if one
                                                  erroneously assumes that the firms behave
  as a monopolist (rS           n-i) when in fact the oligopolis-ts do not maximize

  joint profits (5 <           n-i).
           Consider an investigator who has the following information about an

  industry: it has constant marginal costs C
                                                               M , price P0, and
 market output            .     The investigator notes that the industry is composed

 of several large firms, so that the competitive assumption is untenable.
                                                                                             Instead,
 he assumes that the firms behave like a monopolist. A
                                                       unit tax of t is
 imposed on the output of the
                                             industry. What is the excess burden of the tax?

          There are a number of ways to proceed. Our
                                                                   investigator might begin
 by using a diagram like Figure 3. The market demand and
                                                                       market marginal revenue
 curves are denoted by P[X] and MR[X], respectively, where X
                                                                            nx is industry output.
The curves are sketched so that the marginal revenue curve

intersects the marginal cost curve at
                                                         and the associated price is
                                                                        P0
Prior to imposition of the tax, there is a monopoly excess burden
                                                                  of cbd
which is a consequence of the fact that price exceeds marginal cost.8
                                                                                       After
the tax is imposed, price and output are
                                                          and X , respectively, and
the incremental excess burden is abde.

        Algebraically, the area abde can be approximated by


(4.1) abde
             -.
                                    dX       1 dX dP          dX dP
                  (P0 -                  ÷                            1 dX dP 2
                              M0)                      (P0 —M0)-- - +
                                         12.




                     FIGURE 3




Dollars


          Pt




          P0




                                M0-J-t




               at
                I

                I


                                x
                xt       xo
                                                                                13.


  Computation of the differentials      dX          dP
                                              and
                                                    --   clearly    requires some
  knowledge of the demand curve's shape. A typical approach is to

  take advantage of the identity that characterizes
                                                           monopoly equilibrjum




  (L.2) P(l +   I) = M

 where P is price, M is marginal cost, and rj
                                                     is the price elasticity of
 market demand. Substituting
                                  P0 and N0 into eq. (4.2) gives r =                          -
                                                                                P0/(M0            P0).
 Assuming that n   is    locally constant, eq. (4.2) implies that dP(l +                dM.
 However, when a unit tax is imposed, dM is just dt, so


        =     (1


         The only additional information required now is an estimate of

Given the assumption of a locally constant elasticity of demand, X =           P    ,

and


          =   P

        Substituting eqs. (4.3) and (4.4) along with values for
                                                                          P and M0
into eq. (4.1) yields an estimate of the excess burden of the tax.

        The investigator's belief that the industry behaves as a monopoly

when actually it is a conjectural variations oligopoly leads to two errors:

(i) an "econometric" error which arises by estimating          Ti    from eq. (4.2),
and (ii) a "behavioral" error which is
                                             a consequence of using eq. (4.3)
to estimate how the price will respond to the tax.        Note that even if
error (1) were eliminated, problems would still arise due to the use of

eq. ('4.3).

            To illustrate these points, consider the following example: an

industry consists of four identical firms which have constant marginal costs

of $2. Each firm has a conjectural variation of 6 =                            2.    The market demand

curve is X =        P2.      Using the first order condition, eq. (2.4), the

equilibrium price is $3.22, and each firm's output is 0.024, so that market

output is 0.096.

            As before, the problem is to estimate the excess burden of a "small"

per unit tax on industry output. The only data available to the investigator

are price, market output, and marginal costs. On the assumption that the

four firms can be modelled as a monopoly, our investigator computes the price

elasticity of demand by substituting P = $3.22 and N                               $2.00 into eq. (4.2),

and finds         rì =   -2.639.    Assuming an isoelastic demand curve, at least

locally, this value of n                     can be substituted into eq. ('4.3) to find

     =   1.610.     Similarly, by substituting into eq. (4.4),                          is —0.0374.

There is now enough information to evaluate the excess burden formula,

eq. ('4.1). Specifically, the welfare loss generated by the tax is $0.12l9

=   (3.22-2)(.0374)(l.6lO)              + 4 (.0374)(l.6l0)2

            Contrast this with a calculation made on the basis of the true model.

Because the welfare loss depends upon areas under the market demand curve,

Figure 3            still provides the appropriate framework. Using a value of

    =    -2.0   in eq. (4.4) yields dXIdP =               -0.0599.            is found by the chain

                    dP dX          dP                 .              dX                        dX
rule: dP
       —        =            .           is
                                         .
                                               the reciprocal of          ,   or   1/—.0599.        is

found by first finding                        from eq. (3.1), and then multiplying by the number of

firms the market (four), giving                              =   -0.196.       Substituting these
                                                                                       15.



   values in the excess burden formula,
                                               eq. (4.1), yields a value of $0.5598
   =   (3.22-2)   (.196) +   (.o599)(3.272)2    .   The true value is about five times

  the value estimated on the basis of the
                                                    incorrect assumption of
  monopolistic behavior ($O.1219).

             It might be argued that the comparison is unfair because the

  investigator who assumes monopoly should also be allowed to start with the

  correct value of the price elasticity of demand.
                                                             Assume, then, that the
  investigator obtaiiis independently the true value of       Setting ri = —2.0
  in eq. (4.3) gives -- = 2.0.
  •              •   dP         dX
                                     found by substituting
                                                   .
                                                           into eq. (4.4), is
  —0.0599.    Substituting these values into eq. (4.1) yields an excess burden
  of $o.2659 = (3.22—2) (.0599) (2.0) +
                                           .- (0.0599)22.       Although larger than
 the earlier calculation of $0.1219, it is still less than half the true

 value of 0.5598.

           As we emphasized at the outset, these calculations are intended

 merely to illustrate the formulas presented earlier in this
                                                                      section, and
 there is no reason to take the specific quantitative results seriously.

 They do show, however, that making incorrect assumptions on market structure

 potentially can lead tomalor errors in welfare cost estimates.



 V. Conclusion

          We have discussed some positive and normative aspects of taxation

using a conjectural variations model of oligopoly. The assumption that an

oligopolis-tic industry acts as if it is competitive or monopo1is-tic can

produce misleading results. For example, it is quite possible that a tax

on a factor used by oligopolists will raise their economicprofits
                                                                              ,   although
this result never could arise in the polar cases. More generally,. we have

shown that impacts of a tax upon an oligopolistic industry need not lie

between those of monopoly and competition.
                                                                      16.




       In their famous econometric study published almostenty years ago,

Krzyzaniak and Musgrave [1963] asserted that there was a positive relationship

between the corporate income tax rate and corporate profits. The finding

was roundly attacked. While our concern here is not the merits of their

particular statistical procedure, other economists1 comments on the theoretical

plausibility of the result are of some interest. The critics

Cragg, Harberger and Mieszkowski [1967] observed:

        Not only does this result run counter to most economists'
        judgments of plausibility, it also opens questions concerning
        the pricing behavior of corporations which have wide
        ramifications beyond the specific issue of corporation tax
        incidence. Indeed, it is certainly not far from the truth
        to say that if we accept the Krzyzaniak-Musgrave results at
        face value, we must also accept the task of rebuilding the
        foundations of the theory of the behavior of the firm.
        (pp. 811—812)

We have shown that far from being outside the pale of economic theory, the

Krzyzaniak—MurVe result can be rationalized using fairly conventional

neoclassical tools.

        Since the time of the debate over the Krzyzaniak-Musgrave study,

virtually all the work on taxation has assumed perfect competition.   Within

this framework, authors have studied the effects of alternative assumptions

concerning production technologies and demand structures. General equilibrium

responses have been carefully taken into account,   as have been dynamic

considerations Our results suggest that there might be a high payoff to

analyzing models that are perhaps simpler along these dimensions, but include

a more realistic description of market behavior. For example, it could be

instructive to fit a basic conjectural variations model to industry data.12

The estimated coefficients then could be used to conduct positive and
                                                                       17.



normative analyses of taxation along the lines suggested here.
                                                                  "Anything
can happen" is not an excuse for
                                   ignoring the empirically important case
of oligopoly in the study of tax policy.
                                                                      18.




                                   Footnotes




        1See, for example, the discussion of tax theory in Tresch [1981].

        2The conjectural variations model is discussed by Bresnahan [1981]

and Seade [1980].

        3Asymmetxic equilibria may arise in cases where a firm's profit

function achieves its maximum at two distinct output levels. Hence,

under the conventional assumption that each firm's profit function is

strictly concave, only symmetric equilibria will exist.

        1Assuming that costs are convex.

       5Hereafter for the sake of clarity, we will suppress the arguments

of the inverse demand and cost functions where there is no ambiguity.



        6A similar cost function can arise when only a subset of factors

is taxed.

        7See, e.g., Harberger [i97Z., pp. 160—162].

        8 It is assumed throughout that the structure of demand is such that

consumer surplus measures provide good approximations to welfare changes.

        9Even more sophisticated methods for estimating the elasticity of

the market demand curve can be expected to lead to incorrect estimates if

the underlying theoretical model is misspecified.

       10of   course,   this means that he must ignore the fact that eq. (4.2)

is no longer satisfied.
                                                                  Lg.




      11For some examples of the former, see
                                               Fullerton, Shoven, and alley
[1978]. For the latter, see Feldstejn [1974].

     12See, for example, Gollop and Roberts [1979].
                                                                    20.




                                 References



Bresnahan, Timothy F., "Duopoly Models with Consistent Conlectures,"

        American Economic Review 71, no. 5, December, 1981, pp. 93'l'945.

Cragg, John G., Arnold C. Harberger and Peter Mieszkowski, "Empirical

        Evidence on the Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax,"

        Journal of Political Economy 75, no. 6, December, 1967, pp. 811-821.

Feldstein, Martin S., "Tax Incidence in a Growing Economy with Variable

        Factor Supply," Quarterly Journal of Economics 88,

        1974, pp. 551—573.

Fullerton, Don, John B. Shoven and John WFlley, "General Equilibrium

        Analysis of U.S. Taxation Policy," 1978 Compendium of Tax Research,

        Office of Tax Analysis, Department of the Treasury, Washington,

        D.C., 1978, pp. 23—58.


 Gollop, Frank M. and Mark J. Roberts, "Firm Interdependence in

        Oligopolistic Models," Journal of Econometrics 10, 1979,

        pp. 313—331.

Harberger, Arnold C., "The Incidence of the Corporation Income Tax," in

        Arnold C. Harberger (ed.), Taxation arid Welfare, Boston: Little,

        Brown   and Company, 1974, pp. 135-162.
Krzyzaniak,Marian and Richard A. Musgrave, The Shifting of The Corporation

        Income Tax, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1963.

Musgrave, Richard A., TheTheory of Public Finance, New York: McGrawHill, 1959.

Seade, Jesus, "On the Effects of Entry," Econonietrica, March 1980, pp. 479-489.

Tresch, Richard W., Public Finance: A Normative Theory, Plano, Texas:

        Business Publications, Inc., 1981.
