NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ONE-HIT WONDERS:
WHY SOME OF THE MOST IMPORTANT WORKS
OF MODERN ART ARE NOT BY IMPORTANT ARTISTS
David W. Galenson
Working Paper 10885
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10885
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2004 by David W. Galenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

One Hit Wonders: Why Some of the Most Important Works of Art are Not by Important Artists
David W. Galenson
NBER Working Paper No. 10885
November 2004
JEL No. J0, J4
ABSTRACT
How can minor artists produce major works of art? This paper considers 13 modern visual artists,
each of whom produced a single masterpiece that dominates the artist’s career. The artists include
painters, sculptors, and architects, and their masterpieces include works as prominent as the painting
American Gothic, the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris, and the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington, D. C. In each case, these isolated achievements were the products of innovative ideas
that the artists formulated early in their careers, and fully embodied in individual works. The
phenomenon of the artistic one-hit wonder highlights the nature of conceptual innovation, in which
radical new approaches based on new ideas are introduced suddenly by young practitioners.
David W. Galenson
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
sgrodow@midway.uchicago.edu

3
The history of popular music is haunted by the ghosts of scores of singers and groups who
made a single hit song and were never heard from again. Periodically radio stations that
specialize in classic rock will devote a weekend to these one-hit wonders, and once again we hear
the Penguins singing “Earth Angel,” the Teddy Bears singing “To Know Him is to Love Him,”
Doris Troy singing “Just One Look,” and a host of other nostalgic selections from this curious set
of isolated achievements.
Yet well over a century before the Murmaids recorded “Popsicles, Icicles,” the
phenomenon of the one-hit wonder had appeared in dramatic form in the visual arts. Looking
back over the modern era, we can in fact see a series of artists, each of whom produced a single
landmark work that dominated his or her career. Although each case is eminently familiar to art
historians, humanists are loath to undertake studies that involve systematic generalization, and
consequently the one-hit wonders of modern art have never been analyzed as a class. This paper
will examine thirteen instances in which a single major work was produced by an otherwise
minor artist. Even a brief survey of the characteristics of these works and their makers is
sufficient to establish that they share a strong common basis. Understanding this common basis
furthermore produces a general conclusion about the causes of one-hit wonders that appears to
have implications for a range of intellectual activities that extends far beyond modern art.
Measurement
A one-hit wonder occurs when an important work of art is created by an otherwise
unimportant artist. It will be valuable to study this phenomenon only if it can be identified with
confidence, and to do this it is necessary to be able to measure importance in art in a reasonable
and objective way. Most art historians would deny that this is possible, but they are mistaken in

4
this belief. As the critic Clement Greenberg observed years ago, quality in art is not simply a
matter of individual taste, but rather “There is a consensus of taste. The best taste is that of the
people who, in each generation, spend the most time and trouble on art, and this best taste has
always turned out to be unanimous, within certain limits.”1 This study will base its measurements
of importance on a systematic survey of the judgements of a group of the experts Greenberg had
in mind. Throughout the study, importance both of artists and of individual works of art will be
determined by the amount of attention they receive in art historians’ narratives of the history of
the modern era. In practice, this will be measured by the frequency with which reproductions of
particular works of art appear as illustrations in published surveys of the history of modern art.
Three quantitative criteria will be used to identify one-hit wonders. First, to be of interest
the hit in question must be a big one. In practice, the requirement will be that the hit must be
illustrated more often than any single work by much more important artists of the same period
(with the importance of the artists measured by the total illustrations of all the works of each).
Second, the artist who made the single great hit obviously must have had no other hits. In
quantitative terms, the hit must have many more illustrations than any other work by the artist.
And although less central to the definition of the phenomenon, a third criterion will involve the
drama of the single hit. The most startling one-hit wonders will be those artists who did not
produce a large body of works judged worthy of notice by scholars, even if no other one clearly
stood out: the most striking one-hit wonders will be those whose careers are dominated by the
single hit. In practice, the hit will be required to account for at least half of the artist’s total
illustrations.
Masters and Masterpieces

5
Earlier research has shown that the greatest individual works of art, as defined here by the
probability of appearance in surveys of art history, are typically made by conceptual artists. The
innovations of conceptual artists are the product of new ideas, and because these can arrive
suddenly and completely, they are often be discretely embodied in individual works that stand
thereafter as the first and consequently most important expression of the particular new idea. In
contrast, the innovations of experimental artists involve new ways of representing perceptions,
and are arrived at only gradually and slowly. They are typically embodied piecemeal in larger
bodies of work, and consequently no single work is the obvious and complete demonstration of
the innovation. This analysis has explained why great experimental artists - Cézanne, Degas,
Monet, Renoir - failed to produce individual paintings that art historians’ textbooks reveal to be
as important as specific paintings by great conceptual artists - Picasso, Manet, Seurat, Duchamp.2
The same research may explain the phenomenon of the one-hit wonder. Specifically a
conceptual artist may produce one new idea, and never again make a significant innovation. That
single new idea may be completely embodied in a specific work of art. If the idea is an important
one, the work that announces it may become an important part of the narrative of art history, and
that single work will dominate the artist’s career from the vantage point of the textbooks.

6
If this analysis is correct, and one-hit wonders are typically conceptual artists, earlier
research on artists’ life cycles suggests another prediction concerning the timing of the single hits
within the careers of their makers. Specifically, the hits should occur early in those careers.
Because important conceptual innovations depend on radical new approaches , and typically on
extreme simplifications, they tend to occur before an artist has become accustomed to using the
established rules of his discipline, and before he has become immersed in the details and
complexity of the discipline.3 If one-hit wonders are in fact conceptual artists, their single great
innovations should therefore tend to occur early in their careers.
Théodore Géricault
Tables 1 and 2 were produced by searching 27 textbooks published in English since 1970
for all the illustrations of the work of five Romantic painters of the early 19th century. An
obvious puzzle is posed by Théodore Géricault’s place in the two tables. Although he ranks only
fourth among the artists in Table 1 in overall importance, with fewer total illustrations of his
work than J .A. D. Ingres, Eug ne Delacroix, or J. M. W.Turner, Géricault’s painting of The Raft
of the Medusa dominates Table 2, with twice as many illustrations as any single painting by
Ingres or Turner, and more than 50% more than any painting by Delacroix. Comparing Tables 1
and 2 shows that the Medusa accounts for half of Géricault’s total illustrations. Medusa appears
in 22 texts while no other painting by Géricault appears in more than four.
Géricault’s masterpiece was occasioned by a tragedy that had become a political scandal.
The frigate Medusa had run aground in 1816 off the West African coast, due to the incompetence
of the royalist aristocrat who commanded the ship. The ship’s lifeboats were inadequate for all
the passengers, and the captain chose to use the boats to save himself and the ship’s senior

7
officers, leaving 149 people adrift on an improvised raft. After an ordeal of 13 days, 15 survivors
were rescued by a search vessel. Two of the survivors published an account of the horrors of the
voyage, that included famine, thirst, insanity, mutiny, and cannibalism. The ensuing public
outrage prompted a number of changes in government policies, including the removal of the
minister of the marine. 4
Géricault seized on this event as the basis for a major work. He immersed himself in the
details of the voyage, befriending a number of the survivors, and interviewing and drawing them.
He had a model of the raft built in his studio in Paris, and travelled to Le Havre to study the
action of ocean waves. He visited hospitals and morgues to study the expressions of the dying
and the dead.5 From first sketch to completion of the final work, Géricault devoted 16 months to
his masterpiece. He made hundreds of sketches and drawings of a number of different episodes
in the narrative before settling on the moment when the survivors first sighted the rescue ship. At
least 49 drawings and paintings directly connected with The Raft of the Medusa survive,
including a series of studies of individual figures, several oil sketches of the full composition,
and the enormous final painting, which measures more than 375 square feet in size.6
Kenneth Clark observed that the nature of the painting evolved as Géricault planned it:
“The composition grew more academic as it went on.” The image of the painting ultimately owed
more to the study of earlier art than to direct visual observation:
In the end it is this studio work, rather than the studies of corpses
and hospitals inmates, which is evident in the picture. To our eyes
The Raft of the Medusa is a highly artificial performance made up
of elements from Michelangelo, Caravaggio and Pierre Guérin,
who had been Géricault’s master; the pointing figures even remind
one of Raphael’s Transfiguration.7
The innovation of the Medusa lay in Géricault’s novel use of these traditional means. In the

8
earlier practice of French history painting, ideal forms and compositions were used to celebrate
the actions of classical military heroes. Géricault subverted this tradition, by using these
academic forms instead to give tragic status to helpless and unknown victims. In Walter
Friedlaender’s conclusion, “Géricault does not represent heroes, but heroism, the heroic
endurance of the anonymous, suffering at the hands of fate and their fellow men; he lends them a
pathos and passion attained neither by his predecessors nor by his contemporaries... Géricault’s
Medusa splits wide open not merely the form of classicism, but its content and its feeling.”8
Géricault exhibited the Medusa at the Salon of 1819. He had hoped that the enormous
effort he had devoted to celebrating this event as a catalyst for political reform would be
rewarded by an enthusiastic public reception and the purchase of the painting by the government,
and when neither of these occurred he became deeply depressed. In the next few years his style
and subject matter changed sharply, as he abandoned tragic motifs and grandiose treatments in
favor of detailed observation of everyday reality. He never again carried out a project on a scale
approaching that of the Medusa.9
Géricault died prematurely, just five years after completing the Medusa. Kenneth Clark
concluded that “he carried through one major work into which he put the whole of himself.”10
Commenting on that one work, Thomas Crow stressed that “It is crucial to recognize that the
painting communicates its subject matter as an idea rather than anything resembling reportage.”11
Géricault’s exhaustive preparations for an innovative master work that used images and forms
taken from art history to make an ideological statement clearly identify him as a conceptual artist.
That he executed his greatest work at the age of 28 is also consistent with the pattern that
conceptual innovators typically produce their major work early in their careers.

Antoine-Jean Gros

9

Tables 1 and 2 also identify a second one-hit wonder. Antoine-Jean Gros was an older
artist whose work was a major influence on Géricault. Although in total Gros’ work received
barely more than a third as many illustrations as that of Turner, and just over a quarter as many as
that of Ingres, his portrayal of Napoleon’s visit to the plague house in Jaffa was illustrated as
many times in the books surveyed for this study as any single painting by either of those much
greater artists. That painting clearly dominates Gros’ career from the vantage point of the texts,
for it accounts for nearly two-thirds of the total illustrations of his work, and is reproduced more
than five times as frequently as any other painting he made.
Gros idolized Napoleon. The consul had befriended the painter as early as 1796, and Gros
painted several large works that celebrated Napoleon’s heroism in battle. In 1804, Napoleon
commissioned Gros to make an important painting for purposes of public relations. In 1799, the
French army had occupied the Palestinian city of Jaffa under a negotiated surrender in which they
agreed to spare the lives of the Turkish soldiers stationed there. Napoleon had promptly reneged
on the agreement, and executed more than 2,500 Turkish soldiers. When the French army in Jaffa
was then struck by the bubonic plague, Napoleon ordered his surgeon to poison the ailing French
soldiers instead of taking them along on the army’s retreat to Cairo. The surgeon refused, and a
few soldiers who survived the plague were captured by the English troops who arrived in Jaffa.
Their accounts of the French atrocities in the city were widely publicized by the English press.12
Napoleon in the Plague House at Jaffa was commissioned in response to this damaging
publicity. The painting commemorated a visit the general had made to the plague hospital on
March 11, 1799. Gros systematically deviated from eyewitness accounts of the episode in an

10
obvious mythmaking effort. He portrayed Napoleon fearlessly touching the sore of a plague
victim, implying not only that the general was immune to disease but also that he had miraculous
powers of healing, suggesting parallels with Christ as well as associating Napoleon with the
traditional divine touch of the kings. In 1804, these remarkable additions to Napoleon’s pedigree
served to strengthen his qualifications for the imperial throne he would soon claim. Gros
heightened the visual drama of the scene by taking it out of the small hospital room where it had
actually occurred and placing it instead in an exotic Near Eastern setting, in the courtyard of a
mosque overlooked by a walled city. A French flag flying triumphantly over the city reinforces
the suggestion that the French had come to bring civilization to the Holy Land.13
Gros’ painting of the plague house drew on the traditions of French history painting to
emphasize the importance of the event in several ways. One was its great size, of more than 390
square feet. Another was its composition. Thomas Crow has pointed out that in arranging the
figures in the Plague House Gros directly appropriated the composition of Lictors Returning to
Brutus the Bodies of his Sons (1789) by Jacques-Louis David, thus associating his painting with a
famous work by the greatest painter of the previous generation, who had also been Gros’ teacher.
But Gros also innovated in departing from these traditions, by using conventional forms and
compositions to celebrate a modern hero rather than one from classical times. History painting
was thus now used not to celebrate past heroes, but to glorify a present one.14
Gros later painted other tributes to Napoleon, and after Napoleon’s fall he attached
himself to the Bourbons. But his work is generally considered to have deteriorated badly after he
executed the Plague House. Although he was made a Baron and became president of the
government’s Academy of Fine Arts, Gros became dissatisfied with both his own work and that

11
of the next generation of French artists. Overshadowed first by Géricault and later by Delacroix,
he ultimately committed suicide. Kenneth Clark attributed Gros’ decline to the fall of Napoleon:
“Without a hero he was lost, and he never again painted a picture that moves us.”15 Yet the loss
of his hero may not have been the sole cause of Gros’ inability to match or surpass the success of
Napoleon in the Plague House, whether during the decade of Napoleon’s life that remained after
1804 or the two decades that remained to Gros after Napoleon’s fall. Gros’ skillful use of art
history in producing his great symbolic work, including the direct use of a composition by David,
identifies him as a conceptual artist. That his greatest contribution was completed by the age of
33, when he showed his masterpiece at the Salon of 1804, suggests that his career was typical of
conceptual innovators, whose best new ideas generally arrive early in their careers.
Gustave Caillebotte
Table 3 is based on a survey of 36 textbooks published during the past four decades in
English, French, German, and Italian. Gustave Caillebotte’s work is illustrated overall only oneeighth as often as that of Paul Cézanne, less than one-sixth as often as that of Edgar Degas, and
less than one-quarter as often as that of Auguste Renoir. Table 4, however, shows that
Caillebotte’s Paris Street; Rainy Weather appears in 11 of the books, or more than any individual
work by Cézanne, Degas, or Renoir. Rainy Weather accounts for more than 60% of Caillebotte’s
total reproductions in the books, and appears in more than three times as many books as any
other painting by him.
Gustave Caillebotte inherited a considerable fortune, and he used his wealth to become
one of the first patrons of the Impressionists. The paintings by Degas, Manet, Cézanne, Monet,
Renoir, Sisley, and Pissarro that he bequeathed to the French state form the core of the Musée

12
D’Orsay’s collection of these painters today. But Caillebotte was also a painter, and he
16

exhibited his work in five of the Impressionist group shows held during 1876-1882; Rainy
Weather appeared in the third group show, in 1877.
Caillebotte’s friendship with the Impressionists, and his participation in their exhibitions,
might appear to signal that he violates the prediction made earlier, that one-hit wonders should be
conceptual artists, for Impressionism was quintessentially an experimental movement. The group
was led by Monet, who devoted his career to an effort to capture the visual appearance of nature,
with its constantly changing effects of light and atmosphere; he believed that this could only be
done by working outdoors in front of the motif, painting directly on the canvas, without
preparatory studies. Monet and his Impressionist colleagues established the forms of their
paintings as they worked, and made frequent changes as their motif, or their perception of it,
changed over time.17 That Caillebotte’s paintings did not fit this Impressionist model in either
appearance or practice, however, was commented on as early as 1877, when an anonymous critic
remarked that “Monsieur Caillebotte is an Impressionist in name only. He knows how to draw
and paints more seriously than his colleagues.”18
Kirk Varnedoe and Peter Galassi believe that Caillebotte often began his meticulous
preparations for his paintings by tracing the major contours of the motif from a camera image either from a photograph or from an image on a camera’s groundglass - then using these lines as
the basis for construction of a complete perspective drawing, made with the aid of a straight-edge
and mathematical calculations.19 Caillebotte made at least 19 preparatory works for Rainy
Weather, including three perspective studies, three oil studies, and a full compositional oil
sketch. Interestingly, Varnedoe recognized not only that Caillebotte’s practice contrasted sharply

13
with the experimental approach of the Impressionists, but that it resembled that of the conceptual
painter Georges Seurat. Thus Varnedoe commented of Rainy Weather that “Its scale, method,
and structure stand outside the Impressionism of the 1870s and relate more closely to the
principles of Neo-Impressionism. Indeed, the relation between the Temps de pluie [Rainy
Weather] and Georges Seurat’s Un Dimanche apr s-midi sur l’île de la Grande Jatte seems quite
striking.”20
Had Varnedoe been interested in artists’ life cycles, he might have noticed an additional
similarity between these works, for both were made by young artists: Seurat completed the
Grande Jatte at 27, and Caillebotte executed Rainy Weather at 29. Caillebotte’s innovation was
not nearly as great as that of Seurat, and Rainy Weather is a much less important work than the
Grande Jatte. Yet in Rainy Weather Caillebotte used the newly renovated neighborhood he had
grown up in to make a subtle but powerful statement about the isolation of the residents of the
modern city as they walked through its great empty spaces. The conceptual discipline of the
process Caillebotte followed in making the painting is reflected in its precisely structured shapes,
for instead of the boisterous and bustling Parisian streets that appear in the Impressionist
paintings of Monet and Pissarro, Rainy Weather offers a more disturbing representation of the
alienation of the residents of the modern city.
Paul Sérusier
Tables 5 and 6 are based on a survey of 31 textbooks published in French since 1963.
Table 5 shows that these books contain 14 illustrations of paintings by Paul Sérusier, or less than
one-fifth as many as they contain of the work of four great artists of the late 19th century who are
also listed in the table. Remarkably, however, Table 6 shows that Sérusier’s The Talisman

14
appears in these books more often than any single painting by Cézanne, Vincent van Gogh,
Renoir, or Degas. The Talisman accounts for nearly 80% of all the illustrations of Sérusier’s
paintings, and it is illustrated more than three times as often as the only other painting by Sérusier
that appears in the books.
Late in the summer of 1888 in the Breton artists’ colony of Pont Aven, the 25-year-old art
student Paul Sérusier introduced himself to Paul Gauguin, who was generally recognized as the
leading Symbolist painter. Sérusier then spent a morning painting with the older artist at the
edge of a small forest. Gauguin told Sérusier not to hesitate to use pure colors to express the
intensity of his feelings for the landscape: “‘How do you see this tree,’ Gauguin had said... ‘Is it
really green? Use green then, the most beautiful green on your palette. And that shadow, rather
blue? Don’t be afraid to paint it as blue as possible.’”21
Upon Sérusier’s return to Paris, the small painting of the Bois d’Amour that he had made
under Gauguin’s supervision excited a group of his fellow students, including Pierre Bonnard,
Maurice Denis, and Edouard Vuillard. The students renamed Sérusier’s little landscape The
Talisman in recognition of its inspiration for their art, gave themselves the collective name of the
Nabis, from the Hebrew word for prophet, and began to hold meetings at which they discussed
Gauguin’s ideas and the Symbolist movement in art.
Denis later recalled that “the extremely philosophical intellect of Sérusier very quickly
transformed the least words of Gauguin into a scientific doctrine, which made a decisive impact
on us.”22 The Talisman was more abstract and less carefully planned than Gauguin’s paintings,
yet it clearly illustrated Gauguin’s message that the artist should not merely record what he saw,
but should express his feelings by exaggerating his perceptions. The simplicity of The Talisman

15
appears also to have led to Sérusier’s development of the doctrine that the new Symbolist art
should privilege naiveté and sincerity over craftsmanship, and the belief that the expression of
the artist’s feelings could be heightened by cruder renderings of the subject, as clumsy execution
revealed an emotional truth that was hidden by more polished technique.23
The meetings of the Nabis led not only to changes in the styles of the young painters, but
to one of the most far-reaching statements in the history of art. In 1890 Denis, who was then 20
years old, published under a pseudonym an article that began with the declaration that “It is well
to remember that a picture - before being a battle horse, a nude women, or some anecdote - is
essentially a plane surface covered with colors assembled in a certain order.”24 Although Denis
was not advocating abstraction in art - he stated that a painting is an arrangement of colors before
it is a motif, not instead of a motif - his formulation was a critical starting point for the doctrine
that would develop in the course of the twentieth century that a painting could in fact legitimately
be an arrangement of colors without any explicit subject.25 Three years later, on the occasion of
Gauguin’s death, Denis explained that the concept of the painting as a plane surface had been
introduced to him and his fellow students for the first time by The Talisman, which had taught
them clearly “that every work of art was a transposition, a caricature, the passionate equivalent of
a sensation received.”26The opening declaration of Denis’ 1890 article has become famous in art
history, but another prophetic statement appeared later in the same article: “‘Be sincere: it is
sufficient to be sincere to paint well. Be naive. Make crudely that which one sees.’”27 This
statement foreshadowed innumerable debates of the following century, in the course of which a
progressive abandonment of skillful execution in favor of naive or crude technique would lead to
bitter arguments over the purposes of art, and even over whether particular works could be

16
considered art. Although Denis did not explain why this statement was given within quotation
marks, it is possible that this was his acknowledgment that its formulation was also due initially
to Sérusier.
The Talisman was the work of just a few hours, and it measured less than 90 square
inches in size. But in the Nabis it gave rise to one of the leading movements of advanced art of
the 1890s, and through Denis’ article it led to the development of a revolutionary doctrine of the
autonomy of the work of art. The fame of The Talisman, and the lack of fame of its maker, are
direct consequences of the conceptual nature of the painting: The Talisman communicated
Gauguin’s novel conceptual aesthetic to Denis and the other Nabis, and Sérusier was the
messenger who recorded and transmitted the revelation. Although Sérusier subsequently devoted
himself to developing the new Symbolist aesthetic, his role was perceived as elaborating and
clarifying a doctrine that had originated with Gauguin.28 Sérusier’s failure to make other
paintings that most art historians consider worthy of notice in the nearly 40 years that remained
to him after producing The Talisman at 25 testifies to his failure subsequently to produce other
new ideas comparable in importance to those he had expressed in that painting.
Vladimir Tatlin
Tables 7 and 8 are based on surveys of 25 textbooks published in English since 1980. The
leading sculptors in Table 7 - Auguste Rodin, Constantin Brancusi, Alberto Giacometti, and
Henry Moore - are among the most important sculptors of the modern era. Vladimir Tatlin’s 19
total illustrations represent less than a third as many as those of works by Rodin, less than half as
many as those of works by Brancusi and Giacometti, and not much more than half as many as
those of works by Moore. Remarkably, however, Table 8 shows that Tatlin’s Monument to the

17
Third International is illustrated more often than any sculpture by Rodin, the greatest modern
sculptor, and more than twice as often as any sculpture by Brancusi, Giacometti, or Moore. The
Monument accounts for nearly 80% of Tatlin’s total illustrations, and appears in three times as
many textbooks as his next most frequently reproduced work.
Vladimir Tatlin was a young Russian sculptor whose artistic goals were fundamentally
changed by the Revolution. He became a leader of the new Constructivist movement, which was
dedicated to the belief that art must have a social purpose, and that artists should join engineers
and scientists in creating new forms, using new materials, that would be appropriate for new
social organizations. In 1919, the Soviet government commissioned Tatlin to design a monument
for the Third International, which Lenin had recently founded to promote global revolution.
Tatlin responded by creating a model of a tower. It is this model, and reconstructions of it that
were made after the original was lost, that are illustrated in the textbooks surveyed.29
Tatlin’s Monument was actually designed as a building that would house the Third
International. Its intended height of 1300 feet would have made it the tallest structure in the
world. Tatlin’s conceptual approach to art was reflected in the many layers of symbolism
embodied in his plan.30 The tower appeared to lean forward, befitting a progressive new form of
government. The spiral shapes incorporated into the design symbolized rising aspirations and
triumph; the intertwining of two spirals represented the process of dialectical argument and its
resolution. Unlike earlier, static governments, which were housed in heavy, immobile structures,
the dynamic new communist government should have a mobile and active architecture, so the
Monument was supposed to move. The lowest level of the tower, where the congresses of the
International would meet, would rotate completely on its axis once in the course of a year; the

18
second level, which would house the International’s administrative offices, would revolve once a
month; and the highest, third level, which would house the information offices of the
International, would revolve daily. The diminishing size of the higher floors reflected the
progression of power, up from the large hall of the assembly to the smaller and more
authoritative bodies at higher levels.
Tatlin was not an architect or an engineer, and his design for the tower was highly
impractical. As John Milner observed, “It was the idea and not the mechanistic realities which
were his prime concern: as engineering, the tower is utopian.”31 The tower, which was to straddle
the Neva River in Petrograd, was never built. Yet photographs of the model were widely
reproduced in pamphlets and books from an early date, for the design’s embodiment of the idea
that advanced art could serve the purposes of modern society. This was of course strictly an idea,
for as Robert Hughes observed, the Monument “remains the most influential non-existent object
of the twentieth century, and one of the most paradoxical - an unworkable, probably unbuildable
metaphor of practicality.”32
Tatlin subsequently pursued the logic of Constructivism in a variety of other activities,
including the design of costumes and sets for theatrical productions, and the design of textiles
and ceramics. He devoted several years to an attempt to design a flying machine that would allow
individuals to glide: like all his works, it was intended for everyday use by the Soviet masses.33
The diversity of his activities is typical of conceptual artists, as is the fact that his later work
lacked the innovativeness of the ambitious project he designed early in his career.
Meret Oppenheim
Tables 7 and 8 also identify a second one-hit wonder. Meret Oppenheim ranks last in

19
Table 7, as the 25 books surveyed contain only seven illustrations of her work - less than one
seventh as many as they have of Brancusi’s work, less than one fifth as many as Giacometti’s,
and just over one fifth as many as Moore’s. Yet Table 8 shows that all seven of Oppenheim’s
illustrations are of a single work, Le Déjeuner en fourrure, which places it in a tie with
Brancusi’s single most reproduced sculpture, and ahead of any sculpture by either Moore or
Giacometti. Remarkably, the only sculpture by Meret Oppenheim that appears in any of the
textbooks is thus reproduced at least as often as any single work by three of the greatest sculptors
of the twentieth century.
Meret Oppenheim was born in Germany, grew up in Switzerland, and went to Paris to
study art at the age of 19. She worked under the informal guidance of several Surrealist artists
she met there, including Alberto Giacometti and Max Ernst. Oppenheim considered her art to be
the direct embodiment of ideas: “Every idea is born with its forms. I carry out ideas the way they
enter my head. Where inspiration comes from is anybody’s guess but it comes with its form; it
comes dressed, like Athena who sprang from the head of Zeus in helmet and breastplate.”34
To support herself Oppenheim began designing clothing and jewelry, using the same
conceptual approach as in her painting and sculpture. One day in 1936 she was sitting in the Café
de Flore with her friends Dora Maar and Pablo Picasso when Picasso became intrigued with a
bracelet Oppenheim had made by covering metal tubing with fur. Picasso joked that one could
cover anything with fur, and Oppenheim replied, “Even this cup and saucer...” Shortly thereafter
André Breton invited Oppenheim to contribute to an exhibition of Surrealist objects. Recalling
her conversation with Picasso, Oppenheim bought a large cup and saucer with spoon at a
department store, and covered the three objects with the fur of a Chinese gazelle. Breton named

20
the work Déjeuner en fourrure (Luncheon in Fur), which echoed Manet’s Déjeuner sur l’herbe.
Later the same year, Alfred Barr bought the work for the collection of his recently established
Museum of Modern Art in New York.35
Meret Oppenheim continued to make art past the age of 70; a catalogue raisonné of her
work includes approximately 1,500 paintings, drawings, and sculptures.36 Yet the textbooks
surveyed for this study demonstrate that she never became an important artist. Those textbooks
also demonstrate, however, that Déjeuner en fourrure became a famous work of art.
Oppenheim’s sculpture was a striking embodiment of two central aspects of Surrealist art: it was
an object with symbolic meaning, lacking in aesthetic quality and craftsmanship, and its
symbolism placed it squarely in a line of Surrealist works that represented sexual freedom. Thus
Robert Hughes described the Déjeuner as “the most intense and abrupt image of lesbian sex in
the history of art.”37 A sculpture made by a 23-year-old artist as a result of a chance conversation
in a Paris café became an emblem of Surrealism, and both the fame of the work and the lack of
fame of its young maker stem from the fact that Déjeuner en fourrure not only dramatically but
fully expressed a single innovative idea.
Grant Wood
Tables 9 and 10 were produced by searching 49 textbooks published since 1968 for all the
reproductions of paintings by five American artists of the early 20th century. Grant Wood ranks
last in Table 9, with less than 60% as many total illustrations as Edward Hopper and Georgia
O’Keeffe, and less than 70% as many as Charles Sheeler and Stuart Davis. Yet the positions are
reversed in Table 10, as Wood’s American Gothic is reproduced in 24 of the books, 50% more
often than Hopper’s Nighthawks, and more than twice as often as any painting by Sheeler, Davis,

21
or O’Keeffe. American Gothic accounts for two-thirds of the total illustrations of Wood’s
paintings, and appears in eight times as many books as Daughters of Revolution (1932) and
Parson Weems’ Fable (1939), the other two of Wood’s paintings that are most frequently
reproduced.
Grant Wood was a largely self-taught artist. He lived in Iowa throughout his life, but early
in his career he made several trips to France. This influenced his artistic development, as for
nearly two decades he painted landscapes in a style derived from Impressionism, and such later
artists as Bonnard and Vuillard. In this early period he worked visually in front of his subject,
with an emphasis on an appearance of spontaneity and avoidance of smooth finish.
Wood’s art was changed by a commission he received in 1927, when he was 36, to create
a stained-glass window for the Veterans Memorial Building in Cedar Rapids. He had previously
begun his small oils by working directly on the canvas, but making an image for a surface that
would measure 24'x 20'clearly required more careful planning. He began with preliminary
sketches, and eventually made a full-scale working drawing of the entire design. In 1928 Wood
went to Germany to supervise the work of the Munich glass company that was to stain and
assemble the window. Working with the German craftsmen gave him a new appreciation for the
careful design of individual parts that would fit together to create a unified whole, and for the
precision of fine craftsmanship. This new respect for an art based on careful preparation and
execution was reinforced by the opportunity in Munich to study the paintings of Flemish and
German masters of the 15th and 16th centuries. Wood was particularly struck by these artists’ use
of visual elements drawn from the everyday life of their own locales.38
Wood’s style and subject matter changed when he returned from Germany, as he set out

22
to create his own distinctive regionalist art under the inspiration of Northern Europe’s Old
Masters: “to my great joy, I discovered that in the very commonplace, in my native surroundings,
were decorative adventures and that my only difficulty had been in taking them too much for
granted.”39 In 1930, a year after his return, Wood painted his masterpiece. American Gothic
began with an oil sketch Wood made of a house he saw in Eldon, Iowa; in keeping with his new
systematic approach, he also had a friend photograph the house. The selection of the house was
done with care, as Wood observed that “I know now that our cardboard frame houses on Iowa
farms have a distinct American quality and are very paintable. To me their hard edges are
especially suggestive of the Middle West civilization.”40 Wood then made a full sketch of his
sitters with the house behind them, and squared the sketch for transfer to his canvas. That
Wood’s intentions for his painting were not merely visual is indicated by the fact that he changed
the house, stretching it vertically by heightening the porch, and elongating a front window. He
also changed his sitters, by elongating and thinning their unsmiling faces: “Any northern town
old enough to have some buildings dating back to the Civil War is liable to have a house or
church in the American Gothic style. I simply invented some American Gothic people to stand in
front of a house of this type.”41 The thin, vertical forms of the building and the two figures are
furthermore echoed in the three long prongs of the pitchfork that the farmer holds. Wood took the
sitters’ clothing from 19th-century photographs, and their stiff poses mimic those of early longexposure photographs. In total, the painting is carefully planned to give a visual representation of
a particular set of rural Midwestern values, including rigidity, austerity, religiosity, and
provinciality.42 When Wood completed American Gothic he submitted it to the annual exhibition
of American paintings at the Art Institute of Chicago. It was awarded a prize, and was promptly

23
purchased by the Art Institute. It was an immediate success with the public, and quickly became
an American icon, as the solemn couple has fascinated generations of viewers.
American Gothic was one of the first paintings Wood made with the elaborate preparatory
procedure he would follow for the remainder of his career, methodically working up his images
from preliminary sketches to full preparatory cartoons before beginning to paint them. His
compositions were carefully measured and arranged according to a formula he called “the
principle of thirds,” as he divided his surfaces into nine equal rectangles, then drew diagonals
through the perpendicular intersections to serve as directional guides for all principal contour
lines. 43 He regretted the years he had spent painting spontaneously, and late in his life he
dismissed his early paintings as mere “wrist work,” due to their lack of planning and thought. He
told a friend that he had “really found himself” in the early 1930s.44
Most painters arrive at their mature styles early in their careers. Grant Wood did not
arrive at his trademark style until he was in his late 30s. Yet once he recognized the attractions of
a conceptual approach, with careful planning and execution of images that would carry symbolic
meanings, he produced the major work of his career almost immediately, as he used his
knowledge of midwestern history and culture to create one of the most famous images in the
history of American art.
Richard Hamilton
Table 11 shows that in a survey of 36 textbooks published since 1980, Richard
Hamilton’s work was illustrated less than half as often as that of four leading American artists of
the 1950s and the ‘60s, and slightly less than that of his countryman David Hockney. Yet Table
12 shows that Hamilton’s Just what is it that makes today’s homes so different, so appealing?

24
appears in 21 of those texts, more than one and a half times as many as any single work by
Robert Rauschenberg, Roy Lichtenstein, or Andy Warhol, more than twice as many as any
painting by Jasper Johns, and more than two and half times as any work by Hockney. Just what is
it? accounts for four-fifths of Hamilton’s total illustrations, and four times as many as he, the
only other of his works that appears in any of the books.
In London during the early 1950s Richard Hamilton was a member of the Independent
Group, made up of young artists who met informally to discuss their interest in mass culture.
They shared a fascination with American advertising and graphic design, and wanted to create an
art that would have the same kind of popular appeal. They also wanted this art to bridge the
growing gap between the humanities and modern science and technology.45 In 1956 the
Independent Group organized a joint exhibition, “This is Tomorrow,” which was designed to
examine the interrelationships between art and architecture. Hamilton agreed to create an image
that could be used as a poster for the show. The result was a small collage titled Just what is it
that makes today’s homes so different, so appealing?
Hamilton began the work by making a list of subjects, that included Man, Woman,
History, Food, Cinema, TV, Newspapers, Cinema, TV, Telephone, Comics, Cars, Domestic
appliances, and Space, among other categories. Hamilton, his wife, and another artist then
searched through magazines, cutting out illustrations that could represent the categories on
Hamilton’s list. Hamilton then selected one image for each category, choosing them according to
how they would fit into the imaginary living space he was constructing. Among its component
images, Just what is it? contains a male body-builder, a female pin-up, a comic book cover, an
insignia for Ford automobiles, and even the word “Pop” on a large Tootsie pop held up by the

25
body-builder. The work’s title was itself the caption from a discarded photograph.46
In 1956, years before Andy Warhol would reproduce photographic images or Roy
Lichtenstein would mimic comic books, a 34-year-old English artist had combined these
techniques in a single work. In recognition of this Marco Livingstone has declared Just what is
it? to be “an extraordinary prophecy of the iconography of Pop.” 47 And appropriately for a
prototype for a movement that would celebrate commercial culture, Just what is it? was not only
made from advertisements, but was itself made to be an advertisement. Just what is it? differed
considerably from the work Hamilton did before it and after; Livingstone noted that it has
become an icon of early Pop art “in spite of being completely uncharacteristic of [Hamilton’s]
work at that time.”48 Yet this quality was in itself a characteristic of Hamilton’s work, for abrupt
changes are common among conceptual artists, who often adopt new styles in order to express
new ideas: Edward Lucie-Smith recognized this when he observed that Hamilton’s “productions
tend to differ radically from one another because each is the embodiment of an idea, and the idea
itself has been allowed to dominate the material form.”49
Richard Hamilton has had a long career as a painter and art teacher. He is considered to
have been a leading figure in British Pop art, and he has been honored by three retrospective
exhibitions at London’s Tate Gallery.50 Yet, as Table 11 emphasizes, he has never achieved
nearly the same level of fame or critical attention as a number of American Pop artists of his
cohort. His only celebrated work, Just what is it?, was an isolated conceptual innovation. The
rise of Pop art did not make Hamilton a famous artist, but it did give Just what is it? a place in
the canon of contemporary art for its role as a forerunner of the dominant advanced art movement
of the early 1960s.

Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers

26

Based on a survey of 24 textbooks published since 1990, Table 13 shows that for their
total achievement Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers rank far below several of the greatest modern
architects, as both have less than half as many illustrations of their buildings in the texts as Le
Corbusier and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, and less than three quarters as many as Walter
Gropius. Yet remarkably Table 14 shows that the Pompidou Center in Paris, designed by Piano
and Rogers, is illustrated in 22 of the 24 textbooks, or more than any single building designed by
Le Corbusier, Mies, or Gropius. The Pompidou accounts for more than 60% of Piano’s total
illustrations, and more than three times as many as any of his other buildings, while it accounts
for almost 70% of Roger’s total illustrations, and nearly three times as many as any of his other
designs.
In 1971, the commission to design a new Parisian cultural center that would house a
museum of modern art, a public lending library, a center for visual research, several cinemas, and
several restaurants was awarded to the partnership of Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers. The two
young architects, aged 34 and 38, respectively, were awarded the commission in an international
competition that attracted more than 650 entries. The building opened in 1977, and quickly
became one of Paris’ most popular tourist destinations.
The Pompidou Center was the first large-scale realization of an idea that had been widely
discussed during the 1960s, that since buildings can change functions over time in unpredictable
ways, they should be made as flexible as possible.51 As Piano stressed, “constructing a building
for culture at the beginning of the Seventies was an incredibly confused undertaking: the only
thing to be done was to aim at convertibility.”52 The theory held that buildings should be like

27
machines, in that for ease of production and later maintenance and alterations they should be
made from standardized parts. Large interior spaces would allow temporary subdivision for
specific purposes, that could easily be changed; services - including even the movement of
people - should be placed on the outside of the building, where they could easily be altered or
replaced, and where they would not reduce the flexibility of the open interior spaces. In this
approach architecture provided a structural framework, and supplied a set of services, but it
eliminated all specificity of place or use.53
The Pompidou is striking both because of its great size and its industrial appearance. It
has been a great success as a cultural center, but it has in fact not served many of the innovative
purposes Piano and Rogers had intended. Thus it was never extended over a larger area, its parts
have not become standard in other buildings, and it did not become a prototype for other arts
centers. Its great popularity has stemmed not from its flexibility, but instead from the novelty of
its image.54 The Pompidou was a bold design by two daring young architects, and it attracted
considerable criticism for its failure to blend into the surrounding Marais district. Piano later
acknowledged that he and Rogers made mistakes; he regretted that the Pompidou had required
the demolition of so many houses, and that it consequently was not linked as firmly to the
neighborhood as he would have liked. Yet he observed of the Pompidou overall that “more than
a mistake, it was a huge joke, a kind of face pulled at the cultural establishment.”55
Piano and Rogers dissolved their partnership after completing the Pompidou, and both
have gone on to very successful careers, with major commissions and impressive awards. Both
are known for their high-tech designs and their enthusiasm for new materials and technologies.
But although both have produced a large body of work, neither has come close to designing

28
another building as innovative as the Pompidou, or as novel an embodiment of a general
architectural theory.
Gerrit Rietveld
Tables 13 and 14 also identify a second one-hit wonder. In Table 13, Gerrit Rietveld
stands well below Louis Kahn, with barely more than half as many total illustrations. Kahn is
widely considered to have been one of the most influential architects of the second half of the
twentieth century.56 Yet Table 14 shows that Rietveld’s Schröder House appears in more than
twice as many books as either of Kahn’s most frequently illustrated buildings. The dominant
position of the Schröder House in Rietveld’s career is clear, for it accounts for all but one of the
illustrations of his architecture in the textbooks.
Gerrit Rietveld grew up working in his father’s cabinetmaking shop, and he had begun to
make original designs for furniture by the age of 11. He spent the next two decades working as a
craftsman, designing furniture and jewelry. In 1919 he joined the Dutch art movement De Stijl,
but already the year before he had created the celebrated Red-Blue Chair, which effectively
applied their aesthetic concerns to design.57
In 1919 Rietveld remodelled a jewelry shop, and this eventually led a Utrecht couple to
hire him to design their new house. Rietveld would later design scores of other buildings in a
long and distinguished career as an architect, but the Schröder House, built in 1924 when he was
36 years old, was his first house, and by far his most innovative. Rietveld wanted to make
buildings, like furniture, from mass-produced, standardized, and elementary components, and the
Schröder House is visibly assembled from separate parts.58 It became celebrated almost
immediately as the architectural embodiment of the De Stijl movement’s philosophy, and is

29
typically cast in that role by art historians even today. So for example Reyner Banham observed
that “The surfaces are... as smooth and as neutral as those of a Mondriaan painting, in similar
colors.” The aggressive sparseness and simplicity of the design made the Schröder House the
precursor of much of later modern architecture: Banham saw that “Here for the first time in 1924,
the aesthetic possibilities of the hard school of modern architecture were uncompromisingly and
brilliantly revealed... Machine aesthetic; rectangular space play; the bare minimum of the modern
architecture that was to be.”59
Rietveld became one of the leading Dutch architects of his time, and applied his ideas to
designing large-scale housing and factories as well as individual family houses. Yet although he
worked for another 40 years after designing the Schröder House, his aesthetic did not
subsequently change in any basic way, and his designs became much less startling in later years
as more and more architects emulated the new forms he had created for the first house he ever
designed.
Judy Chicago
Table 15 shows that 40 textbooks published since 1990 contain more than five times as
many illustrations of the work of Jasper Johns as of that of Judy Chicago. In total Chicago’s work
is also illustrated less than half as often as that of Frank Stella, Cindy Sherman, or Bruce
Nauman. Remarkably, however, Table 16 shows that Chicago’s Dinner Party appears in nearly
50% more textbooks than any single work by Johns, and in more than twice as many texts as any
single work by Stella, Sherman, or Nauman. Together Tables 15 and 16 clearly identify Chicago
as a one-hit wonder, for The Dinner Party accounts for 90% of Chicago’s total illustrations; only
two of Chicago’s other works appear in any of the books, and each of those appears only one

time.

30
To symbolize the neglect of women’s achievements by historians, Judy Chicago decided

to create a work that would reinterpret the Last Supper from the point of view of women. When
she found she was unable to reduce the number of guests to 13, she redesigned the table as a
triangle, and tripled that number. For these places at the table Chicago selected women who
represented particular historical epochs, whose lives embodied a significant achievement, and
who had worked to improve conditions for women.60
The Dinner Party was a complex conceptual work, with symbolism at many levels. The
sequential placement of the women around the table provided a historical narrative: “Beginning
with pre-patriarchal society, The Dinner Party demonstrates the development of goddess
worship, which represents a time when women had social and political control... The piece then
suggests the gradual destruction of these female-oriented societies and the eventual domination
of women by men, tracing the institutionalizing of that oppression and women’s response to it.”61
The material form of the work was symbolic. Chicago used decorated plates to represent the
guests: “Since plates are associated with eating, I thought images on plates would convey the fact
that the women I planned to represent had been swallowed up and obscured by history instead of
being recognized and honored.”62 Chicago’s study of history made her realize that women’s
achievements were not made by isolated individuals, so the placement of the table on a floor
inscribed with the names of other women symbolized the fact that the women at the table had
risen from a foundation created by other women; each guest was chosen not only for the
significance of her own achievement, but to represent the tradition from which she came. The
arts used to make the work were also symbolic, as Chicago chose china painting and embroidery

31
because they were genres traditionally used by women that had often been ignored by the men
who wrote the history of art.63
Chicago planned the work, then assembled a team of people to help her produce it. In all
more than 400 people - most, but not all, women - worked on The Dinner Party over a period of
five years. The final work was large and intricate:
A triangular table, forty-eight feet per side, is arranged with thirtynine commemorative settings in which sculptural ceramic plate
forms, with napkins, knives, forks, spoons, and goblets, sit on
individualized needlework cloth runners... The whole is
complemented by the additional 999 names of women penned
across the 2,300 lustrous triangular tiles that comprise the raised
floor on which the table sits. The Dinner Party thus images a
collaboration that is a collective or combined history of 1,038
women, through a process that was itself collaborative.64
In spite of the enormous effort and complex organization involved in the undertaking,
Chicago had no doubt that the production of the work was not its most significant message: “I am
often asked whether the process of creating The Dinner Party was even more important than the
final work of art, and my answer has always been no.” Her answer was a reflection of the
conceptual nature of the work, which proved serendipitous from another point of view. The
Dinner Party drew large crowds when it was presented as a temporary exhibit at a series of
museums, but for many years Chicago was frustrated by its failure to find a permanent home in a
major museum. Because of its conceptual nature, however, she discovered that its message could
be communicated even if the work was not displayed: “It was extremely fortuitous that The
Dinner Party was structured so that the information it embodied was able to enter the culture in
several forms. Consequently, when the work of art was blocked by the art system, the book [that
Chicago wrote about the work] brought the concept of the piece to what turned out to be an

65

extremely receptive audience.”

32

Maya Lin
Tables 15 and 16 also identify Maya Lin as a one-hit wonder. Although her total of 16
illustrations in Table 15 represents less than 15% as many illustrations as the textbooks contain
of the work of Jasper Johns, less than a quarter as many as that of Frank Stella, and less than half
as many as that of Cindy Sherman or Bruce Nauman, Table 16 shows that her Vietnam Veterans
Memorial appears in more books than any single work by those artists. Lin’s illustrations total
barely one third as many of those of the work of the sculptor Richard Serra, but the Memorial ties
Serra’s Tilted Arc for the distinction of being the single work made by any American artist during
the 1980s that is most often reproduced in the textbooks surveyed.66 The Memorial is moreover
the only work of Lin’s that appears in any of the 40 textbooks.
Lin chose to major in architecture in college because she saw it as a way to combine art
and science.67 During her senior year she took a seminar on funereal architecture, in which her
interest in the psychology of architecture led to a clash with her teacher. For a class project to
design a memorial for World War III, she designed a tomblike underground structure that was
intended to frustrate the viewer:
I remember the professor of the class, Andrus Burr, coming up to
me afterward saying quite angrily, “If I had a brother who died in
that war, I would never want to visit this memorial.” I was
somewhat puzzled that he didn’t quite understand World War III
would be of such devastation that none of us would be around to
visit any memorial, and that my design was instead a prewar
commentary. In asking myself what a memorial to a third world
war would be, I came up with a political statement that was meant
as a deterrent.68
The incident heightened Lin’s awareness that memorials are highly charged politically, and

33
reinforced her belief that memorials constitute a separate genre: “They’re on the boundary
between function and symbolism, because their function is a symbolic one. They’re hybrids, in
between art and architecture. Not sculpture either. In a separate category.”69
At the time there was a national design competition for a Vietnam veterans memorial, and
Lin’s class took this task as its final project. Lin and a few friends traveled to Washington to see
the intended site for the memorial. She later recalled that “it was at the site that the idea for the
design took shape”:
I had a simple impulse to cut into the earth.
I imagined taking a knife and cutting into the earth, opening
it up, an initial violence and pain that in time would heal.
When Lin returned to Yale she made a sketch of her idea, and was initially concerned that it was
too simple. She soon realized, however, that complicating the design would weaken it: “The
image was so simple that anything added to it began to detract from it.”70
After completing the seminar requirement, Lin submitted her design to the national
competition, and the jury selected it as the winner. Although the choice occasioned a bitter
debate, in the course of which race and gender were raised as objections to Lin’s selection, the
Memorial was in fact built according to Lin’s original design. It was a radical innovation in
memorial architecture, for its non-representational form owed a greater debt to Minimalist
sculpture than to any previous memorials. In spite of the simplicity of its form, the Memorial
incorporated a number of symbolic meanings. So for example Lin made one of its walls point to
the Washington Monument, and the other to the Lincoln Memorial, thus creating sight lines that
symbolically unify the country’s past and present. The black of the Memorial’s granite is the
color of mourning. And instead of the traditional vertical form with which many memorials

34
triumphantly dominate the landscape, the horizontality of the Memorial, embedded in the ground,
suggests a humbler commemoration of the soldiers who died in a war that was not a triumph.
The Memorial was dedicated in the fall of 1982, just 18 months after Lin graduated from
college. It quickly became recognized as a moving tribute to the soldiers who had died in
Vietnam, and at the age of 22 Lin had become a famous architect. In a memoir published in
2000, she confessed that “I used to dread it whenever some large-scale disaster would happen
because I inevitably would get a fax about whether I could design a memorial to... which I would
politely decline.”71 Although Lin has now executed commissions from such institutions as the
University of Michigan, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Southern Poverty Law Center, and even
her alma mater, Yale, none of these works appears in the textbooks surveyed for this study. Lin’s
first significant project dominates perceptions of her work, just as it dominates the current
understanding of memorial architecture. So for example when the eight final designs under
consideration for the memorial to the victims of the 2001 attack on the World Trade Center were
announced by the five-member jury - of which Lin was a member - the New Yorker’s architecture
critic explained the disappointment of both critics and the public by observing that “in the post Vietnam-memorial age, we may have come to expect too much of a memorial... Lin’s Vietnam
memorial set the bar very high.”72
The Vietnam Veterans Memorial “was born of an instantaneous idea to cut open the
earth.” Its sudden origin was no more accidental than the radical innovation it embodied, or the
fact that it was produced by a college student with no professional experience as an architect. All
of these can be seen as consequences of Lin’s conceptual approach to her enterprise: “In my art, a
simple clear idea or moment of inspiration is the soul of the piece.”73

Conclusion

35

There are many fewer one-hit wonders in the visual arts than in popular music. Yet this
study has shown that one-hit wonders have played a significant role in modern art, and that it is
useful to consider them as a group. The 13 artists considered here may not represent all the
significant one-hit wonders of the modern era, but it is unlikely that there are many more cases of
comparable importance, and it is even more unlikely that any additional cases would significantly
change the basic profile that emerges from this survey.
The 13 artists examined here were motivated by a variety of goals. Some were motivated
by social concerns, ranging from protests against injustices to the pursuit of better forms of
government; the three architects were concerned with creating more efficient public and private
buildings; and some had more purely artistic goals. But regardless of their specific motivations,
all 13 worked conceptually: their innovations expressed ideas, often by applying general
principles, and many had expressly symbolic aims. The painters in the group generally planned
their works carefully, and executed them methodically.
For conceptual artists, creative life clearly does not begin at 40. Of the 13 artists
considered here, only Judy Chicago had not completed her masterwork before celebrating her
40th birthday, and she finished her Dinner Party before she reached 41. Five of the 13 made their
greatest works before the age of 30, and three produced their hits by the age of 25.
One of the most puzzling features of the careers of conceptual innovators in general is the
decline in their creativity that often begins at a surprisingly early age. I believe that a principal
reason for this is the loss of clarity that occurs as the accumulation of professional experience
makes them increasingly aware of the complexity of their disciplines, and progressively robs

36
them of the ability to formulate bold and simple new approaches. Although conceptual
innovators may continue to innovate as they grow older, there is a tendency for their innovations
to become narrower in scope and application as their awareness of the complexity of their
disciplines increases. The evidence of the one-hit wonders is suggestive in this context. Three of
the very simplest ideas in this sample - Sérusier’s painting The Talisman, Oppenheim’s design of
Luncheon in Fur, and Lin’s design of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial - were produced by the
three youngest innovators in the group. In contrast, one of the most complex projects, Chicago’s
Dinner Party, was produced by the oldest innovator in the sample. The Talisman was produced
in one morning, while both the Luncheon and the Memorial were virtually fully designed in a
single moment of inspiration, whereas the idea of the Dinner Party required extended adaptation
and change before taking its final form.
Although the phenomenon of the one-hit wonder has not received systematic study, it also
appears to exist in other intellectual activities. A number of writers, for example, have produced
one important novel that dominates the other works they have written: even a partial list might
include Mary Shelley, Harriet Beecher Stowe, Bram Stoker, Margaret Mitchell, Henry Roth,
Malcolm Lowry, William Burroughs, Ralph Ellison, J. D. Salinger, Jack Kerouac, and Joseph
Heller. We are aware that these writers were one-hit wonders because of the large amount of
critical attention that is devoted to novels and novelists, but the same phenomenon probably also
exists in the other arts, and in most, if not all, scholarly disciplines.74
The analysis used in this study appears to have several implications for the phenomenon
of the one-hit wonder wherever it occurs. As is the case for the 13 artists discussed above, it
appears that practitioners of any discipline who produce a single isolated masterpiece are likely

37
to be conceptual innovators, theorists who think and work deductively, rather than experimental
innovators, empiricists who work inductively. And related to this prediction is a second: as is
also the case for the artists studied here, one-hit wonders in all disciplines are likely to execute
their single major work early in their careers.
In view of the enormous importance of innovation, it is to be hoped that the success of the
analysis used in this study in understanding the conceptual basis of the achievements of one-hit
wonders in the visual arts will prompt more scholars to examine this phenomenon in other
disciplines. One result may be convincing explanations of career patterns of creativity that have
previously been considered immune to systematic analysis. Another, even greater result may be
an improved understanding of human creativity in general, that may lead to an ability to increase
individual creativity. Why do some conceptual innovators make a single, early innovation, and
fail to produce any other significant work, while others go on to produce a series of important
contributions? The answer to this question may now be within reach, through the use of case
studies like the ones presented above, with research projects designed to compare the one-hit
wonders with their peers who make a number of innovations.
In the past, economists have generally been unwilling to study the careers of individuals,
just as humanists have been unwilling to carry out systematic comparisons of the careers of
significant numbers of individuals. Yet now the possibility of increasing the contributions of
some of the most innovative members of our society, through knowledge gained from systematic
studies of limited numbers of innovators, may be sufficiently great to induce both economists and
humanists to overcome whatever methodological objections have prevented these studies in the
past, and to expand their research agenda to the systematic study of the careers of innovators.

38

39

Footnotes

I thank Robert Jensen and Joshua Kotin for suggestions and discussions of the issues treated in
this paper, and the National Science Foundation for financial support.
1.

Greenberg 1993, p. 118.

2.

E. g. see Galenson 2002a, 2002b.

3.

E. g. see Galenson 2004b.

4.

Rosenblum and Janson 1984, pp. 120-21; Eisenman 1994, pp. 64-66; Crow 1995,
pp. 288-92.

5.

Berger 1955, p. 18.

6.

Berger 1955, pp. 17, 26, 79.

7.

Clark 1973, p. 185.

8.

Friedlaender 1952, pp. 101-02.

9.

Crow 1995, p. 194; Berger 1955, p. 55.

10.

Clark 1973, p. 177.

11.

Eisenman 1994, p. 66.

12.

Porterfield 1998, pp. 47-55.

13.

Porterfield 1998, pp. 56-61; Rosenblum and Janson 1984, pp. 70-71.

14.

Crow 1995, p. 244.

15.

Clark 1973, p. 178.

16.

For a listing see Varnedoe 1987, pp. 203-04.

17.

Galenson 2004a.

18.

Varnedoe 1987, p. 188.

19.

Varnedoe 1987, Chapters 3-4.

20.

Varnedoe 1987, pp. 88-95.

40
21.

Chipp 1968, p. 101.

22.

Chipp 1968, p. 102.

23.

Mauner 1967, pp. 5, 31.

24.

Chipp 1968, p. 94.

25.

Mauner 1967, p. 38.

26.

Chipp 1968, p. 101.

27.

Chipp 1968, p. 97; Denis 1920, p. 4.

28.

Denis, 1920 p. 147.

29.

The Monument could have been treated as a building here, and compared to works
by architects. Yet because of Tatlin’s training as a sculptor, and the impracticality of his
design as a building, the Monument is treated as a sculptor.

30.

Milner 1983, Chapter 8.

31.

Milner 1983, p. 170.

32.

Hughes 1982, p. 92.

33.

Milner 1983, Chapters 9-10.

34.

Curiger 1989, pp. 20-21.

35.

Curiger 1989, p. 39.

36.

Curiger 1989, pp. 134-263.

37.

Hughes 1982, p. 243.

38.

Dennis 1986, pp. 67-78.

39.

Dennis 1986, p. 75.

40.

Dennis 1986, p. 80.

41.

Dennis 1986, pp. 80-85.

42.

Corn 1983, pp. 129-33.

43.

Dennis 1986, p. 222.

41
44.

Corn 1983, p. 33.

45.

Livingstone 1990, pp. 33-36.

46.

Morphet 1992, p. 149; Hamilton 1982, pp. 22-24.

47.

Livingstone 1990, p. 36.

48.

Livingstone 1990. p. 34.

49.

Stangos 1994, p. 230.

50.

Livingstone 1990, p. 33.

51.

Cruickshank 2000, p. 290; Donin 1982, p. 9.

52.

Donin 1982, p. 23.

53.

Cruickshank 2000, p. 290.

54.

Cruickshank 2000, p. 290; Donin 1982, p. 23.

55.

Donin 1982, p. 27.

56.

E.g. Doordan 2002, p. 206; Moffett, Fazio, and Wodehouse 2004, p. 541; Scully
2002, pp. 298-99.

57.

The Red-Blue Chair is illustrated in a number of textbooks of architecture. Those
illustrations are not tabulated in Table 13 because they do not involve the design of
buildings.

58.

Brown 1958, pp. 21, 29, 41.

59.

Banham 1975, p. 68.

60.

Chicago 1979, pp. 11-12.

61.

Chicago 1979, p. 53.

62.

Chicago 1979, p. 8.

63.

Chicago 1979, pp. 13-15.

64.

Sackler 2002, pp. 118-19.

65.

Chicago 1996, pp. 57, 78.

42
66.

Galenson 2003, Table 3.

67.

Munro 2000, p. 481.

68.

Lin 2000, p. 4:08.

69.

Munro 2000, p. 482.

70.

Lin 2000, pp. 4:10-11.

71.

Lin 2000, p. 12:03.

72.

Goldberg 2003, p. 50.

73.

Lin 2000, pp. 4:44-45.

74.

One-hit wonders have not been systematically studied in other arts, or in academic
disciplines, but the existence of both conceptual and experimental innovators has been
documented in arts other than painting - e.g. see Galenson 2004b - and in economics - see
Galenson and Weinberg 2004. The prediction in the text is based on the proposition that
among conceptual innovators in any intellectual activity there are likely to be some who
produce a single important innovation, generally early in their careers, that is not followed
by other contributions of comparable importance.

Table 1: Total Illustrations of Paintings by Five Romantic Artists in 27 Textbooks
Artist

Illustrations

Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres (1780-1867)

61

Eug ne Delacroix (1798-1863)

58

Joseph Mallord William Turner (1775-1851)

47

Théodore Géricault (1791-1824)

44

Antoine-Jean Gros (1771-1835)

17

Source:

Hamilton 1970; Cleaver 1972; Picon 1974; Ruskin 1974; Spencer 1975; Cornell
1983; Britsch and Britsch 1984; Rosenblum and Janson 1984; Sporre 1984;
Feldman 1985; Hartt 1989; Wood, Cole and Gealt 1989; de la Croix, Tansey, and
Kirkpatrick 1991; Sprocatti 1992; Strickland and Boswell 1992; Adams 1994;
Eisenman 1994; Janson and Janson 1995; Stokstad 1995; Grieder 1996; Norman
1997; Wilkins, Schultz, and Linduff 1997; Freeman 1998; Gebhardt 1998; Gilbert
1998; Honour and Fleming 1999; Kemp 2000.

Table 2: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Painting by Each of Artists Listed in Table 1
Artist, painting

Illustrations

Géricault, The Raft of the Medusa, 1819

22

Delacroix, The Death of Sardanapalus, 1827

14

Ingres, Large Odalisque, 1814

11

Turner, Rain, Steam, and Speed - The Great Western Railway, 1844

11

Gros, Napoleon in the Plague House of Jaffa, 1804

11

Source: see Table 1

Table 3: Total Illustrations of Works by Four Late Nineteenth-Century Painters in 36 Textbooks
Artist

Illustrations

Paul Cézanne (1839-1906)

144

Edgar Degas (1834-1917)

114

Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841-1919)

78

Gustave Caillebotte (1848-1894)

18

Source: Jensen 2004, Table 2.

Table 4: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Work by Each of Artists Listed in Table 3
Artist, title

Illustrations

Caillebotte, Paris Street; Rainy Weather, 1877

11

Cézanne, The Large Bathers, 1906

10

Degas, Little Dancer of Fourteen, 1881

10

Renoir, The Boating Party, 1881

10

Source: Jensen 2004, Table 3.

Table 5: Total Illustrations of Paintings by Five Late Nineteenth-Century Painters in 31
Textbooks
Artist

Illustrations

Paul Cézanne (1839-1906)

120

Vincent van Gogh (1853-1890)

101

Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841-1919)

75

Edgar Degas (1834-1917)

74

Paul Sérusier (1863-1927)

14

Source: Galenson 2002a, pp. 83-85.

Table 6: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Painting by Each of Artists Listed in Table 3
Artist, painting

Illustrations

Sérusier, Le Bois d’Amour (The Talisman), 1888

11

Cézanne, The Large Bathers, 1906

9

Renoir, Le Moulin de la Galette, 1876

9

van Gogh, P re Tanguy, 1887

7

Degas, L’Absinthe, 1876

5

Source: see Table 5.

Table 7: Total Illustrations of Sculptures by Six Modern Sculptors in 25 Textbooks
Sculptor

Illustrations

Auguste Rodin (1840-1917)

65

Constantin Brancusi (1876-1957)

51

Alberto Giacometti (1901-66)

39

Henry Moore (1898-1986)

34

Vladimir Tatlin (1885-1956)

19

Meret Oppenheim (1913-85)

7

Source:

Hughes 1982; Cornell 1983; Britsch and Britsch 1984; Sporre 1984; Feldman
1985; Arnason and Wheeler 1986; Honour and Fleming 1986; Hartt 1989; Wood,
Cole, and Gealt 1989; Varnedoe 1990; de la Croix, Tansey, and Kirkpatrick 1991;
Hunter and Jacobus 1992; Sprocatti 1992; Strickland and Boswell 1992; Adams
1994; Fleming 1995; Stokstad 1995; Wilkins, Schultz, and Linduff 1997;
Freeman 1998; Gilbert 1998; Bocola 1999; Britt 1999; Bell 2000; Kemp 2000;
Dempsey 2002.

Table 8: Single Most Frequently reproduced Sculpture by Each of Artists Listed in Table 7
Sculptor, title

Illustrations

Tatlin, Monument to the Third International, 1920

15

Rodin, Monument to Balzac, 1898

12

Brancusi, Bird in Space, 1928

7

Oppenheim, Le Déjeuner en fourrure, 1936

7

Moore, Reclining Figure, 1939

5

Giacometti, Man Pointing, 1947

4

Giacometti, City Square, 1948

4

Source: see Table 7

Table 9: Total Illustrations of Paintings by Five American Artists in 49 Textbooks
Artist

Illustrations

Edward Hopper (1882-1967)

67

Georgia O’Keeffe (1887-1986)

61

Charles Sheeler (1883-1965)

53

Stuart Davis (1894-1964)

52

Grant Wood (1892-1942)

36

Source:

Haftmann 1965; Green 1966; McLanathan 1968; Novak 1969; Rose 1969;
Hamilton 1970; McCoubrey et. al. 1970; Mendelowitz 1970; Myron and Sundell
1971; Cleaver 1972; McLanathan 1973; Picon 1974; Spencer 1975; Davidson
1979; Taylor 1979; Lynton 1980; Russell 1981; Hughes 1982; Britsch and Britsch
1984; Sporre 1984; Arnason and Wheeler 1986; Honour and Fleming 1986; Hartt
1989; Wood, Cole, and Gealt 1989; de la Croix, Tansey, and Kirkpatrick 1991;
Tamplin 1991; Hunter and Jacobus 1992; Strickland 1992; Silver 1993; Adams
1994; Craven 1994; Fleming 1995; Stokstad 1995; Baigell 1996; Hughes 1997;
Lucie-Smith 1997; Wilkins, Schultz, and Linduff 1997; Gebhardt 1998; Gilbert
1998; Lucie-Smith 1999; Preble, Preble, and Frank 1999; Tobler 1999; Kemp
2000; McCoubrey 2000; Prendeville 2000; Bjelajac 2001; Dempsey 2002; Doss
2002; Pohl 2002.

Table 10: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Painting by Each of Artists Listed in Table 9
Artist, painting

Illustrations

Wood, American Gothic, 1930

24

Hopper, Nighthawks, 1942

16

Sheeler, American Landscape, 1930

11

Davis, Lucky Strike, 1921

9

O’Keeffe, Black Iris III, 1926

9

Source: see Table 9.

Table 11: Total Illustrations of Works by Six Contemporary Painters in 36 Textbooks
Painter

Illustrations

Andy Warhol (1928-87)

68

Robert Rauschenberg (1925- )

67

Jasper Johns (1930- )

63

Roy Lichtenstein (1923-97)

54

David Hockney (1937- )

30

Richard Hamilton (1922- )

26

Source:

Russell 1981; Hughes 1982; Cornell 1983; Britsch and Britsch 1984; Sporre 1984;
Feldman 1985; Arnason and Wheeler 1986; Honour and Fleming 1986; Hartt
1989; Wood, Cole, and Gealt 1989; de la Croix, Tansey, and Kirkpatrick 1991;
Tamplin 1991; Wheeler 1991; Hunter and Jacobus 1992; Sprocatti 1992;
Strickland and Boswell 1992; Adams 1994; Stangos 1994; Wood, et. al. 1994;
Janson and Janson 1995; Stokstad 1995; Dawtrey, et. al. 1996; Lucie-Smith 1997;
Wilkins, Schultz, and Linduff 1997; Freeman 1998; Gebhardt 1998; Gilbert 1998;
Britt 1999; Bell 2000; Hopkins 2000; Kemp 2000; Blist ne 2001; Lucie-Smith
2001; Richter 2001; Dempsey 2002; Preble, Preble, and Frank 2002.

Table 12: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Work by Each of Artists Listed in Table 11
Artist, title

Illustrations

Hamilton, Just what is it that makes today’s homes so different, so
appealing?, 1956

21

Rauschenberg, Monogram, 1959

13

Lichtenstein, Whaam!, 1963

12

Warhol, Marilyn Monroe Diptych, 1962

11

Johns, Flag, 1955

10

Hockney, A Bigger Splash, 1967

8

Source: see Table 11.

Table 13: Total Illustrations of Buildings by Seven Modern Architects in 24 Textbooks
Architect

Illustrations

Le Corbusier (1887-1965)

94

Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886-1969)

71

Walter Gropius (1883-1969)

48

Renzo Piano (1937- )

35

Louis Kahn (1901-74)

32

Richard Rogers (1933- )

32

Gerrit Rietveld (1888-1964)

17

Source:

de la Croix, Tansey, and Kirkpatrick 1991; Tamplin 1991; Hunter and Jacobus
1992; Kulterman 1993; Adams 1994; Fleming 1995; Janson and Janson 1995;
Stokstad 1995; Cruickshank 1996; Grieder 1996; Lucie-Smith 1997; Wilkins,
Schultz, and Linduff 1997; Gilbert 1998; Glancey 1998; Theil-Siling 1998; Sutton
1999; Cruickshank 2000; Kemp 2000; Watkin 2000; Trachtenberg and Hyman
2001; Doordan 2002; Glancey 2003; Moffett, Fazio, and Woodhouse 2004;
Sennott 2004.

Table 14: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Building by Each of Architects Listed in Table 13
Architect, Building

Illustrations

Piano and Rogers, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris 1971-77

22

Gropius, Bauhaus, Dessau, Germany, 1926

20

Le Corbusier, Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, France 1950-54

19

Mies van der Rohe, Seagram Building, New York, 1958

18

Rietveld, Rietveld Schröder House, Utrecht, 1924

16

Kahn, Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth, 1966-72

7

Kahn, Jonas Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, La Jolla, 1959-65

7

Source: see Table 13.

Table 15: Total Illustrations of Works by Eight Contemporary American Artists in 40 Textbooks
Artist

Illustrations

Jasper Johns (1930- )

108

Frank Stella (1936- )

73

Cindy Sherman (1954- )

46

Richard Serra (1939- )

44

Bruce Nauman (1941- )

43

Eva Hesse (1936-70)

36

Judy Chicago (1939- )

21

Maya Lin (1960- )

16

Source: Galenson 2003, Table 2.

Table 16: Single Most Frequently Reproduced Work by Each of Artists Listed in Table 15
Artist, title

Illustrations

Chicago, The Dinner Party, 1979

19

Lin, Vietnam Veterans Memorial, 1982

16

Serra, Tilted Arc, 1981

16

Johns, Three Flags, 1958

13

Nauman, Self-Portrait as a Fountain, 1970

8

Hesse, Hang-Up, 1966

7

Stella, Die Fahne Hoch, 1959

7

Sherman, Untitled Film Still, 1979

6

Source: Galenson 2003, Table 3.

References

1

Adams, Laurie. 1994. A History of Western Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Arnason, H. H., and Daniel Wheeler. 1986. History of Modern Art, third edition. New York:
Harry N. Abrams.
Baigell, Matthew. 1996. A Concise History of American Painting and Sculpture, revised edition.
New York: Harper Collins.
Banham, Reyner. 1975. Age of the Masters. New York: Harper and Row.
Bell, Corey. 2000. Modern Art. New York: Watson-Guptill.
Berger, Klaus. 1955. Géricault and His Work. Lawrence: University of Kansas Press.
Bjelajac, David. 2001. American Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Blist ne, Bernard. 2001. A History of 20th-Century Art. Paris: Flammarion.
Bocola, Sandro. 1999. The Art of Modernism. Munich: Prestel Verlag.
Britt, David, editor. 1999. Modern Art. New York: Thames and Hudson.
Britsch, Ralph, and Todd Britsch. 1984. The Arts in Western Culture. Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall.
Brown, Theodore. 1958. The Work of G. Rietveld Architect. Utrecht: A. W. Bruna and Zoon.
Chicago, Judy. 1979. The Dinner Party. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books.
Chicago, Judy. 1996. Beyond the Flower. New York: Penguin Books.
Chipp, Herschel, editor. 1968. Theories of Modern Art. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Clark, Kenneth, 1973. The Romantic Rebellion. New York: Harper and Row.
Cleaver, Dale. 1972. Art, second edition. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Corn, Wanda. 1983. Grant Wood. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cornell, Sara. 1983. Art. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Craven, Wayne. 1994. American Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.

2
Crow, Thomas. 1995. Emulation. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cruickshank, Dan, editor. 1996. Sir Banister Fletcher’s ‘A History of Architecture’. Oxford:
Architectural Press.
Cruickshank, Dan, editor. 2000. Architecture. New York: Watson-Guptill.
Curiger, Bice. 1989. Meret Oppenheim. Zurich: Parkett.
Davidson, Abraham. 1979. The Story of American Painting. New York: Galahad Books.
Dawtrey, Liz, et. al. 1996. Investigating Modern Art. New Haven: Yale University Press.
de la Croix, Horst; Richard Tansey; and Diane Kirkpatrick. 1991. Gardner’s Art Through the
Ages, ninth edition. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Dempsey, Amy. 2002. Art in the Modern Era. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Denis, Maurice. 1920. Théories, fourth edition. Paris: L. Rouart and J. Watelin.
Dennis, James. 1968. Grant Wood. Columbia: University of Missouri Press.
Donin, Gianpiero. 1982. Renzo Piano. Rome: Casa del Libra.
Doordan, Dennis. 2002. Twentieth-Century Architecture. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Doss, Erika. 2002. Twentieth-Century American Art. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eisenman, Stephen, editor. 1994. Nineteenth-Century Art. London: Thames and Hudson.
Feldman, Edward. 1985. Thinking About Art. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Fleming, William. 1995. Arts and Ideas, ninth edition. Fort Worth: Harcourt Brace.
Freeman, Julian. 1998. Art. New York: Watson-Guptill.
Friedlander, Walter. 1952. David to Delacroix. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Galenson, David. 2002a. “Measuring Masters and Masterpieces: French Rankings of French
Painters and Paintings from Realism to Surrealism.” Histoire et Mesure 17 (1-2), pp. 4786.
Galenson, David. 2002b. “Quantifying Artistic Success: Ranking French Painters - and Paintings - from Impressionism to Cubism.” Historical Methods 35 (1): 5-20.

3
Galenson, David. 2003. “The Reappearing Masterpiece: Ranking American Artists and Art
Works of the Late Twentieth Century.” NBER Working Paper 9935.
Galenson, David. 2004a. “The Life Cycles of Modern Artists: Theory and Implications.”
Historical Methods, forthcoming.
Galenson, David. 2004b. “A Portrait of the Artist as a Very Young or Very Old Innovator:
Creativity at the Extremes of the Life Cycle.” NBER Working Paper 10515.
Galenson, David, and Bruce Weinberg. 2004. “Creative Careers: The Life Cycles of Nobel
Laureates in Economics.” Unpublished paper.
Gebhardt, Volker. 1998. The History of Art. New York: Barron’s.
Gilbert, Rita. 1998. Living with Art, fifth edition. Boston: McGraw Hill.
Glancey, Jonathan. 1998. 20th Century Architecture. New York: Overlook Press.
Glancey, Jonathan. 2003. The Story of Architecture. London: DK Publishing.
Goldberger, Paul. 2003. “Memories.” The New Yorker, December 8.
Green, Samuel. 1966. American Art. New York: Ronald Press.
Greenberg, Clement. 1993. The Collected Essays and Criticism. Volume 4. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Grieder, Terence. 1996. Artist and Audience, second edition. Madison: Brown and Benchmark.
Haftmann, Werner. 1965. Painting in the Twentieth Century. New York: Frederick Praeger.
Hamilton, George H. 1970. 19th and 20th Century Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Hamilton, Richard. 1982. Collected Words 1953-1982. London: Thames and Hudson.
Hartt, Frederick. 1989. A History of Painting, Sculpture, Architecture, third edition. New York:
Harry N. Abrams.
Honour, Hugh, and John Fleming. 1986. The Visual Arts, second edition. Englewood Cliffs:
Prentice-Hall.
Honour, Hugh, and John Fleming. 1999. The Visual Arts, fifth edition. New York: Harry N.
Abrams.

4
Hopkins, David. 2000. After Modern Art, 1945-2000. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hughes, Robert. 1982. The Shock of the New. New York: Knopf.
Hughes, Robert. 1997. American Visions. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Hunter, Sam, and John Jacobs. 1992. Modern Art, third edition. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Janson, H.; and Anthony Janson. 1995. History of Art, fifth edition. New York: Harry N.
Abrams.
Jensen, Robert 2004. “Some Reflections on Innovation and the Western Canon of Great Art and
Artists.” Unpublished paper, University of Kentucky.
Kemp, Martin, editor. 2000. The Oxford History of Western Art. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kulterman, Udo. 1993. Architecture in the 20th Century. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold.
Lin, Maya. 2000. Boundaries. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Livingstone, Marco. 1990. Pop Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Lucie-Smith, Edward. 1997. Visual Arts in the Twentieth Century. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Lucie-Smith, Edward. 1999. Lives of the Great 20th-Century Artists. London: Thames and
Hudson.
Lucie-Smith, Edward. 2001. Movements in Art Since 1945. London: Thames and Hudson.
Lynton, Norbert. 1980. The Story of Modern Art. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Mauner, George. 1967. The Nabis. New York: Garland.
McCoubrey, John, et. al. 1970. American Painting, 1900-1970. New York: Time Life.
McCoubrey, John. 2000. American Tradition in Painting, new edition. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
McLanathan, Richard. 1968. The American Tradition in the Arts. New York: Harcourt Brace and
World.
McLanathan, Richard. 1973. Art in America. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

5
Mendelowitz, Daniel. 1970. A History of American Art, second edition. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston.
Milner, John. 1983. Vladimir Tatlin and the Russian Avant-Garde. New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Moffett, Marian; Michael Fazio; and Lawrence Woodhouse. 2004. A World History of
Architecture. Boston: McGraw Hill.
Morphet, Richard. 1992. Richard Hamilton. London: Tate Gallery.
Munro, Eleanor. 2000. Originals, new edition. New York: Da Capo Press.
Myron, Robert, and Abner Sundell. 1971. Modern Art in America. New York: Crowell-Collier.
Norman, Geraldine. 1977. Nineteenth-Century Painters and Painting. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Novak, Barbara. 1969. American Painting of the Nineteenth Century. New York: Praeger.
Picon, Gäeton. 1974. Modern Painting. New York: Newsweek Books.
Pohl, Frances. 2002. Framing America. London: Thames and Hudson.
Preble, Duane; Sarah Preble; and Patrick Frank. 1999. Artforms, sixth edition. New York:
Longman.
Preble, Duane; Sarah Preble; and Patrick Frank. 2002. Artforms, seventh edition. Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Prendeville, Brendan. 2000 Realism in 20th Century Painting. London: Thames and Hudson.
Richter, Klaus. 2001. Art from Impressionism to the Internet. Munich: Prestel.
Rose, Barbara. 1969. American Painting. Lausanne: Skira.
Rosenblum, Robert, and H. W. Janson. 1984. 19th-Century Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Ruskin, Ariane. 1974. History in Art. New York: Franklin Watts.
Russell, John. 1981. The Meanings of Modern Art. New York: Museum of Modern Art.
Sackler, Elizabeth, editor. 2002. Judy Chicago. New York: Watson-Guptill Publications
Scully, Vincent. 2002. Modern Architecture and Other Essays. Princeton: Princeton University

Press.

6

Sennott, R. Stephen, editor. 2004. Encyclopedia of 20th-Century Architecture. New York: Fitzroy
Dearborn.
Silver, Larry. 1993. Art in History. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Spencer, Harold. 1975. The Image Maker. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Sporre, Dennis. 1984. The Arts. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Sprocatti Sandro. 1992. A Guide to Art. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Stangos, Nikos, editor. 1994. Concepts of Modern Art, third edition. London: Thames and
Hudson.
Stokstad, Marilyn. 1995. Art History. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Strickland, Carol, and John Boswell. 1992. The Annotated Mona Lisa. Kansas City: Andrews
and McMeel.
Sutton, Ian. 1999. Western Architecture. London: Thames and Hudson.
Tamplin, Ronald, editor. 1991. The Arts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, Joshua. 1979. The Fine Arts in America. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Theil-Siling, Sabine, editor. 1998. Icons of Architecture: The 20th Century. Munich: Prestel.
Tobler, Jay, editor. 1999. The American Art Book. London: Phaidon.
Trachtenberg, Marvin; and Isabelle Hyman. 2001. Architecture, second edition. New York: Harry
N. Abrams.
Varnedoe, Kirk. 1987. Gustave Caillebotte. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Varnedoe, Kirk. 1990. A Fine Disregard. New York: Harry N. Abrams.
Watkin, David. 2000. A History of Western Architecture, third edition. New York: WatsonGuptill.
Wheeler, Daniel. 1991. Art Since Mid-Century. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Wilkins, David; Bernard Schultz; and Katheryn Linduff. 1997. Art Past, Art Present, third

edition. New York: Harry N. Abrams.

7

Wood, Michael; Bruce Cole; and Adelheid Gealt. 1989. Art of the Western World. New York:
Simon and Schuster.
Wood, Paul; et. al. 1994. Modernism in Dispute. New Haven: Yale University Press.

