                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           R&D SUBSIDIES AND CLIMATE POLICY:
                                IS THERE A “FREE LUNCH”?

                                              David Popp

                                         Working Paper 10880
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10880


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2004




The author thanks Larry Goulder, Richard Newell, and Klaas-Jan Koops for helpful conversations that
inspired this paper. Financial support for this work was provided by the National Science Foundation under
grant number SES-0001679. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy: Is There a “Free Lunch”?
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 10880
October 2004
JEL No. O33, O38, O41, Q42, Q43, Q55

                                           ABSTRACT

Because of the long-term nature of the climate problem, technological advances are often seen as an

important component of any solution. However, when considering the potential for technology to

help solve the climate problem, two market failures exist which lead to underinvestment in climate-

friendly R&D: environmental externalities and the public goods nature of new knowledge. As a

result, government subsidies to climate-friendly R&D projects are often proposed as part of a policy

solution. Using the ENTICE model, I analyze the effectiveness of such subsidies, both with and

without other climate policies, such as a carbon tax. While R&D subsidies do lead to significant

increases in climate-friendly R&D, this R&D has little impact on the climate itself. Subsidies address

the problem of knowledge as a public good, but they do not address the environmental externality,

and thus offer no additional incentive to adopt new technologies. Moreover, high opportunity costs

to R&D limit the potential role that subsidies can play. While R&D subsidies can improve

efficiency, policies that directly affect the environmental externality have a much larger impact on

both atmospheric temperature and economic welfare.

David Popp
Assistant Professor of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
400 Eggers
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu
       Politicians often propose increased R&D spending as a solution to the climate change

problem. Such spending offers the political cover of doing “something” about climate change

while avoiding more painful costs that may come from regulations requiring emissions

reductions. For example, in his 2003 State of the Union address, President George W. Bush

proposed $1.2 billion of research funding to develop vehicles powered by fuel cells. Can such

policies impact the global climate? Can R&D subsidies substitute for more restrictive emissions

policies? This paper addresses these questions.

       Because of the long-term nature of the climate change problem, technological change is

often considered a part of any policy solution. There is ample evidence that market forces such

as higher prices or stringent environmental policies induce technological change. For example,

Popp (2002) documents dramatic increases in patenting for renewable energy technologies

during the energy crisis of the 1970s. In recent years, economic models of climate policy have

paid increasing attention to the links between policy and technological change. Models that

explicitly link technological progress to climate policy find that such links reduce the costs of a

given policy, as policy levers serve to hasten the development of more climate-friendly

technologies.

       Given the importance of policy-induced technological change, as well as a political

climate that favors R&D subsidies over policies to limit emissions, it is useful to consider the

role that research and development (R&D) policy, by itself, might play. Such policies are of

interest because, in the language of economists, markets for new knowledge are imperfect.

Spillovers of knowledge make it difficult for inventors to reap the full social benefits of their

innovations. As such, the incentives provided by private markets for R&D investment lead to

underinvenstment in R&D. Policies addressing this, such as government-funded subsidies for
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                   2


R&D, R&D tax credits, or improved intellectual property rights to help inventors capture more

of the returns to innovation, lead to greater levels of R&D spending, and presumably more

innovation as a result.

       Recent work to consider the role of R&D policy as part of a climate policy portfolio

includes Schneider and Goulder (1997), Kverndokk et al. (2004), and Fischer and Newell

(2004). Schneider and Goulder (1997) note that even if it is desirable to postpone the bulk of

emissions abatement to the future (see, for example, Wigley et al. 1996), short-term policies that

bring about low-cost emissions reductions are desirable. One reason for this argument is that

such policies spur innovation, making future emissions abatement less costly. However, they

also find that simply using R&D subsidies to achieve these cost reductions is not as effective.

While R&D subsidies do correct market failures that pertain to knowledge markets, they do not

address environmental market failures, and thus do not encourage adoption of any newly

discovered climate-friendly technologies.      Kverndokk et al. (2004) extend this work by

considering both an existing and potential new alternative energy technology. R&D subsidies

increase usage of the existing alternative energy technology, but as a result delay the introduction

of the newer, and possibly better, technology.       Fischer and Newell (2004) compare R&D

subsidies and other policies designed to reduce carbon emissions from the U.S. electricity sector.

They rank R&D subsidies as the least effective for reducing emissions, but do not consider the

effect of knowledge spillovers, and do not consider the use of multiple policies simultaneously.

       This paper builds on this work to study the role of both carbon taxes and R&D subsidies

using the ENTICE model (Popp 2004a,b), an extension of the well-known DICE model of global

warming (Nordhaus 1994, Nordhaus and Boyer 2000). Like the DICE model, the ENTICE

model is dynamic growth model linking economic activity and the environment. Because it
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                               3


explicitly models the economic impact of climate damages, the model can be used to simulate

optimal policy paths that balance both the costs and benefits of climate policy. In this paper, I

use the model to compare the effectiveness of R&D subsidies to policies such as a carbon tax

designed to reduce emissions. Because the ENTICE model calculates the costs and benefits of

each policy, I am able to build on the existing literature by calculating optimal levels of R&D

subsidies. Like Schneider and Goulder, I show that these subsidies do enhance the effects of

other policies, but have little impact on their own. Furthermore, by examining the change in

optimal policy paths with and without R&D subsidies, I show that most of the benefits of R&D

subsidies come from cost savings, as there is little change in emissions under a carbon tax with

or without subsidies in place. Finally, when deciding on a level of government R&D spending,

policymakers need to be aware of the opportunity costs of new R&D spending. Because R&D is

performed by highly-trained personnel, some new energy R&D will likely come at the cost of

other types of productive R&D. If policymakers ignore these costs, the overall macroeconomic

effect of subsidies may even be negative.



I. Theory: Market Failures Affecting Environmental R&D

       While market forces will lead firms to do some research on technologies designed to

reduce carbon emissions, there are two reasons to expect markets to underinvest in such R&D.

These market failures provide the motivation for government policy designed to increase such

research. One, of course, is the traditional problem of environmental externalities. Because

carbon emissions are not priced by the market, firms and consumers have no incentive to reduce
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                 4


emissions without policy intervention. This reduces the market for technologies that reduce

emissions, and thus reduces incentives to develop such technologies.1

        The second market failure pertaining to R&D is the public goods nature of knowledge

(see, for example, Geroski 1995). In most cases, new technologies must be made available to the

public for the inventor to reap the rewards of invention. However, by making new inventions

public, some (if not all) of the knowledge embodied in the invention becomes public knowledge.

This public knowledge may lead to additional innovations, or even to copies of the current

innovations.2 These knowledge spillovers provide benefit to the public as a whole, but not to the

innovator. As a result, private firms do not have incentives to provide the socially optimal level

of research activity.

        Much economic research has been done quantifying the effect of such spillovers.

Economists studying the returns to research consistently find that knowledge spillovers result in

a wedge between private and social rates return to R&D. Examples of such studies include

Mansfield (1977, 1996), Pakes (1985), Jaffe (1986), Hall (1996), and Jones and Williams (1998).

Typical results include marginal social rates of return between 30 and 50 percent.                              In

comparison, estimates of private marginal rates of return on investments range from 7 to 15

percent (Bazelon and Smetters 1999, Jones and Williams 1998, Hall 1996). Since firms make

investment decisions based on their private returns, the wedge between private and social rates of

return suggests socially beneficial research opportunities are being ignored by firms because they

are unable to fully capture the rewards of such innovations.


1
  Note that the externality market failure need not eliminate incentives to develop such technologies completely.
The market failure problem means that individuals do not consider the social benefits of using technologies that
reduce emissions. However, such technologies may also come with private benefits – for example, reduced gasoline
expenditures from switching to a hybrid-powered automobile.
2
  Intellectual property rights, such as patents, are designed to protect inventors from such copies. However, their
effectiveness varies depending on the ease in which inventors may “invent around” the patent by making minor
modifications to an invention. See, for example, Levin et al. (1987).
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                 5


       Because of knowledge spillovers, climate-friendly R&D will be underprovided by market

forces even if policies to correct the environmental externalities of emissions, such as carbon

taxes, are in place. Popp (2004a) finds that the welfare gains from an optimal carbon tax

increase by seven percent when the tax is supplemented with R&D subsidies sufficient to support

all socially-efficient research. This suggests two possible avenues through which policy can

encourage the development of environmentally-friendly             technologies:    correcting   the

environmental externality and/or correcting knowledge market failures.

       Not surprisingly, economic theory dictates that the socially optimal policy is to address

both market failures. Moreover, Schneider and Goulder (1997) show that policies to address

knowledge spillovers are more effective if they address all knowledge spillovers, rather than

focusing on R&D pertaining to alternative energy. Nonetheless, as targeted R&D subsidies are

likely to be more politically popular than either broad-based R&D measures or restrictive

emissions targets, it is useful to explore the potential of each mechanism both individually and in

tandem.

       To address this question, I use the ENTICE-BR model of climate policy (Popp 2004b).

ENTICE-BR extends the ENTICE model (Popp 2004a) to include policy-induced R&D on both

energy efficiency and a carbon-free backstop energy technology source. Both ENTICE models

build on the well-known DICE model of climate change (Nordhaus 1994, Nordhaus and Boyer

2000). The DICE model is a dynamic growth model of the global economy that includes links

between economic activity, carbon emissions, and the climate. Because it includes both costs

and benefits of climate change, it allows the modeler to simulate optimal paths for control of

carbon emissions. As such, unlike the analysis by Schneider and Goulder, I am able to calculate

optimal policies for both carbon taxes and R&D subsidies. Moreover, I examine how the
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                 6


optimal policy for each changes depending on whether the other market failure has also been

addressed.



II. The ENTICE Model

           To examine R&D policies to address climate change, one must use a climate policy

model that that explicitly links climate policy and innovation. Typically, these models include

such links in one of two ways. Bottom-up models include a detailed specification of energy

systems, but typically do not include detailed modeling of the overall macroeconomy. Such

models usually implement induced technological change with a learning-by-doing framework, in

which the costs of various technologies decrease with experience. Examples include Gerlagh

and van der Zwaan (2003), Manne and Richels (2002), Grübler and Messner (1998), and

Messner (1997). Because these models do not address the opportunity costs of any new research

efforts, they tend to provide optimistic results concerning the potential of technological change.3

Top-down models focus on the links between environmental policy and macroeconomic

performance.         Endogenous technological change in these models typically comes through

accumulated investment in research and development (R&D). Recent models of this nature

include Goulder and Schneider (1999), Nordhaus (2002), and Buonanno et al. (2003). However,

of these models, only Goulder and Schneider include a choice of multiple energy technologies,

including a carbon-free alternative.

           The ENTICE-BR model belongs to this second group of models. It is a top-down model

providing explicit links between economic activity and environmental damages. The model uses

the basic dynamic growth model framework of the DICE model (Nordhaus 1994, Nordhaus and

Boyer 2000), but includes explicit links between climate policy and climate-friendly R&D.
3
    See Popp (2004a, 2003) for a discussion.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                      7


Climate-friendly R&D can come in one of two forms: as R&D designed to improve overall

energy efficiency, or R&D that helps reduce the cost of the carbon-free energy source. The

model is calibrated to a base year of 1995, and is solved in 10-year increments for a period of

350 years.4 Figure 1 illustrates the logic of the ENTICE-BR model. Key equations pertaining to

the energy research sector are presented below. Interested readers are referred to Popp (2004a,b)

for more detailed presentation of the model structure.

        In both the DICE and ENTICE models, the goal of the model is to maximize the present

value of per capita utility, which increases along with increased per capita consumption, subject

to various economic and environmental constraints. One important difference between ENTICE

and the original DICE model is that energy use must enter the production function explicitly, so

that the potential benefits of energy saving research can be captured. As illustrated in Figure 1,

total energy services, which are defined below, are used along with capital and labor to produce

output. Defining output as Qt, labor as Lt, the physical capital stock, Kt, and effective energy

units, Et, the production function used in ENTICE-BR is:

(1)               Qt = At K tγ L1t − γ − β Etβ − p F , t Ft − p B, t Bt

Note that the cost of both energy sources are subtracted from final output, and that the price of

both fossil fuels and the backstop, pF.t and pB,t respectively, vary over time. The model is made

dynamic by the various uses for output, which can satisfy current consumption needs, or be

invested into the physical capital stock or as energy R&D.5 Energy R&D either increases the

level of energy efficiency technology or lowers the cost of the backstop technology. The

4
  Details of the calibration can be found in Popp (2004b) and in an appendix available from the author. All results
presented in this paper use the base case parameters from that paper, which assumes an initial backstop price of
$1200 per carbon ton equivalent (equivalent to 7.1¢/kWh). The effect of changing the calibrated parameter values
in a model with R&D subsidies is similar to the effect of such changes in the model without R&D subsidies.
Sensitivity analysis in the model without R&D subsidies may be found in Popp (2004b).
5
  As in the basic DICE model, other types of R&D are treated exogenously, and simply modeled as increases in the
productivity of all inputs over time.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                  8


environmental component of the ENTICE-BR model links fossil fuel usage to increases in

atmospheric temperature. An associated damage function results in lower levels of output as

temperature increases.

       As the main difference between the DICE model and ENTICE-BR is the energy research

sector, I discuss those components of the model in greater detail. Effective energy units, Et, uses

a nested constant elasticity of substitution (CES) framework to aggregate the contributions of

fossil fuels, the backstop energy source, and knowledge pertaining to energy efficiency. The

first nest, introduced in Popp (2004a), combines energy-efficiency knowledge and fuel

consumption into the composite input of effective energy units. The second nest, between fossil

fuels and the backstop technology, is introduced in van der Zwaan et al. (2002).               This

specification models the backstop and fossil fuels are imperfect substitutes, allowing for the

possibility of “niche markets” for the backstop technology even when the price of the backstop

exceeds fossil fuel prices. In each nest, the ease of substitution is represented by ρi. The case of

perfect substitution is ρi = 1. The elasticity of substitution is 1/(1–ρi). Given this, effective

energy units are modeled as:

                                                                        1
                    ⎡                                           ρ /ρ
                                                               ⎞ H B⎤
                                                                            ρH
                                    ⎛⎛ F           ρB
                    ⎢                         ⎞                     ⎥
               Et = ⎢α H H E ,Ht + ⎜⎜ ⎜⎜
                           ρ             t                 ρB ⎟
(2)                                           ⎟⎟        + Bt        ⎥
                                    ⎜⎝ αΦΦt                    ⎟⎟
                    ⎢               ⎝          ⎠                ⎠   ⎥
                    ⎣                                               ⎦

       Equation (2) states that the total energy requirements for production must be met either

by the use of fossil fuel or by technological advances that substitute for fossil fuels. Note that

technology affects equation (2) in one of two ways. HE,t represents technological advances that

replace fuels in production, and can thus be thought of as improvements to energy efficiency.

This stock of knowledge responds endogenously to changes in policy, through an invention
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                       9


possibilities frontier that is described below. αH is a scaling factor that determines the level of

energy savings resulting from new knowledge.6

         In addition, technology influences the level of the backstop technology chosen by

lowering the cost of this input. The backstop technology represents energy sources, such as wind

or solar power, that are assumed abundant, and thus available at constant marginal cost.

Currently, the high costs of these technologies limit their potential contribution to energy

consumption. However, we expect that technological advances will lower their costs over time.

Defining HB,t as the stock of knowledge pertaining to the backstop, and using η to represent the

relationship between new knowledge and prices, the backstop price at time t is:7

                                                PB,0
(3)                                   p B,t =
                                                H ηB,t

         The contribution of new energy R&D to the knowledge stocks HE,t and HB,t is determined

by an invention possibilities frontier, which translates R&D into new contributions to

knowledge. Knowledge is cumulative, so that these contributions are added to the previous


6
  Technology also enters exogenously through Φt, which represents exogenous changes in the ratio of carbon
emissions per unit of carbon services. Examples include changes in consumption patterns and switching to less
carbon-intensive fossil fuels, such as natural gas. The role of exogenous technological change is explored more
fully in Popp (2004a). This remaining technological change is retained so that emissions in the baseline (no policy)
simulation with R&D replicate the results of the DICE model without R&D. The R&D modeled in the ENTICE
models captures purposeful short-term efforts to improve energy efficiency or lower the costs of the backstop
technology. However, such R&D is not the only way in which carbon intensity falls over time. Because the DICE
model and its variants are a one-sector macroeconomic growth model, changes in consumption patterns or
substitution among types of fossil fuels are not explicitly modeled. As a result, long-run emissions simulated
without any exogenous decline in carbon-intensity are unrealistically high. Fortunately, Popp (2004a) shows that
the percentage of exogenous technological change remaining does not affect the net economic impact of induced
technological change, as it is the level of R&D induced between an exogenous and endogenous R&D simulation that
is important. Changing the scaling factor only changes the level of emissions in each simulation, but not the
difference between results in simulations with and without climate policy.
7
  Because differences in the costs of fossil fuels and the backstop technology will affect their relative usage, defining
the costs of fossil fuels is also important. Following Nordhaus and Boyer (2000), the price of carbon is the sum of
the marginal cost of carbon extraction, and a markup that captures the difference between consumer prices and the
marginal costs of extraction. Defining CumCt as cumulative carbon extraction up to year t, and CumC* as the
maximum possible extraction, the price of fossil fuels at any given time is PF,t = 276.29 + 700[CumCt/CumC*]4.
.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                               10


knowledge stock. Defining Ri,t as R&D on research for each technology at time t, the knowledge

stocks are given as

(4)            H i ,t = aRib,it H iφ,t + (1 − δ H ) ⋅ H i ,t −1 ,          i = E,B

I assume that both bi and φi lie between 0 and 1. As discussed in Popp (2004a), φi < 1 assumes

there are diminishing returns to research across time. Since energy R&D is specialized within a

given field, it becomes more and more difficult to find new inventions as the knowledge frontier

moves out. Popp (2002) provides supporting evidence. Similarly, b < 0 assumes diminishing

returns to research at any given time.

       Finally, because of the public goods nature of knowledge, the role of market failures in

R&D must be considered. As noted earlier, virtually all empirical studies of R&D find that the

social returns to R&D are greater than the private returns to R&D. Since firms will invest until

the private rates of return to R&D are equal to the rates of returns on other investments,

underinvestment in R&D will occur. I model these positive externalities by constraining the

private rate of return for R&D to be four times that of investment in physical capital. Removing

this constraint assumes that government policies, such as R&D subsidies, are in place to correct

market failures.

       In addition, since empirical work suggests that at least some energy R&D will come at

the expense of other forms of R&D, we need to account for the opportunity cost of R&D. Since

the social rate of return on R&D is four times higher that of other investment, losing a dollar of

other R&D has the same effect as losing four dollars of other investment. This is modeled by

subtracting four dollars of private investment from the physical capital stock for each dollar of

R&D crowded out by energy R&D, so that the net capital stock is:

(5)            Kt = {It – 4*crowdout*(RE,t + RB,t)}+(1-δ)Kt-1,
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                    11


where crowdout represents the percentage of other R&D crowded out by energy R&D, It

represents investment in physical capital, and δ is the depreciation rate of capital over time.8



III. Simulations

         Because the ENTICE-BR model includes environmental damages, it can be used to

calculate an optimal climate policy in which marginal benefits equal marginal costs. Such a

policy meets a benefit-cost criterion of maximizing total net benefits, and is equivalent to using

carbon taxes to correct the environmental externality described in section I.                           In addition,

removing the constraint that the rate of return of energy R&D be four times that of other

investment is equivalent to using policy to correct market failures for R&D, such as government

funded R&D that supplements private R&D effort.9 In this section, I use the model described

above to compare the effects of alleviating one or both of these market failures. I begin by

summarizing the main results of using an optimal carbon tax, which corrects the environmental

externality, but does not address knowledge spillovers. I then consider how the results change

when R&D subsidies are used to correct the market failures resulting from knowledge spillovers.

Finally, because the level of emissions reductions resulting from an optimal tax is lower than

often proposed by policymakers, I also consider whether R&D subsidies affect the desirability of

more restrictive emissions reduction proposals.




8
  For this paper, I use the base case assumption of 50% crowding out, as discussed in Popp (2004a,b). These papers
show that assumptions about crowding out are important, and explain much of the variation found across climate
policy models that include induced technological change.
9
  Of course, the implied assumption that the social rate of return on R&D now equals that of other investments
implies that the government sets subsidy levels at a socially optimal level. Thus, the results provide an upper bound
for the potential of R&D subsidies. Realistically, one would expect political constraints and imperfect information
to limit the government’s ability to set optimal subsidies. This strengthens the results that follow, which suggest that
subsidies by themselves are not nearly as effective as carbon taxes.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                               12


A. Optimal Environmental Policy

        Popp (2004b) presents the results of a simulated optimal carbon tax without R&D

subsidies. As is typical of economic models that solve for an optimal climate policy, the results

recommend that climate policy proceed slowly.                   Because carbon emissions stay in the

atmosphere for a long period of time, the marginal damage from any additional ton of emissions

is low. Thus, gradually phasing in carbon reduction lowers the opportunity cost of reducing

emissions without having much impact on the global climate. Figure 2 shows the carbon tax for

the first 100 years. The tax starts at a value of $10.30 per ton in 2005,10 and rises to $72.59 by

2105. To compare the magnitude of the tax to other policy goals, Nordhaus and Boyer (2000)

calculate a tax of $52.48 per ton to restrict emissions to 1990 levels.

        The emissions reductions resulting from this carbon tax can be found by comparing the

lines for business as usual (BAU) and optimal tax in Figure 3. Compared to BAU, carbon

emissions under an optimal carbon tax fall by just 3.2% in 2005, by 5.4% in 2025, and by 15.4%

in 2105. As a result of this, atmospheric temperature continues to rise, although at a slightly

slower pace, as shown in Figure 4. Here, and in the figures that follow, solid lines illustrate

results under BAU, and dashed lines results using an optimal carbon tax only. Lines marked

with additional symbols show results from a simulation also including R&D subsidies. These

are discussed in subsection B.

        Table 1 and Figures 5 and 6 show R&D spending on energy efficiency and the backstop

technology (as well as under the R&D subsidy policy to be discussed below). In the base year

(1995), there are $10 billion of energy R&D, and $1 billion of backstop energy R&D.11 Based


10
  All monetary figures are presented in 1990 U.S. dollars.
11
  The $10 billion figure for energy R&D represents 2% of all R&D spending by OECD countries in 1995. The $1
billion figure for backstop research represents an additional 10 percent of R&D, and comes from data in Anderson
(1997).
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                 13


on results from Popp (2002), the model is calibrated so that the initial elasticity of energy R&D

with respect to energy prices is 0.35, and so that the elasticity falls over time due to diminishing

returns to research, as discussed in section II. This results in $13 billion of energy efficiency

R&D in 2005, and $1.37 billion of backstop energy R&D in 2005 under the optimal policy.

       Finally, it is useful to consider the overall economic impact of the carbon tax. I calculate

the net economic impact as the present value of consumption with policy minus the present value

of consumption under BAU. Simply correcting the environmental externality through an optimal

carbon tax increases welfare by $2.31 trillion.



B. R&D Subsidies

       The above results correct show the effects of policy designed to correct the

environmental externality market failure. However, as discussed in section II, the potential of

R&D to reduce the costs of complying with climate change is limited by additional market

failures for R&D. Because firms cannot fully capture the social benefits of their research, they

will underinvest in energy (and other) R&D. The main contribution of this paper is to ask how,

if at all, the potential of R&D changes when such market failures are corrected. This section

evaluates the potential of government R&D subsidies as part of a climate policy scenario.

       Because two market failures, the environmental externality and knowledge spillovers,

need to be corrected, there are three possible policies to consider. They differ by addressing

either one or both of these two market failures. First, one could imagine a policy that simply

corrects the knowledge spillover problem, but ignores the environmental externality. This would

be equivalent to removing the rate of return constraint in ENTICE-BR, but not implementing a

carbon tax. While such a policy corrects for knowledge spillovers, it ignores the environmental
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                14


benefits that emerge from energy R&D. Second, the government could use R&D subsidies that

consider both the social benefits of knowledge spillovers and the environmental benefits

provided by the R&D. Such subsidies will, of course, be greater than the subsidies under the

first policy option. In this case, the total level of R&D would be equivalent to the R&D under a

carbon tax with the rate of return constraint removed.12 Finally, rather than using R&D subsidies

in isoloation, the government can use subsidies in tandem with an optimal carbon tax. Such a

policy would be preferred to either using a carbon tax or subsidies alone, as it addresses both

market failures.13

        Table 1 and Figures 5 and 6 show the levels of both types of energy R&D under the

various policy scenarios. Table 1 also shows the percentage by which R&D increases from BAU

under each policy scenario.14 In the short run, simply implementing an optimal tax increases

R&D more than correcting R&D market failures. For example, compared to BAU, backstop

R&D increases by 7 percent under the carbon tax (which corrects the environmental externality,

but not the spillover problem), but just 4.7 percent in the BAU scenario with R&D subsidies

(which corrects the spillover problem, but not the environmental externality).

        However, while the percentage of R&D induced by the carbon tax remains relatively

constant over time, the percentage increase induced by the subsidy grows. Each additional R&D

dollar not only benefits current consumers, but also provides additional building blocks for future

research. Thus, as shown in the figures, the major difference in long run R&D comes from

correcting the spillover problem, rather than the environmental externality. By the middle of


12
   Such a policy is implemented in ENTICE-BR by first solving the model with a carbon tax and no rate of return
constraint. I then constrain R&D to the levels found in that run, and re-run the model without a carbon tax.
13
   Note that, unlike Schneider and Goulder (1997), I only consider the effect of correcting the knowledge market
failures for energy R&D only, rather than broader policies designed to correct market failures in all R&D markets.
14
   In the table, BAU with R&D subsidies represents the first policy discussed above, in which only knowledge
spillovers are considered. Optimal tax with R&D subsidies gives the level of R&D under both the second and third
policies discussed above, in which subsidies address both the environmental externality and knowledge spillovers.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                               15


next century, optimal R&D subsidies increase R&D by as much as 43 percent. Furthermore,

after correcting for knowledge spillovers, the additional increment to R&D from also

acknowledging the environmental externality is small, as shown by the differences between the

lines labeled BAU with R&D subsidies and optimal tax with R&D subsidies in Figures 5 and 6.

There is a larger difference between R&D with and without subsidies under BAU (or under an

optimal tax policy) than there is between R&D with and without a tax when a subsidy is in place.

Thus, while climate policy will induce some increases in climate-friendly R&D, the most

significant gains to R&D spending come from directly addressing the market failures resulting

from knowledge spillovers.

       Nonetheless, note from Figures 3 and 4 that while subsidies do increase energy R&D in

the long-run, they have little impact on other important variables. Recall that, in these figures,

the two solid lines show emissions under BAU and the dashed lines show emissions with the

optimal carbon tax. Symbols mark the lines representing policies with R&D subsidies. These

figures emphasize the importance of environmental policy for reducing emissions. While there

is a significant drop in emissions between any BAU scenario versus any carbon tax scenario,

there is almost no change in emissions under BAU versus BAU with R&D subsidies only.

Similarly, the addition of R&D subsidies does not lead to further emissions reductions after a

carbon tax is in place. Of course, similar trends hold for temperature.

       Moreover, using R&D subsidies leads to virtually no change the optimal level of the

carbon tax, which remains within one-half of one percent of its original level after subsidies are

included. The carbon tax rate is based on the marginal damage of emissions. The marginal

damage curve for carbon emissions in any given year is relatively flat, as one additional ton of

carbon is just a small addition to total concentrations. While R&D allows emissions reductions
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                  16


to be achieved at lower cost, it does not change the marginal benefits gained from reducing

emissions, which is the avoided marginal damage. A tax set at this level is still necessary to

force consumers and producers to consider the environmental costs of their actions when

consuming fossil fuels. While R&D subsidies can augment other environmental policy, and can

help lower the costs of complying with these policies, they cannot serve as a substitute for

policies designed to restrict emissions!15

         As would be expected, with such small impacts on emissions, the effects of R&D

subsidies on overall economic welfare are also small. Table 2 shows the welfare gains from four

separate policies: R&D subsidies only, optimal R&D subsidies only, an optimal tax only, or both

an optimal tax and optimal R&D subsidies. Of course, the maximum welfare gain is achieved

when policy addresses both market failures. In this case, welfare improves by $2.43 trillion. As

shown in the table, most of this increase comes from the carbon tax. A carbon tax alone achieves

95% of these welfare gains. However, R&D subsidies alone achieve just 10% of the maximum

welfare gain.

         The above results suggest that R&D subsidies can be a useful complement to other

environmental policies, but do not have the ability to address the climate change problem alone.

Thus, while policymakers may find it politically expedient to fall back on proposals for increased

research efforts to confront climate change, significant progress cannot be made without

complementary policies in place to restrict emissions. There are two reasons for the limited

potential of R&D subsidies. Most importantly, R&D subsidies address market failures in the

invention of new technologies, but do not provide incentives to adopt new technologies.

Consider, for example, Figure 7, which shows the percentage of energy coming from backstop

15
  The result that the carbon tax does not change is consistent of the theoretical predictions of Goulder and Mathai’s
(2000) benefit-cost model, which compares optimal tax levels with and without policy-induced technological change
(but ignores knowledge spillovers and R&D subsidies).
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                17


sources. Compared to BAU, this percentage increases by about five percentage points under a

carbon tax. However, there is almost no change in the percentage when comparing BAU with

and without R&D subsidies.

        A second limitation of R&D subsidies comes from the opportunity costs of R&D. R&D

is performed by highly trained scientists and engineers. Shifting more resources towards one

type of research results in fewer resources available for other research opportunities.                        For

example, Goolsbee (1998) finds that one of the chief beneficiaries of R&D tax subsidies are

scientists and engineers, as increased demand for their services leads to higher wages. Similarly,

in Popp (2004a), I present evidence that approximately one-half of the energy R&D spending

that took place in the 1970s and 1980s came at the expense of other R&D. This lost R&D comes

at a high cost. Because of market failures for knowledge, the social returns to R&D are high for

all types of R&D, not just for energy R&D. Recall from section II that the consensus from

studies on the returns to R&D is that the social rates of return are approximately four times

higher than the rates of return to other investments. Thus, taking one dollar from other R&D

projects has the same effect as taking four dollars from other types of investments. Indeed, the

socially optimal level of R&D subsidies found by the ENTICE-BR model account for this, as the

rates of return to R&D remain twice that of other investment even after the constraint requiring

the returns to be four times higher is removed.16 If the government ignores these social costs,

and subsidizes energy R&D until its rate of return is equal to that of other investments, net

economic welfare actually falls due to the lost value of other R&D.




16
  The result follows from the combination of the social returns on R&D being four times that of other investments,
and from the assumption that 50% of new energy R&D comes at the cost of other R&D. Thus, the total social cost
of new energy R&D is twice that of other investments.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                   18


C. Other Climate Policies

           By implementing an optimal carbon tax, the above simulation shows the maximum

possible gains to economic welfare from correcting the market failures concerning emissions and

R&D. However, most discussions of climate policy revolve around more restrictive policies that

set fixed emissions levels. Thus, I consider the interaction of R&D subsidies with two additional

policies – one restricting emissions to 1995 levels, and a second mandating at least 10 percent of

energy come from backstop sources.17 The policy mandating backstop energy retains a carbon

tax as well, so that climate policies are in place even after backstop prices fall to a level where a

government mandate is not needed to encourage 10% market penetration.

           Figure 8 compares atmospheric temperature under the BAU scenario and each of our

three policy scenarios. For each policy scenario, results are presented for policies that also

include R&D subsidies. As before, these subsidies have little effect on the value of variables

other than R&D, so that the results without subsidies are similar. Requiring 10% of total energy

to come from backstop sources slightly lowers atmospheric temperature in the short run, but has

little long-term effect. As shown in Figure 9, which illustrates the percentage of energy coming

from backstop sources under each policy, the mandate merely speeds up the time it takes for

backstop market penetration to reach 10%. Once this occurs, the mandate has no additional

effect, and usage patterns mirror those of the optimal carbon tax policy.

           In contrast, restricting emissions to 1995 levels lowers atmospheric temperature nearly

one degree Celsius more than either the optimal tax or backstop mandate policies. However, this

drop in temperature comes at a cost. As shown in Table 2, restricting emissions to 1995 levels

has a negative impact on net economic welfare – the potential benefits of reduced emissions do

not justify the costs of reducing emissions quickly. Recall from Figure 3 that an optimal climate
17
     Popp (2004b) includes a discussion of a policy restricting emissions without R&D subsidies.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                             19


policy entails a gradual emissions reduction. Acting quickly forces short-term reductions before

technology has had a chance to evolve and lower the costs of action.

       Turning to R&D, note that while R&D subsidies increase both backstop and energy

efficiency R&D under these alternative polices, the impact of this additional R&D is generally

negligible. Figures 10 and 11 show energy efficiency and backstop R&D under each policy

scenario, both with and without subsidies. Not surprisingly, the restrictive policy induces the

most R&D, particularly for backstop energy. As before, the biggest jumps in R&D come not

from environmental policy, but from the subsidies themselves.

       Nonetheless, once again R&D subsidies have little impact on emissions or temperature.

In fact, under the restricted emissions case, there is no change in temperature when R&D

subsidies are added to the policy, since the climate policy offers no incentives for reductions

beyond what is initially mandated, even as subsidies improve the quality of technology. In this

case, the only benefits from additional R&D come from cost savings. Faster development of

new technologies makes meeting a fixed emissions target cheaper. As a result, the carbon tax

needed to meet this goal falls by 14 percent in 2005, and by five percent in 2025. Such results

are consistent with the predictions of Goulder and Mathai (2000) in the case of a cost-effective

policy designed to meet a given goal at the least possible cost.

       However, under both the restricted emissions and backstop mandate policies, the benefits

of these cost savings are small compared to the direct effect of addressing the environmental

externality through policy. In each case, R&D subsidies only improve net economic welfare by

a few percentage points, as shown in Table 2. Not only do R&D subsidies not effectively

address the climate change problem on their own, they also have little ability to soften the

economic costs of more restrictive climate policies.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                  20


IV. Discussion

       This paper examines the potential role that subsidies for climate-friendly R&D may play

in policy designed to reduce carbon emissions. Because firms are not fully compensated for the

social benefits of knowledge spillovers, they perform less R&D than is socially optimal. R&D

subsidies, either through direct government funding of R&D or through tax credits for private

R&D activity, can help raise R&D levels to a socially desirable level. Indeed, the results show

that such subsidies do have a significant effect on the long run levels of energy R&D. Moreover,

in the long-run subsidies induce more R&D than a carbon tax does.

       However, R&D subsidies cannot serve as a substitute for other climate policies. While

R&D levels rise dramatically when subsidies are included in the policy simulations, there is little

change to other variables. Most importantly, since the subsidies do not provide incentive to

adopt new technologies, emissions do not fall unless subsidies are accompanied by a policy to

address the environmental externality created by carbon emissions, such as a carbon tax.

Moreover, for policies designed to meet a benefit-cost criterion, using subsidies does not change

the optimal level of the carbon tax, as the marginal benefits of reduced emissions do not change.

In contrast, under a cost-effective criterion, designed to meet a fixed emissions target at the least

possible cost, R&D subsidies lower the tax level needed to achieve the desired emissions

reductions. In both cases, while properly targeted R&D subsidies can lower the cost of such

policies somewhat, as shown by the five percent welfare gain from the policy using both a tax

and subsidies in section III B, the biggest gains to both welfare and the environment come from

policies designed to target emissions directly.

       Finally, when setting the level of R&D subsidies, policy makers need to consider the

opportunity cost of additional R&D. Because R&D requires highly trained personnel, at least
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                21


some new energy R&D efforts will come at the expense of other R&D. Just as spillovers make

the social returns to energy R&D high, they also make the social returns to other types of R&D

high. Thus, some of the large social benefits of additional energy R&D are offset by large

opportunity costs from giving up other types of R&D spending. Ignoring the costs of reducing

these R&D efforts would result in overly generous subsidies for energy R&D, and could have

negative impacts on the economy as a whole.

       These results have important implications for those on both sides of the policy debate.

For those who advocate that climate policy should proceed slowly, the limitations of R&D

suggest that technological change is unlikely to reduce the burden of costly climate policies by

significant amounts. On the other hand, the results also offer support for those that argue that

quick, strict emissions reductions are needed. For example, the go-slow approach suggested by

the DICE model is partially a result of assumptions about the potential damages from climate

emissions (see, for example, Kaufmann 1997). For those who think the damages are higher, and

that strict carbon policies are justified, the results show that R&D policy alone cannot substitute

for high carbon taxes or strict emissions limits if significant emissions reductions are to be

achieved. In either case, while R&D subsidies can be useful to lower the cost of any given

emissions target, they do not eliminate the need for such a target, nor for continued debate over

the stringency that emissions limits should take.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                        22


References

Anderson, Dennis (1997), “Renewable Energy Technology and Policy for Development,”
      Annual Review of Energy and the Environment, 22, 187-215.
Bazelon, Coleman and Kent Smetters (1999), “Discounting Inside the Washington Beltway,”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13(4), 213-228.
Buonanno, Paolo, Carlo Carraro, and Marzio Galeotti (2003), “Endogenous Induced Technical
      Change and the Costs of Kyoto,” Resource and Energy Economics, 25(1), 11-34.
Fischer, Carolyn and Richard Newell (2004), “Environmental and Technology Policies for
       Climate Change and Renewable Energy”, Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 04-
       05.
Gerlagh, Reyer and Bob van der Zwaan (2003), “Gross World Product and Consumption in a
       Global Warming Model with Endogenous Technological Change,” Resource and Energy
       Economics, 25(1), 35-57.
Geroski, Paul (1995), “Markets for Technology: Knowledge, Innovation, and Appropriability,”
      ch. 4 in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Paul
      Stoneman ed., Blackwell Publishers, Oxford UK, 90-131.
Goolsbee, Austan (1998), “Does government R&D policy mainly benefit scientists and
    engineers?”American Economic Review, 88(2), 299-302.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Koshy Mathai (2000), “Optimal CO2 Abatement in the Presence of
      Induced Technological Change,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
      39(1), 1-38.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Stephen H. Schneider (1999), “Induced technological change and the
    attractivenes of CO2 emissions abatement,” Resource and Energy Economics, 21, 211-253.
Grübler, Arnulf and Sabine Messner (1998), “Technological Change and the Timing of
       Mitigation Measures,” Energy Economics, 20(5-6), 495-512.
Hall, Bronwyn (1996), “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” in
       Technology, R&D, and the Economy, Bruce Smith and Claude Barfield, eds., Brookings,
       140-183.
Jaffe, Adam B. (1986), “Technological Opportunity and Spillover of R&D: Evidence from
       Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76, 984-1001.
Jones, Charles I. and John C. Williams (1998), “Measuring the Social Return to R&D,”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 1119-1135.
Kaufmann, Robert K. (1997), “Assessing the DICE Model: Uncertainty Associated With the
      Emission and Retention of Greenhouse Gases,” Climatic Change, 35(4), 435-448.
Kverndokk, Snorre, Knut Einar Rosendahl, and Thomas F. Rutherford (2004), “Climate Policies
      and Induced Technological Change: Which to Choose, the Carrot or the Stick?”
      Environmental and Resource Economics, 27(1), 21-41.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                          23


Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter (1987),
       “Appropriating the Returns from Industrial Research and Development,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 3, 783-820.
Manne, Alan S. and Richard G. Richels (2002), “The impact of learning-by-doing on the timing
      and costs of CO2 abatement,” Working Paper 02-8, AEI-Brookings Joint Center for
      Regulatory Studies, Washington, DC.
Mansfield, Edwin (1996), “Microeconomic Policy and Technological Change,” in Technology
      and Growth: Conference Proceedings, Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Jane Sneddon Little, eds.,
      Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 183-200.
Mansfield, Edwin (1977), “Social and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations,”
      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91, 221-240.
Messner, Sabine (1997), “Endogenized Technological Learning in an Energy Systems Model,”
      Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 7(3), 291-313.
Pakes, Ariel (1985), “On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return,” Journal of
       Political Economy, 93, 390-409.
Nordhaus, William D. (2002) “Modeling induced innovation in climate-change policy,” in:
    Arunf Grübler, Nebojsa Nakicenovic, W.D. Nordhaus (Eds.), Technological Change and the
    Environment, Resources for the Future, Washington, DC, 182-209.
Nordhaus, William (1994), Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of the Greenhouse
      Effect, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, William .D. and Joseph Boyer (2000), Warming the World: Economic Models of
      Global Warming, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Popp, David (2004a), “ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of
      Global Warming,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 48(1), 742-
      768.
Popp, David (2004b), “ENTICE-BR: The Effects of Backstop Technology R&D on Climate
      Policy Models,” NBER Working Paper #10285.
Popp, David (2003), “Lessons From Patents: Using Patents to Measure Technological Change in
       Environmental Models,” NBER Working Paper #9978, forthcoming in Ecological
       Economics.
Popp, David (2002), “Induced innovation and energy prices,” American Economic Review, 92
    (2002) 160-180.
Schneider, Stephen H. and Lawrence H. Goulder (1997), “Achieving low-cost emissions
       targets,” Nature, 389, 13-14.
van der Zwaan, Bob C.C., Reyer Gerlagh, Ger Klaassen, and Leo Schrattenholzer (2002),
      “Endogenous technological change in climate change modeling,” Energy Economics,
      24(1), 1-19.
Wigley, T.M., Richard G. Richels, and James. A. Edmonds (1996), “Economic and
      Environmental Choices in the Stabilization of Atmospheric CO2 concentrations,”, Nature,
      379, 240-243.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                               24


       Figure 1 – Schematic of the ENTICE-BR Model




                                  Fossil                  Backstop
                                  Fuels                   Technology



              Temperature                                                Energy
                                                 Fuels                   Efficiency



                                                            Energy
      Capital                   Labor                       Services




                               Output




       Investment          Consumption           R&D



Figure 1 illustrates the logic of the ENTICE-BR model. Capital, labor and energy services are
combined to produce output, which can be used for consumption, or reinvested into energy R&D
or other investment. As described in the text, energy services combines two types of fuels (fossil
fuels and a non-carbon backstop technology) and energy efficiency technologies. The use of
fossil fuels leads to increased atmospheric temperature, which lowers output through a damage
function.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                              25


Figure 2 – Optimal Carbon Tax Rates

                                80



                                70



                                60
 carbon tax (1990 US dollars)




                                50



                                40



                                30



                                20



                                10



                                 0
                                 2005   2025   2045          2065   2085   2105
                                                      year
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                26


Figure 3 – Carbon Emissions Under Optimal Climate Policies



                            16


                            14


                            12
 emissions (billion tons)




                            10


                            8


                            6


                            4


                            2


                            0
                            1995              2015       2035             2055            2075           2095
                                                                   year
                                   BAU                      BAU w/R&D subsidies            optimal tax
                                   tax w/R&D subsidies      BAU w/Optimal R&D subsidies



The figure shows annual carbon emissions under both business and usual (BAU) and an optimal
carbon tax policy. Note that R&D subsidies, by themselves, result in very small reductions in
emissions. This is true in both the BAU and optimal tax simulations. Policies aimed directly at
emissions are needed to achieve reductions.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                                                     27


Figure 4 – Atmospheric Temperature Under Optimal Climate Policies

                                                       4


                                                      3.5
 Degree Celsius increase from from 1900 mean levels




                                                       3


                                                      2.5


                                                       2


                                                      1.5


                                                       1


                                                      0.5


                                                       0
                                                       1995       2015      2035   2055      2075          2095   2115    2135         2155   2175
                                                                                                    year

                                                            BAU                           BAU w/R&D subsidies            optimal tax
                                                            tax & subsidy                 BAU w/Optimal R&D subsidies




The figure shows how the departure of global mean temperature from 1990 levels, reported in
degrees Celsius is affected by carbon taxes and/or R&D subsidies. As with emissions, R&D
subsidies by themselves have little effect on temperature.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                                   28


Figure 5 – Energy Efficiency R&D Under Optimal Climate Policies

                                          60




                                          50
  Energy R&D (billions 1990 US dollars)




                                          40




                                          30




                                          20




                                          10




                                           0
                                           1995         2015            2035                2055           2075             2095
                                                                                     year

                                                  BAU          BAU w/R&D subsidies           optimal tax     tax w/R&D subsidy




The figure shows the level of energy efficiency R&D, in billions of 1990 US dollars. As can be
seen by comparing the BAU and optimal tax lines with and without subsidies, policies that
correct R&D market failures induce more additional R&D than does the carbon tax itself.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                           29


Figure 6 – Backstop Energy R&D Under Optimal Climate Policies


                                         6




                                         5
  backstop R&D (billions 1990 dollars)




                                         4




                                         3




                                         2




                                         1




                                         0
                                         1995   2015        2035                2055            2075                2095
                                                                         year

                                                 BAU   BAU w/R&D subsidies        optimal tax   tax w/R&D subsidy


The figure shows the level of backstop energy R&D, in billions of 1990 US dollars. As can be
seen by comparing the BAU and optimal tax lines with and without subsidies, policies that
correct R&D market failures induce more additional R&D than does the carbon tax itself.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                           30


Figure 7 – Percentage of Energy From Backstop Sources

                               30




                               25
  Percentage backstop energy




                               20




                               15




                               10




                                5




                                0
                                1995   2015   2035   2055       2075       2095         2115    2135      2155      2175
                                                                       year

                                              BAU    BAU w/R&D subsidies          optimal tax   tax w/R&D subsidy


The figure shows the percentage of energy from backstop sources under BAU or an optimal
carbon tax. As with emissions, a policy addressing carbon emissions directly, such as a carbon
tax, is necessary to increase this percentage. There is almost no change between BAU and BAU
with R&D subsidies.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                                                  31


Figure 8 – Temperature Under Various Policy Scenarios

                                                                4
 Atmospheric temp. departure from 1900 mean levels (Celcius)




                                                               3.5


                                                                3


                                                               2.5


                                                                2


                                                               1.5


                                                                1


                                                               0.5


                                                                0
                                                                1995         2025        2055     2085          2115     2145              2175
                                                                                                    year

                                                                       BAU          optimal tax   10% backstop mandate    1995 emissions


The figure shows the departure of global mean temperature from 1990 levels, reported in degrees
Celsius, under various policy scenarios. In each case, both emissions reduction policies and
R&D subsidies are used. While the backstop mandate has little effect on long-run atmospheric
temperature, restricting emissions to 1995 levels reduces long-run temperature by over one
degree Celsius compared to BAU.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                              32


Figure 9 -- Percentage of Energy From Backstop Sources Under Various Policy Scenarios


                               60




                               50
  Percentage backstop energy




                               40




                               30




                               20




                               10




                                0
                                1995    2025         2055       2085           2115        2145        2175
                                                                   year

                                       BAU     optimal tax   10% backstop mandate     1995 emissions




The figure shows the percentage of energy from backstop sources under various policy scenarios.
Note that the backstop mandate increases backstop usage in the short-run, but has little long run
effect.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                                33


Figure 10 – Energy Efficiency R&D Under Various Policy Scenarios

                                          60



                                          50
  Energy R&D (billions 1990 US dollars)




                                          40



                                          30



                                          20



                                          10



                                           0
                                           1995             2015             2035                2055   2075             2095
                                                                                          year

                                               optimal tax                     tax w/R&D subsidy        10% backstop mandate
                                               10% backstop mandate w/subs     1995 emissions           1995 emissions w/subs




The figure shows the level of energy efficiency R&D, in billions of 1990 US dollars, under
various policy scenarios. Note that the biggest increases come not from more restrictive policies,
but from R&D subsidies.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                                                               34


Figure 11 – Backstop Energy R&D Under Optimal Climate Policies


                                        9


                                        8
 backstop R&D (billions 1990 dollars)




                                        7


                                        6


                                        5


                                        4


                                        3


                                        2


                                        1


                                        0
                                        1995               2015              2035               2055   2075             2095
                                                                                         year

                                               optimal tax                     tax w/R&D subsidy       10% backstop mandate
                                               10% backstop mandate w/subs     1995 emissions          1995 emissions w/subs


The figure shows the level of backstop energy R&D, in billions of 1990 US dollars, under
various policy scenarios.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                            35


Table 1 – Energy R&D Spending Over Time


       Energy Efficiency R&D             2005          2025         2055          2105
       BAU                              13.08         19.67        26.37         37.96
          w/R&D subsidies               13.08         21.69        32.22         49.53
       optimal tax                      13.28         19.91        26.88         38.89
          w/R&D subsidies               13.41         22.37        33.44            51

       Backstop R&D                      2005         2025          2055         2105
       BAU                                1.28          1.7          2.27        3.43
          w/R&D subsidies                1.34         1.93          2.93         5.16
       optimal tax                       1.37         1.83          2.44         3.61
          w/R&D subsidies                1.44         2.12          3.25         5.67

       Percent Change from BAU
       Energy Efficiency R&D            2005          2025         2055          2105
       BAU                               N/A           N/A          N/A           N/A
          w/R&D subsidies               0.0%         10.3%        22.2%         30.5%
       optimal tax                      1.5%          1.2%         1.9%          2.4%
          w/R&D subsidies               2.5%         13.7%        26.8%         34.4%

       Backstop R&D                     2005          2025         2055          2105
       BAU                               N/A           N/A          N/A           N/A
          w/R&D subsidies               4.7%         13.5%        29.1%         50.4%
       optimal tax                      7.0%          7.6%         7.5%          5.2%
          w/R&D subsidies              12.5%         24.7%        43.2%         65.3%


Table 1 presents levels of energy R&D spending over time, in billions of 1990 US dollars. BAU
shows R&D spending under business as usual without any R&D subsidies. BAU with R&D
subsidies presents the R&D levels with subsidies that address knowledge spillovers, but not the
environmental externality. Optimal tax shows R&D levels under a carbon tax designed to
correct the environmental externality, but without R&D policy to address knowledge spillovers.
Optimal tax with R&D subsidies is the level of R&D under policies addressing both the
environmental and knowledge market failures.
R&D Subsidies and Climate Policy                                                            36


Table 2 – Welfare Gains

                                                                            % of
                                                                        maximum
                                                          Gain from      welfare
                                                               BAU          gain
Optimal tax & R&D subsidies                                    2.43        100%
Optimal tax only                                               2.31         95%
Optimal R&D subsidies only                                     0.27         11%
R&D subsidies only                                             0.23          9%
Restrict emissions & R&D subsidies                            -3.61       -148%
Restrict emissions to 1995 levels                             -3.75       -154%
Backstop mandate & R&D subsidies                               1.68         69%
Backstop mandate                                               1.57         64%


Table 2 summarizes the welfare gains under various optimal emissions policies, as well as under
two alternative policies discussed in subsection C. Net economic welfare is measured as the
difference in the present value of consumption between a policy and BAU simulation, and is
presented in trillions of 1990 US dollars. The maximum welfare gain comes from a combination
of optimal carbon taxes and R&D subsidies, as this addresses both market failures. Note that
R&D subsidies themselves do not enhance welfare as much as policies that directly deal with the
environmental externality from carbon emissions.
