                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      UNBALANCED GROWTH

                                               Kala Krishna
                                              Cesar A. Perez

                                          Working Paper 10899
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10899


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2004 by Kala Krishna and Cesar A. Perez. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Unbalanced Growth
Kala Krishna and Cesar A. Perez
NBER Working Paper No. 10899
November 2004
JEL No. O12, O30, D50

                                             ABSTRACT

We study a model designed to understand the concept of unbalanced growth. We define leading

sectors to be those that raise the profits from industrialization for other sectors the most. We identify

the leading sectors and show that subsidizing them in sequences will raise welfare if the future is not

discounted too strongly.

Kala Krishna
Department of Economics
523 Kern Graduate Building
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802
and NBER
kmk4@psu.edu

Cesar A. Perez
The Pennsylvania State University
                           Unbalanced Growth
                              Kala Krishna∗
                 Pennsylvania State University and NBER
                                César A. Pérez
                         Pennsylvania State University
                                  October 25, 2004


                                        Abstract
          We study a model designed to understand the concept of unbalanced
      growth. We define leading sectors to be those that raise the profits from
      industrialization for other sectors the most. We identify the leading sectors
      and show that subsidizing them in sequence will raise welfare if the future
      is not discounted too strongly.


1     Introduction

In the post World War II decades, much attention was directed to the problem of

development. Why, it was asked, did some countries develop and others, which

looked quite similar, did not? The obvious answer seemed to be that there

were alternative routes any given economy could take. Two distinct schools of

thought emerged.

    Rosenstein-Rodan [10], along with Nurkse [9], Scitovsky [11], and Fleming

[3], argued that there was a vicious circle present. Firms did not industrialize

because there was no market for their goods and there was no market for their

goods because income was low and income was low because firms did not in-

dustrialize. This kind of low-level equilibrium, it was argued, could be broken
   ∗ Comments from two referees and the editor are gratefully acknowledged. Research support

from the National Science Foundation under grant SBR-932085 is gratefully acknowledged by
Krishna.



                                             1
by the simultaneous industrialization of a large part of the economy. Failure to

industrialize is seen in essence as a coordination problem. This has come to be

called the “big push” or “balanced growth” doctrine.

   On the other hand, the “unbalanced growth” camp led by Albert O. Hirschman

[4], while agreeing on the existence of a vicious circle, argued that industrial-

ization of certain “leading” sectors would pull along the rest of the economy.

Hirschman’s discussion of “backward” and “forward” linkages was an integral

part of this analysis. These refer to the eﬀects of one investment on the prof-

itability of investment at earlier and later stages of production. Investment by

a firm can, through forward linkages, motivate investment by another firm that

uses the first firm’s output as an input. Similarly, through backward linkages,

one firm’s investment can motivate another firm, which provides inputs to the

first firm, to invest. Instead of industrializing a large number of sectors, he

argued that what was needed was the industrialization of the “leading” sectors.

Then, through backward and forward linkages these sectors would spark the

industrialization of the rest of the economy. Thus, growth is unbalanced as it

does not occur everywhere, only in certain sectors, which then pull others along.

   These ideas, although highly influential in the 1950s, lost much of their

appeal in later decades. Krugman [6] argues that this fall from grace stemmed

from the fact that the ideas lacked formalization. He says:

   “Like it or not, however, the influence of ideas that have not been embalmed

in models soon decays. And this was the fate of high development theory.

Myrdal’s eﬀective presentation of the idea of circular and cumulative processes,

or Hirschman’s evocation of linkages, were stimulating and immensely influential

in the 1950s and early 1960s. By the 1970s..., they had come to seem not so

much wrong as meaningless. What were these guys talking about? Where were

their models? And so high development theory was not so much rejected as


                                       2
simply bypassed.”

   It was only in the late 80s and early 90s, beginning with the work of Murphy,

Shleifer, and Vishny [8] (MSV from here on), that formal models which address

some of these issues were introduced. MSV’s paper delineated the conditions

under which the balanced growth doctrine might apply. They show that an

industrializing firm must be able to aﬀect aggregate income through more than

just its profits if the balanced growth approach is to be warranted. The idea

is very simple. Aggregate income is composed of wage income and profits. A

firm can acquire a better technology (an act we call industrialization) by paying

a fixed cost. Initially aggregate income is too low, thereby demand is too low,

making industrialization unprofitable. In their basic model there is no role

for government to spark oﬀ self-sustaining industrialization by a “big push.”

The reason is that if industrialization is not privately profitable, it must reduce

income in the aggregate when undertaken. This then reduces demand for other

firms thereby reducing their motivation to industrialize.

   For government intervention to be desirable, a firm’s industrialization must

increase aggregate income, even though its profits are negative. In this event it

is possible that after a number of sectors have industrialized, aggregate demand

may have increased enough to make industrialization profitable for other sectors.

If profits are the only way a firm’s industrialization aﬀects aggregate income,

then this is not possible. In their paper MSV look at three ways in which a firm’s

industrialization may aﬀect aggregate income: (1) wage diﬀerentials between

sectors, (2) an inter-temporal model that shifts income between periods, and

(3) reductions in cost through investment in infrastructure.

   In the literature, the focus has been on balanced rather than unbalanced

growth. Models along the lines of those developed by MSV are not suited to

exploring the ideas that lie behind unbalanced growth. In their models, all firms


                                        3
are alike and the only issue is whether it is possible for industrialization by

one firm to create spillovers in demand for other firms through an increase in

aggregate income.1 In the words of Streeten [13]:

    “Insofar as unbalance does create desirable attitudes, the crucial question is

not whether to create unbalance, but what is the optimum degree of unbalance,

where to unbalance and how much, in order to accelerate growth; which are the

“growing points,” where should the spearheads be thrust, on which slope would

snowballs grow into avalanches?”

    In the same vein Bardhan [1] says:

    “From the policy point of view the new literature on learning and strategic

complementarities, like the earlier development literature on externalities, un-

derestimates the diﬃculty of identifying the few sectors and locations where the

spillover eﬀects may be large ... .”

    In contrast to MSV, our model is structured to shed light on these key ques-

tions. We consider an economy with a hierarchy of goods. Only the good at the

top of the hierarchy is consumed. Each good uses the good below it in the hierar-

chy, as well as labor, as inputs. The vertical structure of the model implies that

a cost reduction at any stage reduces the price of the final good and increases

its demand. Consequently, the derived demand for all intermediates rises and

this increase in their demand shifts the change in profits from industrialization

at any stage upwards. Linkages are related to the extent by which industrial-

ization by a sector aﬀects the profitability of industrialization of sectors above

and below it. If forward linkages and backward ones are equally strong, then a

parallel shift occurs. If forward linkages are stronger than backward linkages,

the change in profits from industrialization shift up more for goods downstream
   1 To be fair, the third model analyzed by MSV does consider the role of infrastructure, an

input, on profitability of investment by other identical firms. However, it is not formulated to
answer the key questions regarding unbalanced growth.




                                               4
from the sector and less for firms upstream from it.2

    The model presented here fits squarely into the complementarities and cu-

mulative processes literature. The acquisition, by a sector, of better technology

translates into a lower price for the consumption good and a corresponding

increase in demand for other sectors’ output. This makes their potential in-

vestments more profitable. Because of fixed costs associated with the new tech-

nology, no firm acting independently finds it profitable to invest. Investment

complementarities are not taken advantage of, and the vicious circle of low

demand-no investment-low demand becomes an underdevelopment trap. But,

as Matsuyama [7] in his excellent survey of the complementarities literature3

points out:

    “...the circularity does not always imply a vicious circle. If the economy

acquires more than a critical mass of support industries, the very fact that the

relation is circular generates a virtuous circle.”

    The unbalanced growth approach is based on the idea that industrializing

the “leading” sectors is the most eﬃcient way to reach this critical mass and

turn a vicious circle into a virtuous one.

    The structure of our model resembles that of MSV and is a combination of a

vertical structure similar to the vertical complementarities model in Matsuyama

[7] and the investment with start-up costs model in Shleifer [12]. However, our

model is designed to address a diﬀerent set of questions.

    We define the leading sector to be the one whose investment has the largest
   2 The issue of where linkages are the strongest is where the consumer good-oriented growth

camp and the heavy industry-oriented growth camp diﬀer. However, linkages may well have
been strongest upstream for a large, relatively closed economy, like India in the 60’s, which
produced many of the intermediates it used, while they may well have been strongest down-
stream for a smaller, more open economy. Hence, both camps could have been correct, but
for diﬀerent countries!
   3 His survey is strictly about complementarities in models with monopolistic competition.

Although our model does not involve monopolistic competition the complementarities are
exactly those his paper surveys.




                                             5
positive eﬀect on other sectors’ decision to invest. Since the change in the

incentive to invest comes from the eﬀect on the final goods cost, this boils down

to identifying the sector whose industrialization reduces the cost of the final

good the most. We find that when sectors use each other’s outputs as inputs

relatively intensively (our intermediate input parameter γ > 1) then the leading

sector tends to be the sector farthest upstream. Conversely, low intensity use

of other’s output implies the leading sector is downstream.4

     The paper is organized as follows. In the next section we lay out the basic

model. Section 3 deals with the eﬀects of industrialization as a function of where

it occurs in the hierarchy. This identifies the leading sectors depending on the

extent of the linkages between sectors. Section 4 asks whether subsidization can

create a virtuous circle where initial subsidization sparks self-sustaining indus-

trialization. While industrialization by any sector always helps other sectors,

small positive eﬀects need not spark oﬀ industrialization of the entire economy.

We find that the extent of cost savings together with the extent of linkages de-

termine whether self-sustaining industrialization can occur. Then we ask how

subsidization can improve welfare and when a case can be made for subsidiza-

tion. Section 5 provides some concluding remarks.


2          The Basic Model

We will first set out the model in the absence of any decisions about investment

and consider these issues in the following section. On the demand side, we have

a representative agent setup. The utility function of this agent is given by:



                                   U (T, Z) = T ε Z 1−ε
    4 Ina more general model where the input output relations are more diﬀuse other factors
like the share in cost of an intermediate good in the cost of final goods will come into play.




                                              6
where Z is produced by using a unit of labor alone. The production process of

T is more complicated. The final good T is the culmination of the hierarchical

production process discussed above. We assume that there are T + 1 steps

involved in making T. A unit of T requires γ units of the good directly below

it in the hierarchy, indexed by T − 1, as well as a unit of labor. Thus, T is

produced in the T + 1 stage of the process. The intermediate good indexed

by 0 is at the bottom of the hierarchy and just requires a unit of labor for its

production.

   As we assume perfect competition, price equals cost. Taking Z as the nu-

meraire good, since the price of Z equals its cost:


                                 p(Z) = 1 = w.                               (1)


Throughout we will use p(j) and c(j) to denote the price and cost of good j.

We also have that the price of intermediate good 0 equals its cost:


                              p(0) = c(0) = w = 1.                           (2)


From the technology assumed:


                              c(t) = γc(t − 1) + w                           (3)


for 0 < t ≤ T. By expanding (3) we get:
                                        µ               ¶
                                            γ t+1 − 1
                             c(t) = w                                        (4)
                                              γ−1

for γ 6= 1, and:

                                 c(t) = wt + w                               (5)

for γ = 1. Note that c(t) must increase in t since goods higher up in the

hierarchy are necessarily more expensive to produce and must cost more. c(t)

is linear in t if γ = 1, lies above the γ = 1 cost function when γ > 1, and below


                                        7
it when γ < 1. Intuitively, c rises faster with t as the linkage between the goods

in the hierarchy, γ, rises. c(t) is depicted in Figure 1.5 For simplicity we draw

all functions as continuous on t.

    Setting w = 1:
                                                    γ t+1 − 1
                                 p(t) = c(t) =                .
                                                      γ−1
    Demand for Z is given by:

                                                        (1 − ε) Y
                                Dz (p(Z)) =                                                (6)
                                                          p(Z)
                                                = (1 − ε) L,

where L denotes the labor endowment and Y national income. Of course, Y =

wL = L, since there are no profits. Demand for T is given by:

                                                           εY
                                  DT (p(T )) =                                             (7)
                                                          p(T )
                                                           εL
                                                    =
                                                          c(T )

as price equals cost. Similarly,

                                 Dt    = γ T −t DT (p(T ))                                 (8)
                                                T −t
                                            γ      εL
                                       =              .
                                                c(T )

Dt depends on the price of the final good alone because of the Leontieﬀ tech-

nology. Note that Dt increases in t for γ < 1 and decreases in t for γ > 1. The

demand for all the inputs stems ultimately from the demand for the final good

at the top of the hierarchy. From (8) it is clear that if γ > 1, then market size

falls as t rises. If γ < 1, market size rises as t rises. When γ = 1 market size is

fixed. Figure 2 depicts Dt .6
   5 The reader may prefer to think of (3) as a first order diﬀerence equation. Shocks are

propagated along the sectoral structure of the economy according to γ T −t . They are amplified
forward if γ > 1 and backwards if γ < 1.
   6 One might suspect that the market size eﬀect is driving the results. However, adjusting

market size to be equal at all stages does not alter our results. See [5] for details.


                                                8
3     Industrialization

We assume that consumers cannot save and hence spend all their income in

each period. The future, containing an infinite number of periods, is discounted

by all agents according to the discount factor δ. For each good/sector t there

exists a technology that reduces marginal cost by reducing the direct labor input

requirement from 1 to 1/θ where θ > 1. It also requires F units of labor as a

setup cost. We assume that this technology is non-appropriable by others for one

time period. The act of adopting this new technology is called industrialization.

    We assume that in each period, industrialization can occur in at most one

sector. If more than one sector is willing to industrialize, then the sector with

the most to gain is assumed to industrialize. If more than one sector innovated

in a time period, or if profits persisted for more than a single period, expecta-

tions about other firms’ behavior would become important for each potential

innovator’s profits. The behavior of other firms would aﬀect p(T ), and hence

the demand for each input during a time frame relevant for the profits of firms

considering industrialization. In such a setting, multiple equilibria based on

expectations about other firms’ behavior could occur. Such multiplicity is well

understood, see for example, Shleifer [12], and the excellent survey by Mat-

suyama [7], and is deliberately ruled out in this paper.

    There are a number of firms who compete in price in each sector with each

firm selling a homogeneous product. At most one firm in a sector will choose to

industrialize. The industrializing firm then chooses to price at the cost of non-

industrializing firms as the elasticity of the demand curve it is facing is less than

unity.7 In the following period, other firms can freely access the technology and
   7 D (p(t)) = γ T −t D (p(T )) so that the elasticity of demand for good t equals the elasticity
       t                T
of demand for the final good times the ratio of the percentage increase in p(T ) relative to the
percentage increase in p(t). The former is unity as utility takes a Cobb Douglas form, and the
latter is less than unity as the final good price increases less than proportionately relative to
that of any intermediate input since any intermediate input has a cost share less than unity.



                                                9
competition dissipates all profits. However, although profits go to zero after the

first period of innovation, the eﬀects of the innovation remain and are perceived

by other firms through an increase in demand as a result of a lower price for

good T .

   We will distinguish between three things: 1. The sector’s incentive to indus-

trialize which is related to its profits from doing so. 2. The eﬀects a sector’s

industrialization has on sectors above and below it in the hierarchy of produc-

tion, i.e., the extent of its forward and backward linkages. 3. The identity of

the leading sector. This is the sector whose industrialization has the largest

eﬀect on the industrialization choice of other sectors. Since these eﬀects operate

via the price of the final good, this is the sector whose industrialization has the

largest eﬀect on the cost of the final good.

3.1    The Gains from Industrialization.

We need an expression for the change in profits of a firm, indexed by t, if it

decided to industrialize when no other firm had industrialized. We will assume

that these profits are below zero to start with so that no firm chooses to in-

dustrialize when no industrialization has occurred. Following that we examine

how t’s profits from industrialization are aﬀected by industrialization of sectors

above and below it in the hierarchy.

   Given our model, a firm will choose to industrialize if its current variable

profits exceed F . Define c(t|B) to be the cost of producing a unit of t when all the

sectors in the set B have industrialized but no one in sector t has industrialized.

Similarly, cI (t|B) is the cost of producing a unit of t when t has industrialized

as well as all sectors in the set B. We will denote by c(t) and cI (t) the case

where B = φ, the empty set. pI (t|B) and p(t|B) can be similarly defined with

p(t) and pI (t) again denoting the case where B is the empty set.



                                         10
      If a firm in sector t is the first to industrialize, it has marginal costs given

by:
                                                                    1
                                     cI (t) = γc(t − 1) +                                           (9)
                                                                    θ
where c(t − 1) is defined by (3). It also incurs a fixed cost given by F . Since

it chooses to price as high as it can, as argued earlier, it prices at its com-

petitors’ cost, c(t). Its profit from industrializing (in the period in which its

industrialization takes place) when no one else has, denoted by π I (t) is given

by:                                          ¡           ¢
                              I     aγ T −t ε L + π I (t)
                            π (t) =                        −F
                                             p(T )
where a = 1 − 1/θ. Solving for πI (t) in order to incorporate the eﬀects of profits

on income gives:8
                                                  aγ T −t εL
                                         I          p(T )      −F
                                    π (t) = h                    i.                                (10)
                                                        aγ T −t ε
                                             1−           p(T )
             9
Similarly:
                                                      T −t
                                             aγ      εL
                                     I         p(T |B) − F
                                   π (t|B) = h         T −t ε
                                                              i.                                   (11)
                                               1 − aγp(T |B)

Proposition 1 If γ < 1, then the sector with the greatest incentive to indus-

        trialize is the one furthest downstream. If γ > 1, it is the one furthest

        upstream. If γ = 1, all sectors have the same incentive to industrialize.

Proof From equations (10) and (11) it follows that products with larger de-

        mands have a greater incentive to industrialize as the fixed cost can be

        spread over a larger number of units. Figure 3 depicts π I (t) for these three

        cases.

      The gains from industrialization initially lie strictly below zero as we assume

no industrialization occurs without intervention of some kind.
  8 Assume that firms do not take into account the eﬀect of their profits on aggregate income

would not aﬀect the spirit of the results that follow.
   9 Note                         aγ T −t εL                               aγ T −t ε
            that we assume that     p(T )
                                               − F < 0 which implies 1 −    p(T )
                                                                                       > 0 since L > F .


                                                   11
3.2     Industrialization and the Gains from Industrialization.

Here, we consider the eﬀects of industrialization of a group of sectors on the

change in profits from industrialization of the remaining sectors. We need to

distinguish two distinct eﬀects. When a firm industrializes it makes profits

(positive or negative) in the period in which it industrializes. This change

in profits aﬀects income, and hence the potential change in profits of other

firm’s in that same period. This eﬀect we call the impact eﬀect. Note that

like in MSV, if it is not profitable for a sector to industrialize on its own,

then its industrialization must have a negative impact eﬀect. In the period

of industrialization, there is no price change, and if profits are negative, income

is reduced by industrialization.

   In the next period the rest of the sector acquires the technology and price

falls. This reduction in price, as a result of better technology, increases demand

and therefore increases the potential change in profits for other firms not yet

industrialized. We call this the long-run eﬀect. While impact eﬀects are just as

in MSV, the long-run eﬀects are new.

   Recall equation (11) and note that industrialization by any firm t reduces

the price of good t in the following period. This, in turn, reduces the cost, and

price, of the final good and raises the quantity demanded. This feeds back to the

demand for all the intermediate goods in the hierarchy. The “leading sector”

is that sector which has the largest eﬀect on the gains from industrialization of

other sectors. From equation (11) it is obvious that the leading sector must be

the sector that lowers p(T |B) the most. This will depend on the value of γ.

3.2.1   γ=1

In this case, industrialization of any firm anywhere in the hierarchy shifts all

gains from industrialization up equally. Because γ = 1 there is neither dilution



                                        12
nor magnification of this eﬀect as we move upstream or downstream. In essence,

a unit of the final good requires a unit of each of the intermediate goods. Thus,

industrialization of any sector has the same eﬀect on the change in profits of

any un-industrialized firm. This implies that in this case there is no such thing

as a leading sector.

   More formally, when γ = 1:
                                           aεL
                                         p(T |B) − F
                             πI (t|B) = h              i.
                                          1 − p(Taε|B)

Also, p(T ) = T + 1 and if any n of T + 1 rungs in the hierarchy industrialize

the price of the final good is given by:


                               p(T |n) = T + 1 − na.


Therefore, p(T ) depends only on the extent of industrialization and not the

location of the industrializing firms in the hierarchy. This case is depicted in

Figure 4. π I (t|n) is a horizontal line which shifts up proportional to the extent of

industrialization as shown. Once a certain threshold amount of industrialization

has occurred, all remaining industrialization takes place automatically, i.e., it is

self sustaining. This threshold is the smallest n for which πI (t|n) exceeds zero.

When γ = 1 all sectors are equally good candidates for leading sectors. Note

that, it is possible to have self-sustaining industrialization once a threshold level

is crossed yet no industrialization occurs in the absence of intervention.

   There is a strong similarity between this case and MSV. Here, every sector

is identical to any other sector in the sense that they all have the same eﬀect

on the gains from industrialization of other firms. We need enough of them

to industrialize to reduce the price enough so that demand increases enough to

make industrialization worthwhile. In MSV, enough sectors need to industrialize

to increase aggregate income enough so that demand increases enough to make


                                           13
industrialization worthwhile. In either case only the number of sectors that

industrialize matters.

    One important diﬀerence between MSV and our model is that here we do not

need something like a wage premium to make self-sustaining industrialization

possible. The vertical linkages provide us with a way for one firm’s industrial-

ization to positively aﬀect the profits of other firms.

3.2.2     γ 6= 1

We now turn to the slightly more complex case where γ 6= 1. Again p(T |B) <

p(T ), with p(T |B) now given by:
                                    µ                ¶          T
                                                                X
                                        γ T +1 − 1                ¡ T −j ¢
                     p(T |B) = w                         − wa      γ    ι                (12)
                                           γ−1                  j=0

where ι is an indicator function equal to one for j ∈ B and equal to zero

otherwise. Now due to the market size eﬀect, πI (t|B)is decreasing (increasing)

in t if γ is more (less) than unity so that firms highest (lowest) in the hierarchy

have the greatest incentive to industrialize.

    Industrialization of the sectors in the set B shifts up the gains from indus-

trialization of the remaining sectors. Consider what happens in the context

of linkages. Linkages are related to the extent by which industrialization by a

sector aﬀects the profitability of industrialization of sectors above and below

it.10


Proposition 2 When γ < 1, backward linkages are stronger than forward link-

        ages and profits from industrialization shift up more for low t than high

        t. When γ > 1, forward linkages are stronger than backward linkages and

        profits from industrialization shift up more for high t than low t. When
 1 0 If we did away with diﬀerences in market size we would still be left with the question of

what determines the identity of the leading sector.




                                              14
     γ = 1, both are equally strong and profits from industrialization shift up

     in a parallel manner.

Proof When t industrializes, demand increases for things it uses as inputs, i.e.,

     for k < t demand rises from
                                               Ã               !
                                        T −k            εL
                                    γ              γ T +1 −1
                                                      γ−1

     to                                 Ã                           !
                                 T −k                εL
                             γ              γ T +1 −1
                                                                        .
                                               γ−1      − aγ T −t
     These are backward linkages. At the same time demand also increases for

     sectors who use t0 s output as inputs, i.e., for s > t demand rises from
                                         Ã           !
                                    T −s      εL
                                  γ        γ T +1 −1
                                                     γ−1

     to                                 Ã                           !
                                                    εL
                             γ T −s         γ T +1 −1
                                                                        .
                                               γ−1      − aγ T −t
     These are forward linkages. When γ = 1, both linkages are equal in

     strength and a parallel shift occurs as depicted in Figure 4. If γ > 1, then

     γ T −k > γ T −s and backward linkages are stronger than forward linkages.

     Consequently, profits from industrialization shift up more for low t than

     high t. If γ < 1, then γ T −k < γ T −s and forward linkages are stronger than

     backward linkages, so that profits from industrialization shift up more for

     high t than low t. The case where γ > 1 is depicted in Figures 5 and 6.

     The analogous diagrams can be drawn for γ < 1 and this is left to the

     reader.


   The leading sector is the one that reduces p(T |B) the most. When γ 6= 1,

the magnitude of the reduction in p(T |B) depends not only on the number of

sectors industrialized but also on which sectors have industrialized.

                                              15
Proposition 3 When γ > 1 the sector with the lowest index which has not

      already industrialized is the leading sector. When γ < 1, the sector with

      the highest index which has not yet industrialized, is the leading sector.

      When γ = 1, all sectors are leading sectors.

Proof From equation (12) it is easy to see that the fall in the price of the final

      good due to industrialization of Sector t is proportional to aγ T −t . When

      γ > 1, aγ T −t is largest for the lowest t, while for γ < 1, aγ T −t is largest for

      t = T. When γ = 1, aγ T −t is constant. When γ > 1 the amplification of a

      cost reduction is forward, to higher t, so that the leading sector being the

      one with the smallest index makes sense. When γ < 1 the amplification of

      a cost reduction is backward, to lower t, so that the leading sector being

      the one with the largest index again makes sense.


4     The Case for Subsidizing Industrialization

Why does the market not ensure that the optimal extent of industrialization

occurs? There are two distortions in our model. First, producers maximize

profits, rather than welfare that includes both producer surplus and consumer

surplus. In our model we set things up so that in the first period of industrial-

ization, there are no consumer surplus gains and the producer appropriates all

the gains. From the second period onward, there are no producer surplus gains,

only consumer surplus ones. Note that if it is not profitable to industrialize,

then the first period losses must be made up by later gains in consumer surplus

for industrialization to be worth subsidizing through this channel alone.

    The second and less standard distortion has to do with the fact that there

are positive spillovers from industrialization across sectors which industrializing

firms cannot appropriate. Since price of the final good falls in the period after

any sector industrializes, derived demand, and hence, the profits from indus-

                                          16
trialization shift up for all un-industrialized sectors. This makes for too little

industrialization.

   What can we say about optimal policy? We can begin by noting that if

there is a case for subsidizing industrialization, then the optimal way of doing

so must involve subsidizing the leading sector among the ones that are not

industrialized. Why? By definition, the leading sector has the greatest positive

externality on the profits of other sectors so the benefits of its industrializing

are highest. Moreover, as it is the most profitable, the subsidy needed to induce

industrialization is at its lowest.

   So suppose one proceeded to subsidize in this fashion, targeting the lead-

ing sector that is not industrialized. Could such a policy ever stimulate self-

sustaining industrialization? If so, then the government need just subsidize to

this point, confident that complete industrialization would follow automatically.

   We focus on the case where γ > 1. The case where γ < 1 is analogous. Let

π I (n|[0, n)) denote the profits obtained by firm n from industrializing when all

sectors from 0 up to but not including n have industrialized. As n rises to n1

and further to n2 more and more industrialization occurs as depicted in Figure

5. This reduces the price of the final good and this channel shifts π I (n|[0, n))

upward. But, as n rises we are also moving along a downward sloping curve

which reduces πI (n|[0, n)). In Figure 5 the shift in the curve overcomes the

movement along the curve, i.e.,

                                 dπ I (n|[0, n))
                                                 > 0.                        (13)
                                       dn

In the Appendix we show that for (13) to be true, we need θ > γ T +1 . In

other words, θ must be large, i.e., industrialization must result in substantial

cost savings. If π I (n|(n, T ]) becomes positive for n < T , then if a government

subsidizes industrialization up to this point, it will become self sustaining and


                                         17
proceed without further government help. The initial losses from industrializa-

tion could be covered by later profits. Figure 6 depicts the case where θ < γ T +1

and the movement along the curve dominates. As a result, it is not possible for

initial losses from industrialization to be covered by later profits.

   We leave it to the reader to draw the figures analogous to Figure 5 and 6

when γ < 1. When γ < 1, then the leading sector is sector T . Industrialization

should start downstream. Profits shift up and are higher downstream. For the

shift up in profits to dominate the fact that the leading sector is moving up

stream it must be that
                                     ∂π I (n|(n, T ])
                                                      < 0.                         (14)
                                           ∂n
As shown in the Appendix, for (14) to hold we need

                                                    1
                                          θ>            .
                                               γ T +1

   Assume that industrialization is not profitable to begin with and construct

the welfare that obtains from subsidizing n sectors in the optimal manner. This

involves targeting the leading sector that has not yet industrialized in each of n

consecutive periods. Since γ > 1, we would wish to start with sector 0.11

   Welfare is defined to be the welfare of the aggregate consumer. Let V (1, P, I)

denote the indirect utility function of this consumer as a function of the price

of the final good Z, which is unity as it takes one unit of labor to make it, the

final good, T, denoted by P, and his income, I.12 Suppose, for example, that

B industries have industrialized and t is industrializing. Then P = P (T /B)

and I = L + π I (t/B), the sum of labor income and the profits of industrializing

firms excluding subsidies. Subsidies to firms are just transfers and cancel out in
 1 1 Once   again, the arguments for γ < 1 are analogous and left to the reader.
 1 2 Recall  that there are two goods, Z, and T , and the price of Z is unity.




                                               18
calculating national income. Hence, welfare is merely13

                                    V (1, P (T /B), L + π I (t/B)).



       There are two possibilities where welfare is slightly diﬀerent. Either there is

no possibility of self-sustaining industrialization, i.e., γ T +1 > θ > 1 or there is,

i.e., θ > γ T +1 > 1. Consider the former case where self-sustaining industrializa-

tion is not possible. Suppose the government subsidizes the leading sector for

n periods, i.e., it subsidizes the first n sectors in sequence for n periods. In any

of these periods, indirect utility may be higher or lower than without industri-

alization. Income may fall below L if profits are negative, which pulls indirect

utility down. However, as the price of the final good is lower, indirect utility is

pulled up. From t = n onwards, prices are constant at P (T /B = {s : s < n})

which is less than P (T ) while income is L. Hence, indirect utility is higher than

it would have been without industrialization.

       Now what needs to be added if self-sustaining industrialization is possible?

Not much! If self-sustaining industrialization occurs once sectors up to k have

been industrialized, then if n < k, there is nothing to be added. If n ≥ k then

we just need to realize that industrialization will keep on going. The outcome

is exactly that with n = T + 1, i.e., when the government subsidizes all sectors.

       Thus, if γ T +1 > θ, or θ > γ T +1 and n < k, then welfare when n sectors

industrialize starting from the one furthest upstream is


                     n−1
                     X       £ t ¡                                                     ¢¤
   W (n) =                    δ V 1, P (T /B = {s : s < t}), L + π I (t/B = {s : s < t} (15)
                      t=0
                         µ         ¶
                              δn
                     +                 V (1, V (1, P (T /B = {s : s < n − 1}), L) .
                             1−δ
  1 3 It   is clear that income is just labor income, L, plus any net profits since subsidies cancel
out.


                                                    19
   If θ > γ T +1 and n ≥ k, then



  W (n) = W (T + 1)                                                              (16)
                T
                X     £ t ¡                                                     ¢¤
           =           δ V 1, P (T /B = {s : s < t}), L + π I (t/B = {s : s < t} (17)
                t=0
                    Ã            !
                        δ T +1
                +                    V (1, V (1, P (T /B = {s : s < T }), L) .
                        1−δ
   In general there is no reason to expect W (n) to be concave or for a simple

policy to be optimal. However, there are a few things we can say about welfare.

Proposition 4 If δ is close to unity, then subsidizing industrialization is welfare

      improving even when it is not privately profitable. If δ is close to zero,

      then it is not.

Proof As δ approaches unity, the second term in (15) or (16) goes to infinity.

      As δ approaches zero, the losses in current income from industrialization

      can never be made up.

   It is hard to say what the optimal extent of subsidization is. However, it

is clear that subsidizing n leading sectors in sequence must raise welfare if δ is

large enough.

Proposition 5 For each n, there exists a δ(n), such that for δ > δ(n), it is

      better to subsidize n leading sectors in sequence than to do nothing.

Proof This follows from the fact that the first term in (15) or (16) can be

      negative while the second term must be positive and raising δ raises the

      (unbounded above) weight put on the second term.

   Thus, one can make a case for industrialization when it is not privately

profitable without relying solely on the welfare gains emanating from lower

prices of the final good post industrialization.

                                                  20
5     Concluding Remarks

Our aim in this paper has been to formalize in a simple way the concept of

unbalanced growth. Models like the simple one given here can help cast light

on the old debate about paths to industrialization. It suggests that in a closed

economy, when the future is not discounted too highly, there is a case for subsi-

dizing industrialization. Other things equal, the sector whose industrialization

has the largest impact on the cost of making the final good is the sector to

target.

    We hope in future work to look at more general settings and at issues like the

role of trade. Through trade some of the benefits to industrialization of a sector

accrue to the rest of the world suggesting that there may be a case for coordi-

nating industrialization world wide and for the subsidization of industrialization

at an international level.


6     Appendix: Conditions for Self-Reinforcing In-
      dustrialization

Recall that from equation (11)
                                            aγ T −n εL
                              I             p(T |[0,n))   −F
                             π (n|[0, n)) = h               i                             (18)
                                                   aγ T −n ε
                                             1−   p(T |[0,n))

where
                               µ ∙ n         ¸    ¶
                                 γ γ −1                       γ T −n − 1
             p(T |[0, n)) =                    + 1 γ T −n +
                                 θ γ−1                           γ−1
                                 T +1                T −n+1
                               γ      − θ − (1 − θ)γ
                             =                              .                             (19)
                                         θ (γ − 1)
                                                                                   h            i
                                                                               1       γ n −1
Due to industrialization, the cost of the inputs up stream of n falls to       θ        γ−1         ,
                                                                               h   n
                                                                                           i
                                                                           γ       γ −1
so that the cost of production of the nth good becomes p(n|[0, n)) =       θ        γ−1         +

1. This in turn allows us to write the price of the final good as the cost of the


                                          21
implicit requirement of the nth good, γ T −n p(n|[0, n)), plus the labor requirement
                           γ T −n −1
from then on,                 γ−1 .      This is what gives us (19).

      We also know that

                                                                aγ T −n εL
                                              I                 p(T |[0,n))   −F
                                             π (n|[0, n)) = h                   i                            (20)
                                                                        aγ T −n ε
                                                             1−        p(T |[0,n))

       γ T −n ε
If   p(T |[0,n))   rises, then the numerator rises while the denominator falls so that
                                                                                                        γ T −n
π I (n|[0, n)) must rise. Hence, we need only consider the derivative of                              p(T |[0,n)) .

Diﬀerentiating gives


                       h                 i
                             γ T −n ε
                   d       p(T |[0,n))
                                                                                        |[0,n))
                                                  −p(T |[0, n))γ T −n ln γ − γ T −n dp(Tdn
                                             =                                                    .          (21)
                             dn                                    [p(T |[0, n))]2
Since
                                                       γ T +1 − θ − (1 − θ)γ T −n+1
                                 p(T |[0, n)) =                                     .                        (22)
                                                                 θ (γ − 1)


                                  dp(T |[0, n))   (1 − θ) γ T −n+1 ln γ
                                                =                       <0
                                      dn               θ (γ − 1)
as θ > 1. The sign of (21) is the same as the sign of its numerator or


                                                        £          ¤
                                                       − γ T +1 − θ .
    £          ¤
If − γ T +1 − θ > 0, i.e., θ > γ T +1 , then π I (n|[0, n)) rises with n.

      As n rises more industrialization occurs. This reduces the price of the final

good and this channel raises the profits from industrializing at n. Also, as n

rises γ T −n falls for γ > 1. This channel reduces πI (n|[0, n)). With γ > 1, this

movement along the π I (t|[0, n)) curve reduces profits as πI (t|[0, n)) is falling

in t. From this it follows that increasing industrialization from below when

γ > 1 entails conflicting forces. If θ > γ T +1 , then the former dominates so that

π I (t|[0, n)) rises with n.

                                                              22
   Similarly, when industrialization starts at the top of the hierarchy:
                                                 aγ T −n εL
                              I                  p(T |(n,T ])   −F
                             π (n|(n, T ]) = h                    i                        (23)
                                                          aγ T −n ε
                                                 1−    p(T |(n,T ])

where
                                   µ            ¶             µ          ¶
                                     γ n+1 − 1      T −n    1 γ T −n − 1
              p(T |(n, T ]) =                     γ      +                                 (24)
                                        γ−1                 θ     γ−1
                                       T +1            T −n
                                    θγ      + (1 − θ)γ      −1
                              =                                 .
                                             θ (γ − 1)

Due to industrialization good T can be thought of as using γ T −n units of n
             n+1          ¡                  ¢
which costs γ γ−1−1 and θ1 γ T −n−1 + ... + 1 units of labor. This gives us the

above expression.

    Diﬀerentiating π I (n|[0, n)) with respect to n gives:
h                  i        h T −n            i
       aγ T −n ε
  1 − p(T |(n,T ])   L  −     aγ     εL
                             p(T |(n,T ]) − F   aγ T −n ε ∙                         µ
                                                                                      ∂p(T |(n, T ])
                                                                                                     ¶¸
         h                    i2                           p(T |(n, T ]) (− ln γ) −
                   aγ T −t ε                                                              ∂n
           1 − p(T   |(n,T ])    p(T |(n, T ])2

   which is negative when
                                                  1
                                         θ>           .
                                               γ T +1




                                              23
References

[1] Bardhan, P.: “Contributions of Growth Theory to the Analysis of De-

   velopment Problems,” in Handbook of Development Economics, Vol 3B,

   North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1988.

[2] Dornbusch, R., S. Fischer, and Paul Samuelson: “Comparative Advantage,

   Trade, and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,”

   American Economic Review, 67 (1977), pp. 823-839.

[3] Fleming, J. Marcus: “External Economies and the Doctrine of Balanced

   Growth,” Economic Journal, 65 (1955).

[4] Hirschman, Albert O.: The Strategy of Economic Development. Yale Uni-

   versity Press, New Haven, 1958.

[5] Krishna, Kala, and Cesar Perez: “Unbalanced Growth,” Mimeo, Pennsyl-

   vania State University.

[6] Krugman, Paul R.: Development, Geography, and Economic Theory. MIT

   Press, Cambridge, 1995.

[7] Matsuyama, Kiminori: “Complementarities and Cumulative Processes in

   Models of Monopolistic Competition,” Journal of Economic Literature,

   (June 1995), pp. 701-729.

[8] Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny: “Industri-

   alization and the Big Push,” Journal of Political Economy, (1989), pp.

   1003-1026.

[9] Nurkse, Ragnar: Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Coun-

   tries. Oxford University Press, 1953.



                                     24
[10] Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul N.: “Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and

    South-Eastern Europe,” Economic Journal, 53 (1943), pp. 202-211.

[11] Scitovsky, Tibor: “Two Concepts of External Economies,” Journal of Po-

    litical Economics, 62 (1954), pp. 143-151.

[12] Shleifer, A.: “Implementation Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 94

    (1996), pp. 1163-1190.

[13] Streeten, Paul: “Balanced versus Unbalanced Growth,” The Economic

    Weekly, (April 20, 1963), pp. 669-671.




                                      25
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Figure 5
Figure 6
Figure 7
Figure 8
