                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHAT HAPPENS WHEN WE RANDOMLY
                              ASSIGN CHILDREN TO FAMILIES?

                                             Bruce Sacerdote

                                          Working Paper 10894
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10894


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




I thank Holt International Children's Services and particularly Laura Hofer for her help in gathering data and
information on international adoptions. The National Science Foundation provided generous funding for the
entire project including the data collection. I thank Anne Ladenburger, Abigail Ridgeway, and Ariel Stern-
Markowitz for tireless research assistance and valuable suggestions. Seminar participants at NBER Summer
Institute, Syracuse, Cornell, Case-Western, Brigham Young University and elsewhere contributed helpful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Happens When We Randomly Assign Children to Families?
Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 10894
November 2004
JEL No. J0, I2

                                            ABSTRACT

I use a new data set of Korean-American adoptees who, as infants, were randomly assigned to

families in the U.S. I examine the treatment effects from being assigned to a high income family, a

high education family or a family with four or more children. I calculate the transmission of income,

education and health characteristics from adoptive parents to adoptees. I then compare these

coefficients of transmission to the analogous coefficients for biological children in the same families,

and to children raised by their biological parents in other data sets. Having a college educated mother

increases an adoptee's probability of graduating from college by 7 percentage points, but raises a

biological child's probability of graduating from college by 26 percentage points. In contrast,

transmission of drinking and smoking behavior from parents to children is as strong for adoptees as

for non-adoptees. For height, obesity, and income, transmission coefficients are significantly higher

for non-adoptees than for adoptees. In this sample, sibling gender composition does not appear to

affect adoptee outcomes nor does the mix of adoptee siblings versus biological siblings.

Bruce Sacerdote
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
bruce.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
I.     Introduction

       Social scientists have long been interested in the effects of family and neighborhood

environment on children's outcomes and the transmission of parental characteristics to children. For

example, Black, Devereux and Salvanes [2003] show that exogenous shocks to mother's education

have small effects on children's educational attainment, while Currie and Moretti [2003] show that

mother's education has a causal link to children's health. In a well known experiment Katz. Kling

and Liebman [2001] and Ludwig, Duncan and Hirschfield [2001] look at the effects of moving to a

different neighborhood on children's educational outcomes, employment and involvement with

crime. And there are large literatures that deal with the effects of schools and neighborhoods on

children's test scores, educational attainment, income, and health (e.g. Evans Oates and Schwab

[1992], Case and Katz [1991], Hanushek, Kain and Rivkin [1998], Hoxby [2000]).



       This paper uses adoption in infancy as a form of grand intervention in which children are

assigned a particular set of adoptive parents, thereby creating exogenous variation in the family,

neighborhood and school environment. The adoptees in the study are Korean-Americans placed by

Holt International Children's Services during 1970-1980. The adoptees are randomly assigned to

families, conditional on the family being certified by Holt to adopt.     Holt uses a queuing (first-

come first-served) policy to assign Korean adoptees to families. I examine the degree to which

child's income, educational and health outcomes are affected by the adoptive parents' inputs.1



       I find that mother's and father's level of education has a modest impact on the adoptees'

educational attainment and income. For example, an additional year of mother's education raises

the adoptee's years of education by .07 years. This effect is highly statistically significant, but is




                                                  2
only 1/4 the size of the corresponding effect for non-adoptees (biological children) raised in the

same families. My estimated treatment effects for the adoptees are smaller than those found by

Björklund Lindahl and Plug [2004], Plug [2004] and Sacerdote [2002], and this difference may be

driven by the lack of selection of the Holt adoptees into families. Consistent with Case, Lin and

McLanahan [2000], the quality-quantity tradeoff experienced by adoptees is very large. Growing

up in a family of four or more children versus a smaller family reduces an adoptee's probability of

attending college by 8 percentage points.2



        The experiment of being adopted into one family versus another is potentially a much larger

intervention than the experiments normally contemplated by social scientists. For example, the

Moving to Opportunity experiment (Katz, Kling and Liebman [2001] and Kling, Ludwig and Katz

[2004]) shifts the complier subjects neighborhoods and schools but generally leaves the family unit

intact. And for most MTO subjects the intervention begins in adolescence rather than in infancy as

in the case of adoption. Other experiments such as charter school lotteries (Cullen, Jacobs and

Levitt [2004], Rouse [1998]) or school redistricting (Nechyba and Vigdor [2003]), create exogenous

variation in the school attended by the child. without directly altering the neighborhood or family

influences. And some experiments shift the peer group without shifting the school or neighborhood

(Hoxby [2000], Angrist and Lang [2002], Sacerdote [2001], Zimmerman [2002], Foster [2003]).



        Adoption into a high versus low SES (socio-economic status) family is in some respect the

maximum possible intervention since every aspect of the adoptee's life is different. This is both

good and bad for the interpretation and use of the estimates produced. On the positive side, I can


1
  Economists have recently become interested in looking at the experiment of adoption and Björklund, Lindahl and Plug
[2004] is the largest and most comprehensive study to date.
2
  This might be a quality-quantity tradeoff or it might be something unmeasured about the large families of adoptees.
Black, Devereaux Salvanes [2004] which instruments for family size would support the second interpretation. In the
point estimates, the effect is stronger for adoptees than non-adoptees.


                                                         3
argue that I am measuring an upper bound of the possible effects from policies that seek to improve

child's education or income by altering the school, neighborhood or family environment. Under

strong assumptions, I can express my results as a percent of the variation in child outcomes that can

be attributed to variation in nurture within the sample.3 On the negative side, I can not sort out

causal pathways by which the parent's SES affects the children.                     Adoptive parent's income,

education, neighborhood and school quality all co-vary in the known ways.



          Slightly more than 2 percent of all children in the US live with an adoptive mother and

father.    Thus there are roughly 1.4 million adoptees under age 18 for whom adoption policy is

directly relevant.



          A natural question is whether or not adoption studies and mine in particular are relevant for

understanding outcomes for non-adoptees. Even though these families are all pre-screened as being

eligible to adopt through Holt, there is still a large amount of variation in family income, parental

education, and in the outcomes for the children in the families. For example, 20 percent of the

adoptive fathers in my sample have completed 12 or fewer years of education. The adoptees in the

sample have educational attainment and family income that is only modestly higher than U.S.

averages. The mean years of education for the Holt adoptees is 14.75 years versus 14.11 for Asian-

Americans in the NLSY and 13.57 for all other subjects in the NLSY.4 For the biological children

in my sample, I obtain transmission coefficients of education that are similar to those found for

children raised by their biological parents in the PSID, Wisconsin Longitudinal Data, and the

national registry data for Sweden and Finland.


3
  The question of how much environment (nurture) affects outcomes must always be measured relative to the variation
in nurture in the data. For example, there is likely an enormous positive effect on family income from moving a child
from an orphanage in South Korea to a US family, but I can not measure this effect.
4
  Author's calculations from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979. I use the 1979 sample weights to
approximate US averages.


                                                         4
       The adoptees in the sample have roughly .9 fewer years of education than the non-adoptees

in the same families. But there is still substantial overlap in the distribution of outcomes for

adoptees and non-adoptees. The fact that all of the adoptees are Korean American may influence

some of the findings and I address this point several times in discussing the results.



       Is transmission of education, income and health fundamentally different for US adoptees

versus all other US children? This question is ultimately impossible to answer. But in trying to

apply lessons learned from adoption data to children in general, I am reassured by the fact that the

adoptees in the sample resemble the population of non-adoptive children both in their outcomes and

in their nurturing parents' background.




                                                   5
A Brief History of Holt and Korean-American Adoption and the Assignment Process

         Harry and Bertha Holt pioneered international adoption in Seoul, Korea in 1955. The

Holts had built a fortune in lumber and farming in Oregon and were so moved by the plight of

Korean war orphans that they lobbied Congress for a special act to adopt eight of them. When they

returned home with their new children, they discovered that many other Americans also wished to

adopt from Korea.



       Since 1955 over 100,000 Korean children have been adopted into US families, and the

agency which grew out of the Holt’s initial work, now called Holt International Children’s Services,

has been involved in 30 to 40 percent of these adoptions. Holt currently places about 300 Korean

adoptees per year, and hundreds more from China and from programs in Bulgaria, Ecuador,

Guatemala, Hong Kong, India, , Mongolia, Philippines, Romania, Thailand, and Vietnam.



       The process of adopting through Holt's Korea program takes roughly 12-18 months from

initial application to bringing home the adoptee. The major steps include filing an application,

participating in the home study assessment, attending adoption education classes, passing the

criminal background check, being matched with an adoptee, the adoptee flying to the U.S., and

legally adopting the child in family court. This is an extensive and thorough process requiring

numerous meetings with adoption agency officials and numerous exchanges of documents. In part

due to US and South Korean law, adoptive parents must meet several criteria including a minimum

family income and must be married for three years or longer.



        Holt Children's Services of Korea, a separate organization from Holt International

Children’s Services, is in charge of matching children with qualified adoptive parents and does this

in a way which randomizes children into families. Within the Korea program and conditional upon



                                                 6
being qualified to adopt, children are matched to families on a first come, first served basis.

Parents are not given the opportunity to specify gender or anything else about their future adoptee.

The one exception to this rule is that families with all boys or all girls are allowed to request a child

of the opposite gender. In practice, those who are eligible to request girls frequently do so. This

does not present a problem for this study since I condition on adoptee gender in every specification.

The only other opportunity parents have to specify a preference is to indicate that they would be

open to adopting a child with special needs or a disability. I exclude all such adoptions from the

sample.



       Thus it is the timing of when applications are completed that creates the matching of parents

to children, rather than any matching of parent and child characteristics. I provide evidence below

that the child's weight in infancy and other pre-adoption characteristics are uncorrelated with

adoptive parent characteristics such as family income, parental education etc.



Relation to the Adoption Literature

       I follow the empirical approach of recent papers in economics including Björklund, Lindahl

and Plug [2004], Sacerdote [2002], Das and Sjogren [2002], and Plug and Vijverberg [2003] in that

I regress child outcomes on parent inputs, treating the adoptive parents as randomly assigned. The

paper differs from the existing literature in several ways: First and most importantly the data set is

constructed explicitly so that I have true random assignment of children to families. Second, I have

a number of outcomes that were not available to me or other economists in prior studies, such as

drinking, smoking, asthma, obesity and selectivity of the college attended.



       Third in addition to calculating straight transmission coefficients (from parents to children)

for income and education, I take a broad approach and examine the effects of family size, birth



                                                   7
order, parental age and family gender composition. This allows me to test for effects of family size

and sibling gender in a context where the number and gender of siblings is randomly assigned to the

child.



         There is a large adoption literature outside of economics and it has focused mostly on

estimating the heritability of IQ, as in Scarr and Weinberg [1978, 1981], and personality traits as in

Loehlin, Horn, and Willerman [1985, 1987, 1994], and Plomin, Defries, and Fulker [1988, 1991,

1997]. I depart from this literature in two ways.      First I focus on income, education and health

outcomes rather than IQ and personality traits. Second, I use a simple experimental design (random

assignment to adoptive family) without imposing the structural models used in the behavioral

genetics literature.



         A series of papers including Taubman [1988], Behrman and Taubman [1989] and Behrman,

Rosenzweig and Taubman [1994] use comparisons of identical and fraternal twins to identify the

nature and nurture components of educational attainment and obesity. These papers impose a

structural model on the data in order to derive explicit formulae for the variance and covariance of

outcomes for the two different types of twins and their offspring. The identification of nature

versus nurture components comes from the fact that identical twins share precisely the same genes

whereas fraternal twins do not, and from a series of assumptions regarding how much family

environment and DNA is shared between siblings, first cousins, second cousins etc. Goldberger

[1989] points out a number of limitations to this approach.


Empirical Framework and Interpretation of Transmission Coefficients

         In the results below I regress the adoptee's outcomes on the parent's inputs. Alternatively I

compare mean outcomes for treatment groups of adoptees where I form treatment groups on

mother's education, or income or family size. I interpret these coefficients (and differences in


                                                   8
means) as reduced form treatment effects. Assignment to treatment group is random due to Holt's

adoption process. All of the adoptees comply with their assigned treatment group. Because of the

randomization, I can interpret my estimates as the causal effect of being assigned to a particular

type of family. However, within the treatment effect I cannot parse out the extent to which the

effect is working through specific inputs such as mother's education, family income or unobserved

factors such as school quality, neighborhood quality etc.



        In addition to calculating a series of treatment effects, I also measure the transmission of

characteristics from parent to child in a case where there is no genetic connection between the

parent and child. As an accounting identity, we know that all effects of the parents on the children

take place through initial endowments (including genes), through environment (nurture) effects, and

through the interaction of the two.5 For the transmission of education from mothers to children we

might linearize the accounting identity in the following way:



(1) Child's years of education= α + β0*birth mother's educ + β1*adoptive or environmental
                      mother's educ + β2*birth mother's educ*adoptive mother's education + εi


The random assignment of adoptees to families ensures that birth mother's education is uncorrelated

with adoptive mother's education. Thus we can regress the adoptee's educational attainment on

adoptive mother's educational attainment and obtain an estimate of β1. Even though birth mother's

education and the interaction term are omitted variables, they are orthogonal to the adoptive

mother's education and therefore β1 is not biased by the omission of the first and third terms in (1).




5
 As part of this interaction, initial endowments may themselves cause changes in environment as in Ridley [2003] and
Dickens and Flynn [2001].


                                                         9
        For the non-adoptees, the birth mother is the environmental mother and so the two measures

of mother's education are perfectly correlated. Regressing the non-adoptees educational attainment

on mother's education and yields an estimate of (β0+β1+β2).



        I compute the ratio of the adoptee and the non-adoptee coefficients which is β1/(β0+β1+β2).

This is an estimate of the percent of transmission of educational attainment that works through the

level effect of environmental mother's education. Ideally I would like to give this ratio a broader

interpretation, namely the percent of the child's education that is determined by nurture as opposed

to nature and infant health (initial endowments). To make this leap requires several very strong

assumptions. First I need to assume that there are no interaction effects between initial endowments

and family environment, i.e. β2=0.6



        This seems like a dubious assumption on both theoretical and empirical grounds. We know

from previous studies including Sacerdote [2001] and Björklund et al [2004] that the transmission

coefficient for the non-adoptees (.26) is much higher than for the adoptees (.07). An assumption of

no interactions amounts to assuming that the large transmission coefficient for the non-adoptees

works almost exclusively through level effects of nature and infant health. This is in fact precisely

the assumption made by most behavioral genetics studies of heritability of IQ and other traits (e.g.

Loehlin, Horn and Willerman [1987]) and this assumption partially explains the high estimated

heritabilities found in the literature.



        Second, I would need to make some assumptions about the 80 percent of the variation in

child's educational attainment that is not explained by the observed factors. If I further assume that

6
 Once I allow interaction effects, then a nature nurture breakdown is non-sensical since the two factors work together
and perhaps are even endogenously determined. Again I emphasize that any nurture effects estimated are relative to the




                                                         10
this variation is either uncorrelated with the nature and nurture factors of interest in my

decomposition, or has the same nature/nurture breakdown as my observed factors, then I can claim

that my ratio β1/(β0+β1) is indeed the percent of educational attainment determined by family

environment.



Data Description

        We collected data on adoptive parents and their children using Holt records and a mail in

survey.7 The survey asks questions on the children's health, education, and income. We also

collected basic demographic outcomes including marital status and number of children. Currently

we only have surveys from the parents, but we intend to survey as many of the children as possible

to validate the parents' responses.           The family background (parental input) variables include

parental income at the time of adoption, the education of the mother and father, drinking and

smoking behaviors of the mother and father and height and weight for each. We have income as

self reported on the surveys and we have income as reported in Holt records.



        Parents were eligible for inclusion in the survey if they adopted a child through Holt's Korea

program during 1970-1980, making the children ages 23-33 in 2003 when the survey was run.

There were roughly 10,000 such families who met this criterion and we sent the survey to a random

sample of 3,500 of these families. Our cover letter promised respondents a check for $50 and this

was paid immediately upon receipt of a completed survey. We received back 1117 surveys for a

response rate of 32 percent.




variation within the sample. I don't want to rule out the possibility that huge nurture interventions (moving the child
from Korea to the US) have huge effects.
7
  I say we because the effort required extensive work from Holt officers and employees and from a team of research
assistants at Dartmouth.


                                                          11
        Appendix Table 1 shows that the non-response pattern is unrelated to any of the parental

characteristics that we have from the adoption files. I run an OLS regression of a dummy for

responding on parental income, parental education and the adoptee's height and weight at the time

of admission to Holt. The coefficients on the right hand side variables are all small and statistically

insignificant.



        Appendix Table 2 performs a simple test of the random assignment of adoptees to families.

I regress pre-treatment variables for the adoptees on pre-treatment variables for the parents. Under

the null of randomization of adoptees to families, we should see no relationship between adoptee

and parent characteristics. The data are consistent with randomization. Mother's and father's

education and income are uncorrelated with the adoptee's height, and weight measured at the child's

first contact with Holt.



         The survey collects outcomes for up to 5 children in the family. Fortunately, for the

purposes of sample size, most families had more than one child, and in many cases families had

more than one Holt adoptee from Korea. Table 2 shows a frequency tabulation of family sizes in

the sample. Of the roughly 1100 families, 323 have two children, 298 have 3 children, and 214

have four children. Only 60 families have a single child, and that child is of course a Holt adoptee.

Eighty five of our families have six or seven children, but unfortunately we only collected

information on 5 of the children in these large families.8



        Table 2 shows the fraction adoptees and fraction girls by family size. In single child

families, where there is exactly one Holt adoptee, 78 percent of the adoptees are girls. In families of



8
 We did ask the respondents to include their oldest adoptee through Holt. I failed to anticipate so many families of
more than 5 children.


                                                        12
two children, 80 percent of the children are adoptees and 63 percent are girls. In the larger families,

55-60 percent of the children are adoptees and about 55 percent are girls.



       We have data for both adoptees and non-adoptees in the family. We collected information

on the non-adoptees (biological children of the parents) so that we could compare treatment effects

and transmission coefficients across the two groups. We use all children in the family to calculate

family size and to calculate gender ratios and percent adopted in each family. For the subsequent

analysis of adoptees, we keep only Korean adoptees through Holt. We drop the small number of

adoptees under 18 since it is very unlikely that their schooling is complete or that we have useful

income data for them. Seven percent of the final sample is under age 21, and in all of our

regressions we include a set of age dummies to allow for the fact that most of our outcomes

including income, educational attainment and marital status vary by age.



       Table 1 shows mean outcomes at the child level (as opposed to the family level). Thirty

percent of the adoptees are male versus 61 percent of the biological children. The adoptive families

clearly have more than the U.S. population average of boys among their biological children, which

may indicates that some families might be adopting in part to diversify away from boys. The

adoptees are on average six years younger than the non-adoptees. The adoptees' average age at

arrival in the U.S. is 1.7 years, with 28 percent of the adoptees being over age 1 at arrival. Below I

test whether arrival age in this sample matters for outcomes and find no evidence that it does.



       Forty eight percent of the adoptees have four years of college versus 65 percent for the non-

adoptees. Conditional on graduating from a college for which we have U.S. News rankings and

data, the adoptees graduate from colleges with roughly similar SAT scores and acceptance rates as

the non-adoptees. The non-adoptees graduate from schools with a 75th percentile of SAT scores



                                                  13
that is 13 points higher than the schools of the adoptees. The survey measure of family income is

much higher for the non-adoptees than for the adoptees: $61,000 per year versus $42,000 per year.

But this huge difference narrows to $1,600 when I control for age, education, and gender.



       The adoptees are less likely to be married, but this is partially an age effect. Thirty four

percent of the non-adoptees are classified as overweight (have a Body Mass Index >25) versus 24

percent of the adoptees. This could be correlated with the fact that the adoptees are all Korean and

most of the non-adoptees are white, though I do not offer any theory as to why obesity should vary

by race.



       Twenty three percent of the adoptees smoke versus thirty two percent of the non-adoptees.

Reported smoking rates among the adoptive parents are incredibly low at 3 percent for the adoptive

mothers (when weighted at the child level not the family level). This could indicate that people

who want to adopt or who are approved to adopt are unlikely to be smokers, or that the parents have

learned to not admit to smoking in an adoption related survey.



       Figure 1 shows the steep negative relationship between family size and the adoptees'

probability of graduating from college. Adoptees who are randomly assigned into a single child

family have about a 55 percent probability of college graduation versus a 35 percent graduation rate

for adoptees assigned into a seven child family. The negative slope is less steep for the non-

adoptees. The negative effects of family size on education (and the difference in slopes) remain

quite strong even after I control for other family characteristics (see below), though Black

Devereaux Salvanes [2004] would suggest that much of the relationship is driven by unobservables

about the family.




                                                14
          Figure 2 shows how the adoptees and non-adoptees mean years of education vary with

mother's education. The relationship is clearly positive for both groups, but the slope is much less

steep for the adoptees than for the non-adoptees. In other words, the adoptees benefit much less

from additional years of mother's schooling than do the non-adoptees. At lower levels of mother's

education (moving the mother from 11 to 12 years completed), both groups benefit enormously

from additional years of mother's schooling.        But at 13 years of mother's education, the slope

flattens out for the adoptees.



          This pattern of differing slopes for the two groups is more extreme when we look at income.

Figure 3 shows mean family income for the adoptees and non-adoptees at each level of parental

income. The adoptee's income appears to have almost no relationship to parental income.



Results

          In Table 3, I show transmission coefficients from parents to children for a variety of

outcomes. In this table each coefficient is from a separate univariate regression in which I regress

the child's outcome on the same outcome for the mother or parents. Very similar results obtain

when I use the father's outcome instead of the mother's (not shown). More importantly very similar

results are obtained when I measure these transmission coefficients controlling for other parental

background information, and child age and gender. See, for example, Tables 4 and 5.



          In the first row of Table 3, I regress the child's years of education on the mother's. For the

non-adoptees I find a coefficient of .30. The coefficient of transmission for the adoptees is a much

smaller but still highly statistically significant .07. Relative to Björklund et al, I find a slightly

larger coefficient for the non-adoptees and a smaller coefficient for the adoptees. In my sample,

roughly 23 percent of the transmission of educational attainment can be assigned to level effects of



                                                   15
environmental mother's education. In the Björklund et al's, this number is closer to 50 percent. One

possible explanation for the difference may be positive selection of adoptees into families in the

Swedish data. In fact when I run the same regression for non-Holt adoptees in the same families

(where there is no random assignment) I find a much higher transmission coefficient of .16 which is

close to the Björklund Lindahl Plug estimate.



           Results using a dummy variable for graduation from college are similar to those using years

of education attainment. The transmission coefficient for the adoptees is .07 versus .26 for the non-

adoptees. This indicates that 27 percent of the transmission coefficient for non-adoptees works

through level effects associated with the mother's college status.



           Health outcomes show a very different pattern of transmission than do educational

outcomes. Unsurprisingly, parents transmit their height to their biological children much more

strongly than to their adoptive children. The relevant coefficients are .46 and .05. Interestingly,

body mass index is also transmitted much more strongly to non-adoptees than to adoptees.9 The

transmission coefficient for the non-adoptees is .24 versus .02 for the adoptees. This latter finding

could be interpreted in one of several ways. It may be that BMI and obesity have a huge genetic

component which accounts for the much stronger parent to non-adoptee correlation that we see. Or

it may be the interaction between having genes for obesity and having parents who eat a lot that

accounts for the strong transmission to non-adoptees.



           A third related possibility is that because the Korean American adoptees do not necessarily

resemble the parents physically, the adoptees do not take cues from the parent's eating and weight in

setting their own eating and exercise habits. To investigate whether interactions between parent and


9
    Vogler et. al. [1995] have the same finding in a sample that is mostly caucasian adoptees.


                                                             16
child race are relevant in determining these transmission coefficients, I ran the same regression for

240 non-Holt adoptees. I do not have race for these adoptees, but I do know birth country.

Interestingly, I find the same low transmission coefficient of BMI from parents to adoptees (a

statistically insignificant .02) when I look at the non-Holt adoptees. This evidence plus Vogler et al

[1995] suggest that the result is true for adoptees in general, and not just Korean adoptees.



       Two final outcomes of interest are dummy variables for drinking and smoking.                 The

coefficient of transmission for smoking is just as high for the adoptees as for the non-adoptees.

Unfortunately this is not measured with great precision because so few of the parents smoke. For

drinking, the coefficient for the adoptees is .21 which is 68 percent as large as the coefficient for the

non-adoptees of .31. Overall, it appears that the level effects of family environment are a much

bigger component of transmission for drinking and smoking than for years of education.10



       In Appendix 3, I switch from looking at transmission coefficients for these outcomes to

looking at the r-squareds in regressions of child outcomes on all the observed family background

characteristics. Each cell in the table reports the r-squared from a regression of the outcome on

mother's and father's years of education, college status, smoking and drinking status, height, weight,

and obesity and overweight status. I also include as regressors family income and number of

children in the family.



       For the non-adoptees, I can explain 19 percent of the variation in years of education using

the observables about the parents. For the adoptees, I can explain 5 percent of the variation, making

the ratio of adoptee r-squared to non-adoptee r-squared 28 percent. This is similar to ratio of

adoptee to non-adoptee transmission coefficients of 23 percent shown in Table 3. The r-squared




                                                   17
ratios for height, body mass index and smoking and drinking also show a similar pattern to that of

Table 3. The percentage of adoptees' variation in smoking that can be explained is 69 percent as

large as the percentage of non-adoptees variation in smoking.                      In contrast a much smaller

percentage of variation in height and BMI can be explained for adoptees than for non-adoptees.



        Figure 4 shows a scatterplot of the results in Tables 3. I graph the non-adoptee coefficient

against the adoptee coefficient for nine different outcomes. The 45 degree line represents outcomes

for which the two transmission coefficients are equal. Eight of the nine outcomes fall above the 45

degree line meaning that the non-adoptee coefficient is larger. The outcome closest to the 45 degree

line is drinking, indicating that for these outcomes, adoptees and non-adoptees are similar in the

degree to which they acquire their parent's habits. Obesity is also near the 45 degree line, but only 6

percent of children are classified as obese. BMI and overweight status have much more variation

and are significantly above the 45 degree line.



        Table 3A shows how my transmission coefficients for adoptees and biological children

compare with coefficients found in other data sets by other authors. The first four rows of the table

are for four different samples of biological children. Coefficients of transmission of education to

biological children in the Holt sample are close to those Björklund et al find in the Swedish data, ie

.25-.30.    Transmission of education in the NLSY is significantly higher at .40.                       My income

transmission coefficient of .16 is half of the .25-.30 found in the Swedish data and the PSID. The

lower income transmission in my sample is quite possibly driven by higher measurement error in

my income survey question.




10
  Again, by "level effects" I mean the coefficient on environmental mother's outcome in equation (1), as opposed to the
coefficient on biological mother's outcome or the coefficient on the interaction term.


                                                          18
       For the adoptees, I estimate transmission coefficients of education that are significantly

smaller than coefficients found in the NLSY (my calculations) and Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey

(Plug [2004]). I attribute much of this difference to the random assignment of adoptees in the Holt

sample.



       In Table 3B I approach the transmission via nurture question in a slightly different way. I

ask how much children resemble their adoptive or biological siblings, as opposed to their parents. I

form pairs of biological siblings and pairs of adoptive siblings. I regress the younger child's

outcome on the older child's outcome. For education, I find very similar coefficients as those found

using parents: a coefficient of .09 for adoptive siblings and .29 for biological siblings.       The

connection in drinking behavior is equally strong between pairs of adoptive siblings and pairs of

biological siblings. The body mass index of two adoptive siblings is uncorrelated. The only

notable difference in results is with regard to income. Sibling's income has a coefficient of .16 for

adoptive pairs and .29 for biological pairs.



       Table 4 proceeds to regressions of educational outcomes on parent characteristics. Each

column is a separate regression and I pool the data for adoptees and non-adoptees. The base

category is always the adoptees. For the parental characteristics I include interactions between

parental characteristics and a dummy for being a biological child of the parent. (The slope for the

non-adoptees is the sum of the baseline coefficient plus the interaction term.)     The regressions

include, but do not report, age dummies and a dummy for biological child.11



       Column (1) uses years of education as the outcome. In the first two rows I repeat a key

result from Table 3, namely that the coefficient on mother's education is .07 for the adoptees and




                                                 19
.185 higher for the non-adoptees. Each additional child in the family reduces an adoptee's expected

years of education by .12 years and the effect is highly statistically significant. However, for non-

adoptees, the slope on number of children is only -.023 instead of -.12. The difference between

these two coefficients is not statistically significant, though economically it is very significant. The

large difference in slopes is consisent with Case, I-Fen Lin and McLanahan's [2000] result that

adoptees in blended families experience more of a resource constraint.



           The coefficient on number of siblings for the non-adoptees is significantly smaller than the

coefficient of -.28 for women in the PSID in Case and Butcher [1994] and the -.09 OLS coefficient

in the Norwegian data in Black et al [2004]. One explanation for the difference is that there are

more unobserved differences between small and large families in general than between the small

and large families in my sample. This seems possible given that my families have all been

approved to adopt by Holt.



           Log of parental income is not statistically significant in predicting child's years of education,

which may be a statement about the measurement error in my parental income variable. The male

adoptees have significantly lower educational attainment than the female adoptees, with a

coefficient of -.57 years on the dummy for male. The gender effect for the non-adoptees is roughly

0 years, adding the -.57 baseline effect and .55 on the interaction of male and biological child.



           Being the oldest child in the family raises an adoptee's educational attainment by .24 years

and this effect is statistically significant at the 10 percent level. Non-adoptees are helped even more

by being the oldest, but the difference in coefficients for the two groups is not statistically

significant. One might think that parental age would have a significant effect on the outcomes for

11
     I suppress the latter to avoid confusion. The intercept for biological children is generally negative, but that's because


                                                              20
both groups of children, but I do not find evidence for this effect. For the adoptees the effect of

mother's age minus adoptee's age is -.001 and is statistically insignificant.



         Column (2) shows that similar results obtain when I use father's education rather than

mother's.      When I include both father's and mother's education, both inputs matter and the

coefficients add up to roughly the coefficient on mother's education (results not shown).



         Columns (3) and (4) show that controlling for other characteristics, mother's college status

has large effects on the probability that the adoptee graduates college and graduates from a US

News ranked college. Adoptees with a college educated mother are 9 percentage points more likely

to obtain a college degree themselves, relative to adoptees whose mothers do not have four years of

college. This is an 18 percent effect at the means. Adoptees with a college educated mother are

also 9 percentage points more likely to obtain a degree from a US News ranked college versus

adoptees whose mother does not have four years of college. This is a 26 percent effect at the

means.



         Conditional on attending a US News listed college, mother's and father's education and

family income do not have a statistically significant effect on the selectivity of the college attended.

Doubling family income is associated with the adoptee attending a school that has SAT scores

(measured at the 75th percentile) that are 15 points higher. This is roughly .14 standard deviations

higher in the distribution of 75th SAT percentile across schools.



         Column (6) switches the dependent variable to the log of the child's family income. Parental

income and mother's college status have virtually no effect on the adoptee's income. In contrast the


the slope on regressors like mother's education is so much steeper for the biological children.


                                                            21
transmission coefficient of income for the non-adoptees, controlling for other parental

characteristics is .18. As mentioned above, this is lower than results for than the .30 coefficient

typically found for a single year of earnings in the PSID (Solon [1999]) and the .29 I find in the

NLSY. The difference could be driven by the restriction of range among Holt families, or by higher

measurement error in my survey.



        Table 5 examines treatment effects of parent characteristics on several health outcomes

including smoking, drinking, and obesity. The key results in Table 5 are similar to those from the

univariate regressions in Table 4. Adoptees experience a large treatment effect from their mother's

drinking and smoking behavior, but there is little influence of mother's body mass index on the

adoptee's BMI or obesity. In column (1), adoptive mother's drinking raises the adoptee's probability

of drinking by 19 percent. The effect for the non-adoptees is 26 percent and the difference between

the coefficients is not significant. Male adoptees are more likely to drink than female adoptees and

each additional year of mother's education raises the adoptee's probability of drinking by 1.1

percent.



        The effects for smoking in column (2) show a somewhat similar pattern though the

coefficients are smaller and not statistically significant. Mother's smoking raises the adoptee's

probability of smoking by 11 percent, and the effect for the non-adoptees is not statistically

significantly different.



        The effects for BMI and obesity are quite the opposite. Mother's BMI, overweight status

and obesity status have a huge effect for her biological children but very little effect for the

adoptees. If the mother is classified as overweight, the non-adoptees are 19 percent more likely to

be overweight whereas the non-adoptees are .2 percent more likely to be overweight.



                                                22
       Table 6 asks whether the mix of adoptees and non-adoptees in the family affects the

adoptees' outcomes. I form dummy variables for three separate categories of adoptees: 1) the child

is the only adoptee in the family, 2) the child is an adoptee in a family with multiple adoptees and

one or more biological children, and 3) the child is an adoptee in a family with multiple adoptees

and no biological children. The base category for the coefficients are the biological children and the

regressions include a separate intercept for biological children, age dummies, family size dummies,

mother's education, and family income. Both the point estimates and the standard errors indicate

that the outcomes for adoptees do not vary significantly with the mix of adoptees and non-adoptees.



       Appendix Table 5 explores whether the estimated transmission coefficients differ by adoptee

gender.12 I limit the sample to the adoptees and add interaction terms to allow the male adoptees to

have a separate slope on mother's education, mother's college status, parental income, and mother's

body mass index. The outcomes considered are years of education, graduating from a US News

ranked college, drinking, smoking, and BMI. In no case do we find that the male and female

adoptees have coefficients that are statistically significantly different. However, the slopes are

estimated with enough imprecision that it in most cases it is also difficult to reject a sizeable

difference in slopes.



       Appendix Table 6 asks whether the gender mix in the family affects the adoptee's outcomes.

Again I limit the sample to the adoptees. My right hand side variables of interest are the fraction of

girls in the family, whether any of the adoptee's siblings are girls and whether any of the adoptee's

siblings are boys. I try running the regressions separately for boys and girls. I do not find any

evidence of gender mix effects, but again the standard errors are large enough that I cannot say




                                                 23
much more than this. Finally in Appendix 7 and in a large series of specifications not reported, I

ask whether the child's age at adoption affects outcomes. The short answer is that I cannot find any

evidence that within this sample age at adoption matters for educational attainment, income, obesity

or drinking.13



Conclusion

        In this paper, I examine a sample of Korean-American adoptees who in infancy were

randomly assigned to families.           Being assigned to a high education family has economically

meaningful treatment effects for these adoptees. Adoptees are 9 percent more likely to have four

years of college if their mothers do. Each additional year of mother's educational attainment raises

the adoptee's educational attainment by .07 years. But the effects for adoptees are modest when

compared to corresponding effects for non-adoptees. The transmission of educational attainment

and college status to adoptees is roughly 25 percent as large as the transmission of educational

attainment and college status to non-adoptees. Thus, for educational outcomes, the level effects of

parental education are quite important, but only about one quarter of the story.



        Health outcomes show a very different pattern. Parents appear to transmit drinking and

smoking behavior to adoptees and non-adoptees at nearly the same rate. If a mother drinks, the

adoptee is 19 percent more likely to do so, and if the mother smokes, the adoptee is 11 percent more

likely to smoke. The transmission of drinking to non-adoptees is larger in the point estimate but not

statistically significantly different than transmission for the adoptees. Thus parents may be equally

good at transmitting certain health habits to their children, regardless of any genetic connection.




12
   My interest here is in part due to the fact that many of the Moving to Opportunity effects differ greatly by youth's
gender Kling, Ludwig and Katz [2004].
13
   It seems logical that it would matter, but there is no strong evidence of the effect in this sample.


                                                          24
       For height and obesity, there is strong transmission from parents to their biological children

and almost no transmission of these outcomes to adoptees.           For example, the transmission

coefficient on body mass index is .02 for adoptees and .23 for non-adoptees. The results for body

mass index are suggestive of a big role for genes in determining obesity.           A model which

emphasizes the interaction between genes and environment is one plausible way to explain this.

Certain people may have a genetic predisposition towards obesity, and when they are put in a high

calorie and/or low exercise environment, they have high BMIs.           The random assignment of

adoptees to families means that children with obesity promoting genes are not disproportionately

likely to end up in an obesity promoting family environment.



       The largest treatment effects for the adoptees are either caused by or strongly correlated with

the number of children in the family. Each additional child added to the family is associated with a

.12 year decrease in the adoptee's educational attainment and a 2.5 percent reduction in the

probability of attending college. These large effects from family size may imply that there is a

quality quantity tradeoff that is particularly steep for adoptees, relative to non-adoptees. Or, the

family size effects may be picking up important unobserved difference between large and small

adoptive families.



       I also investigated the influences of family structure (number of adoptees versus non-

adoptees) and gender composition on adoptee outcomes. I do not find any effects of family

structure on education, earnings or obesity.    Nor did I find effects from the gender mix in the

family or the age at adoption. However, all of these non-results are measured with imprecision.



       Overall, this study yields several useful conclusions.        First, in a case with random

assignment of children to families, family size is still negatively correlated with education and



                                                 25
income. Second, there is a strong level effect of family environment on child education and

income. However transmission of education and income for adoptees is much less strong than for

non-adoptees. Hence, by definition, either initial endowments or the interaction between family

environment and initial endowments must be driving a large portion of the transmission of income

and education to children. Smoking and drinking habits are transmitted almost equally strongly to

adoptees and non-adoptees. Perhaps most interesting is the fact that parents do not transmit a

tendency for obesity to their adoptees.



       Random assignment via adoption is a form of grand experiment that will not be reproduced

in policies designed to aid children in general. But for many policies, these data trace out an upper

bound for the effects that can be achieved via shifts in family income, or neighborhood quality, or

schools.   I hope that the treatment effects observed here will guide other social scientists in

understanding what determines child outcomes and the possible scope for policy intervention.




                                                 26
References

Altonji, Joseph G. and Thomas A. Dunn, “Relationships Among the Family Incomes and Labor
Market Outcomes of Relatives,” Research in Labor Economics, 12 (1991), 269-310.

Angrist, Joshua D. and Kevin Lang, "How Important are Classroom Peer Effects? Evidence from
Boston's Metco Program," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9263, Oct
2002.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Alan B. Krueger, “Estimates of the Economic Returns to Schooling
      from a New Sample of Twins,” American Economic Review, LXXXIV (1994), 1157-73.

Ashenfelter, Orley, and Cecilia Rouse, “Income, Schooling, and Ability: Evidence from a New
      Sample of Identical Twins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXIII (1998), 253-84.

Behrman, Jere R. and Paul Taubman, “Is Schooling 'Mostly in the Genes'? Nature Nurture
      Decomposition Using Data on Relatives,” Journal of Political Economy, XCVII (1989),
      1425-1446.

Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig and Paul Taubman, “Endowments and the Allocation of
      Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market,” Journal of Political Economy, CII
      (1994), 1131-1174.

Bjorklund Anders and Markus Jantii, “Intergenerational Mobility in Sweden Compared to the
United States,” American Economic Review, 87 (1997), 377-386.

Bjorklund Anders, Markus Jantii and Gary Solon, “Influences of Nature and Nurture on Earnings
Variation: A Report on a Study of Sibling Types in Sweden,” in Bowles, Gintis and Osborne (eds. )
Unequal Chances: Family Background and Economic Success, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2004a.

Bjorklund, Anders, Mikael Lindahl, Erik Plug, "Intergenerational Effects in Sweden: What Can
We Learn from Adoption Data?" Working Paper, Swedish Institute for Social Research, Stockholm
University, 2004.

Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes, "Why the Apple Doesn't Fall Far:
Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital," National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 10066, 2003.

Black, Sandra, Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes, "The More the Merrier? The Effect of
Family Composition on Children's Education," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 10720, 2004.

Capron, C. and M. Duyme, “Assessment of Effects of Socioeconomic Status on IQ in a Full
      Cross-fostering Study,” Nature, CCCXL (1969), 552-554.

Cardon, Lon R., David W. Fulker, John C. DeFries, and Robert Plomin, “Multivariate Genetic
      Analysis of Specific Cognitive Abilities in the Colorado Adoption Project at Age 7,”
      Intelligence, XVI (1992), 383-400.



                                               27
Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz, "The Company You Keep: The Effect of Family and
   Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths," National Bureau of Economic Research Working
   Paper # 3705, 1991.

Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin and Sara McLanahan, "How Hungry Is The Selfish Gene?," Economic
Journal, 110 (446), pp, 781-804.

Case, Anne and Kristin F. Butcher, "The Effect of Sibling Sex Composition on Women's Education
and Earnings," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, v.109 (3), August 1994, pp. 531-563.

Collishaw, S., B. Maughan, and A. Pickles, “Infant Adoption: Pyschosocial Outcomes in
       Adulthood,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology, XXXIII (1998), 57-65.


Cullen, Julie Berry, Brian Jacob, and Steven Levitt, “The Impact of School Choice on Student
Outcomes: An Analysis of the Chicago Public Schools.” Journal of Public Economics
(Forthcoming).

Currie, Janet and Enrico Moretti, "Mother's Education and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings," Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVIII (4),
2003, pp. 1495 – 1532.

Darwin, Charles, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, 1859.

Das, Mitali and Tanja Sjogren, "The Intergenerational Link in Income Mobility: Evidence From
Adoptions," Economics Letters 75, pp. 55-60.

DeFries, John C., Robert Plomin, and David W. Fulker, Nature and Nurture During Middle
       Childhood, Blackwell Press, Oxford, UK, 1994.

Dickens, William and James R. Flynn, "Heritability Estimates versus Large Environmental Effects:
       The IQ Paradox Resolved, " forthcoming in Psychological Review.

Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab, "Measuring Peer Group Effects: A
   Study of Teenage Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, C (1992), 966-991.

Foster, Jennifer, "Peerless Perfomers: The Lack of Robust Peer Effects at a Large Public
University," Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Maryland, 2002.

Freud, Sigmund, Civilization and Its Discontents, 1910.

Gaviria, Alejandro and Stephen Raphael, "School Based Peer Effects and Juvenile Behavior,"
   Review of Economics and Statistics, v.83 (2001), 257-68.

Goldberger, Arthur S, "Economic and Mechanical Models of Intergenerational Transmission,"
American Economic Review, vol. 79, no. 3, June 1989, pp. 504-13

Grilliches, Z. and W. M. Mason, “Education, Income, and Ability, “ Journal of Political
        Economy, LXXX (1972), S74-S103.



                                                28
Hanushek, Eric, John F. Kain, Jacob M. Markman, and Steven G. Rivkin “Does Peer Ability Affect
      Student Achievement?”, Journal of Applied Econometrics 18(5), September/October 2003,
      pp. 527-544.

Harris, Judith Rich, The Nurture Assumption: Why Children Turn out the Way They Do, The
        Free Press, NY, 1998.

Herrnstein, Richard J. and Charles Murray, The Bell Curve: Intelligence and Class Structure in
       American Life, The Free Press, NY, 1994.

Hoxby, Caroline M., "The Effects of Class Size on Student Achievement: New
Evidence from Population Variation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 115,
No. 4 (November 2000), 1239-1285.

Hume, David, Enquiry into the Human Understanding, 1748.

Jacob, Brian A, "Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement: Evidence from
Public Housing Demolitions in Chicago," American Economic Review, vol. 94, no. 1, March 2004,
pp. 233-58.

Jencks, C., Inequality: A Reassessment of the Effects of Family and Schooling in America, Basic
       Books, NY, 1972.

Jencks, C. and M. Brown, “Genes and Social Stratification;” in P. Taubman (ed.), Kinometrics:
       The Determinants of Economic Success Within and Between Families, New York: North
       Holland Elsevier. In press.

Kain, John F., Eric A. Hanushek, Steven G. Rivkin, "Teachers, Schools, and Academic
Achievement," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6691, Aug 1998 .

Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Liebman, "Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2001),
pp. 607-654.

Kling, Jeffrey R, Jens Ludwig and Lawrence F. Katz, "Youth Criminal Behavior in the Moving to
Opportunity Experiment," Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #482, Princeton University,
March 2004.

Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, and Paul Hirschfield, "Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime: Evidence
from a Randomized Housing Mobility Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2001),
pp. 655-680.


Loehlin, John C., Joseph M. Horn, and Lee Willerman, “Differential Inheritance of Mental
       Abilities in the Texas Adoption Project,” Intelligence, XIX (1994), 325-336.

Loehlin, John C., Joseph M. Horn, and Lee Willerman, “Heredity, Environment, and Personality
       Change: Evidence from the Texas Adoption Project, “Journal of Personality, LVIII
       (1990), 221-243.



                                                29
Loehlin, John C., Joseph M. Horn, and Lee Willerman, “Personality Resemblances Between
       Unwed Mothers and Their Adopted-Away Offspring,” Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology, XLII (1982), 1089-1099.

Loehlin, John C., Lee Willerman, and Joseph M. Horn, “Personality Resemblance in Adoptive
       Families: A 10-Year Followup,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, LIII
       (1987), 961-969.

Maughan, Barbara, Stephon Collishaw, and Andrew Pickles, “School Achievement and Adult
     Qualification Among Adoptees: A Longitudinal Study,” Journal of Child Psychology and
     Psychiatry, XXXIX (1998), 669-685.

Mulligan, Casey B., Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1997.

Nechyba, Thomas and Jacob Vigdor, "Peer Effects in North Carolina Public Schools,"
      Mimeo, Duke University, 2003.

Plug, Erik, "Estimating the Effect of Mother's Schooling on Children's Schooling Using a Sample of
Adoptees," American Economic Review, 94(1), pp. 358-368.

Plug, Erik and Wim Vijverberg, "Schooling, Family Background and Adoption: Is It Nature or Is It
Nurture?," Journal of Political Economy, 111(3), pp. 611-641.

Ridley, Matt, Nature Via Nurture, New York: Harper Collins, 2003.

Rouse, Cecilia E., "Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
Milwaukee Parental Choice Program," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 113, no. 2, May 1998,
pp. 553-602.

Scarr, Sandra and Richard Weinberg “The Influence of Family Background on Intellectual
        Attainment,” American Sociological Review, XVIII (1978), 674-692.

Segal, Nancy L. and Thomas J. Bouchard, Entwined Lives: Twins and What They Tell Us About
       Human Behavior, E.P. Dutton, April, 1999.

Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American Economic Review,
82 (1992), 393-408.

Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3. Elsevier Science B.V., 1999.
Taubman, Paul “Role of Parental Income in Educational Attainment,” American Economic Review,
       LXXIX (1989), 57-61.
Vogler, G. P., T. I. A. Sorensen, A. J. Stunkard, M. R. Srinivasan, and D. C. Rao. 1995.
       “Influences of Genes and Shared Family Environment on Adult Body Mass Index Assessed
       in an Adoption Study by a Comprehensive Path Model.” International Journal of
Obesity 19:40–45.
Weinberg, Richard A., Sandra Scarr, and Irvin D. Waldman, “The Minnesota Transracial
       Adoption Study: A Follow-Up of IQ Test Performance at Adolescence,” Intelligence,
       XVI (1992), 117-135.


                                               30
Wilson, R.S. and A. P. Matheny, Jr., “Behavior-Genetics Research in Infant Temperament: The
      Louisville Twin Study,” in R. Plomin and J. Dunn (eds.) The Study of Temperament. (pp
      81-97). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Zimmerman, David J., “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature,” American Economic
Review, 82(1992), 409-429.




                                            31
                                                Table 1
                                 Summary Statistics for Adoptees and
                                 Biological Children in Same Families

                                             Adoptees             Bio    logical

Means for Children                    Obs       Mean     Std.    Obs      Mean      Std.     T Stat for
                                                         Dev.                       Dev.    Difference

Child is Male                         1567       0.30     0.46   1244      0.61      0.49        17.28
Child Age                             1562      27.82     4.74   1252     33.99      6.67        28.63
Child Age at Adoption                 1543       1.38     0.83
Child Adopted at Age 1+               1543       0.23     0.42
Child's Years Education               1555      14.80     2.08   1235     15.66      2.37        10.20
Child has 4+ Years College            1555       0.48     0.50   1235      0.65      0.48         9.22
SAT 25th Percentile Child's College    730    1019.63   116.62    680   1033.11    121.64         2.12
SAT 75th Percentile Child's College    733    1224.87   108.93    683   1240.05    112.98         2.57
Acceptance Rate of Child's College     738       0.70     0.17    689      0.68      0.19        -1.84
Child's Graduated from a College w/   1555       0.35     0.48   1235      0.48      0.50         6.98
US News Rank
Child's Family Income                 1413      41.64    34.40   1176     61.08     42.71        12.83
Child Married? (0-1)                  1552       0.37     0.48   1229      0.65      0.48        15.16
Child's Number of Children            1478       0.50     0.90   1194      1.22      1.31        16.92
Child Overweight (0-1)                1491       0.24     0.43   1201      0.34      0.47         5.67
Child Obese (0-1)                     1491       0.06     0.24   1201      0.07      0.25         1.07
Child Smokes                          1552       0.23     0.42   1223      0.12      0.32        -7.64
Child Drinks                          1537       0.59     0.49   1207      0.66      0.47         3.92

Mother's Years Education              1552      15.18     2.46   1247     15.07      2.45        -1.17
Mother Has 4+ Years College           1552       0.54     0.50   1247      0.51      0.50        -1.42
Parent's Family Income At Adoption    1530      32.52    23.96   1234     32.71     25.33          .21
Parent's Family Income Now            1538      77.99    44.16   1240     79.19     45.06          .70
Mother Is Overweight                  1485       0.47     0.50   1196      0.42      0.49        -2.26
Mother Smokes                         1540       0.03     0.17   1234      0.02      0.14        -1.50
Mother Drinks                         1537       0.52     0.50   1233      0.53      0.50          .62
Age Gap: Mother - Child               1556      31.47     5.47   1244     27.00      5.64       -21.20




                                                   32
                                      Table 2
                     Frequency and Composition of Family Sizes
                                  In the Sample
Families have at least one Holt adoptee from Korea in order to be included in the sample. Family
size and gender is as reported by parents. We have outcomes data on up to 5 children in each
family.
                               Total     Number      Fraction     Fraction
                         Number of            of   Adoptees           Girls
                         Children in    Families
                             Family

                                 1          60         1.000       0.783
                                 2         323         0.799       0.627
                                 3         298         0.595       0.555
                                 4         214         0.550       0.530
                                 5         106         0.546       0.546
                                 6          44         0.552       0.536
                                 7          41         0.643       0.543




                                              33
                                         Table 3
                  Size of Nurture Effect Relative to Total Effect Using
                 Transmission Coefficients From Parents To Children
      I.e. Coefficient on Parent's Outcome When Child's Outcome is Dependent
                                        Variable
Each coefficient is from a separate univariate regression of child's outcome on mother's outcome. I show separate
coefficients for the adoptees and the biological children in the same families. I obtain very similar results when I
include dummies for child age and gender and when I control for parental income and education (see next two tables for
these results).


                                           Adoptee's              Biological             Ratio of         T-stat for
                                            Outcome                  Child's            Adoptee          Difference
                                       Regressed on                Outcome        Transmission to                 in
                                   Mother's Outcome               Regressed            Biological       Coefficients
                                                                 on Mother's
Years of Education                                 0.069              0.299                    0.231            6.176
                                              (0.022)**            (0.032)**
Log Household Income                              -0.087               0.161                  -0.540            4.411
                                               (0.037)*            (0.051)**
Has 4+ Years College                               0.069                0.257                  0.268            4.805
                                              (0.027)**            (0.031)**
Height Inches                                      0.036                0.456                  0.079            5.616
                                                 (0.040)           (0.057)**
Obese                                              0.031                0.103                  0.301            2.107
                                                 (0.018)           (0.029)**
Overweight                                         0.006                0.188                  0.032            4.809
                                                 (0.023)           (0.031)**
BMI                                                0.021                0.235                  0.089            5.394
                                                 (0.021)           (0.035)**
Smokes                                             0.093                0.112                  0.830            0.202
                                                 (0.071)              (0.096)
Drinks (0-1)                                       0.206                0.302                  0.682            2.511
                                              (0.028)**            (0.033)**

Observations                                       1539                  1220




                                                         34
                                                 Table 3A
Transmission in Holt Sample Versus Transmission in Other Samples
Below I report transmission coefficients for education and income in the Holt Sample, my calculations from the
NLSY79, Björklund et al's [2004] coefficients for Sweden, Solon[1999] and Zimmerman [1992] for PSID income, Plug
[2004] for the Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey (WLS).

                                    Transmission of          Transmission     Transmission of                  N
                                            Years of          of 4+ Years            Income
                                 Education (Mother-               College
                                               Child)      (Mother-Child)
Holt Biological                                0.299                0.257                  0.161           1,213
                                          (0.032)**             (0.031)**             (0.051)**
Swedish Biological                              .241                 .268                   .264        148,496
                                            (.001)**             (.004)**              (.004)**
PSID single year Biological                                                              .25-.30             300

NLSY Biological                                  .401                .440                  .290            5,614
                                             (.011)**            (.018)**              (.025)**

Holt Adoptees                                   0.069               0.069                 -0.087           1,642
                                            (0.021)**           (0.027)**              (0.037)*
Swedish Adoptees                                 .114                .107                   .154           7,498
                                             (.007)**            (.013)**              (.021)**
NLSY Adoptees                                    .277                .420                   .112             170
                                             (.060)**            (.078)**                 (.117)
WLS Adoptees                                     .276                .178                                    610
                                             (.063)**            (.063)**




                                                      35
                                              Table 3B
                                 Sibling "Transmission" Coefficients
Below I report coefficients from regressing child outcomes on older sibling's outcome. In column (2) I form all unique
pairs of biological siblings and regress the younger sibling's outcome on the older sibling's. I include dummies for age
and gender of each sibling in the pair. In column (1) I use all possible pairs of adoptive (non-biologically related)
siblings. These latter pairs can be formed from two adoptees in the family or from one adoptee and one non-adoptee.
                                                                   (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                                                Child               Child              Ratio of
                                                            Outcome             Outcome             adoptive to
                                                         Regressed on        Regressed on            biological
                                                            Adoptive           Biological
                                                             Sibling's           Sibling's

     Years of Education                                            0.088              0.290                   .30
                                                               (0.024)**          (0.033)**

     Has 4+ Years College                                          0.098              0.243                   .40
                                                               (0.028)**          (0.035)**

     Log Household Income                                          0.158              0.288                   .55
                                                               (0.029)**          (0.039)**

     Drinks (yes/no)                                               0.323              0.359                   .90
                                                               (0.030)**          (0.039)**

     BMI                                                           0.042              0.210                   .20
                                                                 (0.027)          (0.033)**
     Observations                                                   1764               1132
     R-squared                                                     0.092              0.169
Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                          36
                                                   Table 4
                      Effects of Family Environment on Educational Outcomes and Income
Each column is a separate regression. I pool data for adoptees and biological children. Adoptees are always the base category.
Slopes for the biological children are obtained by adding the interaction term (e.g. bio*mother's education) to the relevant adoptee
coefficient (e.g. mother's education). Dependent variables are years of education, a dummy for having 4 or more years of college, the
75th percentiles of the SAT distribution and the log of child's family income. Regressions include (but suppress) age dummies and a
separate intercept for biological children.
                                                          (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)            (6)
                                                      Child's         Child's     Child Has          Child              75th    Log Child's
                                                    Years of        Years of       4+ Years        College        Percentile     Household
                                                  Education        Education        College     Ranked by      SAT Child's          Income
                                                                                                  US News           College
           Mother's Years of Education                 0.074
                                                   (0.023)**

          Biological Child * Mothers                 0.185
          Years Educ                             (0.041)**

          Number of Children                         -0.122          -0.120         -0.025          -0.030          -0.431          -0.038
                                                 (0.042)**       (0.043)**        (0.010)*      (0.009)**          (3.804)        (0.016)*

          Bio Child* Number Children                  0.099           0.091          0.017           0.018          -3.819           0.028
                                                    (0.071)         (0.068)        (0.015)         (0.015)         (5.722)         (0.025)

          Log Parent's Household Income               0.131           0.168          0.011           0.028          15.307           0.016
                                                    (0.091)         (0.096)        (0.022)         (0.023)        (7.709)*         (0.036)

          Bio Child* Log Family Income                0.128           0.047          0.086           0.002           8.786           0.178
                                                    (0.175)         (0.170)       (0.034)*         (0.035)        (12.838)       (0.057)**

          Child is Male                              -0.573          -0.558          -0.141         -0.115           1.517           -0.146
                                                 (0.118)**       (0.118)**       (0.027)**      (0.025)**          (9.093)       (0.044)**

          Bio Child * Male                           0.554           0.514           0.103           0.100           5.862           0.213
                                                 (0.180)**       (0.177)**       (0.038)**        (0.040)*        (12.745)       (0.065)**

          Oldest Child in Family                     0.236*          0.220*          0.025          -0.009           7.073          -0.020
                                                    (0.130)         (0.130)        (0.030)         (0.029)         (9.571)         (0.050)

          Bio Child*Oldest Child                      0.093           0.084          0.025           0.055          -4.189          -0.029
                                                    (0.191)         (0.192)        (0.041)         (0.041)        (13.517)         (0.069)

          Age Difference:                            -0.001           0.003         -0.002           0.000          -0.479           -0.015
          Mother – Child                            (0.011)         (0.010)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.917)       (0.004)**

          Bio* Age Difference                         0.020           0.005          0.006           0.001           0.325           0.003
                                                    (0.018)         (0.017)        (0.004)         (0.004)         (1.457)         (0.006)
          Father's Years of Education                                 0.026
                                                                    (0.022)
          Biological Child * Fathers                                  0.241
          Years Educ                                             (0.034)**
          Mother Has 4+ Years College                                                0.087          0.087           -8.497          -0.076
                                                                                 (0.027)**      (0.027)**          (8.751)         (0.045)
          Bio Child* Mother Has 4+                                                   0.112          0.111           21.243           0.121
          Years College                                                          (0.040)**      (0.042)**         (13.592)         (0.065)
          Observations                                2679           2654             2679           2679            1369            2511
          R-squared                                   0.147          0.157           0.146          0.091            0.027           0.218




                                                                         37
                                                        Table 5
                                  Effects of Family Environment on Health Outcomes
Each column is a separate regression. I pool data for adoptees and biological children. Adoptees are always the base category.
Slopes for the biological children are obtained by adding the interaction term (e.g. bio*mother's education) to the relevant adoptee
coefficient (e.g. mother's education). Dependent variables are child's BMI and dummies for drinking, smoking, obese and
overweight. BMI is defined from self reported weight and height. Overweight is defined as a BMI >=25 and obese is having a BMI
> =30. Regressions include (but suppress) age dummies, a separate intercept for biological children, dummies for being the oldest
child, and controls for the age difference between the mother and child.

                                                                 (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)
                                                        Child Drinks     Child Smokes      Child's BMI            Child       Child Obese
                                                            (yes/no)           (yes/no)                      Overweight
      Mother Drinks                                            0.185
                                                          (0.029)**

      Bio Child* Mother drinks                                  0.076
                                                              (0.041)
      Mother Smokes                                                              0.108
                                                                               (0.072)

      Bio Child* Mother smokes                                                  -0.009
                                                                               (0.102)
      Mother's BMI                                                                                0.013
                                                                                                (0.020)

      Bio Child* Mother's BMI                                                                     0.222
                                                                                              (0.041)**
      Mother Overweight                                                                                            0.002
                                                                                                                 (0.023)

      Bio Child* Mother Overweight                                                                                 0.189
                                                                                                               (0.037)**
      Mother Obese                                                                                                                  0.025
                                                                                                                                  (0.019)
      Bio Child* Mother Obese                                                                                                       0.080
                                                                                                                                 (0.035)*

      Mother's Years of Education                              0.011              0.001           -0.078           -0.013          -0.004
                                                             (0.006)            (0.005)          (0.047)       (0.005)**          (0.003)
      Biological Child * Mothers Years Educ                   -0.002             -0.011            0.039            0.004           0.000
                                                             (0.009)            (0.007)          (0.076)          (0.009)         (0.005)
      Number of Children                                      -0.006              0.011            0.089            0.013           0.003
                                                             (0.010)            (0.009)          (0.075)          (0.008)         (0.005)
      Bio Child* Number Children                               0.005             -0.014            0.005            0.004           0.003
                                                             (0.015)            (0.011)          (0.132)          (0.015)         (0.009)
      Log Parent's Household Income                            0.016              0.007           -0.146            0.009          -0.001
                                                             (0.026)            (0.021)          (0.188)          (0.021)         (0.013)
      Bio Child* Log Family Income                             0.029              0.007           -0.038            0.019          -0.021
                                                             (0.037)            (0.027)          (0.302)          (0.035)         (0.018)
      Child is Male                                            0.058              0.124            1.652            0.196           0.036
                                                            (0.028)*         (0.026)**        (0.223)**        (0.027)**         (0.015)*
      Bio Child * Male                                         0.056             -0.052           -0.047            0.009          -0.044
                                                             (0.042)            (0.032)          (0.352)          (0.039)        (0.022)*
      Observations                                              2609              2640             2500             2500             2500
      R-squared                                                0.106              0.044            0.111            0.091           0.024
           Robust standard errors in parentheses
           * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



                                                                        38
                                                  Table 6
                   Effects of Family Structure (Number of Adoptees Versus Non-Adoptees)
                                                On Outcomes
Each column is a separate regression. Regressions include (but suppress) age dummies, a separate intercept for biological children, a
set of dummies for family size, dummies for being the oldest child, controls for the age difference between the mother and child,
controls for mothers education and family income. The right hand side variables of interest are the following three mutually
exclusive and exhaustive categories: 1) being the only adoptee in the family, 2) being an adoptee in a family with 2+ adoptees and
biological children, or 3) being an adoptee in a family with 2+ adoptees and no biological children.


                                                                      (1)                     (2)            (3)                 (4)
                                                         Child Four Year         Child's Years of   Child's BMI         Child Drinks
                                                         College Ranked                Education                            (yes/no)
                                                            by US News
            Child is Only Adoptee in                               0.047                  -0.373           0.813               -0.063
            Family                                               (0.075)                 (0.242)         (0.417)              (0.053)

            Family Has 2+ Adoptees                                 0.012                  -0.296           0.838               -0.138
            and Biological                                       (0.079)                 (0.267)         (0.461)             (0.064)*

            Family Has 2+ Adoptees                                 0.025                  -0.353           0.787               -0.117
            and No Biological                                    (0.076)                 (0.241)         (0.419)             (0.057)*

            Observations                                           2748                    2762           2673                  2724
            R-squared                                              0.068                   0.098          0.069                0.047

             Robust standard errors in parentheses
             * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                            39
Appendix Table 1: Is Response Pattern Correlated with Family or Child
Characteristics?


This is an OLS regression of the dummy for response on a series of background variables for the parents and the
adoptee. All the right hand side variables are pulled from Holt Records. We use data for 216 non-responders and 674
responders. We drew a random sample of 500 non-responders. We include all observations for which we have the data
from Holt records.

                                                                                          Responded to Survey
Log (Family Income)                                                                                      0.003
                                                                                                       (0.027)
Mother's Years of Education                                                                              0.007
                                                                                                       (0.008)
Father's Years of Education                                                                              0.008
                                                                                                       (0.006)
Weight At Admission to Holt                                                                              0.000
                                                                                                       (0.003)
Height At Admission to Holt                                                                             -0.004
                                                                                                       (0.004)
Age at Arrival in US                                                                                     0.011
                                                                                                       (0.008)
Constant                                                                                                 0.599
                                                                                                     (0.257)*
Observations                                                                                               890
R-squared                                                                                                0.009
Standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                        40
                                              Appendix 2
                                Child's Pre-Treatment Characteristics
                              Vs. Parent's Pre-Treatment Characteristics

                                                        (1)                     (2)               (3)                (4)
                                          Weight at initial        Height at initial   Child's Age at      Child is Male
                                         social history lbs         social history            Arrival
                                                                            inches
Mother's Years of Education                         -0.034                   0.023               0.002             0.005
                                                   (0.138)                 (0.131)             (0.013)           (0.006)

Father's Years of Education                          0.055                    0.088              0.007             0.000
                                                   (0.117)                  (0.103)            (0.011)           (0.005)

Log Parent's Household Income                       -0.206                   -0.744             -0.048             0.014
                                                   (0.567)                  (0.543)            (0.056)           (0.023)

Mother's BMI                                        -0.009                   -0.030             -0.003             0.001
                                                   (0.055)                  (0.055)            (0.006)           (0.002)

Mother Drinks                                        0.338                    0.587             -0.036             0.022
                                                   (0.661)                  (0.611)            (0.061)           (0.028)
Father Drinks                                        0.988                    0.461             -0.056             0.009
                                                   (0.657)                  (0.613)            (0.065)           (0.029)
Mother's Height Inches                               0.044                   -0.053             -0.003             0.009
                                                   (0.099)                  (0.088)            (0.009)           (0.005)
Father's Height Inches                              -0.101                   -0.110              0.015             0.001
                                                   (0.114)                  (0.100)            (0.010)           (0.004)
Father's BMI                                                                  0.016              0.009             0.002
                                                                            (0.061)            (0.006)           (0.003)
Constant                                           15.043                    35.537              0.472            -0.567
                                                 (11.617)                (9.710)**             (0.894)           (0.414)
Observations                                          360                       371              1337               1358
R-squared                                           0.019                     0.021              0.008             0.006
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%



                                   Variable          Obs       Mean            Std.    Min          Max
                                                                               Dev.
                              weight initial         479       11.23           5.30        4        24.4
                              height initial         494       23.42           4.95      2.7        39.8




                                                              41
                                  Appendix 3
       Variance Explained By Nurture Effects And Total Variance Explained
Each R-squared is from a separate regression of child's outcome on mother's and father's education, college status,
smoking and drinking status, number of children, family income, height, weight, obesity and overweight status

        Child's Outcome                                       R-squared R-squared                  Ratio
                                                               Adoptees Biological            (adoptees/
                                                                         Children             biological)
        Years of Education                                         0.053         0.187             0.281
        Has 4+ Years of College                                    0.060         0.181             0.332
        Graduated from A US News Ranked                            0.073         0.132             0.550
        College
        SAT 75th Percentile of College 2003                        0.025         0.078             0.320
        Acceptance Rate of College 2003                            0.038         0.058             0.656
        Log (Income)                                               0.113         0.056             2.014
        Family Income                                              0.069         0.058             1.191
        Drinks? (0-1)                                              0.079         0.174             0.454
        Smokes? (0-1)                                              0.024         0.035             0.690
        Has Asthma                                                 0.012         0.020             0.603
        BMI                                                        0.012         0.128             0.096
        Overweight? (0-1)                                          0.014         0.065             0.219
        Height in Inches                                           0.016         0.169             0.094
        Married?                                                   0.068         0.041             1.671
        Number of Children                                         0.078         0.138             0.564




                                                        42
                                                          Appendix 4
                                            Marital Status, Number Kids Outcomes
Each column is a separate regression. Regressions include (but suppress) age dummies and a separate intercept for biological
children. I pool the adoptees and the biological children. Adoptees are the base category and the total slope for the biological
children is obtained by adding the base (adoptee) coefficient to the relevant interaction term.

                                                                                (1)                 (2)                 (3)
                                                                           Child is          Number of         Has Children
                                                                           Married            Children
                     Mother's Years of Education                            -0.005              -0.022                 -0.011
                                                                           (0.005)            (0.010)*               (0.005)*
                     Biological Child * Mothers Years                       -0.001              -0.021                 -0.007
                     Educ                                                  (0.008)             (0.020)                (0.008)

                     Number of Children                                      0.011                0.032                  0.020
                                                                           (0.008)             (0.016)*             (0.008)**
                     Bio Child* Number Children                             -0.005                0.070                  0.007
                                                                           (0.013)              (0.037)                (0.014)

                     Log Parent's Household Income                          -0.023                -0.044                -0.007
                                                                           (0.020)               (0.042)               (0.020)
                     Bio Child* Log Family Income                            0.012                -0.077                -0.023
                                                                           (0.032)               (0.089)               (0.031)

                     Child is Male                                          -0.109                -0.176                -0.095
                                                                        (0.024)**             (0.042)**             (0.023)**
                     Bio Child * Male                                        0.064                -0.034                 0.036
                                                                           (0.038)               (0.085)               (0.036)

                    Observations                                               2775                 2674                  2674
                    R-squared                                                 0.188                0.265                 0.223
             Robust standard errors in parentheses
             * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                         43
                                             Appendix 5
                               Do Effects Differ by Adoptee's Gender?
Sample is limited to adoptees. Each column is a separate regression. Girls are the base category and I interact the
dummy for boys with all the right hand side variables of interest. Age dummies are included but not reported.

                                         (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                     Child's     Child Four            75th          Child          Child   Child's BMI
                                    Years of           Year      Percentile        Drinks        Smokes
                                   Education       College          SAT of        (yes/no)       (yes/no)
                                                 Ranked by           Child's
                                                  US News           College
Child is Male                           0.177        -0.011       -103.916           0.316          0.048          1.082
                                      (0.996)       (0.184)        (62.620)        (0.219)        (0.236)        (2.537)

Mother's Years of Education              0.075                                       0.012          0.001        -0.031
                                    (0.028)**                                      (0.007)        (0.006)       (0.052)
Male* Mother's Years                    -0.010                                      -0.005         -0.003        -0.215
Education                              (0.055)                                     (0.012)        (0.011)      (0.104)*
Number of Children                      -0.157        -0.036         -3.180         -0.006          0.005         0.058
                                    (0.044)**     (0.010)**         (3.672)        (0.011)        (0.009)       (0.078)
Male* Number Children                    0.046         0.025         12.186         -0.002          0.008        -0.083
                                       (0.081)       (0.016)        (7.858)        (0.020)        (0.019)       (0.160)
Log Parent's Household                   0.083         0.022          8.750          0.026          0.005        -0.413
Income                                 (0.106)       (0.026)        (8.471)        (0.030)        (0.022)       (0.218)
Male* Log(Family Income)                -0.203        -0.041         14.123         -0.041          0.022         0.714
                                       (0.206)       (0.044)       (15.637)        (0.047)        (0.047)       (0.442)
Mother Has 4+ Years                                    0.107        -10.781
College                                           (0.032)**         (9.827)
malemother_college                                    -0.069          7.390
                                                     (0.055)       (18.691)
Mother Drinks                                                                        0.194
                                                                                 (0.034)**
Mother's BMI                                                                                                      -0.002
                                                                                                                 (0.021)
Male * Mother's BMI                                                                                                0.043
                                                                                                                 (0.046)
Mother Smokes                                                                                       0.110
                                                                                                  (0.079)
Male* Mother Smokes                                                                                -0.009
                                                                                                  (0.177)
Male* Mother's Drinks Per                                                           -0.011
Day                                                                                (0.057)
Observations                            1510          1510              718          1475          1491            1403
R-squared                               0.042         0.038           0.011          0.052         0.021          0.051

Robust standard errors in parentheses
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                          44
                                            Appendix 6
                              Does the Gender Mix Matter for Adoptees?
  Sample is limited to adoptees. Each column is a separate regression. Column (1) is just for girls and column (2) is just
  for boys. Age dummies are included but coefficients are not reported.
                                         (1)        (2)        (3)                      (4)              (5)             (6)
                                 Child Four Child Four Child Four                   Child's           Child           Child
                                       Year       Year       Year                  Years of          Drinks         Smokes
                                   College    College    College                  Education         (yes/no)        (yes/no)
                                 Ranked by Ranked by Ranked by
                                  US News    US News    US News
                                     (Boys)     (Girls)      (All)
Fraction Girls                        0.001     -0.045      0.045                      0.328          -0.027           0.044
in Family                           (0.218)    (0.143)    (0.083)                    (0.387)         (0.091)         (0.081)

Any of Siblings                        0.001          -0.036          -0.050          -0.119          -0.036          -0.026
Are Girls                            (0.125)         (0.041)         (0.036)         (0.148)         (0.037)         (0.029)

Any of Siblings                        0.001           0.008           0.034           0.137          -0.028           0.008
Are Boys                             (0.056)         (0.076)         (0.041)         (0.196)         (0.046)         (0.042)

Number of Children                    -0.010         -0.037           -0.028          -0.149          -0.012           0.010
                                     (0.018)      (0.013)**       (0.011)**       (0.048)**          (0.012)         (0.010)
Child is Male                                                         -0.085          -0.467           0.051           0.150
                                                                   (0.042)*        (0.198)*          (0.049)      (0.044)**
Constant                              0.293           0.555            0.452         15.233            0.666           0.132
                                  (0.071)**       (0.142)**       (0.073)**       (0.362)**       (0.084)**          (0.078)
Observations                            460            1094             1554            1554            1536            1551
R-squared                             0.001           0.017            0.027           0.033           0.006           0.021
  Robust standard errors in parentheses
  * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                             45
                                                 Appendix 7
                                    Does Age at Adoption Affect Outcomes?
     Here we compare the adoptees who are adopted at age < 1year to all other adoptees in the sample who are adopted at
     age 1-5. Many other specifications of age at adoption were tried and all were equally unenlightening (i.e. yielded large
     standard errors).

                                              (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)
                                    Child's Years     Child Four       Log Child's    Child Drinks            Child    Child's BMI
                                    of Education     Year College       Household         (yes/no)         Smokes
                                                       Ranked by          Income                           (yes/no)
                                                        US News
Adopted Age 1+ (ie 1-5)                      0.412          0.085            0.093           -0.437          -0.300           0.780
                                           (1.009)        (0.193)          (0.392)          (0.242)         (0.200)         (2.101)
Mother's Years of Education                  0.078                                            0.011          -0.002          -0.080
                                        (0.027)**                                           (0.007)         (0.006)         (0.055)
Adopted Age 1+ * Mother's                   -0.070                                           -0.002           0.019           0.061
Years Education                            (0.051)                                          (0.012)         (0.011)         (0.088)
Number of Children                          -0.090         -0.026           -0.003           -0.010           0.005           0.141
                                         (0.046)*        (0.011)*          (0.021)          (0.011)         (0.009)         (0.084)
Adopted Age 1+ * Number of                  -0.112         -0.026           -0.054           -0.024          -0.013          -0.306
Children                                   (0.080)        (0.017)          (0.032)          (0.018)         (0.015)        (0.130)*
Log Parent's Household Income                0.010          0.040           -0.059            0.004           0.004          -0.117
                                           (0.103)        (0.027)          (0.044)          (0.029)         (0.023)         (0.206)
Adopted Age 1+ * Log Family                  0.153         -0.018            0.022            0.125           0.027          -0.188
Income
                                          (0.192)          (0.045)         (0.092)       (0.048)**          (0.043)         (0.366)
Mother Has 4+ Years College                                  0.123          -0.072
                                                        (0.034)**          (0.056)
Adopted Age 1+ * Mother Has                                 -0.032          -0.102
4+ Years College
                                                          (0.059)          (0.106)
Mother's Drinks Per Day                                                                      0.100
                                                                                         (0.039)**
Mother's BMI                                                                                                                   0.005
                                                                                                                             (0.025)
Adopted Age 1+ * Mother's BMI                                                                                                 -0.008
                                                                                                                             (0.039)
Constant                                   13.984           0.288           3.721            0.406            0.222           24.213
                                        (0.511)**        (0.120)*       (0.191)**        (0.133)**         (0.113)*       (1.311)**
Mother Smokes                                                                                                 0.104
                                                                                                            (0.069)
Adopted Age 1+ * Mother                                                                                      -0.092
Smokes
                                                                                                            (0.128)
Adopted Age 1+ * Mother's                                                                    0.076
Drinks Per Day
                                                                                            (0.075)
Observations                                 1587           1391             1461             1555            1570              1474
R-squared                                    0.031          0.049            0.013            0.037           0.009             0.010
     Robust standard errors in parentheses
     * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                46
Figure 1: Mean (College Attendance) By Family Size
non-adoptees (higher line) shown in red, adoptees shown in blue
                .7




                                                                          Non-Adoptees
Mean of Child Has 4 Years College
               .5          .6




                                                                          Adoptees
  .4            .3




                                    1   2            3           4           5           6              7
                                                  Number of Children in the Family




                                                        Sample Sizes in Above Graph

                                            Children                  Non-    Adoptees    P Value for
                                                                   Adoptees              Diff In Mean
                                                                                            Outcomes
                                            1                                      60
                                            2                          123        450            0.00
                                            3                          348        400            0.00
                                            4                          370        322            0.00
                                            5                          231        167            0.00
                                            6                           94         78            0.33
                                            7                           69         78            0.00




                                                                     47
Figure 2: Mean Child's Years of Education Vs Mothers
non-adoptees (higher line) shown in red, adoptees shown in blue
                17




                                                            Non-Adoptees
Mean of Child's Years of Education
                            16




                                                            Adoptees
  14            15
                13




                                     11   12   13    14      15      16     17         18       19    20
                                                    Mother's Y ears of Education




                                                         Sample Sizes in Above Graph

                                                     Mother's      Non-     Adoptees    P Value for
                                                    Education   Adoptees               Diff In Mean
                                                                                          Outcomes
                                                          11         13          11            0.94
                                                          12        259         315            0.91
                                                          13         93         111            0.17
                                                          14        131         175            0.00
                                                          15         85          82            0.01
                                                          16        330         434            0.00
                                                          17         71          85            0.07
                                                          18        119         171            0.00
                                                          19         56          61            0.00
                                                          20         50          79            0.00




                                                                           48
Figure 3: Mean of Child's Family Income By Parent's Income At Adoption
non-adoptees (higher line) shown in red, adoptees shown in blue
                  80




                                                                  Non-Adoptees
  Mean of Child's Family Income '000
            50         60        70




                                                                  Adoptees
  40              30




                                       10   25   40   60     85           125              175     200
                                                             Parent's Income




                                                            Sample Sizes in Above Graph

                                                            10      25        40     60     85    125    175    200
                         Parent's Income
                         N .. Non-adoptees                   22      86       236    275    275    166     65     37
                         N..Adoptees                         46      87       289    343    328    192     71     44
                         P Value for Diff In               0.56    0.00      0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00   0.00
                         Outcomes




                                                                          49
Figure 4: Comparison of Coefficient of Transmission from Parent to Child
Graph shows coefficient from a regression of child's outcome on mother's outcome for adoptees and
non-adoptees in the sample.
                                                      .5
   Coefficient of Transmission for Biological Children




                                                                Height Inches
                                         .4




                                                                   Years of EducationDrinks (0-1)
                            .3




                                                                   Has 4+ Years College
                                                             BMI
                 .2




                                                           Overweight
                                                           Log Household Income


                                                              Obese
    .1




                                                                        Smokes

                                                                  .1          .2        .3        .4      .5
                                                               Coefficient of Transmission for Adoptees




                                                                                        50
Figure 5: Comparison of Percent of Variation Explained By Parental
Characteristics for Each of Child Outcomes
Graph shows R-squared from a regression of child's outcome on mother's and father's education,
college status, smoking and drinking status, number of children, family income, height, weight,
obesity and overweight status
                 .2




                                                    Years of Education
                                                      Has 4+ Years of College
                                       Height in Inches     Drinks? (0-1)
   R-Squared Biological Children
                             .15




                                                                  Number of Children

                                                        Graduated from A US News Ranked College
                                       BMI
               .1




                                              SAT 75th Percentile of College 2003
                                                       Family Income
                                                    Acceptance Rate of College 2003
                                       Overweight? (0-1)
                                                            Log (Income)
   .05




                                                           Married?
                                          Smokes? (0-1)

                                       Has Asthma
                 0




                                   0            .05           .1         .15               .2
                                                      R-Squared Adoptees




                                                                  51
