                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              WELL-BEING AND SOCIAL CAPITAL:
                               DOES SUICIDE POSE A PUZZLE?

                                            John F. Helliwell

                                          Working Paper 10896
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10896


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




Department of Economics, University of British Columbia, and Research Associate, NBER. The first version
of this paper was written while I was Visiting Research Fellow, Merton College, and Academic Visitor,
Department of Economics, Oxford University, April-July, 2003. I am much indebted to Merton College and
the Oxford Department of Economics for their hospitality, and to Haifang Huang for exceptionally fast and
effective research assistance. I am grateful for helpful comments on earlier versions of this paper presented
at Merton College, at the Oxford Department of Economics, and at a workshop of the Canadian Institute for
Advanced Research. I received many helpful comments and suggestions there, and also from Ralph Bryant,
Ian Craig, Seena Fazel, Martin Feldstein, John Flemming, Cliff Gaddy, Guy Goodwin, Carol Graham, David
Halpern, Tom Healy, David Hendry, Danny Kahneman, Richard Layard, John Madden, Alexander Murray,
Robert Putnam, Tom Sander and Mark Williams. The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada has provided continuing research support.The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by John F. Helliwell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Well-Being and Social Capital: Does Suicide Pose a Puzzle?
John F. Helliwell
NBER Working Paper No. 10896
November 2004
JEL No. I0

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper has a double purpose: to see how well Durkheim’s (1897) findings apply a century later,

and to see if the beneficial effects of social capital on suicide prevention are parallel to those already

found for subjective well-being (Helliwell 2003). The results show that more social capital and

higher levels of trust are associated with lower national suicide rates, just as they are associated with

higher levels of subjective well-being. Furthermore, there is a strong negative correlation between

national average suicide rates and measures of life satisfaction. Thus social capital does appear to

improve well-being, whether measured by higher average values of life satisfaction or by lower

average suicide rates. There is a slight asymmetry, since the very high Scandinavian measures of

subjective wellbeing are not matched by equally low suicide rates. To take the Swedish case as an

example, this asymmetry is explained by Sweden having particularly high values of variables that

have more weight in explaining life satisfaction than suicide (trust and quality of government), and

less beneficial values of variables that have more influence in explaining suicide rates (Swedes have

low belief in God and high divorce rates), because with the latest data and models the Swedish data

fit the wellbeing and suicide equations with only tiny errors. If the international suicide data pose a

puzzle, it is more because suicide rates, and their estimated equations, differ greatly by gender, while

life satisfaction and its explanations are similar for men and women.

John F. Helliwell
Department of Economics
University of British Columbia
997-1873 East Mall
Vancouver BC, Canada V6T 1Z1
and NBER
john.helliwell@uibc.ca
1. Introduction
There are many reasons for wishing to see if the international evidence on the determinants of
suicide is consistent with results already in hand supporting the positive effects of social
capital on subjective well-being. First, and most immediate, is the need to answer the first
question raised by those skeptical of the earlier results: If the Swedes and other
Scandinavians are so happy, why is their suicide rate so high? In fact, the Swedish rate is
currently below that in most industrial countries, so the refined form of the question is: If
well-being is unusually high in the Scandinavian countries, why are suicide rates not also
lower there than elsewhere?


Second, some researchers are wary of using subjective evaluations of well-being as the basis
for national and cross-national comparisons of well-being. They wonder if the questions can
mean the same thing in different languages. They also worry that the answers are likely to
fluctuate with whim, mood and personality, and so may be of questionable validity. Suicide
rates, if comparably measured, represent actions rather than mere opinions, and hence acquire
more credibility in the eyes of some behaviorists.


Third, correlations between measures of subjective well-being and measures of social capital
may be due to causal channels running in either direction, as well as from some other third
source. Since suicide is the final act, at least for the individuals in question, it lessens or
removes the risk of any correlation being due to reverse causation from suicide to the
determinants of subjective well-being.


Even in the absence of skepticism about the use of subjective measures of life satisfaction to
represent well-being, there would be good reason to be interested in the effects of social
capital on suicide rates. Since suicide is commonly interpreted as an ultimate assessment of
life satisfaction, if social capital is found to reduce suicide rates this would broaden and
strengthen the case linking social capital to well-being. There is a further direct and
predictive link between subjective measures of life satisfaction and suicide, as those with


                                                1
lower than average measures of life satisfaction are far more likely to commit suicide
subsequently. For example, in one large Finnish sample those with below-average life
satisfaction were four times more likely than others of the same age to commit suicide over
the following ten years. There was also a dose-response relation; males near the top of the
dissatisfaction scale were 25 times more likely than other males of the same age to have
committed suicide over the first ten years of the follow-up period (Koivumaa-Honkanen et
al.2001). This association should strengthen the case for relying on subjective measures of
life satisfaction, while possibly also supporting the notion (Kahneman 1999) that is possible
that a single well-being measure could cover the range from very good to very bad, even to
the point of complete despair.


In section 2, I shall start by reviewing some of the existing studies that might be helpful in
specifying and interpreting equations designed to explain international differences in suicide
rates. Section 3 will first present some of the suicide data being explained, followed by the
results from suicide and well-being equations estimated using a slightly larger sample of
countries than was used earlier (Helliwell 2003) for the study of subjective wellbeing.
Matched estimation of life satisfaction and suicide equations assures the measures of social
capital and the underlying histories and institutional structures are identical, thus making the
suicide and subjective well-being results as comparable as possible.


2. Why Do National Suicide Rates Differ?
When Durkheim (1897, 1952) undertook his magisterial analysis of suicide, he presented
differences in suicide rates as a sociological challenge to those who were more inclined to
consider the pre-disposition to suicide to “depend exclusively to individual factors, thus
belonging to psychology alone.” (Durkheim 1952, 46). By contrast, Durkheim argued that
“each society has a definite aptitude for suicide… characteristic of the society under
consideration.” (Durkheim 1952, 48). My purpose mirrors Durkheim’s in attempting to
explain differences in average suicide rates among nations and over time. To aid the selection
of suitable specifications, I shall first consider a broader range of evidence, in order to be


                                              2
better informed about what variables should be included.


A striking proportion of the factors still considered relevant in explaining differences in
suicide rates among individuals and communities were considered and tested by Durkheim
more than a century ago. One of the reasons he chose suicide as a topic of sociological study
was precisely because it was a vital event leaving statistical records almost as complete as
those for births, deaths and marriages, often accompanied with a full range of demographic
information, and having a well-defined location. Because he was aiming to establish a
sociological basis for the explanation of suicide, Durkheim was quicker than modern
scientists would be to dismiss the possibility that psychopathic states and cosmic factors
might have effects on suicide beyond those flowing through the structure of society and
social relations. But even here, his use of evidence is honest and powerful.


Climate, Latitude and Sunshine
Let’s start with the effect of climate, since one of the puzzles we are exploring relates to
Scandinavia and other parts of Northern Europe, where the long winters have sometimes
been suggested to be a cause of the higher-than-expected suicide rates there. But which
aspect of the long winters? Durkheim was quick to note that there is a strong seasonal
variation in suicide rates. But the peak is in summer rather than winter, at the time of
maximum daylight rather than maximum temperature. He argued that the mid-summer peak
was due to the longer days giving more time for social life. More recent research has
confirmed the mid-summer peak and also found a dose-response relationship, with the
seasonal peak being greatest for countries furthest from the equator, and absent for countries
close to the equator (Parker, Gao and Machin 2001). An intriguing study in Denmark
(Rihmer et al 1998) found that an education and treatment programme for primary care
physicians in Gotland led to a large reduction in the suicide rate accompanied by a complete
elimination of its seasonality. The finding of summer suicide peaks is not without exceptions.
For example, there has been a finding of a late fall seasonal suicide peak among the elderly in
some northern countries, e.g. Finland (Hakko et al 1998) and British Columbia (Marion et al


                                              3
1999).


The continuing relation between latitude and the seasonal pattern of suicides has given rise to
an alternative hypothesis that the seasonal pattern is due to the exposure to sunlight (Petridou
et al.2002). There are brain mechanisms sensitive to sunlight, for example controlling the
hormone melatonin. However, a large study of electrical workers exposed to differing amount
of sunlight in the course of their jobs showed no evidence of higher suicide rates among those
with more exposure to sunlight. (Van Wijngaarden and Savitz 2000). And a study based on
simple correlation has argued for a positive relation between latitude and suicide rates (Davis
and Lowell 2002). We shall test the validity of latitude as an explanatory variable later in the
context of a more fully specified model.


As for shorter-term variations in suicide rates, Durkheim reported them to be lowest in the
middle of the night and highest in those parts of the morning and afternoon when existence is
most active, with a pause for lunch (Durkheim 1952, 118). He further supports his link
between activity and suicide by arguing that the lower suicide rates Friday through Sunday
were due to the lower pace of activity then, citing railroad travel data as supporting evidence.
Recent evidence shows more complicated daily and weekly patterns. One continuing finding
that echoes Durkheim, although supported by different reasoning, is a suicide drop before and
during major holidays, with a peak immediately following (Nishi et al 2000, Jessen and
Jensen 1999).


Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) has often been alluded to as a possible reason for higher
suicide rates in climates with long winters. But, as we have already seen, the seasonal pattern
of suicide rates almost universally has its peak in mid-summer and not in mid-winter, while
seasonal affective disorder is concentrated in the winter. Since clinical depression is a strong
predictor of subsequent suicides, both attempted and complete (Blair-West et al. 1999,
Marttunen et al. 1995, Qin et al 2000, Groholt et al 1997, Wickstrom and Rossow 2002), then
either SAD must be atypical in some key respect (e.g. by having less damaging effects of


                                              4
specific memories, as shown by Dalgleish et al 2001), or else be a small fraction of total
depression. It seems implausible to suppose that SAD suicides follow the seasons with a full
six-month lag and occur when mood is at its best for these individuals. The most likely
answer appears to be that seasonal affective disorder is a form of depression that, unlike
bipolar disorder (Chen and Dilsalver 1996), seldom leads to suicide or attempted suicide.
Since seasonal affective disorder, to the extent that its source is understood, is likely to be
seen by the sufferer as having a natural resolution, or at least a foreseeable respite, it may be
less likely to lead to the hopelessness that has been seen as a prevalent wellspring of suicidal
behaviour (Williams 2001, 90). However, even if seasonal affective disorder is not fatal in
enough cases to produce a winter peak in suicide rates, it may nevertheless play some role in
making suicide rates higher in countries further from the equator, if that result should be
found in the empirical evidence presented in the next section.


Contagion
Durkheim (1952, 131) also considers imitation as a cause of suicide, citing many joint and
mass suicides in history and literature by way of evidence. He finds however no geographic
clustering of the sort this might lead one to expect. In modern times, the issue has been
considered mainly in terms of imitation following media publicity. One recent meta-survey
argues that the link between media reports of actual suicides and subsequent suicides is so
solid as to be beyond contention (Gould 2001), with the role through fictionalized treatments
being less certain. Cutler et al (2000) find strong contagion effects on attempted youth
suicides in the United States from suicide attempts among their family and friends.
Schmidtke and Haffner (1988) found that each of two showings of a German TV drama
depicting a young man’s fictional suicide on a railway line was followed by a significant
increase in the number of railway suicides by young men.


Religion Protects
Durkheim then considers the effects of religion and education on suicide rates. He found
suicide rates of 19 per 100,000 in Protestant states, 6 in Catholic states, and 4 in Greek


                                               5
Orthodox states (Durkheim 1952, 152, but expressed in the units now used to measure
mortality rates). He argued that the more religion encouraged independent thought the less
integrated was the church and the community it served. He argues that “the more extensive
the credo the more unified and strong is the society” (Durkheim 1952, 159). In modern
studies, the protective effect of religiosity has been found strong within as well across
societies. For example, a study of young males in Utah, the base of the (Mormon) Church of
Latter Day Saints, found that suicide rates for males in their mid-20s were only one-sixth as
large for active members of the Church of Latter Day Saints, compared to either non-
members or inactive members (Hilton et al. 2002). Some studies suggest that the protective
effect of religion may be greater in less religious parts of a country (Neeleman 1998) or in
less religious countries (Neeleman and Lewis 1999). But at the national level the literature
continues to support the suicide-reducing effects of religion, operating through some
combination of channels, including social support, greater hope in the face of adversity,
reluctance to commit a deadly sin, and official willingness to classify deaths as accidental
rather than suicidal.


Education may be Dangerous
Durkheim argues that education, like weaker religion, encourages a spirit of free inquiry and
is hence also likely to be associated with higher suicide rates. To make an independent case
for the effects of education, he compared suicide rates among Italian regions, all of which
were Catholic, and had roughly equal religious instruction. He found with only a single
exception that those regions with higher levels of literacy also had higher suicide rates. He
dealt with the otherwise puzzling case of the Jews, who had by far the highest education rates
but suicide rates as low as among Catholics, by arguing that the persecution they endured led
them to develop a society much more cohesive than those around, by enough to more than
compensate for the effects of their greater education (Durkhein 1952, 167-8).


Recent evidence on the effects of education on suicide risk is mixed, appearing to depend
much on what other factors are included. The long-standing myth of high suicide rates among


                                              6
    university students appears to have no broad support from the evidence, in samples ranging
    from Cambridge University (Collins and Paykel 2000) through a set of large U.S. universities
    (Silverman et al 1997) to a meta-analysis of 31 studies from many countries (Silverman
    1993). For almost all sub-groups of students, suicide rates are below those of
    demographically matched members of the general population. Campus female rates mirror
    those in the general population in being significantly below male rates, except among
    graduate students (Silverman et al 1997, 9.1 for women, 11.6 for men).


    Gender Differences
    Durkheim argued that the lower suicide rates and lower education levels among women than
    men supported his argument linking education and suicide (Durkheim 1952, 166). This part
    of his reasoning has not stood the subsequent century of experience, as in most countries the
    male suicide rate is still four times that of women, just as it was in the late 1800s, while
    average education levels for women have approached and frequently surpassed those of men.
    The gender differences in suicide represent a double puzzle1: self-reported suicide attempts
    are significantly higher for females than males (Schmidtke et al 1996), while at all ages
    completed suicides are far more frequent among males than females. For example, female
    suicide attempts were significantly more frequent among Norwegian adolescent girls than
    boys (Wichstrom and Rossow 2002), while during the same years completed suicides among
    Norwegian boys were three times as frequent for boys as for girls (Groholt et al 1997). Thus
    it is unsurprising that a Finnish nationwide study found that young females who committed
    suicide were twice as likely as males to have made a previous suicide attempt, to have been
    diagnosed with major depression, or to have been in psychiatric care during the preceding
    year (Marttunen et al 1995).



1 This paradox existed in Durkheim’s data too, and formed part of his argument that mental illness could not be a
very large determinant of suicide rates. After all, he argues, if females are a larger fraction of those in mental
institutions, and if mental illness were the cause of suicide, then female suicides among the female insane would be
equal to the male share, while in fact it is far smaller (Durkheim 1952, 70). He did not, however, compare the
relative suicide rates among the mentally ill and the general population. This would almost surely have led him to be
less secure in his conclusion. But the gender asymmetry between mental illness and suicide remains an important


                                                          7
    A further implication of more frequent incidence of diagnosed depression among females,
    combined with the gender imbalance for completed suicides, is that lifetime suicide rates for
    those diagnosed with major depression are even more gender-biased, being 7% (or 7000 per
    100,000) for males and 1% for females in one study based on US data (Blair-West et al
    1999). Differing exposure to the common conditioning variables has so far proved inadequate
    to explain the large sex differentials (Qin et al 2000). This suggests looking for different
    responses by males and females to the conditioning variables, as will be done in the next
    section, although we will be expecting to find an unexplained constant term that is higher for
    males than females.


    Families Help
    After arguing that religion protects against suicide because, and only insofar as, it is a society,
    Durkheim (1952, 171) then argues that similar protection should be provided by other types
    of social support, and especially by the family and political society. He assembled all suicide
    data for France by age, gender and marital status for the years 1889-91, and found that for
    women of all ages and men over 25, suicide rates were lower among the married, to an extent
    that grew with age, and more so for men than for women. By the age of 65, suicides for both
    genders were 11 times as likely among the non-married (including widowed) as among the
    married. There are corresponding modern results. Durkheim’s finding that the suicide-
    preventive power of marriage falls among elderly women is echoed in modern Hong Kong
    (Yip 1998). Widowhood remains a large risk factor in cross sections (Luoma and Pearson
    2002). One study using US longitudinal data shows much smaller effects of divorce and
    widowhood, especially for women (Kposowa 2000), perhaps because the periods before
    divorce and widowhood may be equally stressful. Durkheim (1952, 259-60) reports data
    collected by Bertillon showing strong correlations between suicide rates and divorce rates,
    both across countries and among regions within a country, even after dividing the regions
    into groups sharing the same religion. Durkheim found that having children sharply reduced
    suicide risk, especially for women, another result echoed by modern findings (Brockington

puzzle.

                                                  8
    2001, Qin et al 2000).


    But Some More Than Others: Genetic Buffering
    There is evidence that life events likely to cause negative health and behaviour outcomes may
    be buffered in some individuals by protective genes. For example, childhood mistreatment
    was found to be less likely to lead to subsequent behaviour problems among males with a
    genotype conferring high expression of monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) (Caspi et al 2002)2.
    In the case of suicide, genetic buffering is most likely to flow from some features of the
    serotonergic system (Roy et al 1999, Mann et al 2001, Arango et al 2002, Souery et al 2003).
    If such genotypes are unevenly distributed among national populations, then we should
    expect to find long-term international differences in suicide rates, and perhaps different
    national responses to similar changes in the economic and social environment.


    Suicide and the Life Cycle
    Durkheim found that male suicide rates in France and Italy in the mid 19th century increased
    by three or four times from the teenage to seventy-year-old cohorts (Durkheim 1952, 101).
    He argued that this was further evidence that suicide was therefore dependent on social
    factors rather then genetic risk factors, which would have produced suicide rates more
    constant across age classes. The modern distribution of suicide rates still increases with age,
    but much less sharply. In several industrial countries there have been increases in youth
    suicide rates over the last fifty years (Cantor 2000), so much so that in the United States the
    youth rate tripled in fifty years (mostly between the mid-1950s and the mid 1970s), and has
    exceeded the national average rate for all ages since the 1980s (Cutler et al. 2000, Figure 9).
    Cutler et al (2000) link the US rise in youth suicide rates chiefly to the parallel rise in divorce
    rates. This echoes the evidence reported earlier on the importance of the family. In light of
    the evidence to be reported later on the importance of social capital, it is worth noting
    Putnam’s finding that declines in trust and memberships in the United States since 1960 are


2 The behavioural role of the MAOA genotype was previously established by Brunner et al (1993) and Craig
(1994).

                                                      9
    primarily due to lower social capital among the young, with this being the first generation
    raised in the television era (Putnam 2000, 2001).


    Death in the City?
    One of the striking differences between Durkheim’s findings and those of modern times
    relates to differences in suicide rates between urban and rural populations. In his data, suicide
    rates were higher in the cities, while homicide rates were higher in rural areas (Durkheim
    1952, 353). In the modern data, this pattern is generally reversed (e.g. Singh and Siahpush
    2002). The underlying causes of this long-term reversal do not appear to have been studied
    extensively, but may have implications for the explanation of international differences in
    suicide rates3. The relation may also be gender specific, as Qin et al (2003) find recent
    Danish suicide rates to be higher in rural areas for males and in cities for females.


    Economics and Suicide
    Durkheim generally saw the main protections against suicide coming from living in tighter
    and more integrated religions, families and societies. Education and income tend, in his view,
    to increase actual and perceived independence, and hence to expose the individual to higher
    suicide risks. On the other hand, economic crises he saw as triggering suicides. He argues that
    economic crises increase suicides because they are disturbances of the social order. He found
    evidence of rising suicide rates equally in times of booms (such as the Paris Exposition of
    1878, and during the great German growth of the 1870s) and slumps, and could not just be
    due to the incidence of poverty in times of economic distress. Under this hypothesis,
    international differences in suicide rates could depend on the comparative volatility of their
    economies. In a similar vein, county-level US data for the 1980s show significant rises in
    suicide rates in the wake of severe earthquakes, floods and hurricanes (Krug et al 1998).




3 Even the extent and nature of the reversal are uncertain. For example, in one study the excess rural suicide rate in
rural New South Wales could be traced entirely to the higher rate among foreign immigrants to rural New South
Wales, although among young men the suicide rate was significantly higher in rural than urban areas, more so for
immigrants than the native-born (Morrell et al. 1999)

                                                          10
    One link between the economy and suicide that has received considerable attention is the
    positive association between unemployment and suicide (Aihara and Iki 2002, Jin et al 1995,
    Gunnell et al. 1999, Lewis and Sloggett 1998). For example, one recent U.S. longitudinal
    study (Kposowa 2001) showed the risk of suicide to double for males and to treble for
    females following spells of unemployment4 An Italian study showed suicide rates far higher
    among the unemployed, more so for males than for females (Preti and Miotto 1999).A
    Danish study found that unemployment was a significant risk factor for males, but not for
    females (Qin et al. 2000). But male rates of attempted suicide decreased significantly during a
    deep recession in Helsinki during the 1990s (Ostamo and Lonnqvist 2001a), while completed
    suicides in Finland as a whole fell during the 1990-1995 recession after rising during the
    preceding boom (Hintikka et al. 1999). The individual-level results are more clear-cut: even
    after allowing for confounding variables, unemployment materially increased the risks of
    subsequent suicide in a large Swedish follow-up study (Johansson and Sundquist 1997). A
    review of all Danish suicides over a 17-year period found that unemployment and low
    income increased suicide risks, especially for men.


    What might we expect to find for the effects of income on suicide, holding other factors
    constant? Durkheim found suicide rates generally higher among those with higher education,
    greater literacy, and higher status occupations, which would suggest that suicide rates might
    therefore be expected to be higher in higher-income countries. On the other hand, as reported
    above, there is some evidence from the recent Danish experience (Qin et al 2003) that suicide
    is more prevalent among those with lower incomes, especially males. Our analysis of this
    issue in the next section makes use of purchasing power parities to construct average per
    capita incomes in each country, so that the same value should represent ability to buy
    comparable amounts of goods and services. Many complications of course flow from
    different private spending patterns, and large international differences in the extant and


4 When comparing the effects for males and females, it is important to allow for the fact that average rates for males
are three of four times those of females, so that the much larger proportionate increase in the female rate in response
to unemployment represent a smaller absolute increase (measured in terms of the increased likelihood of suicide)
than in the case of males.

                                                          11
quality of public provision of health care, education, and other services that might be
expected to be important to individual health and welfare.


Depression: Diagnosis and Treatment
The link between clinical depression and suicide is well-established and almost universal
(Cavanagh et al 2003). For example, US data have been used to calculate a lifetime suicide
risk for those with diagnosed major depression as 7% for males and 1% for females (Blair-
West et al 1999). For males, this represents an annual suicide rate among those with a history
of depression that is about ten times as high as for the rest of the population. For those with
unipolar or bipolar disorder, the lifetime risk of a suicide attempt has been calculated as
approximately 15% and 30%, respectively (Chen and Dilsaver 1996). Those diagnosed as
schizophrenics also have strikingly high subsequent suicide rates, especially so in cases
where depression is also present (Rossau and Mortensen 1997). Suicide rates among previous
suicide attempters have been found to be seven times higher among French adolescents
(Laurent et al 1998), and 25 times higher in Canada (Holley et 1998) than in the general
population. In Sweden, suicide attempters had an all-cause death rate fifteen times expected,
with suicide being the largest contributor (Ostamo and Lonnqvist 2001b).


These linkages from mental illness, and especially depression, to suicide attempts and
completed suicides are so strong that international differences in the successful diagnosis and
treatment of mental illness are likely to significantly affect cross-country differences and
changes over time in national suicide rates. For example, Danish suicide rates fell by more
than one-third between 1980 and 2000, a period during which there were many experiments
and changes in the analysis and treatment of depression. The Gotland study suggests that the
sharp reductions in suicide rates there were due mainly to increased awareness and
involvement by general practitioners, since the reductions were mostly reversed as the trained
practitioners later moved to other parts of Denmark (Rutz 2001). A Finnish study showed
that the sharply increased use of anti-depressants between 1990 and 1995 was accompanied
by a drop in the suicide rate but an increase in the proportion of suicides caused by


                                             12
antidepressants, especially tricyclics (Ohberg et al 1997). Danish (Nilsson 1999) and UK
(Coppen and Farmer 1998) studies showed sharply lower suicide risks (about one-quarter as
great in both studies) among patients continuing with lithium therapy. In these studies it is
difficult to disentangle the effects of the drug from the other benefits of continued treatment.


Method and Opportunity
There are large international differences in the availability of potential methods for suicide,
and also large differences in the methods used for suicides. To what extent do the differing
methods reflect the availability of the means? Furthermore, do the differences in
opportunities and methods lead to international differences in average suicide rates? Since
guns are an especially effective suicide weapon, and their use differs considerably across
cultures, genders, and national boundaries, they have been a focus of special study. There
appears to be a well-established connection between the availability of firearms and the rate
of suicide by firearms. However, much or most of this link appears to be due to changes in
the mix of methods used rather than changes in the overall suicide rate (e.g. Ludwig and
Cook 2000). As part of the research for this paper, Haifang Huang collected comparable data
for gun availability, total suicides, and suicides by firearms for thirty countries. There is a
significant correlation between gun availability and the proportion of suicides by firearms
(r=.5) but not between guns and the total suicide rate. Similarly, while changes in the rates of
prescription of some drugs used for treating depression has been linked to higher rates of
suicide by overdosage of these drugs, once again there is little echo in the overall suicide rate.


The link between suicide and the availability and use of alcohol and narcotics is especially
complicated. First, alcohol and drug dependence at the individual level has been found to be a
strong predictor of subsequent suicides and suicide attempts. At the national level, one study
found that international differences in average alcohol consumption were found to be
correlated with suicide rates only among so-called ‘dry’ cultures, and not among those ‘wet’
countries where alcohol was more regularly consumed (Ramstedt 2001). A distinction is
presumably being made here between use and abuse, with the link between availability and


                                              13
abuse being not easy to establish. Nemtsov (2001) finds a strong correlation in Russia
between alcohol consumption and male suicide rates, both over time and across oblasts
(provinces) of Russia. He argues that the causal significance of alcohol consumption is
revealed by the coincident drops in alcohol consumption and in male suicides during the
Russian anti-alcohol campaign started in 1984.


Migration and Suicide
Since there are many differences in suicide rates across cultures, religions and nations, it
should be expected that immigrants would have different suicide experiences than others in
the countries to which they move. There is also the possibility that either the causes or the
consequences of the migration might increase stress to levels that might pose risks of
depression and suicide. Studies of the suicide experience of migrants has found, just as
already discovered for trust (Rice and Feldman 1997, Soroka et al 2004), that migrants take
with them the suicide propensities (and the methods used for suicide) that were typical in the
countries from which they moved (Kliewer 1991, Burvill 1998). The longer the migrants are
rooted in their new homes, the more their suicide rates come to resemble those in their new
home countries (Hjern and Allebeck 2002), again echoing the results for trust (Soroka et al
2004). Some Swedish evidence has found that the suicide rates for most of their immigrant
groups are higher than in their respective countries of origin (Ferrada-Noli 1997, Johansson
et al 1997). An analysis of the entire 1970s birth cohort in Sweden showed inter-country
adoptees and immigrants to have had 3 to 4 times higher odds of suicide, suicide attempts,
and serious mental illness, when compared with the general population, even after controlling
for a variety of other risk factors (Hjern et al 2002). A U.S. study (Singh and Siahpush
2001)showed significantly lower suicide rates among immigrants than among those born in
the United States, but did not control for either the effects of religion or for the average
suicide rates in their countries of origin. Mobility itself, whether domestic or international,
may increase suicide risks, as one study found the odds of nearly lethal suicide attempts to be
doubled during the twelve months following a move (Potter et al 2001).




                                              14
A related hypothesis, supported by some US data (Ellison et al 1997) is that religious
homogeneity might lead to lower suicide rates. If this finding were generally applicable, it
might help to explain the higher than expected suicide rates among some immigrant groups,
to the extent that they may be migrating to communities with different religions than their
own. The possible effects of religious, ethnic and linguistic diversity will be tested in the next
section.


Measurement Issues
Cross-national comparison of suicide rates requires comparable statistics. If suicide is heavily
condemned by religious, legal or other community or family sanctions, it is presumably less
likely to occur, and may also be under-reported. Cross-national comparisons of the methods
and results of death statistics have tended to argue that there is likely to be significant under-
reporting and re-classifications of deaths in countries with strong sanctions against suicide
(Wasserman and Varnik 1998), but that corrections do not raise rates in such countries
sufficiently to reverse any rankings (Jougla et al 2002). Even within countries, there are some
differences in the relative accuracy of official statistics among regional sub-populations
(Rockett and Thomas 1999).


3. Social Capital and Suicide at the End of the 20th Century
Suicide rate differences among nations, religions, genders and social groups continue to
exhibit qualities that Durkheim thought would make them prime candidates for quantitative
sociology. The differences are large; they vary greatly under changes in circumstances, and
for many of the sub-groups of interest the sample sizes remain large enough to permit strong
distinctions to be made. The analysis in this paper will be mainly at the national level, using
data for 117 country-waves from 50 countries covered by the World Values Survey (WVS,
Inglehart et al 2000) and the European Values Survey (EVS, Halman 2001) over the last two
decades of the 20th century. This strategy permits the fullest use of the measures of social
capital collected in those surveys, and provides suicide results that are comparable with
studies of subjective well-being using the same data.


                                              15
    The national suicide data underlying this study are shown in Figure 2, averaged across survey
    waves for each country, for total suicides and for males and females separately. Figure 3,
    showing national suicide rates for each of the country waves, reveals remarkable changes
    between 1980 and 2000, especially among the countries of the Former Soviet Union (FSU)
    and Eastern Europe that form a large part of the WVS and EVS samples for the 1990s. As
    has been noted in the literature, there was a striking fall in suicide rates in the countries of the
    FSU and Eastern Europe, especially the former, during the years of Perestroika5, followed
    during the 1990s by larger increases, especially in the FSU. Suicide rates in the FSU are now
    more than double those of countries in Western Europe. The data also show large differences
    among other countries, and changes over time within countries. The widespread perception of
    high suicide rates in Scandinavia is supported only by the Finnish case. The Swedish and
    Norwegian rates are below the averages for the other industrial countries. Between 1980 and
    2000, the Swedish and Danish suicide rates fell dramatically, by one-third in Sweden and by
    one-half in Denmark. The southern European and Latin American Catholic countries
    continue to have very low suicide rates throughout the twenty years. The suicide rates in
    Iceland, Ireland and Great Britain are sharply lower than in most industrial countries.


    To put these recent data in a longer term context, Figure 1 compares suicide rates for the
    1870s reported by Durkheim with late 1990s data for the same countries. It can be seen that
    changes over time within individual countries have often exceeded the already large inter-
    country differences. On average, suicide rates have about doubled over the century, but this
    average masks a great variety of experience. Russia, for example, has moved from the lowest
    to the highest rate over a century, from an average total rate of about 3 to about 40 per
    100,000. Suicide rates in France have stayed fairly constant over the century at about 15,
    while the suicide rate in England and Wales has increased slightly, but in both periods
    remaining well below the rates in France and Germany. Among the Scandinavian countries,

5 Varnik et al (1998) and Wasserman and Varnik (2001) argue that the hopes engendered by Perestroika were the
primary cause of the sharp reduction, while Nemtsov (2001) argues that the the primary cause was the success of the
anti-alcohol campaign started in 1984.

                                                        16
Norway and Sweden have seen suicide rates roughly doubling over the 120 years, while the
Finnish rate has quadrupled, moving from one of the lowest in the 1870s to the highest in
Western Europe in the 1990s. The Finnish average rate of about 23 is still only slightly more
than half of the current rate in neighboring Russia, with both countries having moved up from
about 3 in the 1870s.


Tables 1 and 2 show the results of suicide rate equations estimated for total suicides and
separately for males and females. Table 3 shows equations separately for each age group,
with separate equations for males and females. The discussion will start with an analysis of
the basic equation reported in Table 1, followed by consideration of alternative models and
tests of other hypotheses suggested by previous research.


To compare the male and female results, it is important to bear in mind the very different
average sizes of the two rates. The dependent variable in each case is the average suicide rate
per 100,000, so that the coefficients show the number of lives saved or lost, per 100,000
persons, from a unit change in one of the independent variables. To compare proportionate
responses between males and females, the female effects should be slightly more than
trebled, since the male suicide rate is typically between three and four times the female rate
(in the 117 country-waves analyzed in this paper, the average is 7.9 for females and 25.6 for
males).


To provide an example, the first coefficient shows the effect of changes in the average value
of memberships per capita in non-religious voluntary organizations, the same variable as was
used in the earlier study of well-being. In our sample, the average value of this variable is .38
memberships per capita. The statistical power of the membership effect, as well as its size, is
larger for males than for females. The coefficient of 12.7 on the membership variable in the
male suicide equation would suggest that raising the national average by 10%, by about .04,
would reduce suicides by about 0.5 per 100,000, almost 2% of the sample average rate for
males. The same increase in average memberships would lower the female suicide rate by


                                             17
about 0.08 per 100,000, about a fifth as large as the male effect in terms of lives saved.
However in proportionate terms the female effect is two-thirds as large as the male effect.


Turning to the effects of trust, the effects are much larger for males than females, even in
proportionate terms. The effects of trust on suicide rates appear to be very large. One-third of
the respondents think that on average other people can be trusted. If 10% more of the
population in each country thought that others could be trusted, the average value would rise
from .33 to .43. This is a large increase, but is still only one-third of the difference between
the average trust levels in Scandinavia and the FSU. It would, according to the basic equation
in Table 1, be associated with a 4.0 per 100,000 drop in the annual suicide rate for males, and
a smaller 0.5 per 100,000 drop for females.


The protective effects of religion are also still much in evidence. We have followed the
earlier study of life satisfaction by using two different measures of religion: the proportion of
the population that goes to church once a week or more and the number who say that god is
very important to their lives (averaging 0.21 for church and 0.32 for god). The two
component variables are correlated positively, as might be expected, +0.3 at the individual
level and +0.74 at the national level. This high correlation at the national level reduces the
separate significance of the church variable in some specifications, while the combined
variable is always strongly significant. Earlier versions of this paper found equal effects from
church and god, and the two variables were added together for our final estimates of the
suicide equation. But we have since been able to develop comparable data for international
differences in divorce rates. The correlation between church and the divorce rate is -.41,
while that between divorce and the average number of years of schooling is +.48. Adding the
divorce rate to the suicide equation drives out the variables for church and for education, as
can be seen from the results in Table 2. The protective effect of a strong belief in god remains
very great, however. If a further 10% of the population had a strong belief in god (i.e. moving
the sample average from 3.1 to 4.1), the male suicide rate would be lower by 3.2 per 100,000,
and the female rate by 1.4 per 100,000. The effect of religion is thus proportionately twice as


                                              18
    large for females as for males6.


    Divorce has a strong link to the suicide rate at the national level, mirroring the strong effect
    found by Durkheim and in many studies based on individual data. The divorce rate is
    measured as an annual rate per 1,000 people, with an average sample value of 1.9. Measured
    in comparable terms, the annual divorce rate thus averages more than ten times the suicide
    rate. The estimated coefficients suggest that for males, other things equal, a 10% rise in the
    divorce rate would be matched by a 6% increase in the male suicide rate and a 2.5% increase
    in the female rate. These effects are enough higher than the individual-level results as to
    suggest that at the national level divorce and suicide rates may have some common causes
    not directly included in the basic equation.


    Figure 2 shows the predicted and actual values for national suicide rates (averaged across
    waves for compactness) shown in increasing order of predicted suicide rates. The figure
    makes it easy to spot which countries are the outliers. Robustness checks have been done to
    ensure that the coefficient values are not sensitive to the inclusion of the largest outliers,
    which in least squares regression have the largest influence on the choice of parameter
    values. The coefficient standard errors are robustly estimated, with errors clustered by
    country. Do the Scandinavian countries pose a puzzle? It would seem not. Norway, Sweden
    and Iceland are in the bottom half of the distributions of both the actual and predicted values
    for total suicides, with the equation fitting Norway and Sweden almost exactly, and over-
    predicting the Icelandic rate slightly. Finland has the highest rate among the Scandinavian
    countries, and its rate for both males and females is significantly under-predicted. The Danish
    rate is on average predicted accurately for males and under-predicted for females, but the
    average across waves fails to show the quite striking drop in the Danish rate over the 1980 to
    1999 data period, so that at the end of the century the Danish rate was below average and
    over-predicted. The Swedish rate too has been falling over the same period. Perhaps the
    common presumption about Scandinavian suicide rates is based on out-of-date information,

6 The greater protective effect of religion for females is also noted by Stack (2000).

                                                          19
or on some other set of comparison countries.


The remaining equations in Table 1 show the effects of adding variables measuring average
per capita incomes, the quality of government, and latitude. These variables are here
considered separately, as they are quite highly correlated (+.32 and +.37 between latitude and
governmental quality and per capita incomes, and +.80 between per capita incomes and
governmental quality).


The theoretical relevance of per capita incomes and latitude has been discussed in the
previous section. Higher latitude is expected to increase suicide rates, with the effects of per
capita income being uncertain. Higher income countries might have higher suicide rates for
the reasons adduced by Durkheim; on the other hand such countries are also likely to have
health care systems that are better able to diagnose and treat depressions that might otherwise
lead to suicide. Higher-income countries might also have other policies better able to reduce
the prevalence of hardships that have been found in other studies to be predictive of suicidal
behaviour. Measures of the quality of government and of the inequality of incomes might
also be expected to get at the latter factors, perhaps more directly than through average per
capita incomes.


Thus societies with generally higher quality government might also be expected to have
higher quality health care systems, and more effective social welfare policies. To measure the
quality of government we considered the six component indexes of governmental quality
prepared by Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2003). Of the six indexes, two are focussed on
the nature, openness and stability of the electoral system, the first relating to voice and the
other to accountability. The remaining four indices relate to the rule of law, the effectiveness
of government services, the efficiency of the regulatory system, and the absence of
corruption. In previous work on subjective well-being (Helliwell 2003), earlier versions of
the six indexes were each found to have similar effects on subjective well-being, and were
empirically dominated by a simple average of the six measures.


                                              20
    The governance data have been through two subsequent rounds of improvement and
    updating, and our estimation sample has now been extended in breadth and length, so optimal
    aggregation has been considered afresh for the work reported in this paper. For the suicide
    equation, the six indexes can be most effectively combined into two sub-aggregates, with the
    two relating to the electoral system being combined into a variable called ‘democ’, and four
    relating to the effectiveness and trustworthiness of government combined into a measure of
    governmental effectiveness called ‘govdo’. In the context of the suicide equation, govdo
    always dominates the overall variable. The same is now true for the well-being equations
    reported in the next section7.


    Male suicide rates fall with increases in per capita income and in the quality of government,
    but increase with latitude, when the variables are added to the basic equation. There are no
    significant effects on female suicide rates from any of these variables. If all three variables
    are added at the same time, as shown in Table 2, latitude and governmental quality maintain
    significance for men, as latitude does for total suicides. There is thus some evidence to
    support the latitude hypothesis, at least for men. Table 6 shows that when a variable
    representing the Scandinavian countries is added to the basic equation for males it has a
    slightly significant positive coefficient (8.0, t=1.7) which falls to one-third its previous size
    and significance when latitude is added.


    The other equations in Table 2 give results of tests of some other variables which were
    suggested by prior research, and which might have made their way into the basic model had
    they received more empirical support. Several variables are included simultaneously in Table

7 Indeed, as shown in Table 6, if both variables are included together in the aggregate suicide equation, there is a
significant negative effect from govdo and a positive effect from democ, suggesting that harnessing the benefits of
democracy requires an effective underlying set of social and governmental institutions. A comparable test in the
latest life satisfaction equation, also shown in Table 6, shows that govdo dominates democ, but does not turn the
latter negative. The two sub-aggregates have a high positive correlation, +.96, so that the opposite signs in the
suicide equation may be capturing the high suicide rates in some of the countries of the former soviet union where
democratic electoral processes have preceded effective delivery of government services. However, the negative
effect of democ remains even if separate regional variables (which take positive coefficients in the suicide equation)


                                                          21
    2, while Table 6 shows the effects of adding the same variables individually to the basic
    equation, confirming their lack of significance in either form. The level of educational
    attainment measured by average years of schooling, the national average unemployment rate,
    and a measure of diversity all fail to reveal significant influences. The measure of diversity is
    the average of the measures of ethnic, linguistic and religious fractionalization compiled by
    Alesina et al (2002). Table 6 shows that even when ethnic, linguistic and religious
    fractionalization are allowed to have separate coefficients, none has the positive effect that
    might be supposed from some of the studies of suicide among migrant populations. The
    unemployment rate does not enter in the expanded sample, and there are some difficulties in
    obtaining comparable data for unemployment rates, especially in transition economies.
    However, even in this sample the national unemployment rate has a significant effect in the
    life satisfaction equation, as will be seen in the next section. Educational attainment drops out
    in part because of the inclusion of the divorce rate, with which it has a simple correlation, at
    the national level, of +.48.


    Table 7 reports tests of some further variables for which the sample size is slightly smaller.
    Previous research has found that attitudes toward suicide differ by country, and that these
    differences help to explain international differences in suicide rates (Neeleman et al 1997). In
    our sample, there is a positive simple correlation between national average attitudes towards
    suicides and suicide rates (+.10 for males, +.36 for females), but attitudes add nothing to the
    explanatory power of the basic suicide equation for either gender. Prevalence of gun
    ownership and measures of income inequality (the Gini coefficient, and top/bottom income
    decile ratios) also have no measured impact, although issues of data comparability are
    arguably present in both cases. As noted in the previous section, a smaller sample of country
    data does reveal a correlation between gun availability and the proportion of suicides
    committed with guns, although not between gun availability and the total suicide rate.


    Table 3 shows results from the basic equation estimated for each of six age groups, with

are included for the FSU and Eastern Europe.

                                                 22
males and females modeled separately. The effects of belief in god as a protection against
suicide are always proportionately greater for females than males, and in both cases increase
sharply with age, being twice as large for the over-65s as for the 40-somethings. Since the
measure of religion used is national, part of the difference may relate to lesser religious
beliefs among the younger cohorts. Memberships have their greatest benefits for middle-aged
males. For those aged 45-54, the membership effect is four times as large as for the average
of the population as a whole, and more than twice as large as for the average male. For
females, the effects grow gradually with age, at a high enough rate that for the over-65s they
are half as large in absolute terms, and twice as large in proportionate terms, for females as
for males.


The suicide-preventing effects of trust rise with age for both genders, starting from a fairly
low base among the very young, and reaching very large effects for the over-65s. Thus for
both men and women over 65 the effects of trust are twice as high as the all-ages effect for
the same gender.


The effects of national average divorce rates are greatest for those aged 45-54, being for both
genders more than twice as great as in the top and bottom age groups.


Returning to the aggregate data, the measurement issue was addressed in part by estimating a
parallel equation for traffic fatalities, as shown in Table 4. The average sizes of the death
rates from suicide and traffic fatalities are almost identical in our sample (annual rates per
100,000 of 16.8 for suicide and 14.8 for traffic fatalities) and globally, where they tie as the
tenth leading cause of death (Murray and Lopez 1996). Thus the scales of the coefficients are
comparable between the total suicide and traffic fatality equations.


The first equation in Table 4 uses the identical data sample and specification employed in the
basic suicide equation. The results are strikingly comparable to those for suicide, with the
clear exception of religion. The apparent life-saving effects of social capital, as represented


                                              23
    by memberships and trust, are as great for traffic fatalities as they are for suicide. Countries
    with high divorce rates also have high rates of traffic fatalities, but the effect is only one-third
    as large as in the suicide equation. The effects of religion are absent from the traffic fatalities
    equation, suggesting that the anti-depressive effects of religion are being offset by the other
    effects: the possible under-reporting of suicide in countries where there are strong religious
    sanctions against suicide, and reckless driving behaviour by depressed individuals living in
    countries where suicide is a deadly sin. Those with suicidal tendencies have been found to
    engage in high-risk behaviour, and follow-up studies of suicide attempters have shown them
    to have far higher subsequent death rates from all causes, including especially suicide and
    accidental death8. The second equation in Table 4 adds the church variable to the basic
    equation. The two highly correlated (+.74) religious variables take opposite signs, with a
    positive sign on church and a negative sign on god. This suggests, if weakly, that the anti-
    depressive effects of religion are more concentrated in beliefs, with the suicide-proscriptive
    channels more evident in countries with high rates of weekly or greater church attendance. A
    variable denoting orthodox countries attracts a weak positive coefficient, while a similar
    variable for catholic countries has no effect.


    The traffic fatality research will be considered in more detail elsewhere. But even here it
    seems worth testing the basic equation against some alternatives adding additional measures
    of the likely risks of traffic fatalities. Motor vehicle fatalities data in all countries show a
    strong downward time trend due to some combination of safer cars, safer roads, seatbelt use
    and other safety regulations. The third equation in Table 4 adds a time variable, which
    attracts a large negative effect, even larger than is apparent in the national time series data.
    Adding this variable leaves the other coefficients unaffected except for memberships, which
    become insignificant, possibly because there have been changes from wave to wave in the
    wording of the membership question, and substantial changes in the countries involved in the
    survey waves. The changing country participation makes it difficult to use our current data

8 For example, one Canadian follow-up study of suicide attempters (Holley et al 1998) found them with far higher
than normal subsequent mortality rates, especially for suicide itself (25 times the average) and accidental death (15
times normal rates).

                                                          24
sample to analyze changes from one decade to the next in either suicide rates or traffic
fatalities.


The fourth and fifth equations of Table 4 add motor vehicle ownership (per 100 people) and
income per capita as alternative measures of motor vehicle usage and presumably therefore of
the risk of traffic fatalities. No systematic effect is shown, and the basic equation continues to
show large effects from trust, significant effects from divorce and the time trend, and
offsetting effects from church and god.


4. Social Capital and Well-Being: Pulling the Threads Together
How do these new results linking social capital and suicide add to what is already known
about social capital and well-being? Table 5 reports the latest results for a life satisfaction
equation estimated at the national level, plus an encompassing equation for the suicide
equation that includes the national-level variables that have been shown to be significantly
important for either of the equations. The life satisfaction equation has been adjusted from
that used in earlier work (Helliwell 2003) in order to make its estimation and interpretation
more comparable to the national-level equations for suicide. The country sample has also
been enlarged, and includes data from an additional survey wave, so that the number of
separate country-waves has been increased from 87 to 117. To make the estimation
comparable to that for suicides, where only aggregate data are available, national averages are
used for the latest life satisfaction equation. This requires introduction of national-level
equivalents of some variables, such as unemployment, divorce, and trust, that were highly
significant at the individual level and which also have important international differences.


The two equations of Table 5, taken together, provide a consistent message about the positive
effects of social capital on well-being. The influence of trust is consistently strong. Belief in
god and memberships in voluntary organizations increase life satisfaction and reduce suicide
rates. The only measure of family-level social capital is the national average divorce rate,
which increases suicide and decreases life satisfaction. Evidence of the effects of social


                                              25
capital rooted in the workplace are mostly absent from these national-level results, because
appropriate national level variables are not yet available. However, one of the explanations of
the aggregate-level effects of the unemployment rate on life satisfaction may relate to the lack
of workplace social capital among the unemployed. Once divorce is included in either
equation, it drives out church membership, while leaving intact the strength of the variable
measuring the fraction of respondents having a strong belief in god.


To answer the question in the title of the paper, suicide does not appear to pose a puzzle for
the previously established positive linkages between social capital and well-being. The same
measures of social capital that improve life satisfaction also appear to reduce suicide rates. In
particular, the suicide data from Scandinavia line up fairly closely with the estimated models
for both life satisfaction and suicide. This can be seen by examining Figure 4, which shows
the predicted and actual values for life satisfaction. Just as was seen in Figure 2, which shows
the comparable data for suicides, the same basic model can be used to explain well-being,
whether measured by high life satisfaction or low suicide rates.


To show the extent of the similarity of fit, Figure 5 compares standardized coefficients for the
encompassing equations for suicide and life satisfaction. The beta coefficients shown in the
figure reveal complete sign consistency and are closely comparable in magnitude. The signs
are of course opposite, since variables that increase suicide rates lower life satisfaction. The
two social capital variables, memberships and trust, have completely consistent coefficient
values in the two equations. By contrast, belief in god is more predictive of suicide rates than
of life satisfaction (with reporting issues possibly coming into play here as well). Divorce
rates have larger effects for suicide than for life satisfaction, while differences in the quality
of government are much more important for life satisfaction than for suicide. These
differences in coefficients provide the main reasons why countries are sometimes ranked
differently for suicide rates than for life satisfaction. For example, Sweden has very high
values for the quality of government, high divorce rates and low belief in God. All of these
factors contribute to explaining why Sweden is very high in life satisfaction and only average


                                              26
in terms of suicide rates.


In the course of dealing with the question posed about suicide in Scandinavia, another puzzle
has been uncovered. This relates to the sharp differences between genders in average suicide
rates, and in the factors that appear to explain those differences. This is in sharp contrast with
the data and modeling of life satisfaction. Average measures of life satisfaction are the same
for males and females, the cross-country variation of the two measures is almost identical (r=
+.986, compared to +.746 between male and female suicide rates) and if the life satisfaction
equation shown in Table 5 is estimated separately for males and females it produces the same
results.


Gender effects need much more research, as they are strongly asymmetrical between the
suicide and life satisfaction equations. There are no significant gender effects in life
satisfaction or its determinants, while suicide rates are four times greater for males than for
females, and are determined quite differently. This asymmetry is mediated by the fact that
suicide attempts are more common for females than males. One way of interpreting these
three facts might be to view life satisfaction as the primary well-being measure, with the
excess of completed male suicides due to some combination of greater peer influence and
impulsive behaviour, and the greater female rates of clinical depression and attempted suicide
representing greater female willingness to develop and call upon social supports (Williams
2001, 219-220). The sharp gender differences in the completion rates for attempted suicides
are apparently mirrored by gender differences in the ideation and visualization of the two
actions. This paper has exposed rather than explained these gender differences, and has
highlighted them by the sharp contrast with the gender symmetry appearing in the life
satisfaction data. In any case, the estimated equations for suicide and life satisfaction are fully
consistent with the established linkages between social capital and well-being, even if for
suicide the strength and nature of the channels are gender specific.


There is one further issue for which the suicide data can perhaps provide reassurance to those


                                              27
    who are skeptical about using subjective measures of life satisfaction as real indicators of the
    quality of life9. For example, it has been suggested that the international differences in
    average measures of life satisfaction are inexplicably large relative to the interpersonal
    differences within countries. How, it is asked, could an unemployed divorced Dane be as
    happy as an average French person? The international differences in life satisfaction are
    indeed large, as is shown in Figure 2. In the latest (1999-2000) survey wave, the average level
    of life satisfaction was 8.24 in Denmark and 7.00 in France. The encompassing equation
    attributes most of this to differences in the extent to which people think that others can be
    trusted (0.80), with an additional large contribution from differences in the quality of
    government (0.36). There are smaller contributions from membership and unemployment
    (both favouring Denmark) and divorce rates and belief in God (both favouring France). Both
    countries have positive residuals in that year, 0.44 for France and 0.26 for Denmark.


    The fact that the same equations fit both bodies of data well, and provide similar explanations
    for both suicide and subjective well-being is reassuring. But is there some further way of
    using the suicide data to check to see if the international differences in life satisfaction are too
    large to be believed? I noted, by way of reassurance that the international coefficient of
    variation is much larger for suicide rates than for life satisfaction (as shown in Table 8). I was
    thus inclined to conclude that one need not fear that the dispersion of life satisfaction
    averages is too great to be credible. But this interpretation is too simplistic, since suicides are
    presumably drawn mainly from the extremely unhappy tail of the life satisfaction distribution,
    so that factors shifting national average measures of life satisfaction would be expected to
    have larger effects on suicide rates. Luckily, there is a Finnish study (Koivumaa-Honkanen et
    al 2001) that collected measures of life satisfaction for a large sample of individuals whose
    suicide experience were followed over the following twenty years. This made it possible for
    us to construct a distribution of suicides conditional on each person’s initial assessment of
    life satisfaction. After allowing only for the higher average suicide rate in Finland, we used


9 The following paragraphs and Table 8 were inspired by helpful correspondence and conversations with Danny
Kahneman.

                                                      28
the Finnish distribution based on micro data to construct a distribution of national suicide
rates based on national average measures of life satisfaction. If skeptics are right to think that
the international distribution of measures of life satisfaction are too large relative to
interpersonal differences, then our constructed international distribution of suicide rates
based on national average measures of life satisfaction would have a larger standard deviation
than does the actual distribution of suicide rates. However, as can be seen from Table 8, the
predicted suicide series based on the national average life satisfaction data transformed using
the Finnish micro distribution not only has a high correlation with the actual suicide series
(0.52), but has a larger mean and a smaller standard deviation. Thus there seems no reason to
think that the international differences in life satisfaction are implausibly large in relation to
those of suicide rates.


Table 8 also compares alternative ways of predicting international differences in suicide
rates, beyond that based only on average measures of life satisfaction. Naturally, we would
expect an improvement when allowance is also made for the fact that Finns have lower than
average belief in God, since these beliefs are more relevant for suicide than for life
satisfaction. Making this adjustment for each country lowers the mean of the predicted
distribution closer to the actual distribution, and raises its correlation with the actual series to
0.70. Moving to the full encompassing model removes the life satisfaction data and replaces
them with all of the variables in the suicide equation. This need not necessarily improve the
correlation, since there may be important omitted variables that affect both suicide rates and
life satisfaction without flowing though the few variables included in the encompassing
model. As can be seen from Table 8, however, the correlation is 0.77, showing that this
omitted-common-variables effect is smaller than the gain from allowing other key variables
to take different coefficients in the two equations. This does not necessarily mean, however,
that there is no suicide-predictive information in the life satisfaction data beyond that
delivered through the variables of the encompassing model. The possibility of such additional
predictive information can be assessed by adding the residual of the encompassing model for
life satisfaction to the encompassing suicide model. It does slightly increase the correlation of


                                               29
   actual and predicted, from 0.77 to 0.79, suggesting that some variables not yet included in the
   explanations of suicide and life satisfaction may have influence on both. If any further
   evidence is needed, this adds to the mutually confirming nature of life satisfaction and suicide
   data as measures of interpersonal and international differences in the quality of life.



                                           References


Aihara, H., and M Iki (2002) “Effects of Socio-Economic Factors on Suicide From1980 through
       1999 in Osaka Prefecture, Japan.” Journal of Epidemiology 12: 439-49. (Japan
       Epidemiological Association)

Alesina, A., A. Devleeshauwer, W. Easterly, S. Kurlat, and R. Wacziarg (2002)
       “Fractionalization.” NBER Working Paper 9411. (Cambridge: National Bureau of
       Economic Research)

Arango, V., M.D. Underwood, and J.J. Mann (2002) “Serotonin Brain Circuits Involved in Major
      Depression and Suicide.” Progress in Brain Research 136: 443-53.

Blair-West, G.W., C.H. Cantor, G.W. Mellsop, and M.L. Eyeson-Annan (1999) “Lifetime
       Suicide Risk in Major Depression: Sex and Age Determinants.” Journal of Affective
       Disorders 55(2-3): 171-8.

Brockington, L. (2001) “Suicide in Women.” International Clinical Psychopharmacology
       16(Suppl 2): S7-19.

Brunner, H.G., M. Nelen, X.O. Breakefield, H.H. Ropers and B.A. van Oost (1993) “Abnormal
      Behaviour Associated with a Point Mutation in the Structural Gene for Monoamine
      Oxidase A.” Science 262(5133): 578-80.

Burvill, P.W. (1998) “Migrant Suicide Rates in Australia and in Country of Birth.”
        Psychological Medicine 28(1): 201-8.

Cavanagh, J.T., A.J. Carson, M. Sharpe and S.M. Lawrie (2003) “Psychological Autopsy Studies
      of Suicide: A Systematic Review.” Psychol-Med 33(3): 395-405.

Chen, Y.W. and S.C. Dilsaver (1996) “Lifetime rates of Suicide Attempts among Subjects with
       Bi-Polar and Unipolar Disorders Relative to Subjects With Other Axis 1 Disorders.”
       Biological Psychiatry 39(10): 896-9.



                                                30
Collins, I.P., and E.S. Paykel (2000) “Suicide amongst Cambridge University Students, 1970-
       1996.” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 35(3): 128-32.

Coppen, A. and R. Farmer (1998) “Suicide Mortality in Patients on Lithium Therapy.” Journal
      of Affective Disorders 50(2-3): 261-7.

Craig, I.W. (1994) “Psychiatric Genetics: Misbehaving Monoamine Oxidase Gene.” Current
        Biology 4(2): 175-7.

Cutler, D.M., E. Glaeser and K. Norberg (2000) “Explaining the Rise in Youth Suicide.” NBER
        Working Paper 7713. (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research)

Dalgleish, T., H. Spinks, J. Yiend, and W. Kuyken (2001) “Autobiographical memory style in
         Seasonal Affective Disorder and its relationship to future symptom remission.”
         Journal of Abnormal Psychology 109, 335-340.

Davis, G.E. and W.E. Lowell (2002) “Evidence That Latitude is Directly Related to Variations
       in Suicide Rates.” Canadian Journal of Psychiatry 47(6): 572-4.

Durkheim,. Emile (1897) Le Suicide (Paris:1e edition )

Durkheim, Emile (1952) Suicide : A Study in Sociology. Translated by John A. Spaulding and
      George Simpson. (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul)

Ellison, C.G., J.A. Burr and P.L. McCall (1997) “Religious Homogeneity and Metropolitan
        Suicide Rates.” Social Forces 76(1): 273-99.

Ferrada-Noli, M. (1997) “Health and Socio-Economic Indicators in Psychiatric Catchment Areas
       with Divergent Suicide Rates” Psychological Reports 81(2): 611-19.

Fernquist, RM (2003) “Perceived Income Inequality and Suicide Rates in Central/Eastern
       European Countries and Western Countries, 1990-1993.” Death Studies 27(1): 63-80.

Gould, M.S. (2001) “Suicide and the Media.” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
       932(April): 200-21.

Groholt, B., O. Ekeberg, L. Wichstrom and T. Haldorsen (1997) “Youth Suicide in Norway,
       1990-1992: A Comparison Between Children and Adolescents Completing Suicide and
       Age- and Gender-Matched Controls.” Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior 27(3):
       250-63.

Gunnell, D., A. Lopatatzidis, D. Dorling, H. Wehner, H. Southall, and S. Frankel (1999) “Suicide
      and Unemployment in Young People: Analysis of Trends in England and Wales, 1921-

                                              31
       1995.” The British Journal of Psychiatry, The Journal of Mental Science 175(Sept):
       263-70.

Hakko, H. P. Rasanen and J. Tiihonen (1998) “Seasonal Variation in Suicide Occurrence in
      Finland.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica 98(2): 92-7. (male peak April-July, bimodal
      for females with peaks in May and October, excess elderly suicides in the Autumn.
      N=21,279)

Halman, Loek (2001) The European Values Study: A Third Wave. (Tilburg: Work and
      Organization Research Centre)

Helliwell, John F. (2003) “How’s Life? Combining Individual and National Variables to Explain
       Subjective Well-Being”. Economic Modelling 20(2): 331-60. ( Also available as NBER
       Working Paper No. 9065 (Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research))

Hilton, S.C., G.W. Fellingham, and J.L. Lyon (2002) “Suicide Rates and Religious Commitment
        in Young Adult males in Utah.” American Journal of Epidemiology 155(5): 413-9.

Hintikka, J., P.L Saarinen, and H. Viinamaki (1999) “Suicide Mortality in Finland During an
       Economic Cycle, 1985-1995.” Scandinavian Journal of Public Health 27(2): 85-8.

Hjern, Anders, and Peter Allebeck (2002) “Suicide in First- and Second-Generation Immigrants
       in Sweden: A Comparative Study.” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology
       (Abstract Volume) 37: 423-29

Hjern, A., F. Lindblad and B. Vinnerljung (2002) “Suicide, Psychiatric Illness and Social
       Maladjustment in Intercountry Adoptees in Sweden: A Cohort Analysis.” The Lancet
       360: 443-8

Holley, H.L., G. Fick and E.J Love (1998) “Suicide Following an Inpatient Hospitalization for a
       Suicide Attempt: A Canadian Follow-Up Study’” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
       Epidemiology 33(11): 543-51.

Inglehart, Ronald, et al (2000) World Values Surveys and European Values Surveys, 1981-
       1984, 1990-1993, and 1995-1997 (Computer File) ICPSR Version. (Ann Arbor,
       Michigan: Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research).

Jessen, G. and B.F. Jensen (1999) “Postponed Suicide Death? Suicides Around Birthdays and
        Major Public Holidays.” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 29(3): 272-83.

Jin, R.L., C.P. Shah, and T.J. Svoboda (1996) “The Impact of Unemployment on Health: A
        Review of the Evidence.” Canadian Medical Association Journal 153(5): 529-40.



                                               32
Johansson, S.E. and J. Sundquist (1997) “Unemployment is an Important Risk Factor for Suicide
       in Contemporary Sweden: An 11-year Follow-Up Study of a Cross-Sectional Sample of
       37,789 People.” Public Health 111(1): 41-5.

Johansson, L.M., J. Sundquist, S.E. Johansson, B. Bergman, J. Qvist, and L. Traskman-Bendz
       (1997) “Suicide Among Foreign-Born Minorities and Native Swedes: An
       Epidemiological Follow-Up Study of a Defined Population.” Social Science and
       Medicine 44(2): 181-7.

Jougla, E., F. Pequignot, J. Chappert, J. Rossolin, A. Le Toullec, G. Pavillon (2002) « La Qualité
        des Données de Mortalité sur le Suicide » Revue d’Epidemiologie et de Santé Publique
        50(1) : 49-62.

Kahneman, Daniel (1999) “Objective Happiness.” In Daniel Kahneman, Ed Diener and Norbert
      Schwarz, eds. Well:Being: The Foundations of Hedonic Psychology (New York:
      Russell Sage) 3-25.

Kaufmann, D., A. Kraay and M. Mastruzzi (2003) “Governance Matters III: Updated Indicators
      for 1996-2002.” Draft Research Paper, June 2003. (Washington: World Bank)

Kliewer, E. (1991) “Immigrant Suicide in Australia, Canada, England and Wales, and the United
      States.” Journal of the Australian Population Association 8(2): 111-28.

Koivumaa-Honkanen, H., R. Hokanen, H. H. Viinamäki, K. Heikkilä, J. Kaprio and M.
      Koskenvuo (2001) “Life Satisfaction and Suicide: A 20-Year Follow-Up Study.”
      American Journal of Psychiatry 158: 433-9.

Knack, S. and M. Kugler (2002) “Constructing an Index of Objective Indicators of Good
       Governance.” (Washington: World Bank).

Kposowa, A.J. (2000) “Marital Status and Suicide in the National Longitudinal Mortality Study.”
      Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 54(4): 254-61.

Kposowa, A.J. (2001) “Unemployment and Suicide: A Cohort Analysis of Social Factors
      Predicting Suicide in the US National Longitudinal Mortality Study.” Psychological
      Medicine 31(1): 127-38.

Krug, E.G., M. Kresnow, J.P. Peddicord, L.L. Dahlberg, K.E. Powell, A.E. Crosby and J.L
       Annest (1998) “Suicide after Natural Disasters.” The New England Journal of
       Medicine 338(6): 373-8.

Laurent, A., N. Foussard, M. David, J. Boucharlat and M. Bost (1998) “A 5-Year Follow-up
       Study of Suicide Attempts Among French Adolescents.” The Journal of Adolescent

                                               33
       Health 22(5): 424-30.

Lewis, G. and A. Sloggett (1998) “Suicide, Deprivation and Unemployment: A Record-Linkage
       Study.” British Medical Journal (Clinical Research ed) 317(7168): 1283-6.

Ludwig, J. and P.J. Cook (2000) “Homicide and Suicide Rates Associated with Implementation
      of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act.” Journal of the American Medical
      Association 284(5): 585-91.

Luoma, J.B. and J.L. Pearson (2002) “Suicide and Marital Status in the United States, 1991-
      1996: Is Widowhood a Risk Factor?” American Journal of Public Health 92(9): 1518-
      22.

Mann, J. John, David A. Brent and Victoria Arango (2001) “The Neurobiology and Genetics of
      Suicide and Attempted Suicide: A Focus on the Serotonergic System”
      Neuropsychopharmacology 24(5):467-77.

Marion, S.A., M.O. Agbayewa and S. Wiggins (1999) “The Effect of Season and Weather on
      Suicide rates in the Elderly in British Columbia.” Canadian Journal of Public Health
      90(6): 418-22.

Marttunen, M.J., M.M. Henriksson, H.M. Aro, M.E. Heikkinen, E.T. Isomesta and J.K.
       Lonnqvist (1995) “Suicide Among Female Adolescents: Characteristics and Comparison
       with Males in the Age Group 13 to 22 Years.” Journal of the American Academy of
       Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 34(10): 1297-307.

Morrell, S., R. Taylor, E. Slaytor and P. Ford (1999) “Urban and Rural Suicide Differentials in
       Migrants and the Australian-Born, New South Wales, Australia 1985-1994.” Social
       Science and Medicine 49(1): 81-91.

Murray, C.J.L. and A.D. Lopez (1996) Global Health Statistics: A Compendium of Incidence,
      Prevalence and Mortality Estimates for Over 200 Countries (Cambridge MA:
      Harvard University Press)

Neeleman, J. (1998) “Regional Suicide rates in the Netherlands: Does Religion Still Play a
      Role?” International Journal of Epidemiology 27(3): 466-72.

Neeleman, J., D. Halpern, D. Leon and G. Lewis (1997) “Tolerance of Suicide, Religion and
      Suicide Rates: An Ecological and Individual Study in 19 Western Countries.”
      Psychological Medicine 27(5): 1165-71.

Neeleman, J. and G. Lewis (1999) “Suicide, Religion and Socio-Economic Conditions: An
      Ecological Study in 26 Countries, 1990.” Journal of Epidemiology and Community

                                               34
       Health 53(4): 204-10.

Nemtsov, Aleksandr V. (2001) Alkogol’naya smertnost’v Rossii, 1980-90-e gody. [Alcohol-
      related Mortality in Russia, the 1980s and 1990s] Moscow.

Nilsson, A. (1999) “Lithium Therapy and Suicide Risk.” The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry
       60(Suppl 2): 85-8.

Nishi, M., et al (2000) “The Relationship between Suicides and Holidays.” Journal of
       Epidemiology/ Japan Epidemiological Association 10(5): 317-20.

Ohberg, A., E. Vuori, T. Klaukka, and J. Lonnqvist (1997) “Antidepressants and Suicide
      Mortality.” Journal of Affective Disorders 50(2-3): 225-33.

Ostamo, A. and J Lönnqvist (2001a) “Attempted Suicide Rates and Trends during a Period of
      Severe Economic Recession in Helsinki, 1989-1997.” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric
      Epidemiology 36(7): 354-60.

Ostamo, A. and J. Lönnqvist (2001b) “Excess Mortality of Suicide Attempters.” Social
      Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 36(1): 29-35.

Parker, G., F. Gao and D. Machin (2001) “Seasonality of Suicide in Singapore: Data From the
        Equator.” Psychol Med 31(7): 549-53.

Petridou, E., F.C. Papadopoulos, C.E. Frangakis, A. Skalkidou and D. Trichopoulos (2002) “A
       Role of Sunshine in the Triggering of Suicide.” Epidemiology 13(1): 106-9.

Potter, L.B. et al (2001) “The Influence of Geographic Mobility on Nearly Lethal Suicide
        Attempts.” Suicide and Life-Threatening Behavior 32(1 Suppl): 42-8.

Preti, A. and P. Miotto (1999) “Suicide and Unemployment in Italy, 1982-1994.” Journal of
        Epidemiology and Community Health 53(11): 694-701.

Putnam, Robert D. (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American
      Community. (New York: Simon & Schuster).

Putnam, Robert D. (2001) “Social Capital: Measurement and Consequences.” In John F.
      Helliwell ed. The Contribution of Human and Social Capital to Sustained Economic
      Growth and Well-Being (Ottawa: HDRC and OECD)(Proceedings of an OECD/HRDC
      conference, Quebec, March 19-21, 2000)

Qin, P., E. Agerbo, N. Westergard-Nielson, T. Eriksson and P.B. Mortensen (2000) “Gender
        Differences For Risk Factors For Suicide in Denmark.” The British Journal of

                                              35
       Psychiatry: The Journal of Mental Science 177: 546-50.

Qin, P., E. Agerbo, and P.B. Mortensen (2003) “Suicide Risk in Relation to Socioeconomic,
        Demographic, Psychiatric and Familial Factors: A National Register Baseline Study of
        All Suicides in Denmark 1981-1997.” The British Journal of Psychiatry: The Journal
        of Mental Science 177: 546-50.

Ramstedt, M. “Alcohol and Suicide in 14 European Countries.” Addiction 96 Supplement
      1:S59-75.

Rice, Tom W., and Jan L. Feldman (1997) "Civic Culture and Democracy From Europe to
       America" Journal of Politics 59(4): 1143-72.

Rihmer, Z., W. Rutz, H. Pihlgren and P. Pestality (1998) “Decreasing Tendency of Seasonality in
      Suicide May Indicate Lowering Rate of Depressive Suicides in the Population.”
      Psychiatry Research 81(2): 233-40.

Rockett, J.R. and B.M. Thomas (1999) “Reliability and Sensitivity of Suicide Certification in
       Higher-Income Countries.” Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior 29(2): 141-9.

Rossau, C.D. and P.B. Mortensen (1997) “Risk Factors in Patients With Schizophrenia: Nested
      Case-Control Study.” The British Journal of Psychiatry, The Journal of Mental
      Science 171(Oct): 355-9.

Roy, A., D. Nielson, G Rylander, M. Sarchiapone and M. Segal (1999) “Genetics of Suicide in
       Depression.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 60(Suppl 2: 12-7)

Rutz, Wolfgang (2001) “Preventing Suicide and Premature Death by Education and Treatment.”
       Journal of Affective Disorders 62(1-2): 123-9.

Schmidtke, A. and H. Hafner (1988) “The Werther Effect after Television Films: New Evidence
      from an Old Hypothesis.” Psychological Medicine 18: 665-76.

Schmidtke, A.et al. (1996) “Attempted Suicide in Europe: Rates, Trends and Socio-Demographic
      Characteristics of Suicide Attempters during the Period 1989-1992. Results of the
      WHO/EURO Multicentre Study on Parasuicide.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica
      95(5): 327-38.

Silverman, M.M (1993). “Campus Student Suicide Rates: Fact or Artifact?” Suicide and Life
       Threatening Behavior 23(4): 329-42.

Silverman, M.M, P.M. Meyer, F. Sloane, M. Raffel and D.M. Pratt (1997). “The Big Ten Student
       Suicide Study: A Ten-Year Study of Suicides on Mid-Western University Campuses”

                                               36
       Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior 23(4): 329-42.

Singh, G.K., and M. Siahpush (2001) “All-Cause and Cause-Specific Mortality of Immigrants
       and Native Born in the United States.” American Journal of Public Health 91(3): 392-
       9.

Singh, G.K., and M. Siahpush (2002) “Increasing Rural-Urban Gradients in US Suicide
       Mortality.” American Journal of Public Health 92(7): 1161-7.

Souery, D., P. Oswald, P. Linkowski, and J. Mendlewicz (2003) “Molecular Genetics in the
       Analysis of Suicide.” Ann. Med. 35(3): 191-6.

Soroka, Stuart N., John F. Helliwell, and Richard Johnston (2004) “Modelling Trust” In Richard
       Johnston and Fiona Kay, eds., Diversity, Social Capital and the Welfare State.
       (Vancouver: UBC Press, forthcoming)

Stack, S. (2000) “Suicide: A 15-Year Review of the Sociological Literature” Suicide and Life
        Threatening Behavior 30(2): 145-76.

van Wijngaarden, E. and D.A. Savitz (2000) “Occupational Sunlight Exposure in Relation to
      Suicide Among Electrical Workers.” American Journal of Industrial Medicine 38(2):
      149-54.

Varnik, A., D. Wasserman, M Dankowicz and G. Eklund (1998) “Marked Decrease in Suicide in
       the Former USSR During Perestroika.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica
       Supplementum 1998, 394: 13-19.

Wasserman, D. and A. Varnik (1998) “Reliability of Statistics on Violent Death and Suicide in
      the Former USSR, 1970-1990.” Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica Supplementum 1998,
      394: 34-41.

Wasserman, D. and Värnik, A. (2001). “Perestroika in the Former USSR: History’s
      Most Effective Suicide Preventive Programme for Men.” In D. Wasserman (Ed.),
      Suicide: an Unnecessary Death. (London: Martin Dunitz) 253-258.

Wickstrom, L., and I. Rossow (2002) “Explaining the Gender Difference in Self-Reported
      Suicide Attempts: A Nationally representative Study of Norwegian Adolescents.”
      Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior 32(2): 101-16.

Williams, Mark (2001) Suicide and Attempted Suicide. (London: Penguin)

Yip, P.S. (1998) “Age, Sex, Marital Status and Suicide: An Empirical Study of East and West.”
       Psychological Reports 82(1): 311-22.

                                              37
Table1: Basic and Extended Suicide Equation, Total and By Gender

                       Basic Equation               Adding INCNAT                Adding GOVDO                Adding LATITUDE
                    suicide    male    female    suicide    male    female    suicide    male    female    suicide    male female
memntotc              -6.94    -12.7     -2.07     -5.34    -9.75      -1.5     -6.09    -10.9     -1.96     -4.97    -8.57 -2.08
                     [3.02]   [3.18]    [1.81]    [2.17]   [2.17]    [1.19]    [2.52]   [2.57]    [1.57]    [2.46]   [2.58] [1.78]
trustnat              -22.8    -43.5     -5.05     -18.4    -35.5     -3.48     -17.6    -32.6     -4.41     -26.8      -52 -5.03
                     [3.59]   [3.84]    [1.93]    [3.02]   [3.26]    [1.16]    [2.73]   [2.83]    [1.25]    [4.48]   [5.15] [1.71]
godn                  -22.3    -31.4     -14.3     -23.2    -33.1     -14.6     -22.9    -32.6     -14.4     -17.5    -21.3 -14.3
                     [5.20]   [3.93]    [9.13]    [5.62]   [4.25]    [9.24]    [5.44]   [4.13]    [8.93]    [4.42]   [3.25] [6.64]
divorce                4.48     8.48      1.01      4.46     8.43         1      4.28     8.04      0.98      3.96     7.39 1.01
                     [5.60]   [5.59]    [3.08]    [5.94]   [5.92]    [3.16]    [5.47]   [5.51]    [2.73]    [5.68]   [5.65] [3.41]
incnat                                            -6.05    -11.2     -2.19
                                                  [2.26] [2.09] [1.23]
latitude                                                                                                     0.23     0.48      0
                                                                                                            [2.83] [3.67] [0.03]
govdo                                                                          -1.61    -3.43       -0.2
                                                                               [1.69] [2.01] [0.31]
Constant             25.02 38.53    12.9 26.35 40.97 13.38                     24.98 38.43    12.9 14.56 16.65 12.96
                     [6.41] [5.44] [9.19] [6.90] [5.92] [8.88]                 [6.50] [5.57] [9.16] [3.06] [2.21] [4.58]
# of obs               117    117    117    117    117    117                    117    117    117    117    117    117
R-square              0.58   0.58   0.53     0.6    0.6  0.54                   0.59     0.6  0.53   0.62   0.63 0.53
Mean
of Dependent         16.39 25.58         7.87 16.39 25.58             7.87 16.39 25.58             7.87 16.39 25.58          7.87
S.D. of Dependent    10.18 17.47          4.7 10.18 17.47              4.7 10.18 17.47              4.7 10.18 17.47           4.7
Table 2: Additional Tests

                    A; Adding INCNAT, GOVDO &          B: Keeping LATITUDE and
                                                       adding CHURCHN, UR,
                    LATITUDE                           EDATTNAT & DIVERSE
                       suicide      suim        suif       suicide     suim        suif
memntotc                  -2.18     -3.18     -1.41           -4.47    -7.54     -2.01
                         [1.01]    [0.94]    [1.10]          [1.93]   [1.93]    [1.69]
trustnat                  -18.9   -35.37      -4.35         -23.63     -44.8     -5.11
                         [3.23]    [3.73]    [1.28]          [3.78]   [4.47]    [1.47]
godn                    -17.19    -20.41    -14.55          -15.16   -16.13    -14.49
                         [4.92]    [3.50]    [7.08]          [2.31]   [1.52]    [4.07]
divorce                    3.54      6.39      1.06            4.07     7.48      1.11
                         [5.09]    [5.32]    [3.24]          [4.36]   [4.34]    [3.03]
incnat                     -4.3     -5.56     -3.57
                         [1.16]    [0.90]    [1.74]
latitude                    0.3      0.64         0         0.27       0.58          0
                         [3.97]    [4.89]    [0.07]        [2.68]     [3.35]     [0.06]
govdo                     -1.92     -4.84      0.57
                         [1.29]    [2.01]    [0.75]
churchn                                                     -3.83      -7.92      -0.15
                                                           [0.65]     [0.79]     [0.05]
edattnat                                                    -0.58      -1.23      -0.06
                                                           [1.21]     [1.56]     [0.21]
ur                                                           0.07       0.15       0.01
                                                           [0.40]     [0.52]     [0.06]
diverse                                                         1       4.75      -1.42
                                                           [0.17]     [0.51]     [0.43]
Constant                12.07     10.52     13.56          15.77      18.03      13.84
                        [2.58]    [1.40]    [4.75]         [2.53]     [1.85]     [3.70]
Observations              117       117       117             117        117        117
R-squared                0.66      0.69      0.54            0.63       0.65       0.53
Mean of                 16.39     25.58      7.87          16.39      25.58        7.87
Dependent
S.D. of Dependent       10.18     17.47         4.7        10.18      17.47        4.7
Table 3: Basic Equations by Age and Gender
                Age 15~24          Age 25~34          Age 35~44        Age 45~54         Age 55~64         Age 65 up
               sui1m     sui1f sui2m        sui2f sui3m    sui3f sui4m   sui4f sui5m   sui5f sui6m   sui6f
memntotc        -4.35     0.51 -13.49       -0.64 -20.74 -3.07 -30.28 -4.11 -25.25 -5.45 -12.75 -5.32
               [1.37]   [0.53] [2.84]      [0.70] [3.38] [2.28] [3.66] [2.10] [3.83] [2.87] [2.20] [1.85]
trustnat        -8.41     2.39 -27.87        4.52 -60.42   1.52 -87.49 -2.83 -73.24 -3.24 -93.64 -25.37
               [0.81]   [1.02] [1.96]      [1.61] [3.52] [0.50] [4.00] [0.58] [4.01] [0.56] [6.10] [3.91]
godn            -8.72    -4.94 -20.15       -8.07 -35.16 -10.76 -47.82 -16.94 -45.98 -19.36 -76.07 -37.72
               [1.45]   [2.84] [1.99]      [4.14] [2.71] [5.61] [2.96] [6.23] [3.42] [6.19] [8.05] [8.00]
divorce          5.21     0.19   9.62        0.45 13.04    1.43 16.28    1.99 12.81    1.42   8.74   1.18
               [4.33]   [0.51] [4.66]      [1.21] [5.04] [3.62] [4.86] [3.75] [5.07] [2.78] [5.64] [1.25]
Constant       14.72      4.73 29.43         6.58 47.37    9.81 63.64 15.44        62 18.42 90.09 35.43
               [2.65]   [5.04] [3.40]      [4.52] [4.33] [5.56] [4.61] [5.96] [5.29] [5.96] [9.69] [10.45]
# of obs.         117      117    117         117    117    117    117    117    117    117    117    117
R-squared        0.33     0.22    0.5        0.37   0.55   0.45   0.55   0.41   0.53   0.46   0.55   0.48
Mean of
Dependent      17.55      4.55     27.19     6.18    33.35     8.53     39.2    11.45    38.14    11.92    46.76   15.34
S.D. of
Dependent      11.73      2.87     18.42     3.81    25.60     5.13    33.58     7.61    28.36     7.44    27.97   11.62

Table 4: Traffic Fatalities (Motor Vehicle Accident Fatalities per 100,000 Population)
                  Basic              Adding          Adding YEAR     Adding Vehicle     Replace National
                                                                     Ownership per    Income with Vehicle
                                   CHURCHN                            100 people            Ownership
Dependent Fatalities Rate         Fatalities Rate    Fatalities Rate Fatalities Rate Fatalities Rate
memntotc                  -5.31              -4.82             -1.22             -0.38              0.06
                         [4.04]             [3.82]            [0.79]            [0.22]            [0.03]
trustnat                -17.03             -18.94            -26.41            -25.09            -23.71
                         [3.53]             [4.06]            [5.26]            [5.68]            [5.32]
godn                      -1.59              -7.49             -8.84             -11.2           -11.01
                         [0.44]             [1.69]            [2.18]            [2.48]            [2.53]
divorce                    1.23               1.54              1.68              1.85              1.74
                         [2.42]             [3.04]            [3.50]            [3.43]            [3.54]
churchn                                       8.92              7.75            10.58             10.06
                                            [2.07]            [1.97]            [2.74]            [2.51]
year                                                           -0.38             -0.37             -0.37
                                                              [4.69]            [4.63]            [4.56]
veh_100                                                                          -0.05
                                                                                [1.64]
incnat                                                                                              -4.4
                                                                                                  [2.23]
Constant                 20.6              20.42             771.3             756.82            770.12
                        [7.41]             [7.79]            [4.79]             [4.74]            [4.67]
Observations              117                117               117                117               117
R-squared                0.26               0.29              0.38                 0.4             0.41
Mean of
Dependent               14.75              14.75             14.75              14.75             14.75
S.D. of
Dependent                 6.12               6.12              6.12              6.12              6.12
Table 5: Encompassing Equations of Suicide and Life Satisfaction

                    Basic            Encompassing            Encompassing Adding Latitude              Encompassing
                                                                                                      Adding Latitude &
                                                                                                              FSU
               suicide      lsatis   suicide      lsatis   suicide      lsatis     suim        suif    suicide     lsatis
memntotc          -6.94      0.51       -6.08      0.51       -2.82      0.34      -4.02     -1.91        -2.43       0.3
                 [3.02]    [2.80]      [2.45]    [2.80]      [1.26]    [2.15]     [1.15]    [1.46]       [1.12]   [1.99]
trustnat        -22.75       1.83     -16.47       1.83     -18.25       1.93    -33.84      -4.45      -17.04        1.8
                 [3.59]    [4.01]      [2.42]    [4.01]      [2.87]    [4.95]     [3.36]    [1.16]       [2.39]   [4.65]
godn            -22.33        1.6     -22.82        1.6     -16.87       1.28    -20.02    -14.27       -16.43      1.23
                 [5.20]    [5.01]      [5.35]    [5.01]      [4.78]    [3.74]     [3.39]    [6.88]       [4.61]   [3.36]
divorce            4.48     -0.19        4.29     -0.19        3.44     -0.14       6.29      0.97         2.89    -0.08
                 [5.60]    [4.01]      [5.37]    [4.01]      [5.20]    [3.39]     [5.48]    [2.91]       [3.59]   [1.88]
ur                          -0.03        0.11     -0.03        0.07     -0.03       0.15         0         0.07    -0.03
                           [3.23]      [0.58]    [3.23]      [0.39]    [2.86]     [0.55]    [0.02]       [0.38]   [3.10]
govdo                        0.82       -1.66      0.82        -2.9      0.88      -6.13     -0.22        -1.44     0.73
                          [10.31]      [1.71]   [10.31]      [2.79]   [12.81]     [3.71]    [0.34]       [1.14]   [5.75]
latitude                                                        0.3     -0.02       0.64         0         0.24    -0.01
                                                             [3.88]    [2.24]     [4.85]    [0.10]       [2.84]   [1.08]
fsu                                                                                                        5.38    -0.58
                                                                                                         [1.23]   [1.87]
Constant        25.02         5.5     23.73         5.5     10.36       6.21        7.7     12.7         11.67      6.07
                [6.41]    [22.27]     [5.42]    [22.27]     [2.12]    [14.23]    [0.96]    [4.74]        [2.58] [13.87]
Observations      117        117        117        117        117        117       117       117            117      117
R-squared        0.58       0.81         0.6      0.81       0.65       0.83      0.69      0.53           0.66     0.84
Mean of
Dependent       16.39         6.9     16.39         6.9     16.39         6.9    25.58       7.87       16.39        6.9
S.D. of
Dependent       10.18       1.06      10.18       1.06      10.18       1.06     17.47         4.7      10.18       1.06
Table 6: Additional Test on Suicide and Life Satisfaction Equations
               DIVERS        UR &             GOVDO VS                         SCAN & LATITUDE                                SCAN, LATITUDE & FSU
                  ITY    EDATTANT                DEMOC
                suicide suicide suicide     suicide   lsatis    suicide suicide      suim      suim      lsatis     lsatis suicide     suim        suif     lsatis
memntotc           -6.88  -6.79    -6.96       -5.42    0.5        -7.21  -5.25      -13.2     -8.97       0.5       0.24    -3.17     -4.34     -2.18       0.22
                  [2.95] [2.80]   [2.96]      [2.28] [2.84]       [3.02] [2.51]     [3.19]    [2.69]    [2.66]     [1.53]   [1.49]    [1.39]    [1.57]     [1.48]
trustnat         -22.07 -21.89 -21.92        -12.81    1.72      -28.83 -28.82     -54.97    -54.94       1.51       1.26 -22.19       -40.1     -5.77       1.27
                  [3.38] [3.59]   [3.43]      [2.10] [3.93]       [3.91] [4.01]     [4.31]    [4.64]    [2.83]     [2.74]   [2.92]    [3.34]    [1.38]     [2.90]
godn             -23.15 -22.83 -22.27        -21.65    1.57      -22.19 -17.84       -31.2   -21.82       1.61       1.16    -16.9   -19.74    -14.46        1.14
                  [5.35] [5.17]   [5.11]      [5.56] [5.08]       [5.45] [4.60]     [4.15]    [3.40]    [4.99]     [3.66]   [4.64]    [3.44]    [6.78]     [3.36]
divorce             4.74   4.63      4.5        4.12  -0.18         4.48   4.01       8.47      7.46     -0.19      -0.13     2.81      4.78      1.02      -0.08
                  [5.53] [5.40]   [5.47]      [5.39] [4.18]       [5.84] [5.85]     [5.85]    [5.81]    [3.90]     [3.17]   [3.56]    [3.66]    [2.49]     [1.89]
edattnat                  -0.23
                         [0.55]
ur                                  0.09                -0.03                                            -0.03      -0.03                                  -0.03
                                  [0.51]               [3.17]                                           [3.34]     [3.12]                                 [3.28]
govdo                                         -7.62      0.97                                             0.81        0.9                                   0.78
                                             [2.80]    [5.11]                                           [9.66]    [11.96]                                 [6.07]
democ                                          8.21     -0.22
                                             [2.55]    [0.81]
latitude                                                                   0.21               0.45                  -0.02    0.16     0.34      -0.01       -0.02
                                                                          [2.68]             [3.56]                [3.63]   [2.37]   [3.55]    [0.17]      [2.00]
scan                                                              4.23     1.65     7.96        2.4      0.23        0.51    2.49       4.3      0.62        0.43
                                                                 [1.40]   [0.49]   [1.66]    [0.45]     [1.30]     [3.02]   [0.80]   [0.90]    [0.33]      [2.42]
fsu                                                                                                                          7.98    17.86       0.02       -0.45
                                                                                                                            [2.37]   [3.21]    [0.01]      [1.49]
div_relg          -8.05
                 [1.99]
div_ethn           1.06
                 [0.20]
div_lang           2.75
                 [0.36]
Constant         27.14    26.74    23.97     21.44      5.58     26.55    16.05    41.41     18.82       5.58       6.69    16.08    18.88     13.52          6.5
                 [6.59]   [5.14]   [5.54]    [6.17]   [21.14]    [6.91]   [3.37]   [6.02]    [2.51]    [23.76]    [15.77]   [3.62]   [2.84]    [4.72]     [14.92]
Observations        117     117      117       117       117       117      117      117       117        117        117      117      117       117         117
R-squared           0.6    0.58     0.58      0.63      0.82      0.59     0.62     0.59      0.64       0.82       0.84     0.66     0.71      0.53        0.85
Mean of
Dependent        16.39    16.39    16.39     16.39       6.9     16.39    16.39    25.58     25.58         6.9       6.9    16.39    25.58       7.87         6.9
S.D. of
Dependent        10.18    10.18    10.18     10.18      1.06     10.18    10.18    17.47     17.47       1.06       1.06    10.18    17.47         4.7      1.06
Table 7: Test Involving Smaller Sample Due To Data Availability
                    Suicide Attitude     Income Inequality     Firearm Prevalence
                              suicide               suicide                 suicide
memntotc                         -6.36                 -6.23                   -6.03
                                [2.62]                [3.06]                  [2.88]
trustnat                       -22.97                -22.82                  -23.61
                                [3.47]                [3.33]                  [3.55]
godn                           -22.83                -20.97                      -20
                                [5.19]                [3.81]                  [4.53]
divorce                           4.49                  4.74                    5.12
                                [5.56]                [5.16]                  [6.23]
sui_mean1                       -0.18
                               [0.14]
p9010                                                 -0.02
                                                     [0.19]
guns                                                                          -0.08
                                                                             [0.77]
Constant                        25.5                 24.43                   24.41
                               [5.33]                [5.33]                  [6.14]
# of obs.                       114*                 100**                    97***
R-squared                       0.59                  0.58                     0.58
Mean of Dependent              16.39                 16.39                   16.39
S.D. of Dependent              10.23                 10.23                   10.22
Note:
1: a higher value of sui_mean means more approval or less disapproval
*: the 3 missing observations are croatia99, slovakia99, greece99
**: the 17 missing observations are: britain 81, denmark 81, spain 96, spain99, ireland 81, n ireland 81, japan 81,
        iceland 81, iceland 90, iceland99, argentina 81, e germany 90, e germany 97, e germany99, estonia 96 ,
        dominic rep 96, and malta99
***: the 20 missing observations are ireland 81, ireland 90, ireland99, mexico 81, mexico 90, mexico 96, iceland 81
        iceland 90, iceland99, s korea 90, chile 90, chile 96, e germany 90, e germany 97, e germany99, portugal 90
        portugal 99, venezuela 96, uruguay 96, and dominic rep 96
Table 8: Descriptive Statistics and Correlations of Actual and Predicted Well-being Measure and
Suicide Rates

Lsatis      Actual level of life satisfaction measure
plsatis     Predicted level of life satisfaction from the encompassing model

Suicide     Actual suicide rate
psui_1      Predicted suicide rate from the encompassing model
psui_2      psui_1 improved by adding the life satisfaction residual from the
            encompassing equation to the suicide equation.
psui_3      The suicide rate predicted using the adjusted Finish suicide risk factor by
            self-reported life satisfaction and each nation's population distribution by
            self-reported life satisfaction in WVS/EVS
psui_4      psui_3 further adjusted for the difference in self-reported importance of god,
            using the estimated effect of godn from the encompassing suicide equation.

Panel a: Descriptive Statistics

Variable    Obs         Mean     Std. Dev.
lsatis            117       6.90      1.06
plsatis           117       6.90      0.96
suicide           117      16.39     10.18
psui_1            117      16.39      7.86
psui_2            117      16.39      8.00
psui_3            117      21.76      7.21
psui_4            117      18.91      8.85

Panel b- Correlations
            lsatis      plsatis    suicide psui_1    psui_2    psui_3    psui_4
lsatis                1
plsatis            0.90          1
suicide          -0.53       -0.51         1
psui_1           -0.60       -0.66      0.77       1
psui_2           -0.67       -0.65      0.79    0.98         1
psui_3           -0.96       -0.86      0.52    0.55      0.63         1
psui_4           -0.83       -0.75      0.70    0.80      0.85      0.83        1
Figure 1: European Suicide Rates 1870s vs 1990s

               40


                         russia


               30        finland



                                                  austria
                                                               switzerlanddenmark
                                                      france
                                   belgium
               20
                                    sweden
                                   norway

                        netherland
               10         italy    britain
    SUI1990S




                0
                    0                        10                 20                  30   40


                    SUI1870S

Source of data: Suicide, Durkheim, Free Press 1979, Page 50, 259
                & WHO Death by Causes Database
                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                           5
                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                               15
                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                                                                                                         35
                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                              45




                             0
                                 10
                                      20
                                           30
                                                40
                                                     50
                                                          60
                                                               70
                                                                                                        Do
                                                                                                            min          P
                                                                                                                  ica eru
                                                                                                                       nR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Figure 2:
  Dom             Peru                                                                                                       ep
       inica                                                                                                        Tur .
             n Re                                                                                                          key
                      p.                                                                                            Me
              Mexic                                                                                                       xic
                        o                                                                                           Gre o
             Gree                                                                                                         ece
                      ce
                                                                                                               Ve      B r a
                B ra




                                                                    B: Male Suicide Rate
                                                                                                                                                                   A: Total Suicide Rate



         Vene zil                                                                                                  nez zil
                 zuela                                                                                                   uel
                                                                                                                   Ge a
            Geor                                                                                                        org
                    gia                                                                                                       ia
          Arge
                 n                                                                                                      C
    Kore           t in                                                                                         Arg hile
          a-S a                                                                                                       ent
                  outh                                                                                                     ina
                                                                                                                       Sp
                 Chile                                                                                                      ain
                Spain                                                                                                  Ma
                                                                                                                   Po lta
                                                                                                                       rtug
                   Italy                                                                                                       al
           Portu                                                                                          Ko
                    gal                                                                                       rea Italy
                                                                                                        No
                                                                                                           rthe - Sou
  Unite          Malta                                                                                                        th
        dK                                                                                              Un rn Ire
  North ingdom                                                                                              ited          la
        ern I                                                                                                      Kin nd
                                                                                                                        gdo
               relan
                        d                                                                                                        m
      Neth
            erlan                                                                                                    I
                     ds                                                                                      Ne relan
                                                                                                                 the             d
                                                                                                                                                                               With Nations Ranked By Actual Suicide Rate




                Chin                                                                                                  rlan
                        a                                                                                                    ds
                                                                                                                    Ice
              Irelan                                                                                                     lan
                        d                                                                                        Au              d
          Aust                                                                                            Un          stra
                  ralia                                                                                        ited          lia
                                                                                                                      Sta
             Icela
                      nd                                                                                                    t
    Unite                                                                                                          Ro es
           d Sta                                                                                                       ma
                    tes
                                                                                           A c tual




          Rom                                                                                                      Slo nia
                                                                                                                        vak
                  ania                                                                                                         i




A ctual
                                                                                                                   Ca a
             Norw                                                                                                       nad
                      ay                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                     Po
            Cana
                     da                                                                                                   la
                                                                                                                   Uru nd
                                                                                                                        gua
   Germ        Japa
                        n                                                                                          No            y
         any,                                                                                                          rwa
                 We s
                         t                                                                              Cz                     y
           Slov                                                                                            ech Chi
                  akia                                                                                             Re na
            Swe                                                                                         Ge
                                                                                                            rma publi
                                                                                                                                 c
                                                                                           Predic ted




                   den                                                                                            ny,
           Urug                                                                                                         We
                   uay                                                                                                         s  t




Predicted
                                                                                                                   Sw
             Pola                                                                                                      ede
                     nd                                                                                            Bu          n
           Bulg                                                                                                        lg a
     Luxe          a r ia                                                                                                    r ia
                                                                                                            Lux       J apa
  Czec mbourg
        h Re                                                                                                      em            n
                publi                                                                                                  bou
                        c                                                                                                     rg
                                                                                                                    Fra
              Fran
                      ce                                                                                                   nc
           Belg                                                                                                    Be e
                                                                                                             Sw         lgiu
       Switz ium                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                         Ge itzerla
               erlan                                                                                         rma            n
          Denm d                                                                                                   ny, d
                    ark                                                                                                  Ea
   Germ                                                                                                                        st
          any,                                                                                                      Au
                                                                                                                         stri
                  East                                                                                                         a
                                                                                                                    Cro
              Aust
                      ria                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                                  De tia
             Croa                                                                                                      nm
                      tia                                                                                                   ar
             Finla                                                                                                  F in k
                     nd                                                                                                   la n
                                                                                                                   Sl o          d
           Slov                                                                                                         ven
                  enia
            Ukra                                                                                                    Uk ia
                    ine                                                                                                 rain
                                                                                                                   Be            e
            Bela                                                                                                        laru
                   ru s                                                                                                         s
                                                                                                                                                                               Regression Fits of the Basic Suicide Equations in Table 1. After Taking Average Across Waves For Compact Presentation




                Latvia                                                                                                Lat
                                                                                                                            via
           Hung                                                                                            Ru       E  sto
                    a ry                                                                                       ssi          n
            Esto                                                                                                    an ia
    Russ            n  ia                                                                                          Hu
                                                                                                                         Fed
                                                                                                                                  .
           ian F
                   ed.                                                                                                 ng
          Lithu                                                                                                  Lith ary
                  ania                                                                                                 uan
                                                                                                                               ia
                                             3
                                                 4
                                                     5
                                                         6
                                                             7
                                                                 8
                                                                     9
                        Uk r                                                                                                                                                                                Do
                               ain                                                                                                                                                                             m
                                      e                                                                                                                                                                         inic




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                        G                                                                                                                                                                                             an
                Rus eorgi
                      sian             a                                                                                                                                                                                   Rep
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .
                                Fed                                                                                                                                                                                       Per
                        Be l             .                                                                                                                                                                           Me u
                               aru
                       Bu l           s                                                                                                                                                                         Ven xico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ezu
                              gar
                                     ia                                                                                                                                                                                       e
                            Lat                                                                                                                                                                                      Gre la
                     Lith         v  ia                                                                                                                                                                                      ece
                             u an                                                                                                                                                                                         Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ile
                          Est ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               C: Female Suicide Rate




                               o                                                                                                                                                                                        Bra
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                z il
                      Rom nia                                                                                                                                                                                        Ge
                               an                                                                                                                                                                                        org
                       Hu n i a                                                                                                                                                                                                  ia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ma
                               gar
                                       y                                                                                                                                                                 No       A            lt
                      Slo                                                                                                                                                                                   rth rgen a
                             vak                                                                                                                                                                                ern          tina
                                    ia                                                                                                                                                                                Irel
                              Per                                                                                                                                                                                            and
                                      u                                                                                                                                                                                 Sp
                           Pol
                                and                                                                                                                                                                                 Por ain
                            Jap                                                                                                                                                                                           tu
                      Slo an                                                                                                                                                                                        Slo gal
                             ven                                                                                                                                                                                         vak
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ia
                          Gre ia                                                                                                                                                                                            Ital
                                ece                                                                                                                                                                                  Ice y
              Kor Croa                                                                                                                                                                                                     lan
                    ea -           t ia                                                                                                                                                                               Po d
                             Sou                                                                                                                                                                                           lan
                    Ven             th                                                                                                                                                                     Ko         Irel d
                           e zu                                                                                                                                                                                 r
                                 e la                                                                                                                                                                    Un ea - S and
              Ge r         F                                                                                                                                                                                 ited          o
                   ma rance                                                                                                                                                                                         Kin uth
                         n y,                                                                                                                                                                                            gdo
                               Eas                                                                                                                                                                                 Ro             m
                                        t
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Actual




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ma
                             Spa                                                                                                                                                                                              n  ia




Actual
                     Arg            in                                                                                                                                                                      Un Urugu
                            ent
                                  i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ited            ay
                      Por na                                                                                                                                                                                           St
                              tug                                                                                                                                                                                 Au ates
                                    al                                                                                                                                                                                 str
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             alia
             Cz e
                  ch           Ital
                                       y
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Cze        C
                      Re p                                                                                                                                                                                     ch anad
                               ubl                                                                                                                                                                                  Re
            Dom                       i c                                                                                                                                                                               pub a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     No lic
                   inic China
                          an                                                                                                                                                                                  Net         r
                               Re                                                                                                                                                                                  her way
                       Ur u p .                                                                                                                                                                                         lan
                              gua                                                                                                                                                                                   Bu ds
                                       y                                                                                                                                                                                l ga




Predicted
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Predicted




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ge         B         ria
                              Ch i
                                     l e                                                                                                                                                                      rma      e la
                          Aus                                                                                                                                                                                      ny, rus
                                 tria                                                                                                                                                                                     We
             Ge r                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sw st
                 ma Brazi
                      ny,               l                                                                                                                                                                                ede
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 n
                              We                                                                                                                                                                             Lux Ukrai
            Uni        Bel st                                                                                                                                                                                     em           ne
                t ed          g                                                                                                                                                                                        bou
                      Ki n i u m
                             gdo                                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                      m                                                                                                                                                                               Fra g
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             nce
               Uni Mexic                                                                                                                                                                                              Fi n
                    ted               o                                                                                                                                                                                     la
                            Sta                                                                                                                                                                                      Cro nd
                                 t es                                                                                                                                                                          Sw
                         No r                                                                                                                                                                                      itze atia
                               w                                                                                                                                                                                         rlan
                      Aus ay                                                                                                                                                                                         Au d
                              tral
                                     ia                                                                                                                                                                                    stri
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a
                 Net Finlan                                                                                                                                                                               Ge
                      h er             d                                                                                                                                                                       rma Japa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ny,          n
                Lu           la n
                                   d                                                                                                                                                                                       Eas
            Nor xembo s                                                                                                                                                                                             B               t
                the                                                                                                                                                                                          Ru elgiu
                     rn I urg
                            rela
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ssi
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      an         m
                                   n                                                                                                                                                                                        Fed
                         Ca n d                                                                                                                                                                                        Lat .
                       Sw
                                ada                                                                                                                                                                                           v
                              ed e                                                                                                                                                                                   Es ia
                                     n                                                                                                                                                                            Lith tonia
                           Irel
                                and                                                                                                                                                                                     ua
                          Ic                                                                                                                                                                                        Slo nia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         v
                 Sw eland                                                                                                                                                                                         Den enia
                      i t ze
                             rlan                                                                                                                                                                                        ma
                                      d                                                                                                                                                                                         rk
                                                                         Figure 3: Regression Fits of the Basic Lsatis Equation in Table 1. After Taking Average Across Waves For Compact Presentation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ch
                     De n t a
                             Mal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Hu        i n  a
                              ma                                                                                                                                                                                        nga
                                    rk                                                                                                                                                                                           ry
            EG




                                  10
                                  15
                                  20
                                  25
                                  30
                                  35
                                  40
                                  45
                                  50




                                   0
                                   5
                 e




                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                       15
                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                       25
                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                       35
                                                                                                                       40
                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                       50




                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                        5




                                                                            10
                                                                            15
                                                                            20
                                                                            25
                                                                            30
                                                                            35
                                                                            40
                                                                            45
                                                                            50




                                                                             0
                                                                             5
            Sw rmany                                  Aus                                    Do
               itze                                         trali                              min Peru
                    rla 99                                                                           ic R 96
                Bel nd 96
                                                         Irela a 81
                                                                n                                           e
                    giu                                 Pol d 99                                   Me p 96
                                                              and                                         xico
                 Aus m 90                                             8                            Me            81
                                                       Nor                                                xi
                Sw tria 99                                   way 9
                    ede                                               96                           Me co 90
                 Fra n 82                                   U                                             xico
                      n                               Aus SA 95                                        Bra 96
                Bel ce 81                                   trali
                    giu                                                                            Gre zil 91




Actual
                                                        Icel a 95
                                                              a




                                                                                 Actual
                 Fra m 99                                                                                 ece
                      n                               Rom nd 99                                                  9
                                                              a




                                       Actual
                 Bel ce 90                                                                     Ve Brazi 9
            E G arus                                  Rom nia99                                   nez          l 97
                 e                                                                                       uel
            W G rman 90                                      ania
                                                                      90                                      a
                 erm y 97                                                                              Sp 96
                      a                            W G USA
                                                                      82                          Ge ain 81
                 C ny 8                                er m
                                                              any                                       o
            Sw roatia 1                                                                          Po rgia 9
               itze                                                   9                                rtug 6
                    rla 99                                  USA 9                                            a
                Bel nd 90                              Can            90                                C l 99
                    giu                                       a                                 N I hile 9
                 Fin m 81
                     lan
                                                      Slo da 90                                       re           0
                                                   W G vakia                                    Arg land



                                                                                 Predicted
                 Aus d 99                              er m           99                              ent 81
                                                              a




Predicted
                                                                                                           ina




                                       Predicted
              Den tria 9
                    ma        0                       Uru ny 96
                                                            gu                                          C        84
                 F      rk 9
                                                       Swe ay 96
                                                                                                Arg hile
                                                                                                      ent 96
            E G inland 0
                 erm        9                                 de                                           in
                      an 6                             Can n 99                                     Irel a 95
                                                              ad                                Arg and
                   Lat y 90                            Nor a 81                                       ent 81
              Lith via 9                                     way                                           ina
                   uan 0                                Pol           82
                  Rus ia 90                                   a                                          Ital 90
                                                       Swe nd 97                                   Ice y 81
              Slo sia 91
                   ven                                        d                                          lan
                                                                                                              d
                                                      Den en 96                                        Ma 81
                                                            m ar                                            lta
                Ukr ia 95
                     a                                             k                                             99
              Slo ine 99                                  Chi 99
                   ven                                          na                              N I Italy 9
              Slo ia 92                                   Chi 95                                      rela        9
                   v                                   Bul na 90                                 S K nd 99
              Den enia 9
                    ma       9                              gar
                                                                 i
                                                                                                         ore
                                                        Pol a 90                                     Bri a 90
                Ukr r k 8 1
                     ain                                      an                                          tain
                                                       Nor d 99                                        Sp 99
                 Fin e 96
                     land                                    w                                             ain
                                                       Cze ay 90
                    Lat 90                                   chia                                        Ital 90
                                                        Ic            99                                      y
                 Est via99
                     o
                                                                                                       Sp 90
                                                   W G eland                                               ain
               Hun nia 99                              er m           9                              Bri         9
                     gar                                      an 0                                        tain 5
                 Bel y 99                              Bul y 90                                        Sp        90
                     ar                                      gar
                                                                   ia
                 Bel us 99                                Jap 99                                 Po ain 9
                     aru                                                                               rtug 9
                                                                an
                   Lat s 96                               Jap 90                                     Bri al 90
                       v                                                                                  tain
                 Est ia 96                                                                          I
                                                                                                                            Figure 4: Suicide, Actual and Predicted by Nation-Waves, Ranked by Actual Suicide Rate




                     oni                               Swe an 81
                                                              den                            Ne relan 81
                  Ru a 9 6                                                                      th            d
                                                          Jap 90                             Ne erland 90
                                                                an
               Hun ssia99
                     ga                                               9                         the
                                                                                                      rla s 99
                                                   Lux France 5
                  Rus ry 90                           em                                        N I nds 9
              Lith sia 9                                   bou 99                            Ne relan 0
                   u         5                         Bul rg 99                                the
                                                                                                      rlan d 90
              Lith ania 9                                   gar
                                                                 ia 9                                       ds
                   uan 9
                         ia 9                                           8                                        81
                              6
Figure-5: Standardized Coefficients From the Encompassing Model of Life Satisfaction
and Suicide Rates



         0.8
         0.6
         0.4
         0.2
           0
        -0.2
        -0.4
        -0.6
           membership trust             god       divorce        ur       govdo


                               suicide                         lsatis
