                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      CATCHING-UP TO FOREIGN TECHNOLOGY?
                 EVIDENCE ON THE “VEBLEN-GERSCHENKRON” EFFECT
                            OF FOREIGN INVESTMENTS

                                              Giovanni Peri
                                              Dieter Urban

                                          Working Paper 10893
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10893


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




Urban gratefully acknowledges financial support from the European Commission Fifth Framework
Programme (Grant No. FMRX-CT-0215). We owe particular thanks to Deutsche Bundesbank for providing
us with unpublished regional data on foreign owned firms in Germany. We thank an anonymous referee and
John Quigley for useful comments. Giorgio Barba Navaretti and Steve Redding also provided helpful
suggestions. Arturo de Visdomini provided excellent research assistance. Errors are ours. The views
expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2004 by Giovanni Peri and Dieter Urban. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Catching-Up to Foreign Technology? Evidence on the Veblen-Gerschenkron” Effect of Foreign
Investments
Giovanni Peri and Dieter Urban
NBER Working Paper No. 10893
November 2004
JEL No. F23, O47, R11

                                            ABSTRACT

The presence of foreign multinational enterprises may benefit local economies. In particular, highly

productive foreign-owned firms may promote technological catch-up of local firms. Such channel

of spillovers is defined as "Veblen-Geschenkron" effect of Foreign Direct Investments and is

analyzed in this article. Rather than the overall density of foreign-owned plants in a region or sector,

it is their productivity advantage that determines the positive effect on domestic firms in

geographical and technological proximity. We test this hypothesis using new firm-level data for

German and Italian manufacturing firms during the 90's. We find evidence of a significant Veblen-

Gerschenkron effect which is robust to different ways of measuring total factor productivity (TFP)

of firms and to different empirical specifications.

Giovanni Peri
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
gperi@ucdavis.edu

Dieter Urban
Institute for International Economic Theory
Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz
55099 Mainz, Germany
durban@uni-mainz.de
1     Introduction

Do foreign direct investments (FDI) benefit domestic firms of the host country? If they do, what
are the channels of these eﬀects? These long standing and important questions have attracted
much interest among economists. On the theoretical ground FDI may help or harm domestic
firms depending on the intensity of diﬀerent eﬀects. Ultimately the net eﬀect of FDI has to be
evaluated empirically, and recent empirical studies have found eﬀects ranging from positive to
negative, depending on the focus, the data and the method used1 . This article contributes another
piece of evidence to this issue by focussing on a potentially important (but somewhat neglected)
determinant of spillovers from FDI to domestic firms2 , namely the productive advantage of foreign
firms over domestic firms within a sector and region.
    According to Blomström et al. (2001) "foreign investors make available (directly or indirectly)
appropriable technology to host country businesses. Appropriable technology should be viewed broadly
as any tangible or intangible resource that can generate economic rent for host country firms, ...
by improving total factor productivity." Technological spillovers, therefore, should depend on the
technological advantage of the foreign firms and on their geographical proximity to the domestic
firms. Hence, our variable of interest will be the productivity advantage of foreign-owned firms over
domestic firms in a sector-region. Since the work of Caves (1974) economists have focussed their
attention on the concentration of foreign-owned firms (measured as the share of FDI capital or share
of FDI workers) within a sector and/or a region as the source (and proxy) of potential spillovers3 .
Recently, however, Aitken and Harrison (1999) have shown that properly controlling for unobserved
region-specific eﬀects eliminates most of the eﬀect of FDI density on domestic firms’ productivity.
This may occur because some local characteristics that attract FDI4 (such as the presence of high-
quality labor force, large local markets, good infrastructures and good administration) also enhance
   1
     Advocates of a positive role of FDI through technological transfer are Findlay (1978), Das (1987), and Wang and
Blomström (1992). Rodriguez-Clare (1993) and Markusen and Venables (1999) argue that they benefit local suppliers
and local consumers. Fosfuri et al. (2001), and Glass and Saggi (1998, 2002) document that they could increase the
human capital of the local labor force. On the other hand, FDI could out-compete local firms forcing them out of
production without employing local labor because of skill mis-match. This is argued in Aitken and Harrison (1999).
   2
     For a survey of the literature see Blomström and Kokko (1998). An interesting meta-analysis of the diﬀerent
research results is Görg and Strobl (2001).
   3
     There have been some studies aimed at quantifying some important channels of knowledge diﬀusion via FDI.
Branstetter (2001) uses patent citation data while Cassiman and Veugelers (2002) rely on survey data. These studies,
however, address specific channels of spillovers rather than their overall impact on productivity.
   4
     See, for example, Shannon and Zeile (1999) for the US and Stirböck (2001) for Europe.



                                                         2
the productivity of domestic firms generating a spurious correlation between the two variables. Once
these factors are properly controlled for, no correlation survives.
   This result, however, does not necessarily imply zero spillovers from FDI. Instead the density
of FDI may not be the right source of (and proxy for) spillovers. The productivity advantage of
foreign firms is potentially a more important source of spillovers. While the largest concentration
of foreign firms occurs, normally, in regions and sectors where domestic firms are already highly
productive, the largest eﬀect of foreign firms on domestic ones could be in backward regions, where
concentration of FDI is small, but their eﬀect is large as the scope for technological catch-up is
large. The operating of this mechanism is named, extending an early intuition by Veblen (1915)
and Gerschenkron (1952), the "Veblen-Gerschenkron" eﬀect.
   The original hypothesis, formalized by Findlay (1978), states that technologically disadvantaged
regions are more likely to benefit from spillovers of FDI and may experience, as a consequence,
stronger productivity growth relative to advanced regions. The hypothesis tested in this article,
using a new dataset of domestic and foreign-owned manufacturing firms in Italy and Germany
for the period 1993-1999, is that the productivity gap between domestic firms and foreign-owned
firms (in the same sector and region) is an important determinant of domestic firms’ productivity
growth. The positive eﬀect of the productivity gap on subsequent productivity growth of domestic
firms will be referred to as Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect. On one hand some recent studies (Haddad
and Harrison, 1993; Kokko, 1994; Sjöholm, 1999; Castellani and Zanfei, 2003) have emphasized
beneficial eﬀects from FDI’s on domestic firms due to intra-industry technology spillovers and
subsequent catch-up. On the other hand, studies on the diﬀusion of technological knowledge based
on patent and innovation data (Jaﬀe et al. 1993; Audretsch and Feldman 1996; Peri 2004) have
emphasized the high degree of localization of these flows. Our analysis is the first to combine the
regional dimension of spillovers from FDI with the importance of the productivity-gap in generating
them. Such a method allows us to identify the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect while controlling for
sector-specific determinants of spillovers.
   A second novel contribution of our study is the computation and use of as many as five mea-
sures of total factor productivity at the firm level, each based on a diﬀerent method and diﬀerent
assumptions. As measures of total factor productivity are always indirect, i.e. based on the calcu-
lation of a "residual" from the production function, they can be polluted by systematic unobserved

                                                  3
errors. In particular, our measures of firm-level TFP address three important problems namely
endogeneity of foreign ownership, unobserved heterogeneity of firms and selection in the sample.
Each one of the methods used is more appropriate in addressing some rather than others among
these issues. The fact that using any of our TFP measures we find robust and similar estimates of
the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect substantially reduces our concerns for spurious results.
    Finally our paper, diﬀerently from others, focuses on the interesting case of Germany, after
reunification vis-a-vis the problematic Italian case of long-standing regional disparities as host-
countries for FDI’s. Our new dataset contains geographic identifiers that allow us to locate firms
within one of 103 Provinces, for Italian data, and within one of 16 Regions (Bundeslanders) for
German data. Italy and Germany have well-known issues of uneven regional development and the
cross-sectional variation of productivity across firms is large. Our study exploits these diﬀerences
and provides some evidence on the role of foreign investments in promoting productivity catch-up
in less developed regions. In particular, Germany is a very interesting case-study as the unification
and subsequent inflow of firms from Western Europe put eastern firms in touch with new tech-
nologies after fifty years of isolation. East German firms after the unification exhibited substantial
technological backwardness when a sudden inflow of western firms occurred, generating the ideal
conditions for a strong Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect.
    Our estimates show the presence of a positive and significant Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect using
each one of our measures of productivity. Such eﬀect is large and of similar magnitude for German
and Italian firms. We interpret this as evidence that the presence of highly productive FDI (con-
sidered as exogenous to domestic firms) has a stimulating eﬀect on productivity growth of local
firms.
    The rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our empirical model and the
estimation strategy. Section 4 describes the data for Germany and Italy, Section 5 presents the
estimates, with particular emphasis on the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect. Section 6 concludes the
article.




                                                  4
2     TFP dynamics

We allow total factor productivity (TFP) of sector s in year t to follow a (deterministic or stochastic)
growth path that depends on structural determinants that may vary by sector and year. Calling
Ai,r,s,t the (logged) diﬀerence between firm i0 s TFP and the average TFP in sector s and year t,
we can describe the dynamics of this variable as follows:

                                                 _ F DI
                Ai,r,s,t+1 = β 1 · Ai,r,s,t + β 2 (Ar,s,t − Ai,r,s,t ) + β 3 F DIdensityr,s,t + εit .           (1)

    Ai,r,s,t+1 depends on its lagged level Ai,r,s,t and on two other factors. One, F DIdensityr,s,t , is the
concentration of foreign owned firms in the same sector and region and is the classic term included
to capture spillovers from FDI. The variable F DIdensityr,s,t , is measured as the share of workers
                                                                                                  _ F DI
employed in foreign-owned firms in region r and sector s at time t. The other, (Ar,s,t − Ai,r,s,t ),
is a measure of the technological (TFP) advantage of the foreign-owned firms on local domestic
firms. In particular it is measured as the diﬀerence between the TFP of the domestic firm i and
the average TFP of foreign firms in the same region r and sector s for year t. As discussed above,
this term captures the scope for productive catch-up of domestic firms assuming that they have an
adequate absorptive capacity5 and that geographycal proximity enhances spillovers. Notice that if
there are no localized spillovers but only an homogeneous externality on all firms in the sector, the
regional gap variable will have no eﬀect as we control for sector-time dummies.
    Equation (1) is a dynamic version of a very common specification used (e.g. by Aitken and
Harrison, 1999) to analyze the eﬀect of FDI on domestic firms’ productivity. The relevant diﬀerences
are the dynamic setting, more appropriate to detect eﬀects that materialize with a delay and the
inclusion of the term capturing the technological advantage of the foreign-owned firms operating in
region r and sector s6 .
    Several assumptions may justify the presence of this term in equation (1). Domestic firms
may come in contact with other technologies randomly in a learning process. The geographical
proximity of technologies used by foreign firms and their relative quality both influence positively
   5
     For countries with low level of human capital a measure of average local schooling could proxy their absorptive
capacity (see, for example, Keller 1996, Glass and Saggi, 1998, Kinoshita 2001). Germany and Italy guarantee
adequate levels of literacy and we assume equal absorptive capacity across provinces for a given technological gap.
   6
     The theoretical foundation for the dynamic specification can be found in Findlay (1978).




                                                          5
the learning rate of a domestic firm. If we think, for instance, that workers from a domestic firm
exchange ideas randomly with workers of foreign-owned firms then the frequency of the exchanges
is positively aﬀected by geographic proximity (hence the choice of regional focus) while the amount
of knowledge exchanged depends on the technological gap (hence the inclusion of the productivity
gap). This is why highly productive FDI in the same region and sector may aﬀect domestic firm’s
productivity. Alternatively, technology from foreign owned firms may be a local public good.
Then, the localized diﬀusion of technology (Jaﬀe et al. 1993) and higher quality of such technology
(average productivity of FDI’s) result in a localized Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect7 . While it can be
hard to distinguish between specific mechanisms, here we need only identify the overall eﬀect of
the "local productivity gap" and its empirical relevance for productivity growth of domestic firms.
    Considering the productivity advantage of foreign-owned firms as exogenous we can estimate the
above equation using dynamic panel methods (such as those proposed by Arellano and Bond, 1991,
or Blundell and Bond, 1998). The coeﬃcient β 2 captures the strength of the Veblen-Gerschenkron
eﬀect (which is the focus of our study) while the coeﬃcient β 3 measures the importance of FDI
concentration. As we control for lagged productivity, the regression also provides information on the
conditional convergence behavior of firm’s productivities to a common sector-specific growth path.
The condition for convergence (stationarity of the Ai,r,s,t series) is that the coeﬃcient on lagged
productivity (β 1 − β 2 ) is smaller than one. In the empirical analysis we will test for stationariety
of Ai,r,s,t and we will check that the estimates of (β 1 − β 2 ) are significantly less than one. Finally,
                                                                                                 _ F DI
εit is an i.i.d. random shock. For future reference, we will call the variable (Ar,s,t − Ai,r,s,t ) the
"Productivity Gap".
    Equation (1) has several potential advantages relative to the standard approach to FDI spillovers.
First, factors that vary with sector and time are fully absorbed by the definition of Ai,r,s,t that cap-
tures only the productivity diﬀerence of a firm from the sector-time average. Second, regional
factors that aﬀect TFP levels of both domestic and foreign firms do not bias the estimates of β 2
because the "Productivity Gap" variable is expressed in log-diﬀerence and therefore independent
from productivity levels. Third, omitted factors that may attract FDI do not bias the estimate
    7
      An alternative possibility in the case of technology as a local public good is that the relevant productivity gap is
between the domestic firm and the most-productive FDI. Work by Girma and Görg (2004) consider this possibility.
In practice, however, the measure of the most productive FDI, based on one observation only, can be very noisy and
less reliable than average productivity of FDI’s.



                                                            6
of β 2 because we control for F DIdensityr,s,t . The eﬀect of such variables is captured by the co-
eﬃcient β 3 . Lastly, this specification enables us to separate a spillover eﬀect from a competition
eﬀect. According to Barrios et al. (2004) foreign owned firms drive up wages through their labor
demand and this forces domestic firms to reduce their employment which in turn increases their
productivity. Such eﬀect is probably due mostly to the presence of foreign firms (rather than to
their productivity) and therefore captured by β 3 . Moreover we can control for this eﬀect by adding
employment growth of domestic firms which would capture the cutting of ineﬃcient jobs. We do
this in section 5.4.



3     Measuring Total Factor Productivity

In order to estimate equation (1), the TFP of firms needs to be measured. As TFP cannot be
observed but it is always calculated as a "residual" from a production function estimation, diﬀerent
assumptions on production and diﬀerent estimation methods may produce diﬀerent estimates. Here
we take the approach of using several diﬀerent methods to measure Ai,r,s,t and we use each of these
measures to estimate equation (1). In particular, we use one measure of TFP based on a superlative
index and four measures based on production function estimation, two of which are more standard
(OLS and fixed eﬀects) and two of which are concerned with non-standard issues (Levinsohn and
Petrin 2003 and eﬃcient frontier). The robustness of the results obtained using each set of measures
reinforces our confidence in the estimated eﬀect. We present each of these methods in the rest of
this section.


3.1   Total Factor Productivity via Superlative Index Number

We first measure TFP using a superlative index number as derived in Caves, Christensen, and
Diewert (1982). This index assumes a translogarithmic production function, constant returns to
scale in production and uses data on factor cost shares. In particular, we define the TFP of a firm
i relative to the average productivity of sector s at time t, Asup
                                                               i,r,s,t as:


                                                                     _
                                                _           αi,r,s + αs ³            _ ´
                         Asup
                          i,r,s,t = (yi,r,s,t − y s,t ) −                 ki,r,s,t − k s,t       (2)
                                                                  2

    In the expression above yi,r,s,t is the natural logarithm of value added per worker (value of

                                                        7
                                                                                         _
sales net of material cost) for firm i in region r, sector s and year t. y s,t is the average value of
yi,r,s,t for all firms in sector s and year t. αi,r,s is the elasticity of output to physical capital of
firm i. Assuming constant return to scale in production and profit maximization behavior, αi,r,s is
                                                                                                      _
measured by one minus the share of labor costs in value added for firm i. The parameter αs is one
minus the average share of capital costs in sector s. ki,r,s,t is the natural logarithm of capital per
                                                                _
worker in firm i in region r, sector s and year t and k s,t is the average of ki,r,s,t for all firms in sector
s and year t. Subtracting the averages is equivalent to controlling for sector-time specific factors
that aﬀect TFP. Using this method TFP is calculated, not estimated and no standard erros are
produced. Hence, the only two types of errors involved are potential mistakes in the firm balance
sheet data and violations of the theoretical assumptions.


3.2      Total Factor Productivity via Production Function Estimation

As an alternative, it is possible to identify the relative TFP of firms through direct estimation of the
production function. We maintain the assumption of constant return to scale of output to capital
and labor8 . However, rather than relying on cost shares we can directly estimate the elasticity of
value added to capital. We indicate with Aprod                         0
                                          i,r,s,t the measure of firm i s TFP in region r sector s

and year t relative to the sector-year average . In this case, we estimate the following equation:

                                             ³           _ ´
                        yi,r,s,t − y s,t = αs ki,r,s,t − k s,t + β s Fi,r,s,t + Aprod
                                                                                 i,r,s,t + εi,r,s,t       (3)

The coeﬃcient αs captures the elasticity of output to physical capital and it is allowed to vary by
sector, implying diﬀerent technologies across sectors. Fi,r,s,t is a dummy variable equal to one if the
firm is foreign-owned and zero otherwise. Some firms change ownership during the sample period
as they are acquired by multinational corporations, so that Fi,r,s,t for a given firm i may change
over time. The coeﬃcient β s captures the eﬀect on productivity of foreign ownership. Similarly to
the previous method, sector-time fixed eﬀects are taken into account by "netting" the group mean
from each variable.
      The term (Aprod                                                                              prod
                 i,r,s,t + εi,r,s,t ) accounts for the remaining productivity of firm i. The term Ai,r,s,t

is the part of the productivity that evolves over time as a state variable. This part is known to
  8
      One of the robustness checks reported in Table 6 will remove this assumption.



                                                            8
domestic owners and potential (foreign) buyers of the firm. The term εi,r,s,t is an i.i.d. zero mean
deviation of productivity, unknown to the owner of the firm and to potential buyers. Both terms,
however, are unobservable to the econometrician. If Aprod
                                                     i,r,s,t is a constant productivity advantage

(or disadvantage) of firm i it could be captured using a firm fixed eﬀect φi in an otherwise standard
panel estimation of equation (3). However, if the variable Aprod
                                                            i,r,s,t varies over time, as firms can be

purchased with little obstacles by foreign multinationals, the optimal choice of acquisition is likely
to be a function of productivity Aprod                                                      prod
                                  i,r,s,t . This would induce correlation between the term Ai,r,s,t and

Fit , undermining the consistency of least squares estimates of αs and β s even if we include firm
fixed eﬀects.
   The problem of endogenous acquisition of firms is similar to the one of endogenous exit of
firms addressed by Olley and Pakes (1996) and Pavcnik (2001), or the one of endogenous choice
of inputs addressed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003). In our dataset we need to pay particular
attention to endogeneity of acquisitions, which happened frequently in the 90’s. On the other
hand, sluggishness of the European labor market guarantees that the innovations to the variable
kit are likely uncorrelated with the contemporary innovations to Aprod
                                                                  i,r,s,t as it probably takes a firm

at least one year to adjust its capital and the labor inputs.
   Our method, a variation on the procedure proposed by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003), relies on
the fact that the optimal choice of variable inputs of a firm, such as the material inputs used,
mit (for which data are available) depend monotonically on the firm’s productivity Aprod
                                                                                    i,r,s,t and on

its capital per worker kit . Therefore, using the fact that mit = m(Aprod
                                                                     i,r,s,t , ki,r,s,t .) we can invert

the function and express Aprod
                          i,r,s,t as a function A(mit , ki,r,s,t ). Using a polynomial approximation

of A(mit , ki,r,s,t ) we can substitute this function into (3) absorbing all the variation of the term
Aprod
 i,r,s,t in the error and, therefore, eliminating the correlation with Fit . This allows to obtain a

consistent estimate of the parameters β s in the first stage of the estimation. Then in a second
stage, using the assumption that shocks to the productivity variable, Aprod             prod
                                                                       i,r,s,t − Et−1 (Ai,r,s,t ), do not

aﬀect either the current capital/labor ratio, ki,r,s,t , or the past choice of ownership Fit−1 we can
use this moment restriction to implement a GMM consistent estimator of αs . The details of this
method are described in Levinsohn and Petrin (2003).
   The crucial assumption of this approach is that it relies on the contemporary correlation between
use of materials and productivity shocks of a firm to "absorb" from the unobserved term the part

                                                   9
correlated with the variable Fit , hence providing consistent estimates of β s . We then use the
assumption that capital and labor inputs take a period to adjust to productivity shocks (diﬀerently
from material input use that adjusts immediately) in order to get consistent estimates of the
parameter αs .
    A similar method using investments, rather than material inputs, could be used to correct for
the sample selection of firms due to exit, as proposed by Olley and Pakes (1996). Unfortunately
we do not have investment data for the year previous to the one in which a firm exits the dataset.
Partially mitigating this problem, however, we run some probit regressions of the probability that
a firm exits the sample on capital per worker and other firm-characteristics. We do not find any
significant relationship with observable variables. Therefore, rather than drastically reducing the
sample size in order to include a balanced panel of firms, we simply use the whole sample assuming
that the inclusion (or exclusion) in our sample is not correlated with unobserved characteristics
that may aﬀect productivity.
    A final way of estimating total factor productivity relies on eﬃciency frontier estimation tech-
niques. These techniques estimate the distance of a firm’s technology from the production frontier.
Essentially, this amounts to the estimation of:

                                                 ³           _ ´
                            yi,r,s,t − y srt = αs ki,r,s,t − k srt + β s Fit + uit + εit                            (4)


where uit follows a truncated normal distribution on the positive range measuring the technical
ineﬃciency and εit is the usual symmetrically distributed white noise error term.
    The term uit is identified as a firm fixed eﬀect with an industry-specific estimated growth trend:


                                               uit = ui · exp(κs · t),


where ui and κs and their standard errors are estimated by a maximum likelihood method. The
measure of TFP obtained with this method, Afi,r,st
                                              ront
                                                   is defined as Afi,r,s,t
                                                                     ront
                                                                           = uit + εit .9 The advantage
of this estimation method is that it explicitly assumes the existence of a technological frontier
specific to a sector and year and identifies the productivity of firms as their ’relative’ distance from
     9
       While uit alone is the estimated ineﬃciency term, the TFP of a plant should also include the zero-mean deviations
εit . I



                                                          10
this frontier. This is appealing as the local presence of highly productive FDI’s can be considered as
a factor that helps a firm to catch-up to the technological frontier reducing its relative ineﬃciency.



4    The Data

We have gathered and organized two novel datasets containing balance sheets, accounting and
ownership information for a large sample of manufacturing firms in Italy and Germany. The
database of Italian firms is an unbalanced panel of about two hundred thousand observations over
the time period 1992-1999. The number of firms increases over time and reaches about 40 thousand
units in 1999. This database includes, in principle, the whole universe of Italian manufacturing
firms. However, early in the sample, small firms are underrepresented, revealing that the coverage
of data collection has broadened over time. We exclude year 1992 and 1993 from the analysis as
missing data seem too large a fraction of the universe.
    The database of German firms covers a 2% sample of German manufacturing firms and about
16% of German manufacturing employment. It is therefore, much smaller than the Italian database
and concentrates on large firms. The data consists of an unbalanced panel of about 800 manufac-
turing firms per year over the time period 1993-1999. We checked, however, that the dataset is
representative in the regional and time dimension (more in the Appendix).
    Both datasets have firms as a unit of observation and balance sheets are the source of data.
This implies that the productive activity is assigned to the headquarters and not to the actual
location of plants. In our case, the problem is largely mitigated, because we use unconsolidated
balance sheet information both for Italy and Germany. This implies that only plants that are not
independent legal entities are mis-classified regionally. As these plants are usually small relative to
the headquarters and we are interested in total factor productivity (rather than volume of activity),
the resulting error will be small.
    We maintain the econometric analysis for the Italian and German sample separate, because
of diﬀerences in industry codes, regional size and other definitions of variables between the two
datasets. Also, the German data capture a particularly interesting period, as the formerly isolated
East Germany was suddenly exposed to Western technology and FDI penetration. In contrast Italy
did not experience any major shock in the nineties but we can consider the decade as characterized


                                                  11
by slow-growth and slow convergence in regional productivity. As the data are new we describe
each dataset and present summary statistics in the rest of this section10 .


4.1      Italian Firms

Our database of Italian firms, obtained with the assistance of the Centro Studi Luca d’Agliano11 ,
merges the AIDA database of Bureau van Dijk (which contains balance sheet information) and the
multinational firm database Reprint of Politecnico di Milano (which contains ownership informa-
tion). The observations on firms’ balance sheets include data on the number of employees, on wage
cost, on the values of sales, on the value of materials used as intermediates, on fixed assets of the
company, on the industrial sector, its location and its name. The industry code contains 23 man-
ufacturing sectors. Our definition of region, for Italy, is the so-called "Provincia", a rather small
administrative unit containing one main city. There are 103 of them in Italy and they correspond
to the "NUTS3" aggregation level in the Eurostat territorial classification.
      The summary statistics of the main variables for three representative years within our sample
(1994, 1996 and 1998) are reported in Table1a. We define the universe of foreign-owned firms as
those firms with a strictly positive fraction of voting rights held by foreigners. Typically the share
of voting rights held by foreigners will be large enough to exercise control of the firm. In 1998
total employment in foreign firms was 402,704 employees. The large increase in the number of firms
covered by the database from 1994 to 1998 and the decrease in their average size (for domestic
firms) is due to the fact that an increasing number of smaller firms is included over time. We
eliminated from the data those observations that contain outliers in the levels and growth rates of
the firm variables. The appendix describes the selection procedure carefully.
      Foreign-owned firms tend to have higher value added per worker, to be more capital intensive
and pay larger wages than domestic firms. On average, therefore, foreign-owned firms have higher
labor productivity than domestic ones and may be the source of the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect for
Italian firms. We should keep in mind, however, that the summary statistics presented in Table 1a
conceal large diﬀerences across sectors and localities. Foreign-owned firms are concentrated mostly
in large urban areas in the north-west of the country (mostly Milano, Torino and Genova) and
 10
      Further details on the construction of the variables are contained in the Appendix.
 11
      We are grateful to Giorgio Barba Navaretti for making this data available to us.



                                                          12
around Rome. They are present, however in smaller concentration in most of the provinces. This
uneven distribution of FDI is illustrated in Figure 1. The Figure captures with diﬀerent shades of
grey the diﬀerent percentages of employed workers in foreign-owned firms across provinces. Darker
colors correspond to higher FDI concentration. The map also shows the boundaries of provinces.


4.2      German Firms

Our database of German firms, obtained by retrieving past and current data releases by Bureau van
Dijk, is a subset taken from the database Amadeus 200,000 containing only large manufacturing
firms with more than 200 employees or more than 10 Million Deutsche Marks Assets or more than
10 Million Deutsche Marks Sales. The dataset of German firms contains the same variables as
the Italian one, i.e. employment, wage costs, sales, fixed assets, material costs and information
on the location, sector and ownership of the firm. For Germany, given the smaller number of
firms included in the sample (about 800), we are forced to use a fairly broad regional aggregation,
i.e. the 16 Bundesländer12 to have a suﬃcient number of domestic and foreign-owned firms in
each region. Given the large size of firms included in the German dataset we believe that it is
appropriate to consider larger regions as potential receivers of spillovers, because large firms are
likely to hire workers and have interactions in a larger "basin of attraction" than smaller firms.
Twenty manufacturing sectors (defined according to the U.S. SIC code) are included. Three sectors
are excluded because of small-sample concerns. We investigate in the Appendix how representative
these data are using aggregate data of Statistisches Bundesamt (2000) and Deutsche Bundesbank
(2001) as comparison. Consistently with the definition used for Italy, we define as foreign-owned all
firms which reported some foreign ownership of their voting shares13 . We define also Western-owned
firms in East Germany as multinational firms14 . Companies of Treuhandanstalt, the privatization
agency of the German government, are considered local firms.
       Table 1b shows the summary statistics for the German dataset. Notice the larger size of domestic
and foreign-owned firms and their higher productivity and capital intensity relative to Italian firms.
Even in this case labor productivity and wages are significantly higher in foreign-owned firms than in
  12
     The Bundesländer correspond to the NUTS1 classification of EUROSTAT.
  13
     Relevant for ownership is the reported ultimate owner. Only if no information is available on the ultimate owner,
the direct ownership determines the nationality of a firm.
  14
     Criscuolo and Martin (2002) show that UK-owned multinationals in the UK have the same productivity advantage
over UK firms with no plants abroad as foreign-owned multinationals.


                                                         13
domestic ones confirming the idea that the last group enjoys technological advantage over domestic
firms.
         We construct the variable F DIdensityr,t as the share of total workers employed by foreign-
owned firms in Lander r . Data on FDI employment were obtained from Deutsche Bundesbank
(2001)      15   and total employment is obtained from Statistisches Bundesamt (2000)16 .
         Similarly to Italy, the majority of foreign-owned firms is located in large metropolitan areas.
Figure 2 illustrates the density of foreign-owned firms across Bundesländer using darker colors for
higher densities. The density of FDI is highest in the Bundesländer containing Berlin, the political
center, Frankfurt, the financial center, and Hamburg, the major German port. While hosting most
of the foreign firms these regions are not necessarily those receiving the largest benefits from them
because the technological lead of FDI over domestic firms can be smaller than in less developed
regions.



5         Estimation Results

5.1        Replicating Standard Spillover Regressions

In this section, we replicate a basic regression used by Aitken and Harrison (1999), among others,
in order to investigate into spillovers from FDI. Table 2 reports the results from a regression of
firm-level output on firm-level inputs (Labor, Capital and Materials) and on F DIdensityr,s,t . The
regression includes only domestic firms and assumes a log linear production function. We report
the estimates of the elasticity of output to the three inputs as well as the eﬀect of FDI density in
three specifications for each country. The first three specifications (I-III) are estimated on Italian
data while specifications IV to VI are estimated on German data.
         Column I and IV include the mentioned explanatory variables plus sector and time fixed eﬀects.
Such regressions yields a significant coeﬃcient on the F DIdensity variable.17 This result is quali-
tatively and quantitatively similar to those obtained in studies of other countries. F DIdensity has
    15
     We thank Heinz Herrmann of Deutsche Bundesbank for providing these unpublished data.
    16
     There are some incompatibilities between Amadeus, the data of Deutsche Bundesbank (2001) and the data of
Statistisches Bundesamt (2000) such as the definition of sectors, the definition of FDI and the reporting obligations
by firm size.
  17
     We use heteroscedasticity robust standard errors rather than clustered standard errors despite the Moulton
problem caused by the FDI density variable to keep results comparable with the previous literature.




                                                         14
a positive and significant coeﬃcient on the domestic firm’s TFP.
   Column II and V replace the sector fixed eﬀects with firm fixed eﬀects and this renders the
coeﬃcient of F DIdensity insignificant. This is exactly what Aitken and Harrison (1999) found in
a similar specification using their data on Venezuelan firms (see their Table 2, specification 3 and
4). Next, Aitken and Harrison (1999) show that regional control variables such as average regional
wage-costs (that proxies for human capital, unobserved diﬀerences of labor quality or other location
factors) also render the density variable insignificant. We replicate their result in columns III and
VI by including average regional wages. We also run a regression that includes regional fixed eﬀects
(not reported in the table). Also in this case the FDI density variable has no significant eﬀect on
productivity of domestic firms. Finally, we allow elasticities to vary by sector and we include all
firms in our regression (domestic and foreign-owned) controlling for ownership. The estimates of
the eﬀect of FDI on productivity in those specifications (not reported in the table and available
upon request) are very similar to those presented in Table 2 and not significant.
   Summing up, the FDI density variable is positively correlated with domestic firms’ productivity
growth at the regional level, but after controlling for regional characteristics such correlation
disappears. Regional factors that are responsible for growth may also be responsible for the presence
of FDI inducing a spurious correlation. This does not mean, however, that no spillovers from FDI
exist. Instead, the FDI density variable may not be a good proxy for the intensity of technological
spillovers in the first place. We explore in the remaining of this section the role of productivity
advantage of FDI in spurring productivity growth of domestic firms.


5.2   Comparing Total Factor Productivity Measures

We estimate total factor productivity of a firm, Ai,r,s,t , using the five methods presented in section
3. The first method, called "Superlative Index", implements equation (2). We use data on the
share of wage costs relative to value added, in each firm and on average, to calculate the elasticity
of value added to labor (and to capital). This method has the advantage of by-passing any issue of
endogeneity of inputs and ownership as it is not estimation-based. The following four methods are
estimation-based, instead. In particular, we implement regression (3) using simple OLS estimation
(once data are cleaned of their time-sector component), or controlling for firm fixed eﬀects or
accounting for endogeneity of ownership using the Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) method. Finally,

                                                  15
the last columns of Table 3a and 3b report the estimates obtained using the eﬃciency frontier
estimation and allowing for "firm-specific" ineﬃciencies.
   We report the estimated elasticities of value added to capital, by industry (parameters αs
of expression 2 and 3) for Italy (Table 3a) and Germany (Table 3b) using each method. The
index-based measures of αs , reported in the first column of Table 3a and 3b, vary by sector and
cluster around 0.4-0.5. They seem somewhat large, relative to the previously estimated elasticities
(Pavcnick 2002, Levinsohn and Petrin, 2003) which, for several manufacturing sectors are in the
range 0.10 -0.20. The estimation-based elasticities, reported in column 2, 3, 4 and 5 of Table 3a
and 3b are much closer to this range.
   In spite of some variation depending on the method used, the coeﬃcients obtained using diﬀerent
estimation methods seem rather robust and precisely estimated. As an example, elasticity of output
to capital in the Food Sector for Italy range between 0.22 and 0.26. The base estimate for the same
sector in the U.S. reported by Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) is 0.24. For textiles our estimates range
between 0.12 and 0.15 and theirs is 0.18 and for wood products our estimates range between 0.15
and 0.19 and theirs is 0.19.
   The standard errors on these estimates range between 0.01 and 0.03. They are asymptotically
heteroscedasticity consistent for the OLS and the Fixed-eﬀect method, while in the Levinsohn
and Petrin (2003) and eﬃcient frontier estimation we report the bootstrapped standard errors.
On average parameters are more precisely estimated in the Italian case as we have many more
observations. In particular, the standard errors of the estimates using the Levinsohn and Petrin
(2003) method could be very large in the German sample. However, except for few cases, the
parameters for German sectors are also reasonable and close to the range estimated for Italian
firms.
   In spite of the variation in the estimates of factor elasticity, the five methods produce TFP
estimates that are remarkably similar to each other. Table 4 reports the correlation across firms
and time of these five measures for Italian and German data. The TFP values obtained using the
three estimation methods (OLS, FE, Levinsohn and Petrin and eﬃcient frontier) have extremely
high correlation with each other, in the range 0.98-0.99. However the index-based values are also
highly correlated to the other measures exhibiting a correlation coeﬃcient of 0.7-0.8. This reassures
us in the interpretation of each of these measures as a proxy of actual productivity of a firm.

                                                 16
5.3      Evidence on the Veblen-Gerschenkron Eﬀect

In this section we estimate specification (1) to capture spillover eﬀects. We use the Blundell and
Bond (1998) one-step system GMM estimator which improves eﬃciency upon the Arellano and
Bond (1991) GMM diﬀerence estimator (especially in panels with short time dimension) by using
past levels as well as time diﬀerences to instrument the lagged level of firm TFP. This method
provides consistent estimates (as opposed to OLS or fixed eﬀects that produce biased estimates
in panels due to the correlation between the lagged dependent variable and the error term). The
GMM estimates on Italian data are based on a restricted set of instruments, while the German
estimates employ all dependent variables, lags and lagged diﬀerences of the dependent variable as
instruments. The dynamic panel estimations include firm random eﬀects.
       The results of the dynamic panel estimation are reported in Table 5a for Italy and in Table 5b
for Germany. Each column of each table uses a measure of productivity obtained from one of the
five diﬀerent methods described above. The reported standard errors are heteroscedasticity and
autocorrelation consistent. Still, the GMM-estimator assumes no autocorrelation of second order
or higher. A second order AR-test (AR2) investigates this assumption. Finally, the validity (exo-
geneity) of instruments is tested using a heteroscedasticity consistent Hansen-J test. In principle,
the Blundell-Bond estimator is still consistent, when the data are non-stationary, but Binder et al.
(2003) show that the small sample properties become unfavorable. Therefore, we apply a simple
test suggested by Bond et al. (2002) to test for unit roots in our data. We are able to reject the
null hypothesis of non-stationarity for each of the variables included in our regressions (the tests
statistics are reported in the Appendix). Moreover, all the auxiliary AR2-tests cannot reject the
assumption of no autocorrelation of order two at the 5% level and no Hansen-J test rejects the
assumption of exogeneity of instruments at the 5% confidence level in both tables. Therefore, exo-
geneity of lagged diﬀerences and of instruments cannot be rejected.18 The coeﬃcients of interest are
                                                 _ F DI
those on the "Productivity-Gap" variable (Ar,s,t−1 − Ai,r,s,t−1 ) and on the density of multinationals
in the regional industry, (F DI densityrst ).
       The first result emerging consistently from our estimates is that the "Productivity-Gap" variable
has always a positive and significant eﬀect on productivity growth of domestic firms. This is true
  18
    One caveat remains: The Hansen-J test is extremely sensitive to small changes in specifications and to inclu-
sion/exclusion of variables.



                                                          17
both for Italian and German firms and for each measure of productivity. Since the coeﬃcient β 2
of equation (1) is positive and significant, the productivity gap between local multinationals and
the domestic firms acts as a growth-promoting factor, revealing a positive Veblen-Gerschenkron
eﬀect. Such positive eﬀect does not stem from general convergence of firms’ productivity, because
we control for lagged productivity. The positive eﬀect of local catch-up due to the presence of
highly productive foreign firms is estimated above and beyond that mechanism. Moreover, by
construction, the variable Ai,r,s,t is cleaned of any time-sector fixed eﬀects so that the correlation
between productivity gap and domestic firm growth cannot be due to a sector-specific business
cycle eﬀect, or FDI concentrations in some specific sectors.
   Quantitatively, the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect is of comparable size for German and Italian
firms. A 10% productivity gap between a domestic firm and the local multinational firms translates
into 4-6% larger productivity after one year for the average domestic firm. This is a very large eﬀect.
Given the similarity of the estimates between the Italian and the German case, we tend to believe
that the coeﬃcients capture a similar mechanisms at work in the two countries. In spite of the
similarity of the coeﬃcient estimates, German firms probably received larger benefits from FDI
(through this channel) because of the larger initial productivity gap of the eastern domestic firms
and therefore faster catch-up.
   The second result emerging from our estimates is that the density of foreign-owned firms in the
sector-region has generally not a significant eﬀect on productivity growth of domestic firms in most
of the specifications of Tables 5a and 5b. When the eﬀect is significant, however, it is positive.
As argued above this may reflect the fact that the FDI density is largest in urban areas which are
centers of economic activity, where the productivity of domestic firms is already high and hence
less aﬀected by technological spillovers. Instead, in less developed regions the larger productivity
gap with foreign-owned firms is the main cause of technological catch-up even if the density of FDI
is not too large.
   Finally, we tested that (β 1 − β 2 )<1 which ensures conditional convergence of firm’s productivity
to a common sector-year growth path. This restriction is never rejected at any standard confidence
level. Our estimates, therefore, can be interpreted as follows: while some technological factors
specific to sectors determine a common rate of productivity growth, firms that are located in the
same region as highly productive FDI, tend to converge to higher relative productivity levels as they

                                                  18
benefit from technological transfer. To the contrary the concentration of foreign firms in the sector-
region seems to have only a smaller and insignificant eﬀect on relative productivity of domestic
firms. This is consistent with local technological spillovers that depend on the "technological gap"
between FDI and domestic firms, rather than on the density of the last ones. As found above, FDI
can be concentrated in advanced regions, where there is not much scope for technological learning,
while fewer highly productive foreign companies have a strong impact on less developed regions.


5.4   Robustness of the Veblen-Gerschenkron Eﬀect

We performed several robustness checks of our results. Our main goal is to confirm that the
Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect on local firms’ productivity growth remains positive and significant
to changes in the specifications and to the inclusion of control variables. We summarize these
robustness checks in Table 6 by reporting only the estimates and the standard errors for the
coeﬃcient of the "Productivity Gap" that has been the focus of our analysis. We report only the
specifications using the TFP measures based on the superlative index (Sup. Ind.) and on the
firm fixed eﬀect production function estimation (FE), because all the "estimation-based" methods
(OLS, FE, Levinson and Petrin and Frontier) produced very similar results. Columns one and two
of Table 6 report the coeﬃcients estimates using Italian data, columns three and four report the
estimates using German data.
   Specification (1) reports the basic estimates, taken from column one and two of Tables 5a (for
Italy) and 5b (for Germany). Specification (2) omits the variable that captures the density of
employment in foreign-owned firms in the regional sector. It is clear from the reported results
that including that variable or excluding it does not make any diﬀerence. This is true also when
we use other estimation methods (such as Arellano and Bond, in specification (3) and (4)). The
productivity-gap variable seems the only important determinant of spillovers from FDI’s. Specifica-
tion (3) checks the robustness of the results to the estimation method. Often these dynamic panel
methods, based on GMM estimation, are very sensitive to the choice of instruments. The Arellano
and Bond estimator uses past values of the productivity level as instruments for the current changes
of productivity. The point estimates of the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect increase somewhat using
this method, however, the diﬀerence is less than two standard deviations from the eﬀects estimated
using the Blundell and Bond method except for column one where the diﬀerence is somewhat larger.

                                                 19
         More interestingly, in specification (5) we include in the regression the change in firm’s employ-
ment as a control variable to check whether the positive catch-up eﬀect of local firms to multina-
tional productivity was simply achieved by trimming ineﬃciently employed workers (i.e. through
a decrease in employment). While productivity growth has a significant negative association with
employment growth, revealing in equilibrium the potential eﬀects of workers’ selections on produc-
tivity growth, the Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect is still positive and significant, and not much reduced.
For German firms the coeﬃcient estimates are between 0.3 and 0.55 (std. errors 0.06-0.09) while
for Italian firms they are in the range 0.4-0.6 (std. errors 0.02). In this case, the Hansen J-test
of exogeneity of instruments could not always reject endogeneity of the predetermined variables at
the standard levels of significance. While auxiliary tests may occasionally fail, this hardly aﬀects
the magnitude or significance level of the estimated coeﬃcients19 . As the point estimates are very
stable and those tests very sensitive, we regard the overall evidence as favorable to the existence of
strong Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀects.
         Finally, in specification (6) we performed a more demanding robustness check by re-estimating
the TFP measures (in the OLS, FE and Levinsohn and Petrin Method) without imposing constant
returns to scale in the firm’s production function. For the superlative Index method we need
to assume constant returns to scale (CRS) in order to identify the TFP so we cannot perform
this check. The estimates of the elasticity of output to capital (not reported) obtained without
imposing CRS are often quite diﬀerent from before. Remarkably, however, the TFP measures are
highly correlated to those previously estimated and the estimates of the magnitude of the Veblen-
Gerschenkron eﬀect are closely aligned with what we found earlier. Namely, for Italy we obtain
coeﬃcients in the range 0.4-0.6 (table 6 reports only the coeﬃcient based on FE-TFP which is equal
to 0.49) and for Germany in the range 0.3-0.6 (again in Table 6 only the one based on FE-TFP is
reported and it is equal to 0.57) .



6         Conclusion

Technological catch-up is a powerful force behind the development of countries and regions and it
is likely to be an important cause of convergence in income per capita across OECD countries. FDI
    19
    Using German data no auxiliary test ever failed. Only using Italian data we encountered occasional problems of
rejection.


                                                       20
are channels of diﬀusion of technological knowledge. It seems natural, therefore, to inquire whether
the impact of FDI on productivity of local firms works through a catching-up mechanisms that
depends on geographical proximity and on the technological gap. Interestingly, this has not been
done yet. Our article uses two novel datasets of Italian and German firms to test this hypothesis.
Rather than the trite specification in which the presence of FDI’s has an eﬀect on local productivity,
we test the more articulate hypothesis that technological advantage of foreign firms, coupled with
proximity in location and similarity in specialization, helps local firms to grow faster. Technological
advantage of foreign-owned firms is better captured by the average productivity advantage of FDI
in a sector-region rather than by their concentration. Our empirical test confirms this theory. As
our story is based on productivity catch-up and TFP growth we implement in the paper several
diﬀerent methods to measure firms TFP, each with some advantages and limits. This is also
a relatively original contribution and, in our case, it establishes that index-based measures of
firm-level productivity are highly correlated with estimation based measures. In particular, the
simple cost-based superlative index or a simple Fixed Eﬀect estimation of the production function
produce, for our purposes, similar results than the more sophisticated methods that account for
firm heterogeneity or for endogeneity of foreign ownership.




                                                  21
7     Tables and Figures

Table 1a: Summary Statistics for Italian              Manufacturing Firms
    Ownership:                   Foreign                            Domestic
    Year:                        1994                 1996   1998   1994   1996                 1998
    Value Added per Employee     123.69               128.67 128.61 106.08 110.41               101.88
    Fixed Assets per Employee    99.91                85.18  96.85  77.34  74.39                73.91
    Material Inputs per Employee 314.46               323.77 334.24 305.37 295.65               280.84
    Average Wage Cost/ Employee 71.48                 69.77  70.82  56.66  57.85                56.43
    Number of Employees per firm 256                  332    356    72     62                   54
    Number of firms              354                  898    832    9858   30469                36738




    Source: AIDA dataset, merged with Politecnico di Milano data. Values are in Millions of 1999 Italian Lire. The
dataset has been purged from outliers and from firms exhibiting unusual changes in capital and employment from
one year to the other.



    Table 1b: Summary Statistics for German Manufacturing Firms

     Ownership:                                       Foreign                        Domestic
     Year:                                  1994      1996        1998      1994      1996       1998
     Value Added per Employee               279.52    248.86     296.43     196.65    214.95     239.21
     Fixed Assets per Employee              133.36    149.66     160.18     151.37    181.50     204.76
     Material Inputs per Employee           397.39    392.51     458.43     240.98    275.20     330.39
     Average Wage Cost/ Employee            91.46      97.50     103.70      82.15    89.23      95.93
     Number of Employees per firm            1646      1414       1311       1769      1406       1331
     Number of firms                          203       226        212        653      574        556


    Source: Amadeus Dataset. Values are in thousands of 1999 Deutsche Marks. The dataset has been purged from
outliers and from firms exhibiting unusual changes in capital and employment from one year to the other.




                                                       22
Table 2: Standard Spillover Regressions for Italy and Germany

 Country                                  Italy                                 Germany
 Specification              OLS          Firm        Regional        OLS           Firm    Regional
                                           FE        Control                        FE     Control
                              (I)         (II)          (III)         (IV)         (V)       (VI)
                            0.21**       0.21**        0.21**        0.29**       0.25**    0.29**
 ln(Li,t )
                           (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.009)      (0.027)   (0.009)
                            0.03**       0.03**        0.03**        0.07**      0.02**     0.07**
 ln(Ki,t )
                           (0.000)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.005)       (0.01)   (0.005)
                            0.75**       0.75**        0.74**        0.62**       0.62**    0.61**
 ln(Mi,t )
                           (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.009)      (0.030)   (0.009)
                            0.03∗∗      −0.002        −0.004         0.03∗∗       −0.06     0.0006
 F DIdensity s,r,t
                           (0.003)      (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.008)       (0.03)    (0.01)
  Average                                             0.002**                              0.002**
                              -             -                          -           -
  Regional Wage                                      (0.0001)                               (0.001)
 Sector Fixed Eﬀects        Yes           No             Yes         Yes           No         Yes
 Time Fixed Eﬀect           Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
 Region Fixed Eﬀects         No           No             No           No           No         No
 Firm Fixed Eﬀects           No          Yes             No           No          Yes         No
 No.Obs.                   162023       162023        161692         3702         3702       3623
 R2                         0.98         0.98           0.98         0.97         0.99       0.97

Dependent Variable:   ln(Yit ), natural logarithm of sales of domestic firms.
**=significant at the 5% level, *= significant at the 10% level.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors in parentheses




                                                      23
    Table 3a: Production Function Parameters Estimates for Italy by Sector

     Estimation                       Superlative       OLS              Firm      Levinsohn-    Eﬀ.
     Method:                             Index                      Fixed Eﬀect    -Petrin       Frontier
                                      coef .s.e.     coef    s.e.   coef    s.e.   coef s.e.     coef s.e.
     Sector (ATECO definitions)
     Food and Kindred Products        0.47 .    0    0.22    0.05   0.25   0.01    0.26   0.04   0.22   0.01
     Tobacco                          n.a .    n.a   n.a.    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.
     Textile                          0.42 .    0    0.12    0.01   0.15   0.01    0.15   0.01   0.13   0.00
     Apparel                          0.40 .    0    0.17    0.01   0.21   0.02    0.21   0.01   0.18   0.01
     Leather and Shoes                0.38 .    0    0.17    0.01   0.19   0.02    0.16   0.02   0.18   0.01
     Lumber and Wood Products         0.41 .    0    0.19    0.02   0.15   0.01    0.19   0.03   0.16   0.01
     Paper Products                   0.44 .    0    0.19    0.01   0.16   0.02    0.22   0.02   0.17   0.01
     Printing-Publishing              0.38 .    0    0.08    0.01   0.17   0.02    0.15   0.02   0.13   0.01
     Oil Refineries                   0.53 .    0    0.21    0.01   0.16   0.03    0.25   0.06   0.18   0.02
     Chemical                         0.47 .    0    0.10    0.01   0.17   0.01    0.23   0.03   0.13   0.01
     Plastics                         0.43 .    0    0.17    0.01   0.19   0.02    0.18   0.01   0.18   0.01
     Stone, Clay, Glass, Cement       0.40 .    0    0.16    0.01   0.20   0.01    0.19   0.01   0.17   0.01
     Primary Metals                   0.43 .    0    0.17    0.01   0.13   0.02    0.11   0.02   0.15   0.01
     Fabricated Metals                0.38 .    0    0.14    0.01   0.18   0.01    0.15   0.01   0.16   0.00
     Mechanical Machinery             0.37 .    0    0.11    0.01   0.15   0.01    0.07   0.02   0.13   0.00
     Computers                        0.37 .    0    0.06    0.02   0.17   0.03    0.05   0.06   0.11   0.02
     Electric Machinery               0.38 .    0    0.13    0.01   0.15   0.01    0.09   0.04   0.14   0.01
     Communication Equipment          0.39 .    0    0.09    0.01   0.19   0.02    0.17   0.03   0.13   0.01
     Precision Equipment              0.38 .    0    0.11    0.01   0.17   0.01    0.19   0.04   0.13   0.01
     Auto                             0.38 .    0    0.20    0.01   0.13   0.01    0.14   0.04   0.16   0.01
     Other Transportation             0.38 .    0    0.14    0.01   0.16   0.02    0.16   0.05   0.14   0.01
     Furnitures                       0.38 .    0    0.12    0.01   0.20   0.02    0.20   0.02   0.15   0.00
     Repair and Recycling             0.46 .    0    0.27    0.02   0.20   0.04    0.23   0.05   0.18   0.02



    The estimated coeﬃcient in each column is the elasticity of value added to the stock of physical capital, assuming
constant returns to scale in the production function.
    First Column: Superlative index numbers, see main text for calculations. Standard error is zero, because the
value is calculated, not estimated.
    Second and Third Column: OLS and fixed firm eﬀects estimates of the log-linear production function. Standard
errors are hetheroskedasticity consistent.
    Fourth Column: Levinsohn-Petrin Estimates, described in detail in the main text. Standard errors are boot-
strapped.
    Fifth Column: Eﬃcient Frontier estimates. Std errors are bootstrapped.




                                                            24
    Table 3b: Production Function Parameter Estimates for Germany by Sector

     Estimation                              Superlative           OLS               Firm      Levinsohn-    Eﬀ.
     Method:                                    Index                           Fixed Eﬀect    -Petrin       Frontier
     Parameter                               coef .s.e.     coef         s.e.   coef    s.e.   coef .s.e.    coef s.e.
     Sector (SIC definitions)
     Food and Kindred Products               0.68 . 0           0.28   0.03     0.18   0.03    0.20   0.14   0.21   0.02
     Tobacco                                 n.a. . n.a.        n.a.   n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.
     Textile                                 0.45 . 0           0.12   0.04     0.05   0.04    0.07   0.07   0.09   0.03
     Apparel                                 0.62 . 0           0.20   0.05     0.11   0.14    0.30   0.17   0.06   0.05
     Lumber and Wood Products                0.45 . 0           0.20   0.04     0.16   0.05    0.38   0.13   0.18   0.03
     Furnitures and Fixtures                 0.46 . 0           0.07   0.10     0.09   0.12    0.08   0.15   0.10   0.08
     Paper products                          0.54 . 0           0.23   0.03     0.20   0.10    0.02   0.09   0.22   0.04
     Priniting and Publishing                0.56 . 0           0.26   0.09     0.06   0.12    0.04   0.17   0.04   0.04
     Chemicals                               0.58 . 0           0.21   0.06     0.01   0.08    0.19   0.16   0.20   0.10
     Petroleum Refining                      0.73 . 0           0.04   0.02     0.16   0.03    0.09   0.07   0.11   0.01
     Rubber and Plastics                     0.46 . 0           0.24   0.04     0.52   0.11    0.19   0.20   0.23   0.08
     Stone, Clay, Glass, Concrete             0.5 . 0           0.31   0.02     0.31   0.04    0.23   0.01   0.16   0.04
     Primary Metals                          0.43 . 0           0.20   0.04     0.13   0.05    0.27   0.09   0.29   0.03
     Fabricated Metals                       0.39 . 0           0.32   0.01     0.22   0.05    0.22   0.07   0.15   0.02
     Industrial Machinery and Computer       0.42 . 0           0.20   0.01     0.18   0.03    0.16   0.08   0.11   0.04
     Electric Machinery                      0.43 . 0           0.15   0.04     0.14   0.05    0.07   0.11   0.19   0.02
     Transportation equipment                0.40 . 0           0.28   0.03     0.28   0.14    0.08   0.15   0.12   0.05
     Precision Instruments                   0.41 . 0           0.19   0.01     0.18   0.03    0.20   0.04   0.21   0.04
     Miscellaneous Manufacturing             n.a. . n.a         n.a.   n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.
     Leather products                        n.a. . n.a.        n.a.   n.a.     n.a.   n.a.    n.a.   n.a.   n.a.   n.a.



    The estimated coeﬃcient in each column is the elasticity of value added to the stock of physical capital, assuming
constant returns to scale in the production function.
    First Column: Superlative index numbers, see main text for calculations. Standard error is zero, because the
value is calculated, not estimated.
    Second and Third Column: OLS and fixed firm eﬀects estimates of the log-linear production function. Standard
errors are hetheroskedasticity consistent.
    Fourth Column: Levinsohn-Petrin Estimates, described in detail in the main text. Standard errors are boot-
strapped.
    Fifth Column: Eﬃcient Frontier estimates. Std. errors are bootstrapped.




                                                           25
    Table 4: Correlation between diﬀerent TFP Measures

                         ITALIAN FIRMS
                         Sup. Index Lev.Pet.    FE       OLS     Eﬀ.Front.
      Sup.Index          1
      Lev.Pet.           0.841      1
      FE                 0.859      0.998       1
      OLS                0.799      0.994       0.991    1
      Eﬀ.Front.          0.821      0.997       0.996    0.999   1
                         GERMAN FIRMS
                         Sup. Index Lev.Pet.    FE       OLS     Eﬀ.Front.
      Sup.Index          1
      Lev.Pet.           0.708      1
      FE                 0.713      0.976       1
      OLS                0.723      0.981       0.974    1
      Eﬀ.Front.          0.716      0.984       0.987    0.993   1


    The measures of firm-level TFP are calculated in diﬀerences from the sector-period. Each method is described
in detail in the text.




                                                        26
    Table 5a
    Dynamic Panel Estimation, Italy

     Productivity                 Superlative            Firm     OLS      Levinsohn       Eﬀ.
     Measures                       -Index       Fixed Eﬀect Estimates -Petrin             Frontier
     Specification                                  Blundell-Bond Estimator
                                     0.97**         0.58**       0.53**      0.56**          0.54**
     Ai,s,r,t
                                      (0.04)         (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)          (0.03)
                                     0.65**         0.44**       0.42**      0.43**          0.43**
     Productivity Gap
                                      (0.02)        (0.02)        (0.02)      (0.02)          (0.02)
                                        0.06          -0.02        -0.02       -0.02           -0.02
     (F DI density)r,s,t
                                     (0.03)         (0.03)       (0.03)      (0.03)          (0.03)
     Sector/year-Eﬀects                Yes            Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
     Number of Observations          32462          36057        36057       36057         36057
     AR(1) − T est                  -27.47**       -29.02**     -27.98**    -28.51**       -28.36**
     AR(2) − T est                     1.17           0.76         0.33        0.51        0.48
      Hansen − J − T est               1.82           6.05         6.53        6.48           6.34
          (p − value)                (0.61)         (0.11)       (0.09)      (0.09)         (0.10)

    Dependent variable is   Ai,s,r,t+1 , the TFP of firm i in region r and sector s for year t + 1, calculated according
to several diﬀerent methods.
    Ai,s,r,t :TFP of firm i in region r and sector s for year t, calculated according to several diﬀerent methods.
    Productivity Gap: diﬀerence in productivity between the average productivity of a foreign-owned firm in region
r and sector s in year t and domestic firm i at time t. Strict exogeneity assumed.
    (F DI density)r,s,t : Share of workers employed by foreign-owned firms in region r and sector s in year t.
Strict exogeneity assumed.
    AR(2) − T est: Test statistic for the restriction that two-period lagged productivity levels are exogenous
instruments for current changes in productivity
    Hansen − J − T est : Test of exogeneity of the predetermined and instrumental variables.
    **= Significant at the 1% level; * significant at the 5% level
    Errors in parenthesis are clustered by firms.




                                                           27
    Table 5b
    Dynamic Panel Estimation, Germany


     Productivity                 Superlative           Firm      OLS      Levinsohn       Eﬀ.
     Measures                       -Index       Fixed Eﬀect Estimates -Petrin             Frontier
     Specification                                  Blundell-Bond Estimator
                                    0.94**          0.99**       1.08**      1.03**          1.05**
     Ai,s,r,t
                                     (0.11)         (0.13)       (0.14)      (0.18)           (0.13)
                                    0.34**          0.59**       0.67**      0.64**          0.65**
     Productivity Gap
                                     (0.06)         (0.10)       (0.11)      (0.11)           (0.11)
                                       0.23           0.48         0.46       0.68*            0.44
     (F DI density)r,s,t
                                     (0.24)         (0.33)       (0.30)      (0.30)          (0.31)
     Sector/year-Eﬀects               Yes             Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes
     Number of Observations           1236           1285         1291        1225         1291
     AR(1) − T est                  -4.80**        -3.15**      -2.99**     -4.01**        -3.01**
     AR(2) − T est                    0.69           0.10         -0.11       0.95         -0.11
      Hansen − J − T est             20.06          11.40        11.41        7.51           11.44
          (p − value)                (0.39)         (0.91)       (0.91)      (0.99)         (0.91)

    Dependent variable is   Ai,s,r,t+1 , the TFP of firm i in region r and sector s for year t + 1, calculated according
to several diﬀerent methods.
    Ai,s,r,t :TFP of firm i in region r and sector s for year t, calculated according to several diﬀerent methods.
    Productivity Gap: diﬀerence in productivity between the average productivity of a foreign-owned firm in region
r and sector s in year t and domestic firm i at time t. Strict exogeneity assumed.
    (F DI density)r,s,t : Share of workers employed by foreign-owned firms in region r and sector s in year t.
Strict exogeneity assumed.
    AR(2) − T est: Test statistic for the restriction that two-period lagged productivity levels are exogenous
instruments for current changes in productivity
    Hansen − J − T est : Test of exogeneity of the predetermined and instrumental variables.
    **= Significant at the 1% level; * significant at the 5% level
    Errors in parenthesis are clustered by firms.




                                                           28
    Table 6
    Estimates of the Veblen-Gerschenkron Eﬀect, Robustness Checks.

     Country                                           Italy                   Germany
     Method to calculate the TFP:             Sup. Ind.          FE     Sup. Ind.      FE
                                               0.65**          0.44**    0.34**      0.59**
     (1) Basic Blundell-Bond
                                                (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.06)     (0.10)
                                               0.65**          0.44**    0.35**     0.64∗∗∗
     (2) Omitting FDIdensity
                                                (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.07)     (0.10)
                                               0.85**          0.44∗∗    0.41**      0.72∗∗
     (3) Arellano-Bond
                                                (0.09)         (0.06)     (0.13)     (0.18)
                                               0.85**          0.45∗∗    0.41**     0.70∗∗∗
     (4) Arellano-Bond omitting FDIdens
                                                (0.09)         (0.06)     (0.13)     (0.18)
                                               0.63**          0.42∗∗    0.32**      0.55**
     (5) Controlling for Empl. Growth
                                                (0.02)         (0.02)     (0.06)     (0.09)
                                                               0.49**                0.57**
     (6) Not imposing CRS in production          n.a.                      n.a.
                                                               (0.02)                (0.10)

    Std. error in parentheses. *=significant at the 5% level, **= =significant at the 1% level.
    The table reports only the estimated coeﬃcient on the variable "Productivity Gap". Each cell corresponds to
the result of a diﬀerent regression.
    Specification (1): Basic specification using the Blundell-Bond eﬃcient estimator. The estimates are those reported
in the first and second column of Table 5a (for Italy) and 5b (for Germany).
    Specification (2): Basic specification without including the variable FDIdensity
    Specification (3): Estimates performed using the original Arellano and Bond estimator
   Specification (4): Estimates performed using the original Arellano and Bond estimator, not including the variable
FDIdensity
    Specification (5): Basic specification using the Blundell-Bond eﬃcient estimator and including employment
growth as explanatory variable at the firm level. Employment variable assumed pre-determined (not strictly ex-
ogenous).
    Specification (6): The TFP estimates in the first stage of the econometric procedure have been obtained without
imposing constant returns to scale (in capital and labor) of the production function.




                                                         29
                          Figure 1
C oncentration ofFD I relative to D om estic Firm s,Italy 1998




N ote: The m ap show s the concentration of FD I calculated as share of
w orkers em ployed in foreign-ow ned firm s in a Province in year 1998. The
shades of gray (darker shades denotes higher concentration) are five and
intervals are spaced so that regions are equally distributed am ong them
(roughly tw enty provinces perinterval).
D ata Source: ReprintofPolitecnico diM ilano.




                                30
                              Figure 2
 C oncentration ofFD I relative to D om estic Firm s,G erm any 1998




                             Schlesw ig-H olstein


                                                 M ecklenburg-Vorpom m ern
                                    H am burg

                         B rem en

                             N iedersachsen
                                                                  B erlin

                                                                  B randenburg

                                                Sachsen-A nhalt

     N ordrhein-W estfalen

                                                                  Sachsen
                                              Thüringen
                          H essen




      R heinland-Pfalz

     Saarland


                                                    B ayern

                  B aden-W ürttem berg




N ote: The m ap show s the concentration of FD I calculated as share of
w orkers em ployed in foreign-ow ned firm s in a Bundesländer in year 1998.
The shades ofgray (darkercolordenotes higherconcentration)are three and
intervals are spaced so that Landers are equally distributed am ong them
(roughly five Landers perinterval).
D ata Source:U npublished D ata ofD eutsche Bundesbank.




                                                    31
A       Appendix: Data Description

A.1       Italian firms

Firm data are from the database AIDA of Bureau van Dijk and are matched with ownership infor-
mation from the FDI database of Politecnico Milano. Only manufacturing firms are included with
information on a two-digit industry code (ATECO), the province name of the firm headquarter,
and a dummy for foreign ownership participation. Ownership information is collected biannually
and assumed to be persistent in a year previous to a reporting year. Whenever available, un-
consolidated balance sheet data are used to avoid as much as possible multi-plant firms, which
may have production in regions other than the one where the headquarter is located. In general,
Bureau van Dijk does not apply any exclusion criteria. However, very small enterprises appear
under-represented. Moreover, the database is growing over time. While in the initial years only
large firms are sampled, there is no systematic pattern recognizable according to which sampling
strategy the database is enlarged until it reaches full size.
      To control for outliers and to keep the database homogenous, we exclude a number of observa-
tions according to the following criteria:
      1) Observations for which capital stocks or sales data were reported as 0 were excluded; obser-
vations for which material costs were larger than sales were excluded; observations for which gross
operating profits (sales minus material cost minus wage costs) are larger than 80% of sales value or
smaller than -80% were excluded. Firms with less than 500 000 Lira per employee fixed assets and
more than 3 Billion Lira per employee were excluded. These exclusion criteria eliminate outliers.
      2) All observations with value added divided by sales smaller than 10% were excluded. These
firms are considered sales firms that are missclassified by Bureau van Dijk as production units.
      3) All observations with growth rates of employment, fixed assets per employee, material, and
average wage cost per employee20 of more than 400% or less than minus 80 % per year were excluded;
These criteria ensure that the structure of a firm does not change largely due to re-organization,
re-grouping, or takeovers and firm sales within holding companies;
      4) All firms with less than 5 employees were excluded. These firms are too small to be considered
manufacturing firms.
 20
      The wage cost exclusion criterium applies only to superlative index based estimations.



                                                          32
       5) For superlative index based estimations observations with a labor cost share in value added
of more than 0.99 or less than 0.01, and average wage costs per employee (and year) of less than
10 Mill. Lira and more than 500 Billion Lira were also excluded. Some average wage cost data
may be flawed, since there may be a mismatch between the date of reporting of employees and the
period over which wage costs are added. Also, restructuring of firms during the reporting period
may be a cause for outliers.
       Finally, part-time work is not appropriately counted. Reassuringly, however, while the "clean-
ing" of the data reduces the sample by about 20% (from 209,934 to 166,550 observations) our
coeﬃcient estimates are not sensitive to the exclusion criteria.
       We checked representativeness, using ISTAT census for 1996 and 1991. Unfortunately, the
industry codes of the census and of our firm database are incompatible so that we can only compare
the regional dimension. In 1996 our firm database covers 56 % of manufacturing emplyment and
its distribution across provinces calculated using our firm database or ISTAT census data is very
similar (correlation of 0.93).


A.2       German firms

Firm level data are from the Amadeus 200,000 database of Bureau van Dijk. This database is
updated in real time on-line. We took data in March 2001. Bureau van Dijk eliminates all obser-
vations which are older than 5 years. We completed the dataset by using an old CD-ROM from
1999.21 The firm matching between the two datafiles is incomplete, because the firm identification
code changed slightly in some cases. We have made a case by case evaluation if in doubt. We have
also run consistency checks on location information and adjusted 43 observations. All firms without
ownership information in the dataset are considered local owners. This is common practise for the
database. Ownership information is available but not in every year. We assume that ownership
status is persistent in the years previous to reporting and only changes at the year of reporting.
Foreign owned firms are firms with reported voting rights accruing to at least one ultimate foreign
owner. This typically implies a substantial (but not necessarily a majority) share of voting right
in foreign hands. For East German firms Western owners are considered as foreigners. Companies
  21
   We thank Bocconi library for providing us with these data and Bureau van Dijk, oﬃce Milan, for giving us special
permission for the use of these data.



                                                        33
of Treuhandanstalt - the East German privatization agency - are considered domestically owned.
Unconsolidated balance sheet data are used.
      The same exclusion criteria that was applied to the Italian data were also applied for the
German data.22 We exclude, however, all firms with less than 20 employees (rather than 5). As the
Amadeus database excludes small firms, those with less than 20 employees are most likely holding
companies with large assets and no production workers. Even for Germany the coeﬃcient estimates
are not sensitive to changes in the exclusion criteria. Reported industry codes are US-SIC codes.
We include only manufacturing firms with US-SIC codes 20-39. All observations without US-SIC
code are eliminated. In addition, we exclude for the dynamic panel estimations all sectors with
less than 35 observations (SIC21, SIC31, SIC39) to have a reliable sector-specific estimate of the
capital share used in TFP calculation.
      We also investigated, in greater detail, the representativeness of our German database. Tables
and statistics relative to the comparison of our data with Bundesbank data are available from Peri
and Urban (2002). Here it is enough to note that the number of sampled firms in our database is
rather stable over years (around 900 firms sampled each year), reducing the problem of attrition.
Also, while some sectors are over-represented (such as chemicals) due to the larger average size of
their firms, the covarage of our database is close to be representative at the regional level.



B       Appendix: Panel Unit-Root Tests

Coeﬃcient estimates in panels with a short and fixed time dimension using the Arellano-Bond
method are inconsistent if data have a unit-root, while the Blundell-Bond estimator would have
poor small-sample properties (see Binder et al., 2003) with non-stationary data. For this reason
we perform a test of unit-root on each measure of productivity and on other variables used in the
empirical analysis. Bond et al. (2002) suggest to use the t-statistic from a simple OLS estimator
with clustered standard errors. As the estimate is consistent under the null-hypothesis of a unit
root but inconsistent under the alternative hypothesis of a stationary time series the t-statistic is
distributed as a normal under the null. Based on Monte Carlo evidence this test seems to perform
well even in the case of a short time dimension. Using this test we can reject the null hypothesis
 22
      Nominal values of exclusion criteria are translated with an implicit exchange rate of 1 DEM equal to 1000 Lira.



                                                          34
of unit roots for all variables used in our study. The values of the test statistics for each variable
and each dataset are reported in the Table A.1 below.


    Table A1
     Unit Root Tests

     Country                                Italy                                     Germany
     Variable Name         Test-Statistic   Marginal Probability     Test-Statistic    Marginal Probability
     Asup
      it                        7.76                0.00               68.11.11                 0.00
     AF
      it
         E
                                9.00                0.00                 86.71                  0.00
     AOLS
      it                        9.07                0.00                 88.56                  0.00
     ALP
      it                        9.03                0.00                 87.15                  0.00
     AFit
          ront
                                8.88                0.00                 87.16                  0.00
     _ F DI
     Ars,t−1 − Asup
                i,t−1           7.06                0.00                 52.83                  0.00
     _ F DI
     Ars,t−1 −   AF E
                  i,t−1         9.64                0.00                 74.52                  0.00
     _ F DI
     Ars,t−1 − AOLS
                i,t−1           9.16                0.00                 75.41                  0.00
     _ F DI
     Ars,t−1 −   ALP
                  i,t−1         9.32                0.00                 74.88                  0.00
     _ F DI
     Ars,t−1 −   AF ront
                  i,t−1         9.38                0.00                 68.91                  0.00
     F DIdensityrst             7.37                0.00                 41.36                  0.00
     4employmentit             20.93                0.00                146.07                  0.00

    Remarks: test is based on a cluster regression of      xit = βxit−1 + εit . The OLS estimate β OLS is consistent
under the null hypothesis β   = 1. The test statistic is simply (1−β OLS )/seOLS , where seOLS is the firm-clustered
standard error of   β OLS . This test-stastistic has an asymptotic standard normal distribution. Marginal probability
is the probability under which the Ho cannot be rejected.




                                                             35
References

Aitken B. and A. Harrison, 1999, Do domestic firms benefit from direct foreign investment? Evi-
   dence from Venezuela, American Economic Review, Vol. 89, Issue 3, 605-18.

Arellano, M. and S. Bond, 1991, Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence
   and an application to employment equations, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 58, 277-297.

Audretsch D. and M. Feldman, 1996, R&D spillovers and the geography of innovation and produc-
   tion, American Economic Review, Vol. 86, Issue 3, 630-640.

Barrios, S., H. Görg and E. Strobl, 2004, Foreign direct investment, competition and industrial
   development in the host country, European Economic Review, In Press.

Binder, M.,C. Hsiao, and M.H. Pesaran, 2003, Estimation and inference in short panel vector
   autoregressions with unit roots and cointegration, University of Cambridge DAE Working Paper
   No.0003.

Blomstrom M., S. Globerman, and A. Kokko, 2001, The Determinants of Host Country Spillovers
   from Foreign Direct Investment: A Review and Synthesis of the Literature, in: Pain, Nigel ed.
   "Inward investment, technological change and growth: The impact of multinational corporations
   on the UK economy" Houndmills, U.K.-New York.

Blomström, M. and A. Kokko,1998, Multinational corporations and spillovers, Journal of Economic
   Surveys, Vol. 12, Issue 3, 247-277.

Blundell, Richard, and Stephen R. Bond, 1998, Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dy-
   namic panel data models, Journal of Econometrics, Vol. 87, 115-143.

Bond, S., C. Nauges, and F. Windmeijer, 2002, Unit roots and identification in autoregressive
   panel data models: A comparison of alternative tests, Mimeograph, Institute for Fiscal Studies,
   London, March 2002.

Branstetter, L., 2001, Are knowledge spillovers international or intranational in scope? Micro-
   econometric evidence from Japan and the United States, Journal of International Economics,
   Vol. 53, 53-79.




                                               36
Cassiman, B., and R. Veugelers, 2002, R&D cooperation and spillovers: Some empirical evidence
   from Belgium, American Economic Review, Vol. 92, 1169-84.

Castellani, D., and A. Zanfei, 2003, Technology gaps, absorptive capacity and the impact of inward
   investments on productivity of European firms, Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
   Vol. 12, Issue 6, 555-576.

Caves R.E., 1974, Multinational firms, competition and productivity in host-country industries,
   Economica, Vol. 41, 176-93.

Caves, D.W., L.R. Christensen, and W.E. Diewert 1982, Multilateral comparisons of output, input
   and productivity using superlative index numbers, The Economic Journal, Vol. 92, 73-86.

Criscuolo, C., and R. Martin, 2002, Multinationals, foreign ownership and productivity in UK
   businesses, Mimeograph, London School of Economics.

Das, S.,1987, Externalities, and technology transfer through multinational corporations, Journal of
   International Economics, Vol. 22, 171-182.

Deutsche Bundesbank, 2001, Kapitalverflechtung mit dem Ausland, Statistische Sonderveröf-
   fentlichung 10.

Findlay R., 1978, Relative backwardness, direct foreign investment, and the transfer of technology:
   A simple dynamic model, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 92, Issue 1, 1-16.

Fosfuri, A., M. Motta and T. Rønde, 2001, Foreign direct investment and spillovers through workers’
   mobility, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 53, 205-222.

Gerschenkron A.,1952, Economic backwardness in historical perspective, in "The progress of un-
   derdeveloped areas", B.F. Hoselitz edition, University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL.

Glass, A.J., and K. Saggi, 1998, International technology transfer and the technology gap, Journal
   of Development Economics, Vol. 55, 369-398.

Glass, A.J. and K. Saggi, , 2002, Multinational firms and technology transfer, Scandinavian Journal
   of Economics, Vol. 104, Issue 4, 495-513.

Görg, H. and E. Strobl, 2001, Multinational companies and productivity spillovers: A meta-analysis,
   Economic Journal, Vol. 111, 723-39.


                                                37
Girma S, and H. Görg, 2004, Outsourcing, foreign ownership and productivity: Evidence from UK
   establishment data, Review of international Economics, forthcoming 2004.

Haddad, M. and A. Harrison, 1993, Are there positive spillovers from direct foreign investment?
   Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 42, 51-74.

Jaﬀe A., M. Trajtenberg and R. Henderson, 1993, Geographic localization of knowledge spillovers
   as evidenced by patent citations, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, Issue 3, 577-98

Keller, W., 1996, Absorptive capacity: On the creation and acquisition of technology in develop-
   ment, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 49, 199-227.

Keller, W., 2000, From socialist showcase to Mezzogiorno? Lessons on the role of technical change
   from East Germany’s post-World war II growth performance, Journal of Development Eco-
   nomics, Vol. 63, 485-514.

Kinoshita, Y., 2001, R&D and technology spillovers through FDI: Innovation and Absorptive Ca-
   pacity, CEPR Discussion Paper, No. 2775 (London).

Kokko A., 1994, Technology, market characteristics, and spillovers, Journal of Development Eco-
   nomics, Vol. 43, 279-293.

Levinsohn, J. and A. Petrin, 2003, Estimating production functions using Inputs to control for
   unobservables, Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 70, 317-341.

Markusen J and A. Venables, 1999, Foreign direct investment as a catalyst to industrial develop-
   ment, European Economic Review, Vol. 43, 335-356.

Olley S. and A. Pakes, 1996, The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunication equipment
   industry, Econometrica Vol. 64, Issue 6, 1263-97.

Pavcnik N., 2002, Trade liberalization, exit and productivity improvements; evidence from Chilean
   plants, Review of Economic Studies, Vol 69, 245-76.

Peri G., 2004, Determinants of knowledge flows and their eﬀect on innovation, Review of Economics
   and Statistics, forthcoming 2004.

Peri G. and D. Urban, 2002, The Veblen-Gerschenkron eﬀect of FDI in Mezzogiorno and East
   Germany, Working Paper # 164, Centro Studi Luca d’Agliano.


                                               38
Rodriguez-Clare A., 1993, Multinationals, linkages and economic development, American Eco-
   nomic Review, Vol. 86, issue 4, 852-873.

Shannon, Dale P., and William J. Zeile, 1999. Regional patterns in the location of foreign-owned
   U.S. manufacturing establishments. Survey of Current Business, May, 8-25.

Sjöholm F., 1999, Technology gap, competition and spillovers from direct foreign investment: Evi-
   dence from establishment data, Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 36, Issue 1, 53-73.

Stirböck, Claudia, 2001. Agglomeration tendencies on EU regions: where does capital go? ZEW,
   Discussion paper no. 01-28.

Statistisches Bundesamt, 2000, Statistik regional, CD-ROM.

Veblen T., 1915, Imperial Germany and the industrial revolution, London, Macmillan.

Wang, J.-Y. and M. Blomström,1992, Foreign investment and technology transfer, European Eco-
   nomic Review, Vol. 36, 137-155.




                                               39
