                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      BIASES IN STATIC OLIGOPOLY MODELS?
               EVIDENCE FROM THE CALIFORNIA ELECTRICITY MARKET

                                           Dae-Wook Kim
                                         Christopher R. Knittel

                                         Working Paper 10895
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10895


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




We thank Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell, Erin Mansur, Steve Puller, Victor Stango and Catherine
Wolfram for helpful comments. We also thank Severin Borenstein, Jim Bushnell and Frank Wolak for
providing us with their marginal cost data. Kim gratefully acknowledges support from the California Energy
Commission, while Knittel gratefully acknowledges support from the University of California Energy Insti-
tute. The views expressed herein are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Dae-Wook Kim and Christopher R. Knittel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Biases in Static Oligopoly Models? Evidence from the California Electricity Market
Dae-Wook Kim and Christopher R. Knittel
NBER Working Paper No. 10895
November 2004
JEL No. L1, L5, L9

                                           ABSTRACT

Estimating market power is often complicated by the lack of reliable measures of marginal cost.

Instead, policy-makers often rely on other summary statistics of the market, thought to be correlated

with price cost margins---such as concentration ratios or the HHI. In many industries, these summary

statistics may be only weakly correlated with deviations from perfectly competitive pricing.

Beginning with Gollop and Roberts (1979), a number of empirical studies have allowed the data to

identify industry competition and marginal cost levels by estimating the firms' first order condition

within a conjectural variations framework. Despite the prevalence of such "New Empirical Industrial

Organization" (NEIO) studies, Corts (1999) illustrates the estimated mark-up levels may be biased,

since the estimated conjectural variations model forces the supply relationship to be a ray through

the marginal cost intercept, whereas this need not be true in dynamic games. In this paper, we use

direct measures of marginal cost for the California electricity market to measure the extent to which

estimated mark-ups and marginal costs are biased. Our results suggest that the NEIO technique

poorly estimates the level of mark-ups and the sensitivity of marginal cost to cost shifters.

Dae-Wook Kim
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
daekim@ucdavis.edu

Christopher R. Knittel
University of California at Davis
Department of Economics
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
crknittel@ucdavis.edu
1         Introduction
Estimating market power is often complicated by the lack of reliable measures of marginal
cost. Instead, policy-makers often rely on summary statistics of the market, thought to
be correlated with price cost margins–such as concentration ratios or the HHI. In many
industries, these summary statistics may be only weakly correlated with deviations from
perfectly competitive pricing. Borenstein, Bushnell and Knittel (1999) show that these
measures may actually be negatively correlated with market power levels in restructured
electricity markets.
        Beginning with Gollop and Roberts (1979), “New Empirical Industrial Organization”
(NEIO) studies have estimated price-cost margins by estimating the Þrms’ Þrst order con-
dition within a conjectural variations framework. Marginal costs are treated as a function
of observable cost shifters and a set of unknown parameters. By observing ßuctuations in
demand over time (or cross-sectionally), marginal costs are identiÞed through the Þrms’ Þrst
order conditions, which relate prices to marginal costs, the “conduct parameter” and the
elasticity of demand. The use of these models has been extensive.1 Despite the prevalence
of such studies, Corts (1999) illustrates the estimated conduct parameter may be biased,
since the estimated conduct parameter forces the supply relationship to be a ray through
the marginal cost intercept, whereas this need not be true in dynamic games. Because pol-
icy can often hinge on these estimates, it is important to understand the extent of this bias,
and, if possible, its direction. For example, perceived market power in California’s electricity
industry prompted a number of policy changes and lawsuits; many antitrust actions are also
based on the level of market power in an industry.
        In this paper, we take advantage of unique data that allow us to quantify the degree of
error inherent in the NEIO estimates. We analyze the NEIO methods using a number of
metrics. First, we use direct measures of marginal cost to calculate price-cost margins and
compare these to the estimates derived from the NEIO technique. Second, we calculate the
hourly estimates of marginal cost and compare them to actual marginal cost levels. Third,
we compare the sensitivity of the estimated marginal cost to cost shifters with the sensitivity
of actual marginal cost to the same set of cost shifters. To test the robustness of these results,
    1
        See, for example, Brander and Zhang (1990), Applebaum (1983), Porter (1983), Roberts (1984), Spiller
and Favaro (1984), Gelfand and Spiller (1987), Brander and Zhang (1993), Ellison (1994), Berg and Kim
(1994) and Graddy (1995), Nebesky, McMullen, Lee (1995), Kadiyali (1996), Kadiyali (1999), Kadiyali,
Vilcassim, Chintagunta (1999), Raper, Love and Shumway (2000).


                                                       2
we estimate a number of functional forms of both demand and marginal costs. In addition,
we extend Corts’ analytical results to show the conditions in which the NEIO estimate is
unbiased in a dynamic setting.
   Our empirical setting is the restructured California electricity market. Concerns regard-
ing market power levels in restructured electricity markets are especially high, as many
industry observers argue prices have far exceeded marginal costs. Fortunately, as a result
of the long history of regulation and the relative transparency of the production technology,
detailed cost data for electricity markets are currently available. These data have been used
to calculate the level of market power, measured as Lerner and elasticity-adjusted Lerner in-
dexes, in the UK and California markets. Wolfram (1999) compares UK wholesale electricity
prices with marginal costs. Her results suggest the average elasticity-adjusted Lerner index
is small. Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002) and Joskow and Kahn (2001) estimate
hourly marginal cost for the California market and compare these estimates to wholesale
prices. They Þnd that in certain time periods prices substantially exceeded marginal cost.
   While reliable marginal cost data for the electricity industry are currently available, this
is unlikely to continue for a number of reasons. Entrants into these markets–independent
power producers–do not face the same data regulations as the traditional investor owned
utilities. In addition, there is evidence that existing Þrms are lobbying policy-makers to make
cost data unavailable to the public. The absence of reliable data in the future increases the
importance of evaluating methods that infer price-cost margins without cost data while
the data are currently available. We estimate market power and marginal costs under the
assumption that Þrm-level data are unavailable; we employ only data that are likely to be
available in the future: market level prices, quantities and demand and cost shifters. As
such our focus is not on individual Þrm conduct, but instead on the ability to estimate
the eﬃciency of the market as a whole without detailed cost data. Our results suggest
that the NEIO technique does a poor job of estimating market power levels, although this
is functional form dependent. Furthermore the NEIO estimates of marginal cost do not
measure the sensitivity of marginal cost to cost shifters well.
   Absent the “Corts’ critique,” the interpretation of the conduct parameter has also been
controversial. Taking the conjectural variation model literally, the parameter represents a
Þrm’s beliefs regarding how its competitors will react if the Þrm changes its quantity. Un-
fortunately, the theoretical literature has shown that the behavioral parameter represents a
consistent equilibrium only under very speciÞc information assumptions. (Lindh [1992]) If


                                              3
one eschews the CV model as a model of conduct and instead views the “conduct parame-
ter” as simply a summary of the market’s competitiveness, the estimated conduct parameter
measures the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index–this is referred to as the “as-if” conduct pa-
rameter. The focus of this paper is not whether the estimated conduct parameter accurately
reßects the Þrms’ beliefs, but whether the estimated conduct parameter accurately reßects
the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index of the industry.
    Our work adds to a small body of recent work examining the accuracy of NEIO techniques.
Genesove and Mullin (1998) use data from the sugar industry during the late 19th and early
20th centuries; the transparency of sugar’s cost technology and its heavy reliance on the
price of sugar cane allow them to accurately estimate marginal costs. Their results are
listed in Table 1. They Þnd that the direct measure of the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index
falls outside the 95 percent conÞdence interval of the NEIO estimate, and that the NEIO
estimate understates margins; however, in economic terms, the diﬀerence is not large. The
NEIO technique estimates the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index to be .038, when its actual
value is .107. In a recent paper, Clay and Troesken (2003) replicate Genesove and Mullin
for the whiskey industry during the late nineteenth century. They also Þnd that the actual
elasticity-adjusted Lerner index falls outside of the 95 percent conÞdence interval of the
NEIO estimate. Unlike Genesove and Mullin, they Þnd that the NEIO technique over-states
mark-ups for each of the estimated function forms. Another related paper is Wolfram (1999)
which studies the deregulated UK electricity market. Wolfram Þnds that the NEIO technique
provides a noisy estimate of market power; neither perfect competition nor equality to the
actual level of mark-ups can be rejected.
    The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 discusses the empirical framework. The em-
pirical setting and data are discussed in Section 3. Section 4 discusses the results, while
section 5 investigates the robustness of the results. Section 6 concludes the paper and oﬀers
directions for future research.


2     Empirical Framework
We begin by characterizing market i’s equilibrium price within a conjectural variations model:


                     P (Qi , Xi ; β 1 ) + θQi P 0 (Qi , Xi ; β 1 ) = C 0 (Qi , Zi ; β 2 )   (1)




                                                      4
where P (Qi , Xi ; β 1 ) is the market inverse demand function, C 0 (Qi , Zi ; β 2 ) is the market
marginal cost function, Qi is the market level quantity, Xi is a vector of variables that aﬀect
demand, Zi is a vector of variables that aﬀect costs and β 1 and β 2 are vectors of unknown
parameters associated with demand and costs, respectively.
   The parameter θ is an estimate of the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index. To see this, we
can solve for θ:

                                          Pi − M Ci
                                        θ=          η                               (2)
                                              Pi
   IdentiÞcation of θ relies on variation in demand across time or across markets. The
model nests joint proÞt maximization (θ = 1), perfect competition (θ = 0) and the Cournot
equilibrium (θ = 1/N).
   The typical empirical implementation of the NEIO technique uses data on industry level
prices, quantities and demand and cost determinants. Depending on the functional form,
equation (1) can be isolated for P as a function of some measure of the responsiveness of
demand and marginal cost shifters. For example, if demand is linear, then equation (1)
becomes:
                                         MCi        θ ai
                                     Pi =       +                                        (3)
                                         1 + θ 1 + θ bi
where ai is the demand intercept and bi is the slope. Demand can either be estimated jointly
with the supply equation or estimated separately, yielding observations on ab . Marginal costs
are often expressed as a function of cost determinants and an error term is assumed to
account for unobservables, yielding:

                                             γ     θ ai
                                 Pi = Zi        +         + εi .                              (4)
                                           1 + θ 1 + θ bi

2.1    Corts’ Critique
The relevance of equation (1) has been questioned on two fronts. For one, because the pricing
rule is the result of a conjectural variations model, it need not represent a Nash equilibrium.
A number of authors have defended the method on this front, however. The basis of the
defense is that the conjectural variations model is only proxying for a dynamic model, and
the Folk theorem tells us that a range of conducts are Nash equilibria in a dynamic game.
Therefore, the parameter estimate from the NEIO technique should be viewed as only a



                                                 5
measure of the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index and can be thought of as the static-equivalent
measure of an industry’s competitiveness–an “as-if” estimate of market power.
   More damning to the supporters of NEIO technique is Corts (1999). Corts illustrates that
the conduct parameter estimated from equation (1) can be biased even if the econometrician
views θ as an “as-if” estimate of behavior. The intuition is simple. The pricing rule in
equation (1) is the solution to the Þrms’ static Þrst order conditions. If Þrms are competing
in a dynamic setting, then the Þrms’ Þrst order conditions may also depend on the incentive
compatibility constraints associated with collusion–that no one Þrm has an incentive to
deviate. If the incentive compatibility constraints are a function of demand shocks, then the
estimated θ may be biased.
   More formally, consider a static model, the as-if conduct parameter is deÞned as the
elasticity-adjusted Lerner index:


                                      P − C0
                               θ =             η                                                       (5)
                                         P
                                        P − C 0 ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )
                                    = −          /
                                           Q           ∂Q
                                             1      (P − C 0 ) Q
                                    = − ∂P (Q,X;β )           /
                                                  1    X        X
                                               ∂Q

   Corts illustrates that the NEIO technique identiÞes θ by “observing” variation in P, Q and
                                                                            ∂(P −C 0 ) ∂Q
X. In particular, Corts illustrates that the fundamental variation is         ∂X
                                                                                      / ∂X .   SpeciÞcally,
Corts shows that:

                                           1      ∂ (P − Ci0 ) ∂Q
                               θ̂ = − ∂P (Q,X;β )             /                                        (6)
                                               1      ∂X        ∂X
                                          ∂Q
                                               ∂P (Q,X;β 1 )
where θ̂, is the NEIO estimate of θ and            ∂Q
                                                               is treated as “data” obtained from a
Þrst-stage regression. The conduct parameter is identiÞed since the econometrician observes
                    ³               ´                       ¡ ∂Q ¢
                      ∂P (Q,X;β 1 )
how prices change         ∂X
                                      and quantities change   ∂X
                                                                   when X changes; the additional
                0
parameters ( ∂C
             ∂X
                and θ̂) are identiÞed through the equality restriction.
   The econometrician observes how the price cost margin varies with changes in X; whereas
she is interested in the level of the price cost margin. It is possible, for example in a dynamic
game, that two industries exhibit the same variation in P − C 0 from a change in X despite
having vastly diﬀerent levels of P −C 0 . Comparing equations (5) and (6), for θ̂ to be unbiased,
we require:

                                                    6
                              ∂ (P − C 0 ) ∂Q    (P − C 0 ) Q
                                          /    =           /                                           (7)
                                  ∂X        ∂X      X        X
Nevertheless, we have the following proposition:
   Proposition 1: In a static setting, the NEIO estimator, θ̂, is an unbiased estimator of
the as-if parameter, θ̃.(Corts [1999])
   Proof. Solving the as-if parameter for (P − Ci0 ) and diﬀerentiating with respect to X
            ∂P (Q,Xi ;β 1 )
(treating        ∂q
                              as Þxed), the as-if parameter is given as:


                                 ∂ (P − C 0 )       ∂P (Q, X; β 1 ) ∂Q
                                              = −θ̃                                                    (8)
                                     ∂X                  ∂Q         ∂X
                                                       1      ∂ (P − C 0 ) ∂Q
                                     ⇒ θ̃ =     − ∂P (Q,X;β )             /
                                                           1      ∂X        ∂X
                                                              ∂Q

Comparing this to equation (6), we see that this is the NEIO estimator. QED.
   If Þrms are competing in a dynamic game, this condition may not hold. The static Þrst
order condition will diﬀer from the dynamic Þrst order condition because in a dynamic game
the Þrms’ Þrst order conditions have an additional term reßecting the incentive compatibility
constraint associated with collusion; furthermore, this incentive compatibility constraint
may be a function of demand shocks. Denoting this term as I (·) , the Þrst order condition
becomes:

                                       ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )
                               P +θ                    Q − C 0 (Q, Z; β 2 ) − I (·) = 0                (9)
                                           ∂Q
   Proposition 2: In a dynamic setting, the NEIO estimator, θ̂, is an unbiased estimator
                       ∂I(·) ∂q         I(·) q
of θ̃ provided if           /
                        ∂X ∂X
                                   =     X X
                                            /    = 0.
                                                            ∂(P −C ) ∂Q                 0
                                                    1
   Proof. The NEIO estimator continues to be − ∂P (Q,X;β 1)   ∂X
                                                                    / ∂X ; however from the
                                                                            ∂q
dynamic Þrst order condition, we have:

                                 1      ∂ (P − C 0 ) ∂Q                           1      ∂I (·) ∂Q
                     θ̂ = − ∂P (Q,X;β )             /    =θ+                ∂P (Q,X;β 1 ) ∂X
                                                                                               /      (10)
                                     1      ∂X        ∂X                                         ∂X
                                   ∂Q                                             ∂Q

   In contrast, the as-if estimator is actually an estimate of:

                                                             1          I (·) Q
                                            θ̃ = θ +    ∂P (Q,X;β 1 )
                                                                             /                        (11)
                                                                         X X
                                                            ∂Q

   These are equal if:


                                                             7
                                         ∂I (·) ∂Q   I (·) Q
                                               /   =      /                                           (12)
                                          ∂X ∂X       X X
   QED.
   This proposition implies that the NEIO estimator will be unbiased if the marginal change
in the incentive compatibility constraint equals the average. This is similar to the condition
for the static case where the marginal change in the price cost margin must equal the average
in the price cost margin. Corts discusses one such case–if the discount factor is small enough
such that Þrms are colluding at the monopoly price. To see this is true, if Þrms are colluding
at the monopoly price then we have:

                               ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )
                                P+             Q − C 0 (Q, Z; β 2 ) = 0                   (13)
                                   ∂Q
   If we equate this to the dynamic Þrst order condition in the conjectural variations frame-
work, we have


                ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )             ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )
            θ                   Q − I (·) =                 Q                                         (14)
                    ∂Q                            ∂Q
                                                      ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )    ∂P (Q, X; β 1 )
                                          ⇒ I (·) = θ                 Q−                 Q
                                                           ∂Q                ∂Q
                                                 ∂P (Q,X;β 1 )               ∂I(·) ∂Q       I(·) Q
From this we can see that (again treating            ∂Q
                                                                 as Þxed),        /
                                                                              ∂X ∂X
                                                                                        =    X X
                                                                                                / .
   In contrast, if the incentive compatibility constraint is binding then an increase in X
increases the incentive to cheat. For example, consider the Rotemberg and Saloner (1986)
model of collusion. Each period the demand intercept is drawn from a distribution that is iid
across time. Firms observe the demand shock (X) and set prices so as to meet the incentive
compatibility constraint. Consider the case where the incentive compatibility constraint
binds for the expected level of X. If X is larger than E [X], prices will fall since the beneÞts
from cheating have increased, while the present value of punishment from cheating is not
aﬀected. Therefore, the NEIO estimate of θ will be biased downward since the data suggest
       ∂(P −C 0 ) ∂Q
that     ∂X
                 / ∂X   is negative during some periods.
   In contrast, if Þrms are suﬃciently patient such that the incentive compatibility constraint
never binds, then the NEIO proposition 2 shows that the NEIO estimate will be unbiased.




                                                    8
3         Empirical Setting

3.1         Institutional Detail
The restructured wholesale California electricity market began operation in April of 1998.
Prior to 2001, wholesale electricity was primarily traded in two separate markets. The now
defunct Power Exchange (PX) organized a day-ahead market and was one of many “Schedul-
ing Coordinators” (SCs). The PX had an advantage over other SCs because California’s three
IOUs; PaciÞc Gas and Electric, Southern California Edison and San Diego Gas and Electric
were initially required to trade through the PX. Electricity that was not traded through a
scheduling coordinator, was traded through the Independent System Operator (ISO), which
operated an “imbalance market” designed to instantaneously equate supply and demand.
        For system reliability reasons, it was envisioned that the vast majority of energy would
be traded in the PX market; only unforeseen shocks to supply or demand would be traded
in the ISO.2 The transparency of trading the bulk of electricity in the day prior to delivery
allowed market organizers suﬃcient time to plan the use of the state’s transmission grid.
        The PX worked as follows: At 7am each morning, suppliers and demanders submitted
hourly schedules of bids for the following day (beginning at 12am), constituting individual
supply and demand bids for each hour of the day. The PX aggregated these bids into one
hourly supply bid and one hourly demand bid. The intersection of these bids determined the
“unconstrained” PX price for each hour of the day. The PX then submitted its “preferred”
prices and quantities to the ISO. Provided the preferred schedule did not result in any
transmission congestion, the unconstrained PX price became the market clearing price. If
the preferred schedule (along with the schedules of other scheduling coordinators) resulted
in congestion, another round of bidding was used to reduce the demand (or increase the
supply) in certain areas of California. In our analysis, we follow the existing literature and
use the unconstrained PX price as the market clearing price.3


3.2         Measuring Marginal Cost
The California electricity industry is an ideal setting for analyzing NEIO techniques for a
number of reasons. The bulk of electricity that is generated in California is produced using
    2
        During the PX’s operation, over 80% of energy was traded in the PX.
    3
        See, for example, Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002).



                                                      9
fossil fuel generation plants; furthermore fossil-fuel plants are predominantly the marginal
plant operating. Accurate estimates of the short-run marginal cost of fossil-fuel electricity
generating plants can be calculated since their thermal eﬃciencies at diﬀerent output levels
are well known and spot market prices of natural gas are available. For each plant, a heat rate
is available which measures the eﬃciency in the which the plant converts fuel to electricity.
Given a fuel price the component of marginal cost attributed to fuel can be computed. The
remaining components of marginal cost are operation and maintenance costs. We make use
of the marginal cost data from Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak (2002); we refer the reader
to their work for details of the process.
       We make one adjustment to their measure of marginal cost. In 45 percent of the hours
price is below their measure of marginal cost. This likely reßects Þrms’ inter-temporal con-
straints to shutting down power plants, since rational agents would not price below true
marginal cost.4 To control for this, we deÞne marginal cost as:


                                             min(Pt , M Ct,BBW )                                          (15)

       This will tend to overestimate of marginal cost during low demand periods, when these
intertemporal constraints are binding, since during those hours we know only that marginal
cost is, at most, equal to the price.5
       Figure 1 is a scatter-plot of system-wide marginal cost on quantity along with a Lowess
non-parametric regression estimate of the relationship. It is apparent that the market faces
a capacity constraint–although the regression line does not become vertical only steeper as
quantity becomes large. To capture this feature of marginal cost, below we initially assume
that marginal costs are quadratic in quantity; we also estimate an endogenous spline model.


3.3        Estimation of Demand
The demand for electricity is extremely inelastic. Compounding the inelastic nature of
demand is the fact that only a small percentage of demand actually observes wholesale
prices. During the time periods analyzed in this paper, retail consumers faced a Þxed price,
that is, at least in the short run, independent of wholesale prices. Therefore, retail consumers
   4
       Plants face non-trivial start up costs, implying a Þrm may be willing to run a plant when the price is
below the plants static marginal costs if price is expected to rise in the coming hours. The results are robust
to excluding these observations.
   5
     We analyze alternative assumptions below.


                                                      10
show no demand response to changes in the wholesale prices. These features of the market
suggest that short run demand is best viewed as being perfectly inelastic. However, for issues
of market power, the relevant elasticity measure is the elasticity faced by “strategic” Þrms in
the market, since some Þrms may not possess unilateral market power–supplying electricity
until their marginal cost equals price. Following Borenstein, Bushnell, and Wolak (2002)
and Puller (2002), we deÞne a set of Þrms as “non-strategic” and a set of Þrms that are
“strategic.” Firms that do not act strategically act as price takers and submit bids into the
market equal to their marginal cost. Strategic Þrms, in contrast, incorporate their ability
to inßuence price into their bid functions. Following Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak, we
assume that in-state fossil fuel generators are strategic and estimate the level of market
power possessed by these generators.
       Table 2 reports the in-state Þrms’ generation facilities in July of 1999 by fuel type.
Viewing fossil fuel generation as strategic and other fuel types as non-strategic, the California
electricity market is roughly characterized as 5 equally sized strategic Þrms. In contrast to
fossil fuel generation, hydroelectric and nuclear generation facilities are owned by the two
largest retailers in California–PG&E and Southern California Edison. Because during most
hours these Þrms are net buyers of electricity, they do not have an incentive to increase prices
and would therefore not act on any market power they possess.6
       To estimate the hourly residual demand for fossil fuel generators, we Þrst estimate the
inverse supply equation for non-strategic Þrms. SpeciÞcally, we estimate:


                                          Qns = f (P, Z, N, β, εns )                                     (16)

where P is the wholesale price, Z is a vector of cost variables and N is a vector variables
that capture the native load of out-of-state Þrms, β is a vector of unknown parameters and
εns is a mean zero error term that captures unobserved components of non-strategic supply.7
       Letting Qtot be the amount of electricity demanded (perfectly inelastic), the residual
demand faced by strategic Þrms can be expressed as:
   6
       As such, we treat PG&E’s fossil fuel capacity as non-strategic. In addition, we treat the fossil fuel
capacity listed under “other” as non-strategic. This capacity is largely “qualifying facitilty” units that are
paid outside of the auction. As such, they do not have an incentive to act on any market power these might
possess.
   7
     Out-of-state IOUs are obligated to Þrst service their own demand (“native load”). Therefore, increases
in their native load implies, at a given price, less electricity is available to export to California.



                                                        11
                                    Qs = Qtot − Qns                                         (17)
                                         = Qtot − f (P, X, Z, β, εns )


4         Results

4.1        Non-Strategic Functional Form, Variables and Results
In this section we discuss the assumed functional form for non-strategic supply as well as
the variables included on the right hand side. Table 3 reports the summary statistics for the
variables and their correlation with non-strategic supply.
        We allow the wholesale price to aﬀect non-strategic supply diﬀerently during peak, oﬀ-
peak and weekend periods.8 In addition, we interact these three prices with year indicator
variables for the 3 years of data to capture changes in the behavior of non-strategic Þrms.
This yields nine coeﬃcients associated with the wholesale price. The wholesale price is likely
to be endogenous since shocks to non-strategic supply decisions will inßuence the wholesale
price. Fortunately, good demand instruments are available. SpeciÞcally, we instrument for
price using the ISO’s forecast for demand, which is independent of the error term since these
forecasts do not take price into consideration. Given the interaction terms associated with
price, we create nine instruments by interacting the forecasted load with the peak, oﬀ-peak,
weekend and year indicator variables. Although we estimate non-strategic supply within a
GMM framework, the results of the “Þrst stage” regression of the PX price on forecasted
load are presented Table 4; forecasted load is highly signiÞcant in each of the speciÞcations.
        The vector X includes variables that capture the marginal cost of non-strategic supply.
The bulk of non-strategic supply is generated using natural gas and hydroelectric resources.
PNN G and PSNG are the daily city-gate price of natural gas for northern and southern Califor-
nia, respectively. While many of the non-strategic suppliers are out-of-state Þrms, regional
natural gas prices are highly correlated. We control for the availability of hydroelectric
resources using year and month indicator variables.
        A key determinant of an out-of-state Þrm’s ability to export power to California is their
native load requirements. Many of the out-of-state Þrms are IOUs that are obligated to Þrst
meet their native loads; generation capacity in excess of the native load can be exported
    8
        We deÞne the peak period as those hours between 12pm and 6pm.

                                                    12
to California. To capture out-of-state native load requirements, we include the average of
the minimum and maximum temperatures in Phoenix and Tucson in AZ, Portland and
Pendleton in OR, Ely Yelland Þeld and Las Vegas in NV, Salt Lake city in UT, Seattle
and Spokane in WA.9 We also interact this variable with a summer indicator variable, since
native demand is positively correlated with temperature during the summer–because of
air conditioning–and negatively correlated with temperature during the winter–because of
heating.
       Finally, we include Þve sets of indicator variables to capture temporal changes in supply.
We include a set of day of week, year, month, hour interacted with weekday and hour
interacted with weekend dummies.
       Reiss and Wolak (2003) illustrate that identifying θ hinges on the econometrician’s as-
sumptions regarding the function form of demand; the estimates of θ may vary widely de-
pending on functional form assumptions. Therefore, we estimate three functional forms for
non-strategic supply: a linear model, a log-log model and a linear-log model.10 The results
from the three models of non-strategic load equation are reported in Table 5. We estimate
the equation using GMM and report Newey-West corrected standard errors that account for
the serial correlation in the residuals.11
       The results are largely consistent with economic intuition. In each of the three models,
non-strategic supply is more responsive to price changes during the oﬀ-peak and weekend pe-
riods; this is likely because out-of-state Þrms have more excess capacity available throughout
the diﬀerent regions of their marginal cost curves. The sensitivity to price is not statistically
diﬀerent between 1998 and 1999, but decreased during 2000. This decrease is dramatic for
the linear model, when non-strategic supply was much more inelastic. The results also sug-
gest that higher natural gas prices reduce the supply of non-strategic generators; this eﬀect
is stronger for southern California natural gas prices. This may be because the majority
of non-strategic plants that operate on natural gas are located in Arizona. Finally, higher
out-of-state temperatures during the summer months decrease non-strategic supply, while
this eﬀect is reversed in fall, winter and spring.
       The non-strategic supply curve estimates deÞne the residual demand faced by in-state
suppliers. Table 6 reports the mean, median and standard deviation of the residual demand
   9
       The results are robust to a number of alternatives to simple averaging the maximum and minimum
temperatures.
  10
     That is, y = log(X)β + ε.
  11
     We include 24 lags.


                                                  13
elasticity estimates. The estimated elasticities vary widely across the models. Residual
demand is estimated to be much more inelastic when non-strategic supply is linear (implying
a linear residual demand). The log-log and linear-log models largely agree.


4.2    Direct Measures of Mark-ups
Using the residual demand estimates, we calculate the hourly Lerner index and elasticity-
adjusted Lerner index for the three models; the descriptive statistics are reported in Table
7. For the entire sample, the average Lerner index is 0.13. The elasticity-adjusted Lerner
indexes widely agree across the three models. The average elasticity-adjusted Lerner index
ranges from 0.070 to 0.073, which is equivalent to a static equilibrium with 14 symmetric
Cournot Þrms, far more than the 5 strategic Þrms that operate in California.
   To see if there are temporal changes in the level of mark-ups, Table 7 also reports the
Lerner index and elasticity-adjusted Lerner index during weekday peak, weekday oﬀ-peak
and weekend periods and broken up by year. The average Lerner index increased signiÞcantly
in 2000, compared to both 1998 and 1999. Interestingly, however, the average adjusted Lerner
index shows little variation across the three years. The log-log and linear-log models suggest
that market power levels increased slightly in 2000, but not nearly as much as the unadjusted
Lerner Index.
   Both adjusted and non-adjusted Lerner indexes are higher during peak hours. The av-
erage Lerner index during weekday oﬀ-peak periods is higher than weekend periods; for the
linear and linear-log models, this relationship is reversed for adjusted Lerner indexes.


4.3    Strategic Supply
Given residual demand estimates, the strategic supply relationship is estimated from the
Þrst order condition in equation (4). Marginal costs are parameterized as a linear function
of natural gas prices, NOx permit prices and a quadratic function of quantity.



 M C = ψ 0 +ψ 1 PPNG        NG        NG
                   GE +ψ 2 PSCE +ψ 2 PSDG&E +ψ 4 P
                                                   NOx
                                                       +ψ 5 Crisis×P NOx +ψ 6 qst +ψ 7 qst
                                                                                        2
                                                                                           (18)

   Table 8 reports the strategic supply estimates for the three models of residual demand.
The estimates of the average elasticity-adjusted Lerner index vary considerably across the
three models. In the linear model the estimates is 0.063 (compared to the actual of 0.070),


                                              14
while in the log-log and linear-log models market power is overestimated, 0.226 and 0.162,
respectively.12 These results suggest that the NEIO does not provide robust estimates of
market power levels. Given that the true functional form of demand is rarely known, these
results suggest that the NEIO estimates are not reliable measures of market power.
       Marginal costs are estimated to be convex in quantity. Given the high degree of multi-
collinearity with the natural gas prices, it is not surprising that only one of the prices is
positive and signiÞcant (the SCE price). To account for the collinearity we interpret the
natural gas variables as if each price increased by one dollar. A one dollar change in the
price of natural gas for all three utilities results in a 7.7 dollar increase in marginal costs;
this is consistent with engineering estimates. The coeﬃcients with respect to the price of
N Ox permits are puzzling. Increases in the price of permits are estimated to reduce marginal
costs. During the crisis period this eﬀect subsided, but remains negative.
       To test further the accuracy of the NEIO technique in estimating marginal costs, Table
9 reports the summary statistics of the direct measure of marginal cost minus the NEIO
estimate for the linear model, while Figure 4 is a density estimate of this diﬀerence.13 The
density estimate shows that in certain hours the NEIO estimate of MC is much greater than
actual MC, while the NEIO does not understate MC by large amounts. On average, the
NEIO technique underestimates marginal costs; however this is not symmetric. A regression
of the direct measure of marginal cost on the NEIO estimates yields:


                               M CtNEIO = −15.73 + 1.56M CtDirect + εt                               (19)

Thus, the NEIO technique tends to understate marginal cost when marginal cost is low, but
overstate marginal cost when it is high; this can be seen from Figure 5. In high demand
periods, the quadratic marginal cost estimates overstate actual marginal costs. Strangely, the
NEIO estimates suggest marginal costs initially decrease with quantity. In this region, the
NEIO under-estimates marginal costs, but over-estimates marginal costs for high quantities.
       As a second metric for the marginal cost estimates, we regress the direct measure of
marginal cost on the cost shifters included in the NEIO technique. These results are reported
  12
       We have also estimated the model assuming linear marginal costs. The estimated value of elasticity-
adjusted mark-ups (in the linear non-strategic supply case) is .103. The overestimate of mark-ups is not
surprising since marginal costs during high demand periods are underestimated with the linear functional
form.
  13
     We chose the linear model since this yields the most accurate estimate of market power.



                                                     15
in the Þrst column of Table 10. Comparing these to the NEIO technique, we Þnd that the
NEIO technique does a poor job of estimating the sensitivity of marginal cost to cost shifters.
Again, we use the linear model since this yields the most accurate estimates of marginal cost,
on average. Both regressions suggest that the SCE natural gas price is most important in
driving industry marginal cost; in addition, a one dollar increase of all three natural gas prices
results in a 8.8 dollar increase in marginal cost, roughly in-line with the NEIO estimates. In
contrast, the direct measure of marginal cost suggest that NOx permit prices have a positive
and eﬀect on marginal costs; this is statistically signiÞcant during the crisis period. This is
not the case in the NEIO results. Finally, the direct measure of marginal cost is more convex
in quantity than the NEIO results would suggest.
   The next thought experiment we conduct is the following: suppose the econometrician
knew the sensitivity of marginal cost to a speciÞc input, possibly because of an engineering
study, would the estimate of market power become more accurate? We do this for each
of the models estimated. Tables 12 through 14 report the results. For variables denoted as
“known” we replace the unknown marginal cost parameter with the marginal cost parameter
estimated using the direct measures of marginal cost listed in the Þrst column of Table 10.
In general, this does not improve the accuracy of the estimated elasticity-adjusted Lerner
index.


4.3.1    Time-Varying Mark-Ups

We next analyze whether the degree of mark-ups changes over time. We allow for two
such changes: diﬀerent mark-ups across years and diﬀerent mark-ups throughout the day.
Electricity prices during 2000 were certainly higher than in 1998 and 1999; however, there
are a number of possible explanations for this increase. For one, costs may have increased.
Second, the elasticity of residual demand may have fallen. Finally, market power levels
may have increased, thus increasing the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index. Rows 2 through
4 of Table 7 summarizes the actual elasticity-adjusted Lerner index by year, as well as
the standard Lerner index. The standard Lerner index illustrates that mark-ups increased
dramatically between 1998/1999 and 2000. Interestingly, the elasticity-adjusted Lerner index
suggests the change in mark-ups was the result of a decrease in the elasticity of demand; the
adjusted mark-ups are not dramatically higher during 2000 compared to 1998 and 1999.
   The NEIO estimates of mark-ups for the diﬀerent years are reported in Table 9; the results
contrast with the actual measures of mark-ups. The NEIO technique suggests that market


                                               16
power was signiÞcantly higher in 2000. In the linear and linear-log models, the estimate
of θ is signiÞcant only in 2000, while the log-log model suggests that market power existed
in 1999 and 2000. The inability of the NEIO technique to accurately estimate changes in
market power is important, since it could be the case that it does not estimate market power
levels accurately, but policy makers can still learn about changes in market power levels.
Unfortunately, this does not appear to be the case.
    In the second alternative speciÞcation, we estimate a diﬀerent θ during the peak hours
of a weekday, the oﬀ-peak hours of a weekday and during weekends. The actual mark-levels
are reported in rows 5 through 7 of Table 7. The actual value of mark-ups suggest that after
controlling for the elasticity of demand, mark-ups are highest during peak periods, while
market power levels during oﬀ-peak hours and weekends are similar. The average adjusted
mark-up during peak periods is .092, while it is .054 during oﬀ-peak periods; the average
mark-up during weekends is .068. The estimated mark-ups are reported in Table 10. Each
of the models suggest that market power levels are highest during the weekend, at odds with
the actual measures.


5     Robustness Checks
In the above speciÞcations, marginal costs are assumed to be quadratic in the quantity.
However, Figure 4 suggests that this does a poor job representing actual marginal costs.
Our Þrst robustness check alters the functional form for marginal cost. We assume that
marginal costs are a linear spline with one knot. We endogenously determine the knot by
using the method in Andrews (1993). We estimate the endogenous spline model under the
linear non-strategic supply model since this model provided the most accurate estimates of
market power, as such we would like to know whether these accurate estimates are robust
to other functional forms for marginal cost. The results are listed in Table 15. The results
are nearly identical to the quadratic marginal cost model.
    One shortcoming of our data is that in a substantial number of hours our marginal cost
measure is above the market clearing price. This most likely occurs because Borenstein,
Bushnell and Wolak do not consider the dynamic decision making of the Þrms. In the
previous analysis we adjust the hourly marginal cost numbers to be the minimum of the
Borenstein, Bushnell and Wolak measure and price. In this section, we adjust our sample
such that this is less of an issue. In particular, we look at three sub-samples of the data. The


                                              17
Þrst uses only those observations where price is observed to be greater than marginal cost.
In this case, the shadow cost of shutting down a plant in hour t and incurring a start up cost
in hour t + k will be zero.14 In the second sub-sample, we use only data from weekday peak
hours. In this sub-sample, marginal cost exceeds price in only 21 percent of the observations.
Finally, we restrict our sample to hours 11 through 21, where price is above marginal cost
22 percent of the time.
      Tables 16, 18 and 20 report the actual measures of market power from using only those
observations for which the price is above marginal cost, only weekday peak hours and only
hours 11 through 21 to estimate the strategic supply curve, respectively. Tables 17, 19 and
21 report the NEIO estimates. These sub-samples further question the NEIO technique.
Using the sample of observations for which the price is above marginal costs, the log-log and
linear-log models provide the most accurate estimates of average market power, but all of
the models continue to mis-measure intertemporal changes in market power levels. Using
the weekday peak and hours 11-21 observations suggest that the linear model performs the
best in estimating average market power levels, but does not capture inter-year variations.


6       Conclusions
In this paper we have compared actual measures of mark-ups and marginal costs to esti-
mates based on the static conjectural variations Þrst-order conditions of an industry. We
take advantage of unique data that allow us to directly measure mark-ups in the restruc-
tured California electricity market and compare these mark-ups to those estimated by NEIO
techniques. Our results suggest that, in this setting, the NEIO technique is not robust to
functional form changes to demand. We also Þnd that the NEIO estimates of marginal cost
do not measure the sensitivity of marginal cost to cost shifters well. These results support
Corts’ (1999) theoretical critique of NEIO methods.
      The results have clear policy implications. The Þrst is that policy makers should be
wary of relying on NEIO techniques to form policy. In our setting, it would be impossible
to reliably estimate market power even if the true functional form for demand was known,
since a priori one cannot determine which functional form is giving the correct estimates of
market power. This is despite the robustness of actual market power to these functional form
changes. Second, these results underline the importance of data collection requirements in
 14
      One disadvantage of this is that we are truncating our residual.


                                                      18
restructured electricity markets. Given that the NEIO does a poor job in this setting, future
policy based on market power concerns will require actual marginal cost data.




                                             19
References
 [1] Andrews, Donald W. K. “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change With
    Unknown Change Point,” Econometrica, 61(4), July 1993, pp. 821-856.

 [2] Appelbaum, E. “The Estimation of the Degree of Oligopoly Power.” Journal of Econo-
    metrics, 19(2-3) , August 1982, pp. 287-99.

 [3] Berg, Sigbjorn Atle and Moshe Kim. “Oligopolistic Interdependence and the Structure
    of Production in Banking: An Empirical Evaluation.” Journal of Money, Credit, and
    Banking 26(2), May 1994, pp. 309-322.

 [4] Brander James A. and Zhang, Anming. “Market Conduct in the Airline Industry: An
    Empirical Investigation” Rand Journal of Economics 21(4), Winter 1990, pp. 567-583.

 [5] Brander James A. and Zhang, Anming. “Dynamic Oligopoly Behaviour in the Airline
    Industry,” International Journal of Industrial Organization 11(3), September 1993, pp.
    407-435.

 [6] Bresnahan, T. F. “Empirical Studies of Industries with Market Power.” In R.
    Schmalensee and R.D. Willig, eds., The Handbook of Industrial Organization. New
    York: North-Holland, 1989, pp. 1011-57.

 [7] Borenstein, James B. Bushnell, and Christopher R. Knittel. “Market Power in Elec-
    tricity Markets: Beyond Concentration Measures.” The Energy Journal 20(4), October
    1999, pp. 65-88.

 [8] Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell, Christopher R. Knittel, and Catherine D. Wol-
    fram. “Trading Ineﬃciencies in California’s Electricity Markets.” POWER working Pa-
    per PWP-086, University of California, 2001.

 [9] Borenstein, Severin, James B. Bushnell and Frank Wolak. “Measuring Market Ineﬃcien-
    cies in California’s Restructured Wholesale Electricity Market.” American Economic
    Review 92(5), December 2002, pp. 1376-1405.

[10] Clay, K. and Troesken, W. “Further Tests of Static Oligopoly Models: Whiskey, 1882-
    1898.” The Journal of Industrial Economics LI(2), June 2003, pp. 151-166.



                                            20
[11] Corts, K.S. “Conduct Parameters and the Measurement of Market Power.” Journal of
    Econometrics 88(2), February 1999, pp. 227-50.

[12] Diewert, W. E. and T. J. Wales. “ Flexible Functional Forms and Global Curvature
    Conditions.” Econometrica 55(1), January 1987, pp. 43-68.

[13] Ellison, Glenn. “Theories of Cartel Stability and the Joint Executive Committee.”
    RAND Journal of Economics 25(1) Spring 1994, pp. 37-57.

[14] Gelfand, Matthew D. and Spiller, Pablo T. “Entry Barriers and Multiproduct
    Oligopolies: Do They Forebear or Spoil?” International Journal of Industrial Orga-
    nization 5(1). March 1987, pp. 101-13

[15] Genesove, David and Wallace Mullin. “Testing Static Oligopoly Models: Conduct and
    Cost in the Sugar Industry, 1890-1914.” Rand Journal of Economics 29(2), Summer
    1994, pp. 355-377.

[16] Gollop, F. and Roberts, M. “Firm Interdependence in Oligopolistic Markets.” Journal
    of Econometrics 1(3), August 1979, pp. 313-31.

[17] Joskow, Paul and Kahn, Ed. “ A Quantitative Analysis of Pricing Behavior in Cal-
    ifornia’s Wholesale Electricity Market during Summer 2000.” Energy Journal 23(4),
    October 2002, pp. 1-35.

[18] Kadiyali, Vrinda. “Exchange Rate Pass-through for Strategic Pricing and Advertising:
    An Empirical Analysis of the U.S. Photographic Film Industry.” Journal of Interna-
    tional Economics 43(3-4), November 1997, pp. 437-461.

[19] Kadiyali, Vrinda, Vilcassim, Naufel, and Chintagunta, Pradeep. “Product Line Ex-
    tensions and Competitive Market Interactions: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of
    Econometrics 89(1-2), March-April 1999, pp. 339-363.

[20] Knittel, Christopher and Dae-Wook Kim. “A Note on the Market Power of California
    Electricity Firms during the Crisis.” mimeo, UC Davis, 2004.

[21] Kolstad, C. and Turnovsky, M. “Cost Functions and Nonlinear prices: Estimating a
    Technology with Quality-Diﬀerenciated Inputs.” The Review of Economics and Statis-
    tics 80(3), August 1998, pp. 444-453.


                                            21
[22] Lindh, Thomas.“The Inconsistency of Consistent Conjectures:          Coming Back to
    Cournot.” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 18(1), June 1992, pp. 69-90.

[23] Nebesky, William, McMullen, B. Starr, and Lee, Man-Keung. “Testing for Market Power
    in the U.S. Motor Carrier Industry.” Review of Industrial Organization 10(5), October
    1995, pp. 559-576.

[24] Natural Gas Intelligence, “NGI’s Daily Gas Historical Data. 1998-2000.”

[25] Parker, P. and Röller, L. “Collusive Conduct in Duopolies: Multimarket Contact and
    Cross-Ownership in the Mobile Telephone Industry.” Rand Journal of Economics 28(2),
    Summer 1997, pp. 304-322.

[26] Porter, R. H. “A Study of Cartel Stability: The Joint Executive Committee, 1880-1886.”
    BELL Journal of Economics 14(2) Autumn 1983, pp. 301-314

[27] Puller, Steve. “Pricing and Firm Conduct in California Deregulated Electricity Market.”
    POWER working paper PWR-080, University of California, 2001.

[28] Raper, Kellie Curry, Love, Alan H., and Shumway, Richard C.. “Determining Market
    Power Exertion between Buyers and Sellers.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 15(3),
    May-June 2000, pp. 225-252.

[29] Reiss, Peter and Wolak, Frank. “Structural Econometric Modeling: Rationales and
    Examples From Industrial Organization.” mimeo, Stanford University.

[30] Roberts, Mark J. “Testing Oligopolistic Behavior: An Application of the Variable ProÞt
    Function.” Internation Journal of Industrial Organization 2(4), December 1984, pp.
    367-383.

[31] Röller, L. “Proper Quadratic Cost Function with an Application to the Bell System.”
    The Review of Economics and Statistics 72(2), May 1990, pp. 202-210.

[32] Rotemberg, Julio J. and Saloner, Garth. “A Supergame-Theoretic Model of Price Wars
    during Booms.” American Economic Review 76(3), June 1986, pp. 390-407.

[33] Rubinovitz, R. “Market Power and Price Increases for Basic Cable Service Since Dereg-
    ulation.” The RAND Journal of Economics 24(1), Spring 1993, pp. 1-18.



                                            22
[34] Spiller, Pablo T., and Favaro, Edgardo. “The Eﬀects of Entry Regulation on Oligopolis-
    tic Interaction: The Uruguayan Banking Sector.” Rand Journal of Economics 15(2).
    Summer 1984, pp. 244-54.

[35] Wolak, F. “IdentiÞcation and Estimation of Cost functions Using Observed Bid Data: an
    Application to Electricity Markets.” Working Paper 8191, National Bureau of Economics
    Research (2000).

[36] Wolfram, Catherine D. “Measuring Duopoly Power in the British Electricity Spot Mar-
    ket.” American Economic Review 89(4), September 1999, pp. 805-826.




                                            23
A     Tables
Table 1: Previous Studies
Genesove and Mullin                     Wolfram                  Clay and Troesken
Estimate      Actual      Estimate              Actual           Estimate    Actual
    0.038      0.107            0.012            0.052            0.173       0.086
 (0.024)      (0.028)        (0.044)          Not reported        (0.046)    (0.054)
Linear functional form results for Genesove and Mullin (1998),
Wolfram (1999), and Clay and Troesken (2003)


    Table 2: In-state Capacity during July 1999
    Firm      Fossil    Hydro Nuclear Renewable
    AES        4,071        0             0               0
    Duke       2,950        0             0               0
    Dynegy     2,856        0             0               0
    PG&E        580      3,878          2,160            793
    Reliant    3,531        0             0               0
    SCE            0     1,164          1,720             0
    Mirant     3,424        0             0               0
    Other      6,617     5,620           430             4,267


    Table 3: Summary Statistics of Non-Strategic Supply Variables
                            Mean Std Dev                 Min       Max      Corr(X, Qns )
    P rice                  45.343        58.268          0       749.996       0.208
    N aturalGasN            2.993         1.093        1.810       6.840       -0.173
    N aturalGasS            2.888         1.176        1.650       7.260       -0.168
    T emperature            60.275        13.562       21.056     86.667        0.176
    T emperature × Sum      74.918        5.128        58.722     86.667        0.144




                                                  24
A.1   Results

Table 4: First Stage Regressions
                             P rice P × W Day × P k   P × W day × OP k   P × W end
Full Sample
Constant                   -104.883     -341.787           -70.107         -73.929
                           (10.584)     (55.836)          (10.133)        (12.275)
F orecast                    0.006
                            (0.000)
F orecast × W Day × P k                   0.013
                                         (0.002)
F orecast × W Day × OP k                                   0.004
                                                          (0.000)
F orecast × W end                                                           0.005
                                                                           (0.001)
−N −                        21214     4340            10540              6334
Adj R2                      0.276     0.398           0.219              0.289

1999 Sample
Constant                                    -79.308       -13.066         -21.819
                                           (15.796)       (1.787)         (3.064)
F orecast × W Day × P k                      0.004
                                            (0.001)
F orecast × W Day × OP k                                   0.002
                                                          (0.000)
F orecast × W End                                                          0.002
                                                                          (0.000)
-N-                                           1792            4352         2615
Adj R2                                        0.429           0.359        0.369

2000 Sample
Constant                                   -673.504       -136.659        -140.453
                                           (76.773)       (19.183)        (20.642)
F orecast × W Day × P k                      0.024
                                            (0.003)
F orecast × W Day × OP k                                   0.008
                                                          (0.001)
F orecast × W eekEnd                                                       0.008
                                                                          (0.001)
-N-                                          1498             3638         2183
      2
Adj R                                        0.655            0.339        0.444
Notes: All estimates are signiÞcant in 1% level.



                                          25
Table 5: Estimates of the Non-Strategic Supply Relationship
                                Linear      Log-log     Linear-log
P × W day × P k                67.718∗∗∗    0.159∗∗∗     3878.3∗∗∗
                                (7.849)      (0.011)      (261.1)
P × W day × Of fP k            106.053∗∗∗   0.195∗∗∗     4333.0∗∗∗
                               (13.547)      (0.017)      (377.1)
P × W end                     149.387∗∗∗    0.216∗∗∗     4967.6∗∗∗
                               (15.319)      (0.016)      (371.0)
P × W day × P k × Y r99         11.169       −0.008      −12.466
                                (8.614)      (0.012)      (267.6)
P × W day × Of fP k × Y r99     11.951       −0.011      −81.389
                               (10.867)      (0.013)      (286.9)
P × W end × Y r99                3.410        0.010      −82.448
                               (13.207)      (0.012)      (284.2)
P × W day × P k × Y r0        −52.560∗∗∗    −0.014∗∗     −340.651
                                (7.686)      (0.012)      (254.9)
P × W day × Of fP k × Y r00   −83.027∗∗∗    −0.026∗∗∗   −534.106∗∗
                               (12.165)      (0.012)      (279.4)
P × W end × Y r00             −110.935∗∗∗   −0.030∗∗∗   −675.295∗∗∗
                               (13.695)      (0.012)      (279.4)
PNNG                          −909.188∗∗    −0.178∗∗     −3121.9∗
                                (473.2)      (0.090)     (1937.3)
PSNG                          −748.451∗     −0.195∗∗    −5181.0∗∗∗
                                (430.2)      (0.085)     (1846.0)
T emperature                   39.335∗∗∗     0.044∗∗     993.695∗∗
                               (10.787)      (0.024)      (520.5)
T emperature × Sum            −70.733∗∗∗    −0.295∗∗∗   −6613.4∗∗∗
                               (22.870)      (0.085)     (1960.3)
Day, year, month, hour×weekday and hour×weekend monthly indicator
variables not reported.




                                      26
Table 6: Estimates of Residual Demand Elasticities
                       Linear               Log-Log        Linear-Log
                   Mean      Median   Mean      Median   Mean      Median
Entire Sample       0.687    0.576    1.250      1.004   1.334     1.035
                   (0.485)            (0.870)            (1.058)
1998                0.735    0.666    1.279      1.133   1.343     1.131
                   (0.391)            (0.693)            (0.850)
1999                0.983    0.884    1.493      1.246   1.608     1.241
                   (0.490)            (0.921)            (1.125)
2000                0.300    0.266    0.938      0.633   1.001     0.653
                   (0.176)            (0.817)            (0.943)
Weekday Peak        0.385    0.392    0.713      0.621   0.702     0.607
                   (0.215)            (0.412)            (0.406)
Weekday Oﬀpeak      0.641    0.608    1.263      1.058   1.316     1.019
                   (0.406)            (0.798)            (0.933)
Weekend             0.972    0.910    1.599      1.368   1.793     1.486
                   (0.578)            (1.019)            (1.238)
Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.




                                       27
Table 7: Direct Measures of Lerner and Adjusted Lerner Indexes
                             Linear Model Log-log Model Linear-Log Model
                     LI        Adj LI            Adj LI          Adj LI     N
Entire Sample       0.127        0.070            0.073          0.071     21214
                   (0.191)      (0.138)           (0.096)        (0.090)
1998                0.097        0.065            0.068          0.062     5136
                   (0.163)      (0.148)           (0.101)        (0.089)
1999                0.088        0.071            0.066          0.064     8759
                   (0.139)      (0.138)           (0.094)        (0.089)
2000                0.196        0.071            0.085          0.085     7319
                   (0.237)      (0.129)           (0.094)        (0.090)
Weekday Peak        0.228        0.096            0.103          0.097     4340
                   (0.243)      (0.147)           (0.094)        (0.083)
Weekday Oﬀpeak      0.107        0.057            0.066          0.063     10540
                   (0.167)      (0.122)           (0.092)        (0.085)
Weekend             0.093        0.073            0.064          0.065     6334
                   (0.162)      (0.152)           (0.099)        (0.099)
Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.




                                         28
Table 8: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates
                    Linear Model Log-log Model                   Linear-log model
Constant               23.972∗∗∗                7.249∗∗∗                     -0.086
                        (7.256)                 (2.583)                      (3.359)
PPNatGas
   G&E                   1.214                  7.779∗∗∗                      4.636
                        (5.899)                 (2.926)                      (3.294)
 NatGas
PSCE                    14.630∗                 -8.400∗∗                      0.183
                        (8.176)                 (3.674)                      (4.239)
 NatGas
PSDG&E                   -8.120                 6.135∗∗∗                      3.909
                        (5.993)                 (2.286)                      (2.562)
P NOx                  -5.008∗∗∗                 0.157                       -0.402
                        (1.420)                 (0.506)                      (0.475)
P NOx × Crisis          4.814∗∗∗                 -0.304                       0.402
                        (1.234)                 (0.454)                      (0.437)
Quantity               -0.015∗∗∗                 -0.003                  -0.003∗∗∗
                        (0.002)                 (0.002)                      (0.001)
Quantity 2           1.723×10−6∗∗∗         3.969×10−7∗∗                5.205×10−7∗∗∗
                     (2.170×10−7 )         (1.941×10−7 )               (1.638×10−7 )
θ                       0.063∗∗∗                0.226∗∗∗                     0.162∗∗∗
                        (0.013)                 (0.019)                      (0.019)
∗                                         ∗∗                           ∗∗∗
    denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level,        at the .05 level, and         at the .01 level




                                                29
Table 9: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates–Yearly Variation in θ
                    Linear Model Log-log Model                   Linear-log Model
Constant               32.306∗∗∗               17.261∗∗∗                 21.642∗∗∗
                        (8.158)                 (4.435)                      (6.409)
PPNatGas
   G&E                   5.680                 12.007∗∗∗                 11.425∗∗∗
                        (6.263)                 (4.380)                      (4.542)
 NatGas
PSCE                    19.783∗∗               -15.632∗∗∗                -12.617∗∗
                        (8.542)                 (4.905)                      (5.921)
 NatGas
PSDG&E                 —19.729∗∗∗               6.796∗∗∗                     5.867∗∗
                        (6.894)                 (2.304)                      (3.003)
P NOx                  -4.628∗∗∗                 0.101                       -0.286
                        (1.406)                 (0.529)                      (0.563)
P NOx × Crisis          4.447∗∗∗                 -0.234                       0.325
                        (1.218)                 (0.471)                      (0.512)
Quantity               -0.014∗∗∗                -0.004∗                  -0.008∗∗∗
                        (0.002)                 (0.002)                      (0.002)
Quantity 2           1.766×10−6∗∗∗         5.838×10−7∗∗                1.156×10−6∗∗∗
                     (2.169×10−7 )         (2.590×10−7 )               (2.968×10−7 )
θ × Y r98                -0.038                  0.090                       -0.078
                        (0.023)                 (0.069)                      (0.064)
θ × Y r99                0.017                  0.124∗∗                      -0.022
                        (0.045)                 (0.054)                      (0.056)
θ × Y r00               0.058∗∗∗                0.218∗∗∗                     0.122∗∗∗
                        (0.013)                 (0.022)                      (0.029)
∗                                         ∗∗                           ∗∗∗
    denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level,        at the .05 level, and         at the .01 level




                                                30
Table 10: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates–Intra-day Variation in θ
                          Linear-log Model Log-log Model Linear-log Model
Constant                       24.650∗∗∗                 14.257∗∗∗                    1.223
                                (7.440)                   (3.091)                    (1.490)
PPNatGas
   G&E                           1.574                    9.800∗∗∗                  7.084∗∗∗
                                (5.811)                   (2.893)                    (2.033)
 NatGas
PSCE                            14.772∗                  -15.296∗∗∗                 -7.919∗∗∗
                                (8.015)                   (3.973)                    (2.518)
 NatGas
PSDG&E                           -9.080                   8.872∗∗∗                  5.339∗∗∗
                                (5.959)                   (2.388)                    (1.403)
P NOx                          -5.334∗∗∗                   0.668                      0.132
                                (1.445)                   (0.537)                    (0.271)
P NOx × Crisis                  5.129∗∗∗                  -0.769∗                     0.013
                                (1.260)                   (0.470)                    (0.257)
Quantity                       -0.014∗∗∗                  -0.004∗∗                  0.002∗∗∗
                                (0.002)                   (0.002)                    (0.001)
Quantity 2                   1.700×10−6∗∗∗             4.700×10−7∗∗∗             -1.720×10−7∗∗∗
                             (2.169×10−7 )             (1.835×10−7 )             (6.626×10−8 )
θ × W day × P k                 0.068∗∗∗                  0.221∗∗∗                  0.242∗∗∗
                                (0.013)                   (0.017)                    (0.008)
θ × W day × Off P k             0.059∗∗∗                  0.255∗∗∗                  0.260∗∗∗
                                (0.012)                   (0.024)                    (0.010)
θ × W end                       0.092∗∗∗                  0.283∗∗∗                  0.308∗∗∗
                                (0.018)                   (0.027)                    (0.011)
∗                                         ∗∗                           ∗∗∗
    denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level,        at the .05 level, and         at the .01 level




                                                31
Table 11: Summary Statistics of Actual MC minus NEIO MC (linear model)
                     Mean Std Dev Skew Kurtosis                    Min          Max
      d NEIO
M C − MC             −2.00     29.27         −2.44     10.71      −201.41      202.28




Table 12: Supplemental Information and Estimates of Market Power
Linear Model. For variables marked as known, their estimate from the Direct MC equation are
used and treated as Þxed.
              Direct MC       NEIO 1              NEIO 2           NEIO 3             NEIO 4
Constant         -7.200∗∗∗      23.972∗∗∗            21.832∗∗∗       27.107∗∗∗          -17.157∗∗∗
                 (0.676)         (7.256)             (4.872)          (7.726)            (5.100)
PPNatGas
   G&E           0.944 ∗∗
                                  1.214               known           -0.111             -7.888
                 (0.423)         (5.899)                              (6.178)            (7.010)
 NatGas
PSCE             4.227∗∗∗        14.630∗              known          27.387∗∗∗          66.134∗∗∗
                 (1.235)         (8.176)                              (8.463)           (10.649)
 NatGas
PSDG&E           3.205∗∗∗         -8.120              known          -21.580∗∗∗         -45.083∗∗∗
                 (1.065)         (5.993)                              (6.647)            (8.479)
P NOx             0.128         -5.008∗∗∗            -5.380∗∗∗        known             -12.693∗∗∗
                 (0.103)         (1.420)             (1.443)                             (1.536)
    NOx                                ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
P                 0.098          4.814               5.137            known             11.689∗∗∗
×Crisis          (0.099)         (1.234)             (1.302)                             (1.348)
Quantity         0.002∗∗∗       -0.015∗∗∗            -0.015∗∗∗       -0.015∗∗∗           known
                 (0.000)         (0.003)             (0.002)          (0.003)
Quantity 2     -6.52×10−9     1.723×10−6∗∗∗       1.735×10−6∗∗∗    1.794×10−6∗∗∗         known
              (1.525×10−8 )   (2.170×10−7 )       (2.170×10−7 )    (2.263×10−7 )
θ                 0.070          0.063∗∗∗            0.061∗∗∗        0.055∗∗∗           0.130∗∗∗
                 (0.138)†        (0.013)             (0.013)          (0.011)            (0.018)
* denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level
†
    This represents the standard devation.




                                             32
Table 13: Supplemental Information and Estimates of Market Power
Log-log Model. For variables marked as known, their estimate from the Direct MC equation are
used and treated as Þxed.
              Direct MC       NEIO 1            NEIO 2          NEIO 3          NEIO 4
Constant         -7.200∗∗∗      7.249∗∗∗            3.353         13.814∗∗∗           -1.544
                 (0.676)         (2.583)           (3.187)         (7.726)            (2.312)
PPNatGas
   G&E           0.944∗∗        7.779∗∗∗           known           6.145∗∗        6.487∗∗∗
                 (0.423)         (2.926)                           (2.818)            (2.681)
 NatGas
PSCE             4.227∗∗∗       -8.400∗∗           known         -14.699∗∗∗           -3.442
                 (1.235)         (3.674)                           (3.475)            (3.147)
 NatGas
PSDG&E           3.205∗∗∗       6.135∗∗∗           known          11.790∗∗∗           2.171
                 (1.065)         (2.286)                           (1.903)            (2.083)
P NOx             0.128           0.157            -0.247          known              0.144
                 (0.103)         (0.506)           (0.454)                            (0.472)
P NOx             0.098          -0.304            -0.072          known              -0.350
×Crisis          (0.099)         (0.454)           (0.440)                            (0.425)
Quantity         0.002∗∗∗        -0.003           -0.005∗∗∗        -0.003∗            known
                 (0.000)         (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.002)
Quantity 2     -6.52×10−9     3.969×10−7∗∗      6.673×10−7∗∗∗   4.694×10−7∗∗          known
              (1.525×10−8 ) (1.941×10−7 )       (1.778×10−7 )   (2.193×10−7 )
θ                 0.073         0.226∗∗∗          0.186∗∗∗        0.218∗∗∗        0.247∗∗∗
                 (0.096)†        (0.019)           (0.017)         (0.020)            (0.006)
* denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level
†
    This represents the standard devation.




                                           33
Table 14: Supplemental Information and Estimates of Market Power
Linear-Log Model. For variables marked as known, their estimate from the Direct MC equation are
used and treated as Þxed.
              Direct MC       NEIO 1             NEIO 2          NEIO 3          NEIO 4
Constant         -7.200∗∗∗        -0.086             0.530           3.910            -8.101∗∗∗
                 (0.676)         (3.359)            (2.607)         (2.775)           (1.831)
PPNatGas
   G&E           0.944∗∗          4.636             known            3.696             3.840
                 (0.423)         (3.294)                            (3.445)           (2.762)
 NatGas
PSCE             4.227∗∗∗         0.183             known           -1.359             3.432
                 (1.235)         (4.239)                            (4.465)           (3.390)
 NatGas
PSDG&E           3.205∗∗∗         3.909             known           4.945∗∗            0.817
                 (1.065)         (2.562)                            (2.183)           (1.905)
P NOx             0.128           -0.402            -0.330          known              -0.490
                 (0.103)         (0.475)            (0.404)                           (0.387)
P NOx             0.098           0.402              0.356          known              0.480
×Crisis          (0.099)         (0.437)            (0.388)                           (0.358)
Quantity         0.002∗∗∗        -0.003∗∗          -0.003∗∗        -0.004∗∗∗           known
                 (0.000)         (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.001)
Quantity 2     -6.52×10−9     5.205×10−7∗∗∗      5.202×10−7∗∗∗   5.705×10−7∗∗∗         known
              (1.525×10−8 )   (1.638×10−7 )      (1.595×10−7 )   (1.644×10−7 )
θ                 0.071          0.162∗∗∗          0.162∗∗∗        0.157∗∗∗           0.201∗∗∗
                 (0.090)†        (0.019)            (0.019)         (0.020)           (0.005)
* denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level
†
    This represents the standard devation.




                                            34
A.2     Robustness Checks
A.2.1   Endogenous MC Spline
Table 15: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates (Spline Function)
                        Model 1      Model 2                 Model 3
Constant                -14.993∗∗∗    -5.004∗∗∗              -14.524∗∗∗
                          (3.612)      (4.615)                 (3.741)
PPNatGas
   G&E                     0.456        5.633                   0.948
                          (5.360)      (5.833)                 (5.266)
 NatGas
PSCE                    28.819∗∗∗    36.379∗∗∗               28.632∗∗∗
                          (7.585)      (8.342)                 (7.384)
 NatGas
PSDG&E                  -19.277∗∗∗   —34.927∗∗∗              -19.744∗∗∗
                          (6.205)      (7.729)                 (6.105)
P NOx                    -5.645∗∗∗    -5.303∗∗∗               -5.914∗∗∗
                          (1.448)      (1.429)                 (1.474)
P NOx × Crisis            5.407∗∗∗    5.062∗∗∗                5.657∗∗∗
                          (1.262)      (1.241)                 (1.287)
Spline1                   0.003∗∗∗    0.004∗∗∗                0.003∗∗∗
                         (0.0004)     (0.0006)                (0.0004)
Spline2                   0.029∗∗∗    0.029∗∗∗                0.029∗∗∗
                          (0.003)      (0.003)                 (0.003)
θ                         0.065∗∗∗
                          (0.014)
θ × Y r98                            -0.065∗∗∗
                                      (0.020)
θ × Y r99                              -0.009
                                      (0.039)
θ × Y r00                            0.059∗∗∗
                                      (0.014)
θ × W day × P k                                               0.071∗∗∗
                                                               (0.014)
θ × W day × Of f P k                                          0.058∗∗∗
                                                               (0.013)
θ × W end                                                     0.093∗∗∗
                                                               (0.019)
* denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level



                                             35
A.2.2   Selected Sample

Table 16: Direct Measures of Lerner and Adjusted Lerner Indexes–Selected Sample
                             Linear Model Log-log Model Linear-Log Model
                     LI        Adj LI            Adj LI           Adj LI           N
Entire Sample       0.228        0.125            0.130            0.126          11853
                   (0.205)      (0.164)           (0.094)         (0.086)
1998                0.186        0.126            0.128            0.116          2671
                   (0.186)      (0.186)           (0.107)         (0.093)
1999                0.174        0.141            0.130            0.126          4428
                   (0.153)      (0.167)           (0.095)         (0.088)
2000                0.302        0.109            0.131            0.131          4754
                   (0.234)      (0.146)           (0.087)         (0.080)
Weekday Peak        0.287        0.121            0.129            0.122          3446
                   (0.240)      (0.155)           (0.088)         (0.075)
Weekday Oﬀpeak      0.205        0.109            0.125            0.119          5529
                   (0.183)      (0.151)           (0.092)         (0.083)
Weekend             0.203        0.160            0.140            0.143          2878
                   (0.187)      (0.192)           (0.105)         (0.101)
Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.




                                          36
Table 17: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates–Selected Sample
                        Linear Model Log-log Model Linear-Log Model
θ                           0.042∗∗∗           0.166∗∗∗              0.139∗∗∗
                            (0.015)            (0.036)               (0.027)
θ × Y r98                  -0.084∗∗∗            0.048                 -0.003
                            (0.031)            (0.099)               (0.068)
θ × Y r99                    -0.026             0.088                 0.039
                            (0.061)            (0.072)               (0.058)
θ × Y r00                   0.034∗∗            0.155∗∗∗              0.112∗∗∗
                            (0.015)            (0.043)               (0.036)
                                 ∗∗∗                ∗∗∗
θ × W day × P k             0.044              0.168                 0.202∗∗∗
                            (0.015)            (0.036)               (0.018)
θ × W day × Off P k         0.034∗∗            0.193∗∗∗              0.215∗∗∗
                            (0.015)            (0.047)               (0.021)
θ × W end                   0.046∗∗            0.207∗∗∗              0.247∗∗∗
                            (0.023)            (0.053)               (0.024)
* denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level




                                         37
A.2.3   Weekday Peak Observations

Table 18: Direct Measures of Lerner and Adjusted Lerner Indexes–Weekday Peak
                             Linear Model Log-log Model Linear-Log Model
                   LI          Adj LI                Adj LI              Adj LI           N
Entire Sample    0.228          0.096                0.103                   0.097       4340
                 (0.243)        (0.147)              (0.094)             (0.083)
1998             0.214          0.108                0.113                   0.103       1050
                 (0.230)        (0.162)              (0.104)             (0.089)
1999             0.172          0.094                0.094                   0.091       1792
                 (0.187)        (0.134)              (0.088)             (0.082)
2000             0.304          0.089                0.106                   0.101       1498
                 (0.287)        (0.151)              (0.093)             (0.081)
Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.




   Table 19: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates–Weekday Peak
                Linear Model Log-log Model                     Linear-Log Model
   θ               0.079∗∗∗               0.198∗∗∗                 0.167∗∗∗
                   (0.030)                (0.046)                   (0.021)
   θ × Y r98        -0.036                 0.010                    -0.091
                   (0.089)                (0.155)                   (0.088)
   θ × Y r99        0.067                  0.047                    -0.031
                   (0.188)                (0.126)                   (0.077)
   θ × Y r00       0.079∗∗                0.189∗∗∗                 0.134∗∗∗
                   (0.038)                (0.053)                   (0.033)
   * denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level




                                                38
A.2.4   Hour 11-21 Observations
Table 20: Direct Measures of Lerner and Adjusted Lerner Indexes–Hours 11-21
                             Linear Model Log-log Model Linear-Log Model
                     LI        Adj LI            Adj LI           Adj LI       N
Entire Sample       0.198        0.108            0.107            0.100      9724
                   (0.225)      (0.169)           (0.104)         (0.093)
1998                0.169        0.105            0.105            0.093      2354
                   (0.201)      (0.164)           (0.108)         (0.091)
1999                0.149        0.114            0.104            0.099      4015
                   (0.169)      (0.173)           (0.105)         (0.098)
2000                0.277        0.104            0.112            0.106      3355
                   (0.272)      (0.167)           (0.100)         (0.088)
Weekday Peak        0.228        0.096            0.103            0.097      4340
                   (0.243)      (0.147)           (0.094)         (0.083)
Weekday Oﬀpeak      0.207        0.119            0.123            0.107      2480
                   (0.212)      (0.171)           (0.105)         (0.086)
Weekend             0.145        0.118            0.099            0.097      2904
                   (0.195)      (0.195)           (0.116)         (0.110)
Numbers in parentheses represent standard deviations.




                                          39
Table 21: Strategic Pricing Relationship Estimates–Hour 11-21 observations
                        Linear Model Log-log Model Linear-Log Model
θ                           0.065∗∗∗           0.216∗∗∗              0.167∗∗∗
                            (0.020)            (0.027)               (0.021)
θ × Y r98                   -0.084∗∗            0.037                 -0.092
                            (0.044)            (0.100)               (0.088)
θ × Y r99                    -0.030             0.086                 -0.031
                            (0.080)            (0.076)               (0.077)
θ × Y r00                   0.057∗∗∗           0.216∗∗∗              0.134∗∗∗
                            (0.021)            (0.028)               (0.033)
                                  ∗∗∗               ∗∗∗
θ × W day × P k             0.074              0.227                 0.241∗∗∗
                            (0.021)            (0.024)               (0.009)
θ × W day × Off P k         0.089∗∗∗           0.272∗∗∗              0.262∗∗∗
                            (0.028)            (0.030)               (0.011)
θ × W end                   0.121∗∗∗           0.288∗∗∗              0.311∗∗∗
                            (0.038)            (0.039)               (0.013)
* denotes signiÞcant at the .1 level, ** at the .05 level, and *** at the .01 level




                             40
B   Figures

                       Scatterplot of Actual MC with Lowess Smoothed Line


            400
            300
        $/MWh
        200 100
            0




                   0                        5000                   10000   15000
                                                   Strategic Quantity
                   bandwidth = .05



        Figure 1: Scatterplot of Actual MC versus Strategic Quantity
           .04
           .03
        Density
         .02
           .01
           0




                  -200               -100              0            100    200
                                             Actual MC minus NEIO MC


      Figure 2: Kernel Density Estimate of Actual MC minus NEIO MC




                                                   41
              400
              300
            $/MWh
            200
              100
              0




                    0           5000                     10000          15000
                                         Strategic Quantity

                                    Actual MC        NEIO MC



Figure 5: Scatterplot of Actual MC and NEIO MC Estimates versus Strategic Quantity
              400
              300
            $/MWh
            200
              100
              0




                    0           5000                     10000          15000
                                         Strategic Quantity

                             Actual MC       NEIO MC -- Linear Spline



  Figure 6: Scatterplot of Actual MC and Endeogenous Spline NEIO MC Estimates




                                            42
