NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EVOLUTION OF INCOME AND FERTILITY INEQUALITIES OVER THE
COURSE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: A HUMAN CAPITAL PERSPECTIVE
Isaac Ehrlich
Jinyoung Kim
Working Paper 10890
http://www.nber.org/papers/w10890

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2004

We are indebted to Chi-wa Yuen and Jianguo Zhong for collaboration on earlier related work, and
to Omer Moav, Gary Becker, Kevin Murphy, Stephen Turnovsky, Matthias Doepke, and Francis Lui
for comments on previous drafts. We are especially indebted to Thomas Muench for very helpful comments
concerning dynamic stability issues in our heterogeneous agent system, and to Jong Kook Shin for
valuable research assistance. We alone are responsible for errors. The views expressed herein are
those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2004 by Isaac Ehrlich and Jinyoung Kim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

The Evolution of Income and Fertility Inequalities over the Course of Economic Development:
A Human Capital Perspective
Isaac Ehrlich and Jinyoung Kim
NBER Working Paper No. 10890
November 2004, Revised December 2007
JEL No. D3,J1,O1
ABSTRACT
Using an endogenous-growth, overlapping-generations framework where human capital is the engine
of growth, we trace the dynamic evolution of income and fertility distributions and their interdependencies
over three endogenous phases of economic development. In our model, heterogeneous families determine
fertility and children’s human capital, and generations are linked via parental altruism and social interactions.
We derive and test discriminating propositions concerning the dynamic behavior of inequalities in
fertility, educational attainments, and three endogenous income inequality measures -- family-income
inequality, income-group inequality, and the Gini coefficient. In this context, we also reexamine the
"Kuznets hypothesis" concerning the relation between income growth and inequality.

Isaac Ehrlich
415 Fronczak Hall
University of Buffalo
Box 601520
Buffalo, NY 14260-1520
and NBER
mgtehrl@buffalo.edu
Jinyoung Kim
Department of Economics
Korea University
5-1, Anam-Dong, Sungbuk-Ku
Seoul, Korea 136-701
jinykim@korea.ac.kr

INTRODUCTION
Using historical data from a number of developing and developed countries, Kuznets (1955,
1963) argued that income inequality first rises and then falls during a transitional development
period. Post-Kuznets studies fall into two main groups. The first re-tested his hypothesis against data
from many other countries. 1 The second dealt with the development–inequality nexus theoretically as
a causal relation going from either growth to inequality or vice versa. 2 Both sets of studies offered
conflicting conclusions about the competing theoretical and empirical hypotheses.
One issue that was hardly addressed so far is the relevance of relative fertility choices of
different income groups for understanding the evolution of income inequalities over all phases of
economic development, including the comparative levels of income inequality across less-developed,
stagnant economies and highly developed, persistently growing ones. The relevance of fertility and
related population trends to income distributions is two-fold: measures of the “size distribution of
income”, such as the shares of specific income brackets in total income, or the Gini coefficient are
weighted by the population shares of different income brackets, which reflect underlying fertility
differences across these brackets. But even individual- or family-based income inequality measures
are indirectly affected by parental choices concerning fertility and investment in human capital of
offspring. This is especially important over the transitional development period, which typically
involves a “demographic transition” as well.
We tackle this issue by developing an overlapping-generations endogenous-growth model
with heterogeneous families, where human capital is the engine of growth and parents determine
fertility and educational investments in offspring. Our deterministic model offers a dynamic
extension of Becker’s (1967) model of income distribution, as well as a generalization of more recent
work by Ehrlich and Lui (1991), Zhong (1998), and Ehrlich and Yuen (2000). We show that the

1

behavior of income inequality over the transitional development phase can vary in different countries,
depending on the factors triggering economic takeoff and their impact on fertility and investment
behavior of different family groups.
Our model suggests that the relationship between income growth and income inequality is
associative, not causal. Three main forces influence this association: a. interactions between
overlapping generations within families; b. heterogeneities in endowments and investment
efficiencies across families; and c. social interactions across families. 3 The model consists of
finitely-lived individuals. Parents optimize on investments in the quantity and quality of children (in
an extended version outlined in Appendix A, on savings as well). Persistent heterogeneities and social
interactions across families enable us to derive equilibrium paths of income, schooling, and fertility
distributions over three phases: a stagnant steady state, characterizing economies in a pre-takeoff
stage, a perpetual-growth steady state, more related to economies in a highly developed stage, and a
transition phase linking the two.
By this approach we are also able to provide new insights about the “Kuznets hypothesis.”
The association between income growth and inequality is influenced partly by the parameters
determining the inequality levels at the growth vs. stagnant steady state. The association is in a state
of flux during the transitional development phase. Specifically, we show that over this phase the paths
of alternative income inequality measures can assume a U shape, an inverted-U shape, or
combinations of the two, with the inequality level ultimately falling, rising, or staying the same,
depending on the way heterogeneity sources are correlated across families, how relative fertility and
population shares are affected across groups, and the inequality measure used. We derive three such
measures as endogenous variables: family-income inequality, income-group inequality, and the Gini
coefficient. A distinct implication of our model is that regardless of the specific shape of the income

2

inequality path over the transitional development phase, fertility inequality can be expected to assume
an inverted-U shape, with both tails converging on virtual equality.
Section I introduces the model. In section II we derive equilibrium regimes and comparative
dynamic implications, and in section III we present simulated dynamic paths of our basic inequality
measures. Section IV presents supportive evidence on the dynamic evolution of fertility, schooling,
and income inequality based on international panel data from 1950-98.
I. THE MODEL AND EQUILIBRIUM SOLUTIONS
A. The Economic Environment
To derive income and fertility inequality paths over the entire development process, we
extend the deterministic representative-family, OLG model of endogenous growth in Ehrlich and Lui
[EL] (1991) to a heterogeneous-family case that recognizes inter-family interactions as well.
The Economy: The economy is comprised of heterogeneous family groups of varying income levels.
For simplicity we illustrate the model by recognizing just two family groups indexed by i =1,2: a
leading (1) and a following group (2), which in principle could switch places over the process of
development. We implicitly rely on positive assortative mating within groups to maintain their
separate identity in any stable steady state, because if inter-group mating is allowed, and children
inherit the average characteristics of their parents, human capital attainments and income would
eventually converge in all families, given our deterministic setup. 4 In the benchmark model agents
live over two periods: childhood, t-1, when human capital is formed through parental investments,
and parenthood, t (but see Appendix A). All family-based decisions are made by working parents.
Similarly to Becker (1967), we focus on three objective sources of inherited heterogeneity: a.
differences in learning or production abilities (Ai); b. differences in income-yielding “endowments”
( H i), stemming from inherited social status, political power, or other personal assets; c. differences

3

in education-financing costs (θi). We abstract from differences in preferences or external production
technologies, since these need not be related to idiosyncratic personal differences.
Goods Production and Income: The economy is competitive and human capital is the sole asset.
Production or earning capacity of a parent in group i, ( H i+Hit), is composed of a fixed, inherited
income-producing endowment ( H i) measured in units of human capital, and a stock of human
capital, (Hit), attained through parental inputs. Labor supply is assumed fixed. For convenience, we
also assume that consumer goods, including educational services, can be purchased. Under a linear
and strongly additive production technology for all goods, aggregate earnings (Y) equals aggregate
production capacities in each period (L), and firms’ zero-profit condition, π=Y-ϖL=0, yields a
time-invariant real rental rate per unit of production capacity, ϖ =1, which also guarantees full
employment. We initially ignore savings, so earnings are identical to income. In Appendix A, we
allow for savings and thereby for an old-age period of life for retired parents, and show that our
inferences concerning earnings inequality hold for income inequality as well.
Human-capital production: The human-capital formation rule is given by:
(1) Hit+1 = Aihit( H i+Hit)1-γ[( H 1+H1t)(N1t/Nit)]γ ≡ Aihit ( H i+Hit)(Sit)γ,
where hit is the share of earning capacity ( H i+Hit) a parent from family-group i (i = 1, 2) invests in
educating each child, H i and Hit are the parent’s endowed and attained human capital stocks,
respectively, and N1t/Nit is the ratio of the population shares of parents in family groups 1 and i. Sit
denotes an inter-family, “social interaction” factor, which we define below. Note that for the top
income group i=1, equation (1) becomes H1t+1 = A1h1t ( H 1+H1t).
Equation (1) captures two types of interactions in human capital production within and across
families: a. Persistent human capital formation can be sustained over time only if parents invest in
their children’s knowledge; b. Knowledge attained by agents with the higher earning capacity

4

augments the attained production capacity of, and thus has a spillover effect on, agents with lower
capacity (see below). Human capital formation is thus a social, as well as a private, process.
The intergenerational interaction is captured by the relationship between Hit+1 and Hit in
equation (1). The inter-family interaction is defined by the term (Sit)γ in equation (1), where S2t ≡
[( H 1+H1t)/( H 2+H2t)][N1t/N2t] ≡ E2tP2t. The ratios E2t and P2t reflect the relative earning capacities
and family-group sizes of agents in group 1 relative to 2 in generation t, and γ<1 is a
spillover-intensity parameter. This specification is designed to capture social-interaction as a
knowledge spillover effect by which agents with lower earning capacity, or effective knowledge
(group 2), benefit from interactions with leaders in knowledge (group 1) in various contexts. 5
The relevance of E2t is straightforward: the greater the disparity in knowledge, the greater the
potential learning benefit to members of group 2 from knowledge-transfer from members of group 1,
given their own knowledge. P2t≡ N1t/N2t captures the determinant of effective interaction between
individual members of groups 1 and 2, which is simply the conventional “teacher-student ratio”. 6
Preferences and Motivating Forces: For the sake of parsimony, we take parental altruism to be the
sole force motivating parents’ demand for children. The utility function of agent i at period t is:
(2) U(Ci1,t, Wit+1) = [1/(1-σ)][Ci1,t1-σ −1] + δ[1/(1-σ)][Wit+11-σ −1],
where δ denotes the inverse intertemporal discount factor, and σ the inverse intertemporal elasticity
of substitution in consumption. In equation (2), Ci1,t denotes consumption of parents:
(3) Ci1,t = ( H i+Hit)[1 − vinit − θihitnit].
The variable nit represents the number of children per parent, treated as a continuous and certain
variable. The endogenous size of group i thus evolves over time as Nit+1=Nitnit. The parameters vi and
θi are fixed unit costs, as fractions of earning capacity, of raising a child and financing educational
investments per child, respectively. The latter may vary significantly across family groups because of

5

capital-market imperfections. The last term in equation (2),
(4) Wit+1 ≡ B(nit)βHit+1α , with α=1 and β>1,
represents a parental altruism function in an OLG context, borrowed from EL (1991), which reflects
psychic rewards parents obtain vicariously from children’s number and attained human capital. 7 The
restrictions on α and β are necessary to obtain interior solutions for both hit and nit. To ensure the
concavity of equation (2) we must further restrict α(1-σ)<1 (or, σ>0) and β(1-σ)<1.
B. Basic Solutions
The objective function (2) is maximized by choosing nit, and hit, subject to (1), (3), and (4),
taking {Hit, H1t, Nit, N1t} as given. The first-order conditions for optimal nit and hit are:
(5) 0 = − Ci1,t-σ (vi + θihit) ( H i+Hit) + δ Wit+1-σ β B(nit)β-1Hit+1α, for nit ≥ 0, and
(6) 0 = − Ci1,t-σ θinit ( H i+Hit) + δ Wit+1-σ α B(nit)β Hit+1α-1 Ai( H i+Hit)(Sit)γ, for hit ≥ 0.
Equations (5) and (6) confirm that in order for interior solutions for nit and hit to co-exist over
all development phases, we must restrict β>α, and α=1 (note that a growth equilibrium cannot be
sustained if α>1). The optimal solutions for hit and nit are then found to be:
(7) hit = [vi/θi(β−1)], or θihit = vi/(β−1) <1
(8) [1−βvinit/(β−1)]–σ = δ [B(Ai/θi)(Sit)γ]1–σ [vi/(β−1)]-σ (nit)β(1-σ)-1.
Note that in equation (8), the left-hand and right-hand sides represent convex, monotonically rising
and falling marginal cost and benefits schedules of nit, respectively. Their intersection thus offers
unique solutions for hit and nit (the latter having an upper limit of ni = [(β-1)/(βvi)]).
By equation (7), the equilibrium value of hit is independent of the level of human capital,
essentially because for altruistic parents a change in H raises proportionally both the marginal
benefits and costs of investment H. An interesting feature of equation (8) is that ability, Ai, and unit
financing cost of education, θi, exert opposite effects on nti. In fact, the solution depends on the ratio

6

ei ≡ Ai/θi, or families’ relative “investment efficiencies”. Equation (8) indicates that equilibrium
fertility, nit = n(·) = n(vi, B, β, ei, δ, Sit), falls with vi and rises with the other parameters entering n(·).
C. Income Inequality Measures
Three income inequality indices become endogenous functions of our model’s state variables:
a. E2t ≡ ( H 1+H1t)/( H 2+H2t) is a family-income inequality index: the ratio of the (full) incomes of
individual families in family-group 1 relative to family-group 2. An inequality measure directly
related to E2t in our model is inequality in attained human capital stocks, H1t/H2t, which may be
captured by the standard deviation of schooling attainments.
b. S2t ≡ [( H 1+H1t)/( H 2+H2t)][N1t/N2t] ≡ E2tP2t is our income-group, or income-bracket inequality
index − a product of relative income levels and group sizes of family-group 1 relative to 2− which is
also a component of the social interaction term in equation (1). It measures the fraction of aggregate
income going to the top income bracket (above a given dollar value), relative to lower bracket. Note
that P2t≡N2t/N2t is a related inequality measure – an income-group-size inequality index. It measures
the proportion of families in the top income bracket relative to those in the lower bracket, or the
relative population shares of families in the two income brackets. The latter is not independent of S2t
and E2t since, by definition, P2t≡S2t/E2t.
c. The Gini coefficient, Gt ≡ (S2t − P2t)/[(1+ S2t)(1+ P2t)], turns out to be a non-linear function of S2t
and P2t. Specifically, it is an increasing function of S2t, but a decreasing function of P2t.
An immediate insight from all of these income inequality measures is their inherent
dependence on the population shares of different family groups, resulting from their fertility choices.
II. EQUILIBRIUM REGIMES AND COMPARATIVE DYNAMICS
Equations (7) and (8) represent a recursive model, since the leading group 1 arrives at all of its
choices independently as a function of its own parameters, while the following group 2’s fertility

7

choices are affected by those of family 1 through the social interaction term, (S2t)γ. From equations
(1) and (7), we derive an explicit, linear law of motion of human capital in group 1:
(9) H1t+1 = [v1(A1/θ1)/ (β−1)] H1t + [v1(A1/θ1)/ (β−1)] H 1.
Since the economy is dictated by family 1, the equation of motion (9) indicates the existence of two
equilibrium regimes, depending on the magnitudes of the model’s basic parameters: If the slope
dH1t+1/dH1t =v1(A1/θ1)/ (β−1) = A1h1t , exceeds 1, H1t grows exponentially without bound and the
economy is in a persistent growth equilibrium regime. If the slope is below 1, H1t becomes constant
and a stagnant-equilibrium regime ensues. The transitional development phase connecting the
regimes’ steady states is supported by the same parameter set that sustains the growth regime.
For equilibrium steady states to exist, however, certain outcomes must hold:
Proposition 1. Both fertility rates and marginal rates of change of human capital stocks in different
family groups must converge at any stable equilibrium steady state. Formally, we can show that:
(10) n1t = n2t, and a1t ≡ (dH1t+1/dH1t) = A1h1t = a2t ≡ (dH2t+1/dH2t) = A2h2t(S2t)γ.
Proof: In any equilibrium steady state which preserves the heterogeneous family groups, their
relative population shares, P2t ≡ N1t/N2t must be constant over time, requiring fertility rates to equalize
across families. 8 Suppose there is an exogenous shock which initially lowers n2 below n1. This will
increase P2t and the social interaction term S2t in equation (8), raising the marginal benefit from
children in family 2 but not in family 1, which is unaffected by S2t. The rise in n2t subsequently
depresses P2t and S2t, and these adjustments continue until desired fertility rates equalize (although
not necessarily actual rates if the latter were subject to purely stochastic deviations from desired
fertility rates; see footnote 4). This result is consistent with optimal fertility choices, since in a stable
steady state, the impact of lower income is offset by a proportionally lower shadow price of fertility. 9
Similarly, in a balanced growth steady state, H1t/H2t, e.g., must be constant over time. This requires

8

the growth rate of human capital, which is the same as the latter’s marginal rate of change or total
derivative (dHit+1/dHit) at the growth steady state, to equalize across groups. This result will be shown
to apply in a stagnant steady state as well (see section II.A).
Given our assumed uniformity of preferences and external production parameters, M ≡ {B, β,
γ, δ, σ}, dynamic stability also requires a parameter restriction: the unit cost of raising a child as a
fraction of earning capacity must be identical across families, or v1=v2. Put differently, only initial
endowments ( H i), abilities (Ai), and unit investment-financing costs (θi) are allowed to vary across
families. This heterogeneity restriction necessarily holds in the log utility case. 10 More generally,
suppose that v1 > v2. Equation (7) implies that the income share invested in educating a child would
then be higher in family 1 relative to 2, θ1h1t > θ2h2t. By proposition 1 the rate of growth of human
capital must be identical across families in a stable growth steady state, A1h1=A2h2 (S2t)γ. These
equations imply that (A1/θ2) < (A2/θ2)(S2t)γ, i.e., family 2’s marginal cost of fertility schedule would
locate below that of family 1, while its marginal benefit schedule would locate above 1’s. Optimal
fertility would then be strictly higher in family 2 relative to 1, negating a stable equilibrium. To assure
consistent parameter restrictions we must v1=v2=v in all development phases.
A. Stagnant Equilibrium Steady State (s)
In a stagnant equilibrium (SE) steady state, the control and state variables and all inequality
measures are constant over time, given the parameters affecting the rate of return on human capital,
Ai/θi and v. If the latter are sufficiently low, so (dH1t+1/dH1t) = A1h1t = v(A1/θ1)/(β−1) <1 in equation
(9), equation (1) for agent 1 would necessarily converge on SE from any arbitrary value of H10. Local
stability conditions for agent 1 require, in addition, that dn1t/dN1t <1. For agent 2, and thus the full
system, the necessary and sufficient conditions for local stability can be shown to require that the
elasticity of fertility n2(s) with respect to the social-interaction term S2(s) would lie within the

9

following range: 0<e(s)<2{1–[γK/(K+1)]}, where e(s) is the elasticity of n2(s) with respect to the
social-interaction term S2(s), or e(s) ≡ ∂ln[n2(s)]/ ∂ln[S2(s)], and K ≡ {H2(s)/[ H 2+H2(s)]} <1. In our
numerical simulations using the baseline parameters of Table 1 part 1, this condition is satisfied for
any permissible values of the social-interaction intensity 0≤γ≤1 (see Appendix B.1).
Proposition 2. In a stable stagnant-equilibrium steady state, family-income inequality, E2(s), and
families’ relative human capital attainments equal their relative inherited income endowments:
(11) E2(s) = [H1t/H2t](s)= H 1/ H 2.
Proof: Equation (11) is obtained utilizing equation (1), the stagnancy of human capital attainments in
the SE, and the expectation that a1(s)≡A1h1(s)=a2(s)≡A2h2(s)[S2(s)]γ (proposition 1). Indeed, the latter
must hold in the SE as well as the GE: By the heterogeneity condition v1=v2, equation (7) implies that
(12) θ1h1(s) = θ2h2(s).
Inserting the condition a1(s)=a2(s) in equation (8) is thus seen necessary to guarantees that n1(s)=n2(s).
Proposition 2 implies that status differences are the key factor determining family income
inequality in economies that are stagnant over long periods, an inference which seems compatible
with historical evidence, such as pre-industrial revolution Europe. Equation (11) is also dynamically
stable: suppose we start from a stable SE. If a parameter shock lowers a2, raising H1t/H2t above
H 1/ H 2, then E2t and S2t would also rise initially. This would raise n2t and depress P2t and S2t, which
in turn would increase a2t and lower H1t/H2t until the initial equilibrium is restored.
Note that by equations (10) and (12), the income shares spent on both raising (vn) and
educating (θh) children equalize across families. Combining these with equation (8) allows us to
derive the stagnant-equilibrium value of our income-group inequality measure:
(13) S2(s) ≡ E2(s) P2(s) = [(A1/θ1)/(A2/θ2)](1/γ) ≡ (e1/e2)(1/γ).
Proposition 3. In a stagnant steady state the shares of earning capacity devoted to human capital

10

investments per child, θihi(s) are equalized across all family groups, and income-group inequality,
S2(s) depends strictly on the relative “investment efficiencies” of family 1 relative to 2, (e1/e2)(1/γ).
Unlike S2(s), however, the size distribution of families across income brackets P2(s) and the Gini
coefficient G(s) depend on both relative family endowments and investment efficiencies.
Equation (13) has an intuitive interpretation: The only way the social interaction term S2(s) ≡
E2(s)P2(s) can adjust to satisfy equation (10) is through adjustments in fertility choices and their
impact on P2(s). Fertility choices are strictly a function of relative investment efficiencies (equation
8). Therefore, adjustments in S2(s) must be a function of relative investment efficiencies as well.
This analysis yields a set of comparative-dynamic implications in the SE steady state. By
Proposition 2, family-income inequality, E2(s), is strictly a function of families’ relative endowments.
By proposition 3, any changes in relative income-group inequality, S2(s)≡E2(s)P2(s), thus occur via
the groups’ relative population shares, P2(s)=[N1/N2](s). For example, an increase in group 1’s
relative investment efficiency e1/e2 would increase S2(s) by increasing its population share, P2(s). A
higher intensity of knowledge spillover, γ, leaves family choices intact but lowers P2(s) hence, S2(s).
Changes in other common parameters can affect, ni(s), and hi(s), but not any income inequality
measures: by equations (7) and (8), higher fertility unit costs (v) increase hi and lower ni, while
stronger altruistic preferences (B) raise ni in all families (See Table 1 part 1.)
Does income inequality change systematically at different income levels? Note that while
income levels are stagnant in a SE, they can vary with parameter shifts: A skill-biased technological
advance raising family 1’s relative investment efficiency, e1/e2, ultimately raises income levels in all
families. By proposition 2, however, family-income inequality, E2(s), remains unchanged, while by
proposition 3, income-group inequality, S2(s), rises because the wealth effect generated by a higher
e1 temporarily increases group 1’s relative fertility, and ultimately its population share P2(s). The

11

impact on Gini is ambiguous, since G(s) rises with S2(s), but falls with P2(s). 11 The association
between income levels and inequality at the SE thus depends on the inequality measure used.
B. Growth Equilibrium Steady State (g)
In a steady state of a balanced-growth-equilibrium (GE), human capital stocks Hit grow
exponentially without bound, while the long-run values of ni(g), hi(g), and all inequality measures are
constant. Since the relative impact of the endowments, H i, vanishes, proposition 1 implies that the
long-run growth rate of human capital in all groups converges on its marginal value in family group
1, limt→∞ (Hit+1/Hit) ≡ a1(g)=A1h1(g) = ai(g) =Aihi(g)Si(g)γ. Local stability for group 1 is assured if
a1(g)>1, or v(A1/θ1) > (β−1), since dh1t/dH1t=0 and dn1t/dN1t ≤ 0 as in the SE. The necessary and
sufficient conditions for the local stability of the full system, which guaranties a unique solution for
income-group inequality, S2(g)=E2(g)P2(g) but not for its component parts (see the discussion below),
are shown in Appendix B.2 to require that {– γ < e(g) < 2– γ}, where e(g) is the elasticity of n2(g) with
respect to S2(g). Again, our numerical illustration using the baseline parameters in Table 1, part 2
indicate that this condition is satisfied for all permissible values of 0≤γ≤1 (see Appendix B.2).
Proposition 4. Proposition 3 remains valid at the growth equilibrium steady state as well.
Moreover, if the relative distribution of the heterogeneous parameters Ai and θi remains the same in
the SE and GE, income-group inequality S2 would converge on the same level in both steady states:
(14) S2(g) ≡ E2(g)P2(g) = [(A1/θ1)/(A2/θ2)](1/γ) ≡ (e1/e2)(1/γ) = S2(s).
The proof is the same as for proposition 3. The comparative-dynamic implications of equation
(14) are also similar to those of equation (13): S2(g) rises with the relative investment efficiency
(e1/e2) and falls with the spillover coefficient γ, as is the case in the SE steady state. No unique
solutions exist, however, for the growth-equilibrium values of E2(g) or P2(g) (see Appendix B.2).
Unlike the stagnant steady-state case, where family-income inequality E2(s) was determined strictly

12

by the relative family endowments, the endowments’ influence vanishes with persistent growth. The
comparative values of E2 in the GE vs. SE steady states thus depend on the evolution of E2t along the
transitional phase. The same holds for the income-group-size inequality index, P2t.
Comparative-dynamics effects of parameter shifts on inequalities in family-income, E2(g),
and income-group-size, P2(g), are thus ambiguous. A skill-biased technological or institutional
advance favoring the leading family, which by proposition 4 unambiguously raises S2(g)≡E2(g)P2(g),
must raise either E2(g), or P2(g), or both. E2(g) necessarily rises if the upward shift in A1 raises the
growth rate of human capital and income in family 1, A1h1t, above that in family 2 over the entire
transitional-adjustment path. As in the SE case, fertility rises as well, as shown by our simulations in
Table 1 part 2, because an increase in A1 generates a wealth effect, which favors fertility over
educational investment. Over the transitional dynamics adjustment, family 1’s higher income growth
rate ultimately lifts the income growth rate and fertility in family 2 as well, due to the rising social
interaction effect (S2t)γ. Thus, unlike the SE case, both family-income inequality E2(g) and
income-group-size inequality P2(g) rise while fertility inequality increases over the initial part of the
adjustment period, but ultimately falls and vanishes at a new GE steady state. The change in Gini is
ambiguous, since G rises with S2 and falls with P2, but our simulations indicate that G(g) rises as well,
as S2(g) rises more sharply.
These results appear to be consistent with the US experience following the “Information
Technology revolution”: empirical studies have shown that the Gini coefficient rose in the 1980s
(e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992; Acemoglu, 2002). As we predict, Census data also show that over the
same period total fertility levels reversed a historic downward trend since the baby boom and started
rising from 1.74 in 1977 to a peak of 2.08 in 1990, remaining stable thereafter at about 2.02, while the
coefficient of variation of fertility rose from 0.619 in 1983 to 0.710 in 1994, but with the rate of

13

increase diminishing since then (see Figure A). 12
Table 1, part 2 also confirms the implications of equations (7) and (8) that a rise in v lowers
ni(g) and raises hi(g), thus the growth rate, while a rise in B raises only ni(g). Neither affects any
income inequality measure. This is in contrast to a skill-biased technical advance, which raises all
income inequality measures and the growth rate as well. The association between income growth rate
and income inequality thus depends on the parameter changes responsible for their co-movements.
C. Takeoff Triggers.
As equation (9) predicts, starting at a stagnant equilibrium, an upward shock in investment
efficiency, Ai/θi, or in the common unit cost of raising children, v, even one affecting just group 1, can
generate a takeoff and a transitional development phase for all groups. Under the altruistic
specification of our model, the “demographic transition” typically accompanying a takeoff, whereby
fertility generally declines, can be generated by a sufficient upward shift in the unit cost share of
raising children, v, but not by a technological advance: the latter generates a higher growth rate and
thus a wealth effect favoring fertility (see Table 1 part 3). 13 By propositions 3 and 4, however, shifts
in v, thus in fertility levels have no bearing on the dynamic evolution of our income inequality
measures over the transitional development phase. Also, the shapes of the evolution paths of all our
income inequality measures, i.e., whether income inequality is monotonically rising or falling or has
a U-shape, or an inverted U-shape, or any combinations therein, is dictated just by shifts in the
parameters affecting investment efficiency (Ai and θi). The paths of income inequality we derive
below are thus independent of the evolution of fertility levels, but are affected by the evolution of
relative fertility levels across groups and their relative population shares, P2t, as our analysis in the
following section demonstrates.
III. INEQUALITY PATHS OVER THE TRANSITIONAL DEVELOPMENT PHASE

14

A. Paths of Income Inequality Measures
The preceding analysis indicates that the behavior of inequalities over the development phase
partly depends on the type of shock that produces a takeoff. An equally important issue is how fast
any given shock reaches different family groups: a skill-biased technological advance, e.g., is likely
to first reach the group with the highest investment efficiency, or affect it proportionally more than
others. While this group need not necessarily be the one with the highest income − this depends on the
correlation between ability and initial endowments across family groups − a positive correlation is
likely (see Becker, 1967). To contain the possible scenarios we focus on three that are neither
exhaustive nor necessarily of equal empirical plausibility:
a. Synchronous and uniform shocks: These shocks affect all takeoff-triggering parameters (Ai/θi,
v) simultaneously and by the same proportion. This case can be dubbed “the neutral equilibrium
path”; we can show that over the transitional phase:
(15) S2t = S2(s) = S2(g) = [(A1/θ1)/(A2/θ2)](1/γ), and E2t = E2(s) = E2(g) = H 1/ H 2.
Put differently, our basic earnings inequality measures chart a horizontal path all along the
development process. This is because a uniform proportional increase in a takeoff-triggering
parameter affects all optimality conditions symmetrically, leaving constant the spillover effect. Since
the Gini coefficient is a function of S2 and P2, it also exhibits a flat transition path.
b. Shocks favorable to family 1: Such a shock affects family 1 proportionally more than, or ahead
of, family 2. An example would be a technical advance or a market reform that enhances just the
productivity of especially skilled workers (A1), such as a shift from a command to a market economy,
or one that ultimately enhances the productivity of all agents proportionally but is first integrated by
family 1, such as the IT revolution. We implicitly assume a positive correlation between
income-generating endowments and efficiency at human capital investments, or COV( H i, Ai/θi) > 0,

15

so the higher-income family 1 is a leading group at both the stagnant and growth steady states.
If family 1 is affected ahead of family 2, the transitional development phase would be
characterized by the co-existence of family groups in different stages of transition: Family 1 would
initially become a “growth family” while the other remains a “stagnant family”. But the persistent
growth in family 1’s income ultimately produces a takeoff for all, and by proposition 1 all will
eventually grow at an equal rate. The time paths of all income inequality measures (S2, E2, and G) will
exhibit an inverted-U shape, consistent with the “Kuznets hypothesis” (see Figure 1).
The shapes of the income inequality paths in all scenarios, including the comparative income
inequality levels in the growth, relative to the stagnant steady states, depend strictly on whether the
technology shift ultimately affects all families “uniformly”, i.e., equi-proportionally, or
non-uniformly. If a skill-biased technology shift ultimately becomes uniform, it does not affect the
GE income-class inequality S2≡E2P2 by equation (14), but it lowers the GE family-income inequality
E2(g), because the wealth effect triggered by the jump in A1 initially raises the relative fertility level
of group 1, and ultimately its relative population share, P2(g). If the shock raises A1 proportionally
more for family 1, income inequality would then be monotonically increasing over the development
phase for all our three income inequality measures.
c. Shocks favorable to family 2: A family-2 friendly shock could occur, e.g., when a less segmented
capital market lowers the education financing cost to all families, but especially to family 2, thus
lowering (e1/e2), or when the shock first benefits family 2, which could not initially finance private
schooling. In this case, the takeoff-triggering shocks will produce transition paths just opposite to
those in case b. The time paths of all inequality measures will assume a U shape if family 2
experiences a takeoff shock ahead of family 1 (see Figure 2). Whether the inequality level rises or
falls at the GE, relative to the SE steady state depends on whether the non-synchronized shock

16

ultimately becomes equi-proportional, in which case the income-bracket inequality, S2, is constant
and P2(g) falls, so family-income inequality, E2(g), rises. If investment efficiency rises proportionally
more for family 2, all income inequality levels would be monotonously decreasing, or family 2 may
overtake family 1. 14 Our simulations of cases b and c also reveal negative associations between
income growth rate and income inequality over the transitional development phase. In case b,
income inequality and per-capita income growth rate are negatively associated at an early stage of the
transition but become positively associated at a more advanced stage, as Barro (2000) finds, while in
case c they are negatively associated, which is what Forbes (2000) finds. Our analysis thus shows that
the dynamic association between income growth and income inequality can vary by the specific
takeoff triggers, or at different stages of the transitional development phase.
Regardless of the way a takeoff-generating shock affects different families, a fundamental
implication of our model is that the shape of the family-income inequality path over the transitional
development period, E2t ≡ ( H 1+H1t)/( H 2+H2t), would always be congruent to that of human capital
attainments, H1t/H2t, regardless of the specific shape of the paths. Our simulations indicate that this
result applies to our other measures of income inequality as well.
B. Paths of Inequality in Fertility and Human Capital Investment
Since by proposition 1, desired fertility is equalized across families in the SE and GE steady
states, while generally deviating across families over the transitional phase linking the two, we have:
Proposition 5. Except in the “neutral equilibrium” case, the inequality path of desired fertility will
exhibit an inverted-U shape, but tend toward equality in the two steady states framing the
transitional phase (see Figures 1d and 2d). In the neutral-equilibrium case, inequality in desired
fertility assumes a flat time path.
If income inequality measures assume an inverted-U shape due to a skill-oriented technology

17

advance, as in case b of the preceding section, family 1’s relative fertility will initially rise above that
of family 2 and fall below it in subsequent periods, but ultimately result in a higher population share
of group 1, P2(g). This pattern of evolution in relative fertility and income inequality, would not be
altered at all if the technology shock is followed by a rise in the cost of housing or opportunity costs
of female’s time, which raises the unit cost-share of bearing and raising children, v, and generates a
demographic transition for both families. This association between fertility rankings and income
inequality is consistent with the findings in Kremer and Chen (2002) and De la Croix and Doepke
(2003). If the income inequality path assumes a U shape as a result of lower financing costs benefiting
lower-income groups, as in case c of the preceding section, family 1’s fertility will initially fall short
of, but then exceed, that of family 2 during the transition phase. Again, this shape of the income
inequality path would not be altered if a subsequent shock in v generates a demographic transition
with family 2’s fertility level falling ahead of 1’s. In our GE framework, however, such associations
do not indicate causality, nor can they persist, as desired fertility differences ultimately vanish in a
steady state.
IV. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS
A. Basic Tests
We test empirically two basic implications of the model: a. By Proposition 5, we expect
fertility inequality to display an inverted-U shape with flat tails over the development phase; b. Since
schooling levels may approximate human capital attainments, we can test another basic prediction:
We expect the shapes of schooling and family-income inequality paths to be similar over the
transition phase. 15 By our simulation analysis, this expectation applies to all our income-inequality
measures as well. To test these propositions we use panel data from different countries over periods
of varying length. Since all countries in our sample exhibit positive growth rates over the period, they

18

represent economies in transition toward a steady state of growth.
B. Data and Variables Used
a. Completed fertility. Data on the distribution of surviving children per woman are available from the
World Fertility Surveys and the Demographic and Health Surveys. Our sample is based on 72 surveys
of 29 developing countries in various years between 1974 and 2000. From the individual-level data
in each survey, we derive the distribution of surviving children of women age 40 an over. We make
this restriction to insure that our measures relate to women who completed childbearing. We then use
the standard deviation of the distribution of surviving children per woman age 40 and over
[SD-FERT] as our fertility inequality measure. But since the [SD-FERT] is subject to a secular drift,
we enter the average level of completed fertility as a control variable, [AV-FERT].
b. Human capital. Our data are taken from Barro and Lee (2000). 16 We use the average number of
years of schooling in the population age 15 and over as a proxy for human capital stock. As a measure
of inequality in educational attainments we use the standard deviation of the distribution of schooling
years [SD-SCHYR] in the population age 15 and over. As in the fertility inequality regressions, we
also add the mean schooling years as a control variable [AV-SCHYR].
c. Income inequality. The data are taken from Dollar and Kraay (2001). These data cover 86 countries
over the period 1950-1998. No data are available about income-group relative inequality, Si. We
proxy our family-income relative inequality measure, Ei, however, by an inter-quintile income
inequality ratio [QUINT] (each ‘quintile’ representing, by definition, equal number of households),
and Gini (G) by the conventional Gini coefficient [GINI]. To be consistent with our model, we use
only observations that are calculated from household income data, excluding observations based on
personal income and expenditure data.
d. Regressors. We use real per capita GDP level [RGDPn], reported in Heston, Summers, and Aten

19

[HSA] (2001) as a measure of the economy’s development level. Note that since RGDPn is an
endogenous variable in our model, its level summarizes the impact of the model’s basic parameters
which affect our dependent variables as well. We use government’s share of GDP [GOV] as an
additional regressor, however, as a proxy for government re-distributional policies which may have
an exogenous effect on our inequality measures. As a robustness check, we also enter the time trend
as (T) to account for other possible missing trended indicators of the development phase. Summary
statistics for all variables are given in Appendix C.
C. Regression Models
Our basic regression specification links our inequality measures as dependent variables with
regressors introduced in the preceding paragraph plus AV-FERT and AV-SCHYR in the fertility and
schooling inequality regressions, all in linear form, but RGDPn is entered in cubic or higher-order
polynomial forms. This is because we predict the flattening of the income inequality, educational
attainments and fertility paths as the economy converges on a growth steady state.
Our regression specification is not intended to identify a causal effect going from RGDPn to
the inequality measures, as these variables are simultaneously determined by our model. However,
the use of RGDPn as an indicator of an economy’s stage of development is likely to expose the
estimated regression coefficients, which we use to depict the shape of the inequality paths over the
development process, to simultaneity biases. To derive unbiased and consistent estimated regression
coefficients, we use a 2SLS method where RGDPn is treated as an endogenous variable. As
instrumental variables (IVs) we include in the first-stage regression the inflation rate in log form
ln(INFLA) and one-year-lagged RGDPn. INFLA is used to capture the impact of inflation on the real
economy, which is shown to affect RGDPn adversely in the first stage regression. Alternatively, we
also estimated the structural 2SLS regression equation using 2-year-lagged or 3-year-lagged RGDPn,

20

as well as all three lagged RGDPn variables jointly as IV’s, which produced very similar coefficient
estimates. Basmann’s test indicates that INFLA and each of the lagged RGDPn variables can serve as
an IV in the first-stage regression, and when introduced as additional regressors in the second stage,
each of these variables had insignificant and inconsistent effects, validating their use as IVs.
As robustness tests, models 1-3 in Tables 2-5 present OLS regression results based on a few
model modifications. In model 1 we enter only the basic regressors accounting for behavior of the
relative inequality measures over the development phase. Model 2 allows for fixed country effects,
which capture just within-country variability in all variables, and in model 3 we add also GOV and
T as regressors. Models 4-6 in Tables 2-5 repeat the specification of models 1-3 using the 2SLS
method, which we use to derive Figure 3. In the fertility regressions of Table 2, we employ
country-specific random-effects, instead of fixed-effects, models to increase the regressions’
degrees of freedom, because the number of observations per country is small (2.6 on average). To test
for serial correlation, we applied an AR(1) specification using models 2 and 5 of each table. The
Durbin-Watson test cannot reject the null hypothesis of no autocorrelation in all cases.
D. Results
The fertility results are reported in Table 2. All models in the table produce an
inverted-U-shaped association between fertility inequality and real income. The estimated regression
line we chose to depict in Figure 3a is based on the 2SLS results from model 4 (with no random
effects), because this allows for regression estimates based on variability in regressors both within
and across the countries in our relatively small sample. The shape of the inequality path remains
virtually the same, however, if we base it on model 5 (with random effects). Note that the sample is
dominated by developing countries (In Figure 3a, fertility inequality peaks at an RGDPn level of
$3,354 which means that 67% of the observations lie below this real GDP level). Therefore, if we

21

extrapolate the regression line to RGDPn typical of developed economies, fertility inequality would
drop sharply, as we predict theoretically. As for the effects of other regressors, the standard deviation
of the fertility distribution is monotonically related to the distribution’s mean, as one would expect for
any distribution. GOV has a negative but insignificant estimated coefficient in the fertility regression
(it has, however, a significant effect in the Gini regressions). The time-trend regressor is related
inversely to fertility inequality, but directly to educational attainments inequality.
Table 3 reports the results concerning inequality in educational attainments. Regression
results without fixed effects indicate an inverted-U-shaped association between income and
educational-attainment inequality, as depicted in Figure 3b that is based on model 4. Results with
fixed effects show a slightly different pattern (U shape at lower RGDPn values and inverted-U shape
at higher values), essentially because schooling attainments have much lower variability among
developed countries: The association between income and educational-attainment inequality is
literally the same with or without allowance for fixed effects when only non-OECD-country data are
used. Mean schooling expectedly raises the SD of schooling.
Tables 4 and 5 present the regression results concerning the income inequality paths of G
(Gini) and QUINT (a proxy for Eit), respectively.

All model specifications indicate an

inverted-U-shaped association between income inequality and income level. In models 4-6 of both
tables we derive this association based on the subset of countries for which both income and
educational attainments data are available. We do so because our model and simulation results imply
that inequality paths of family-income (Eit) and human capital attainments would exhibit an
increasingly similar shape as the economy converges on a GE steady state. This prediction is borne
out in Figures 3c and 3d, based on model 4 in each table. 17 In fact, the simple correlation coefficient
of the predicted values shown in Figures 3b and 3d is .999 and the correlation coefficient of indicator

22

variables of the predicted paths in these figures (indicator variable takes the value of 1 if the slope of
the path at each RGDPn value is nonnegative and 0 otherwise) is .992. This lends support to our
human capital approach to income distribution. In both figures, income inequality at the highest
RGDPn level in our sample is lower than the extrapolated value of income inequality at RGDPn=0,
which is consistent with the path derived in case a of our simulations, whereby the income inequality
measures E and GINI are lower at the growth steady state than at the stagnant steady state.
Since the estimated regression lines linking both educational attainments and income
inequality measures with income levels exhibit an inverted-U shape, the results militate in favor of
the Kuznets hypothesis. Note, however, that these results cannot be taken to support the Kuznets
hypothesis as a general “law”: our analysis indicates that the observed association can be affected by
the specific composition of countries in our sample and their development stage, as well as by the
specific takeoff triggers operating in different countries.
Our results concerning the dynamic behavior of income inequality can be compared to those
of Deininger and Squire [DS] (1998). Although DS use the same data, they employ a different
fixed-effects regression format with RGDPn and 1/RGDPn entered as regressors. When we add a
cubic or higher-order form of RGDPn to the DS specification, however, the plotted relationships
between GINI or QUINT and RGDPn exhibit inverted-U shapes in this specification as well, similar
to those depicted in Figures 3c and 3d.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
Our deterministic model offers two main messages. The first is that income distribution in the
population is linked fundamentally to the corresponding distribution of human capital attainments,
not just under static conditions, as in Becker’s 1967 paper, but under dynamic conditions as well.
Contrary to inferences reached in earlier dynamic models (see footnote 3), neither inequality

23

disappears at an advanced level of development, let alone at a low and stagnant level of development
– a conclusion justified by the observed systematic linkage between inequalities in income and
educational attainments even in highly developed economies. In this context, our propositions
concerning the behavior of income inequality over the entire development process follow from the
diverging trends in educational attainments across different income groups as well as the social
interaction forces which bind them. The second, and more novel, message is that the dynamic
evolution of the level and distribution of income over the entire development process cannot be fully
understood without recognizing their linkage to the evolution of the relative fertility rates and
population shares of different income classes. Our model shows how income and fertility
distributions evolve conjointly over the transitional development phase. It also enables us to derive
inferences about the comparative income inequality levels in the growth, relative to the stagnant
equilibrium steady states, which frame the transition phase.
Regardless of the dynamic pattern of any of our income inequality measures, a distinct
implication of our model is that the time path of fertility inequality will generally exhibit an
inverted-U shape with attenuated tails over the transitional development phase. This prediction is
supported by our empirical investigation, based on a sample of countries in different stages of
development. It is also consistent with historical evidence indicating that the association between
relative variances in fertility and income levels across Western European regions exhibited an
inverted-U shape between the mid-19th century and 1970, with fertility variances being quite low in
the pre-demographic transition phase (see Coale and Treadway, 1986).
Concerning the shape of the dynamic association between income growth and inequality, no
“general law” applies. We offer, however, several new insights. First, the shape can vary depending
on the parameter(s) that trigger the takeoff and the manner in which they reach different family

24

groups. In ex-command economies, e.g., where the opening of markets benefits more those with
greater ability to acquire new knowledge, it is likely that case (b) illustrated in Figure 1 emerges, with
income inequality measures (initially) rising. If the takeoff-trigger reflects largely government
subsidization of education, case (c) illustrated in Figure 2 may be more likely to occur. Second, the
shape depends on whether the economy is in a stagnant or growth steady state, or in a transitional
development phase where it becomes sensitive to the specific mix of countries in the sample. This
may partly explain why different studies reach different conclusions about it. Third, the shape partly
depends on the inequality measure used. We derive three such measures as endogenous variables:
family-income inequality (E2t); income-group inequality (S2t=E2t P2t), which also depends on the
distribution of families across income brackets (P2t); and the Gini coefficient (Gt), which is increasing
in S2t but decreasing in P2t. Our model offers some strong predictions concerning the dynamic
behavior of these measures.
For example, under given preferences and external production technologies, and a stable
distribution of investment efficiencies, we expect the income-group inequality measure, S2t=E2tP2t, to
converge on equal levels in stagnant and growth steady states, or S2(s) = S2(g). The comparative
levels of this measure’s components, E2t and P2t, and therefore the Gini coefficient, in contrast, may
vary across the two steady states. We expect family-income inequality in a stagnant steady state,
E2(s), to be strictly a function of inequality in inherited family-specific endowments such as social or
legal status. No clear-cut predictions can be made, however, about the shape of the family-income
inequality path (E2t) over the transition phase: An inverted-U-shaped path is likely to emerge as a
result of a uniform, skill-biased technological advance, which first reaches the top-skilled family
group. The relative population share of that group (P2) would then rise at the growth, compared to the
stagnant, steady state, and in this scenario, family-income inequality would ultimately fall at the

25

highest development level, compared to the lowest, as figure 3d illustrates. No government
re-distribution policies are required to achieve such outcome. In contrast, a U-shaped family-income
inequality path with P2 falling and family-income inequality turning higher at advanced, relative to
pre-takeoff, development phases, can emerge as a result of educational subsidies which lower the
financing-cost disadvantage of especially lower-income families.
The link between income and fertility choices also sheds light on the behavior of income and
fertility distributions at the stagnant- and growth-equilibrium steady states. In the SE, a skill-biased
technology advance raises the steady state income and fertility levels as well as fertility inequality
and two income inequality measures - S2(s) and G(s). In the GE, a similar advance raises income
growth and all inequality measures, as well as fertility level and inequality. This prediction is borne
out by the evidence we presented for the US following the IT revolution in the 1980s.
Although our analysis is based on a deterministic model of heterogeneous family groups with
inherited differences in endowments and investment efficiencies, it allows for a degree of social
mobility, especially in the case where leadership in human capital formation can switch from the
group with initially highest earning capacity to the initially followers’ group over the transitional
development phase. Moreover, our key implications hold if we allow also for stochastic variations in
ability within groups (see fn. 4). And although our basic model relates to inequality in earning
capacity, the propositions we derive may apply to total income as well (see Appendix A).
A critical implication of our model is that the dynamic path of family-income inequality,
regardless of its shape, should mirror that of educational attainments, both having flat tails. This is
what we find empirically. This finding supports the basic premise of our model, that family-income
growth and distribution are directly linked to human capital formation and distribution.

26

APPENDICES
A. The Model with Savings
Although our model abstracts from capital markets, we can incorporate returns on savings as
an outcome of “home production” in which old parents’ human capital serves as an input, and the
yield is subject to diminishing returns. This is a natural assumption in the context of our
closed-economy framework. The extension allows us to recognize inequalities in labor earnings as
well as in total income, incorporating both earnings and property income.
Formally, we now assume that each agent lives through three periods: childhood, young
adulthood, and old age. Total savings is defined by Kt≡( H i+Hit)sit, where sit is the fraction of
productive capacity saved at adulthood, and Kt is assumed to fully depreciate within one generation.
Income from savings is generated when old parents combine their accumulated assets, Kt, with their
human capital inputs via the production function, F= D( H i+Hit)1−κ[( H i+Hit)sit]κ, 0<κ<1. The relevant
objective is to maximize:
(2′) U(Ci1,t, Ci2,t+1, Wit+1) = [1/(1-σ)][Ci1,t1-σ −1] + δ[1/(1-σ)]{[Ci2,t+11-σ −1] + [Wit+11-σ −1]},
where the consumption flows at adulthood and old age are given by
Ci1,t = ( H i+Hit)[1 − vnit − θihitnit − sit],
Ci2,t+1 = D( H i+Hit)1−κ[( H i+Hit)sit]κ,
and the altruism function Wit+1 is defined as in equation (4).
The first order optimality conditions for nit and sit are thus given by,
(A1) 0 = − Ci1,t-σ (v + θihit) ( H i+Hit) + δ Wit+1-σ β B(nit)β-1Hit+1α, for nit ≥ 0, and
(A2) 0 = − Ci1,t-σ ( H i+Hit) + δ Ci2,t+1-σ κD( H i+Hit) (sit)κ-1, for sit ≥ 0.
Combining these two equations, we can show that nit and sit are inversely related as follows:
1−βvnit/(β−1) = sit + [δ D1–σ κ]-1/σ (sit)[1-(1-σ)κ]/σ. It is easy to show that the optimal solution for hit
remains the same as in equation (7).
We can now distinguish income inequality from earnings inequality. The measures of the
pooled income of a family head – earnings as well as property income from savings – can be defined
parallel to our earnings-inequality measures in section I.C. For example, TS2t below corresponds to
the ratio of total income-group inequality (wage earnings of adult parents plus non-wage income of
old parents) of group 1 relative to group 2, and the same holds for family income inequality, TE2t, and
the Gini coefficient, TGt:
TS2t ≡ [N1t ( H 1+H1t) + N1t-1 D( H 1+H1t-1)(s1t-1)κ]/ [N2t ( H 2+H2t) + N2t-1 D( H 2+H2t-1)(s2t-1)κ],
TE2t ≡ TS2t / TP2t; TP2t ≡ [(N1t + N1t-1)/ (N2t + N2t-1)], and
TGt ≡ [TS2t − (N1t + N1t-1)/(N2t + N2t-1)] /(1+ TS2t)/[1+(N1t + N1t-1)/(N2t + N2t-1)].
Under our heterogeneity restriction, we can show that in any steady state, the optimal savings
i
rates (s ) and shares of income spent on raising and educating a child, (vni) and (θihi), are identical in
all family groups, since the first-order optimality conditions governing these control variables
become identical for all family groups in all stable steady states. Our total income inequality
measures are therefore identical to the corresponding earnings-inequality measure at both the
stagnant- and growth-equilibrium steady states. Moreover, we can show that the relative inequality in
earnings, and hence in total income in this extended model is the same as that derived in our
benchmark model sans savings, as given by equations (11), (13) and (14). All our propositions in
sections II and III are also maintained in this extended model, as are the qualitative results of the
comparative dynamics reported in Table 1 for both the SE and GE steady states. The time paths of the
inequality measures derived in section III are also shown to have the same shape as in the extended

27

model with savings.
Over the transitional development phase, however, the savings rate may differ across families.
For example, when a takeoff occurs as a result of a skilled-bias technological advance reaching
initially the higher-income family group 1, our income inequality measures assume an inverted-U
shape, and the savings rate of family 1 initially falls below that of (stagnant) family 2. In the following
stage, however, as family group 2 experiences a takeoff because of the social-interaction effects
coming from family-group 1, its savings rate falls below that of family 1. The aggregate savings rate
then starts rising while income inequality is falling. The resulting association between income
inequality and the aggregate savings rate does not indicate causality, however (as in Keynes, 1920,
or Kaldor, 1957).
What would be the effect of changes in D or κ on our income inequality measures? As long
as these changes are common to all families, they will affect only the composition of family income,
but not the total income inequality measures, as our simulations confirm.
B. Local Stability Conditions in the Steady States
1. The stagnant equilibrium
At the stagnant equilibrium, the dynamic system is given by
(B1) P2t+1 = n1/[n2(S2t)] P2t
(B2) H2t+1 = A2 h2( H 2 + H2t) (S2t)γ
To check for local stability, we first fully differentiate equations (B1) and (B2). Following some
algebraic manipulations and omitting the superscript 2, the linearized system becomes:
⎡Ĥ ⎤ ⎡(1 − γ )K
⎡Ĥ t ⎤
γ ⎤ ⎡Ĥ t ⎤
(B3) ⎢ t +1 ⎥ = ⎢
⎢ ⎥ = M ⎢ ⎥ , where,
⎥
1 − e⎦ ⎣ P̂t ⎦
⎣ P̂t +1 ⎦ ⎣ eK
⎣ P̂t ⎦
X̂ t = d ln(Xt) denote percentage deviations from steady state values of X = H or P,

K ≡ {H(s)/ [ H +H(s)]}, and e ≡ [∂n(s)/∂S(s)]/[n(s)/S(s)].
The characteristic polynomial of M or det(M-XI), is then given by
F(X) = X2 + [e – (1–γ) K – 1]X + [ (1-e)(1–γ) K – γeK].
The necessary and sufficient condition for general stability (covering both oscillatory and non-oscillatory
equilibrium scenarios) requires the two roots of the characteristic equation to be smaller than one in
modulus. These conditions are summarized by
(B4) 0 < e < 2 {1– [γK/(K+1)]}
2. The growth equilibrium
In the growth equilibrium, the relative effect of H i is negligible since Hit is increasing without
bound. Thus we can suppress H i to examine the growth equilibrium dynamics. We can then express
the system of growth equilibrium in terms of E2t and P2t as follows:
n1
(B5) Pt2+1 = 2 2 Pt2
n St

( )

( )

( ) ( )

H1t +1
A1h1H1t
A1h1 2 2 − γ A1h1 2 1− γ 2 − γ
=
=
E t St = 2 2 E t
Pt .
H 2t +1 A 2 h 2 H 2t S2t γ A 2 h 2
Ah
Taking the total differentials of (B5) and (B6) around the growth steady state, the linearized system
can be shown equal to:

(B6)

E 2t +1 =

( )

28

⎡ P̂ ⎤ ⎡1 − e(g) − e(g)⎤ ⎡ P̂t ⎤
⎡ P̂t ⎤
(B7) ⎢ t +1 ⎥ = ⎢
⎢ ⎥ = M⎢ ⎥ ,
⎥
(1 − γ )⎦ ⎣Ê t ⎦
⎣Ê t +1 ⎦ ⎣ − γ
⎣Ê t ⎦
2
2
2
2
where e(g) ≡ [∂n (g)/∂S (g)]/[n (g)/S (g)].
The characteristic polynomial of M is thus given by
F(X) = X2 + [γ + e(g) – 2]X + [1 – e(g) –γ],
and the roots of the polynomial equation F(X) are 1 and [1 – e(g) –γ].
The unit root indicates that we do not have a unique equilibrium steady state values of E2(g)
2
and P (g), as we note in the text. However we do have a unique equilibrium solution for S2(g). Since
S2t = E2tP2t, we obtain by adding the solutions for the rates of change in E2t and P2t in equation (B7)
around the growth steady:
Ê t +1 + P̂t +1 = [1 – e(g) –γ] Ê t + P̂t or Ŝt +1 = [1 – e(g) –γ] Ŝt .
Hence, we have stable and unique equilibrium for St as long as -1<[1 – e(g) –γ]<1, or
(B8) –γ < e(g) <2 – γ.

(

)

3. Numerical sensitivity analysis of the conditions for local stability
To perform sensitivity analyses of our local stability conditions, we evaluate the elasticity e(s)
by totally differentiating equation (B4), and then applying the baseline parameters used to derive the
SE as well as the GE in Table 1, parts 1 and 2. Equations (B4) and (B8) are found to be satisfied for
all values of γ ∈ (0,1).
C. Variables used in the regressions and summary statistics
Variable
Description

SD-FERT
AV-FERT
SD-SCHYR
AV-SCHYR
GINI*
QUINT*

Standard deviation of the distribution of surviving children
per female ≥ 40
Average of the distribution of surviving children per female
≥ 40
Standard deviation of the distribution of schooling years in
the population ≥ 15
Average of the distribution of schooling years in the
population ≥ 15
Gini coefficient

RGDPn

Share of total income received by the top relative to the
bottom quintile of families in the population
Real per-capita income

GOV

GDP shares of government spending

INFLA

Annual inflation rate in GDP deflator (percent)

Mean [Std. Dev.]
2.520
[0.306]
4.179
[1.161]
3.684
[0.806]
4.888
[2.755]
37.76
[7.948]
8.826
[5.259]
6340
[5960]
19.53
[8.821]
56.39
[587.1]

* We calculate GINI and QUINT exclusively based on household income data reported in Dollar and Kraay (2001),
excluding observations based on personal income, personal expenditures, or household expenditure data.

29

REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, “Changes in Unemployment and Wage Inequality: An Alternative Theory and
Some Evidence,” American Economic Review, 89, 1259-1278, 1999.
Acemoglu, Daron, “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 40, 7-72, 2002.
Aghion, Philippe, Eve Caroli and Cecilia Garcia-Penalosa, “Inequality and economic growth: the
perspective of the new growth theories,” Journal of Economic Literature, 37, 1615-1660, 1999.
Alesina A. and R. Perotti, “Income Distribution, Political Instability and Investment,” European
Economic Review, 81, 1170-1189, 1996.
Alesina, A., and D. Rodrik, “Distributive Politics and Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 108, 465-490, 1994.
Anand, S., R. Kanbur, “The Kuznets Process and the Inequality-Development Relationship,” Journal
of Development Economics, 40, 25-52, 1993.
Banerjee A. and E. Duflo, “Inequality and growth: What can the data say?” NBER working paper no.
7793, 2000.
Banerjee, A. and Newman, A., “Occupational Choice and the Process of Development,” Journal of
Political Economy, 101, 274-98, 1993.
Barro, Robert, “Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries,” Journal of Economic Growth, 5, 5-32,
2000.
Barro, Robert J. and Jongwha Lee, “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and
Implications,” working paper, 2000.
Becker, Gary, “Human Capital and the Personal Distribution of Income: An Analytical Approach,”
Woytinski Lecture No. 1, Institute of Public Administration, University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor, 1967.
Becker, Gary, “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy, 81, 1973.
Becker, G.S. and N. Tomes, “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income and
Intergenerational Mobility”, Journal of Political Economy 87, 1979.
Benhabib, J. and A. Rustichini, “Social Conflict and Growth,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 129
-146, 1996.
Burdett, Ken and Melvyn Coles, “Marriage and Class,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1997.

30

Coale, Ansley J. and Roy Treadway, “A Summary of the Changing Distribution of Overall Fertility,
Marital Fertility, and the Proportion Married in the Provinces of Europe,” in Ansley J. Coale and
Susan C. Watkins ed., The Decline of Fertility in Europe, The Revised Proceedings of a Conference
on the Princeton European Fertility Project, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1986.
De Gregorio, J. and J. Lee, “Education And Income Distribution: New Evidence From Cross-Country
Data,” Review of Income and Wealth, 48, 395-416, 2002.
De la Croix, David and Matthias Doepke, “Inequality and Growth: Why Differential Fertility
Matters,” American Economic Review, 93, 2003.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, “New ways of looking at old issues: inequality and growth,”
Journal of Development Economics, 57, 259-287, 1998.
Dollar, David, and Aart Kraay, “Growth is Good for the Poor,” The World Bank: Washington, D.C.
, 2001.
Durlauf, S.N., “A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1, 75-94,
1996.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Francis T. Lui, “Intergenerational trade, longevity, and economic growth,” Journal
of Political Economy, 99, 1029-1059, 1991.
Ehrlich, Isaac and Chi-Wa Yuen, “The Growth-Inequality Nexus in the Absence of Borrowing
Restrictions and Government Intervention: Some Implications from a Prototype Model”, Annals of
Economics and Finance, 1, 283-300, 2000.
Eicher, Theo, “Interaction between Endogenous Human Capital and Technological Change,” Review
of Economic. Studies, 63, 127–44, 1996
Fields, Gary, “Measuring Inequality Change in an Economy with Income Growth: Reply,” Journal
of Development Economics, 32, 205-210, 1990.
Fields, Gary, and G.H. Jakubson, “New Evidence on the Kuznets Curve,” mimeograph, Department
of Economics, Cornell University, 1994.
Forbes, K., “A Reassessment of the Relationship between Inequality and Growth,” American
Economic Review, 90, 869-887, 2000.
Galor, Oded and Joseph Zeira, “Income distribution and macroeconomics,” Review of Economic
Studies, 60, 35-52, 1993.
Galor, Oded and Omer Moav, “From Physical to Human Capital Accumulation: Inequality and the
Process of Development,” Review of Economic Studies, 71, 1001-10026, 2004
Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, Penn World Table Version 6.0 Center for
31

International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), 2001.
Kaldor, N., “A Model of Economic Growth,” Economic Journal, 57, 1957.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and
Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 35-78, 1992.
Keynes, J. M., The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Macmillan and Co. Limited, 1920.
Kremer, Michael and Daniel Chen, “Income Distribution Dynamics with Endogenous Fertility,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 7, 2002.
Kremer, Michael and Eric Maskin, "Wage Inequality and Segregation by Skill,” NBER Working
Paper No. 5718, 1996.
Kuznets, Simon, “Economic growth and income inequality,” American Economic Review, 45, 1-28,
1955.
Kuznets, Simon, “Quantitative Aspects of the Economic Growth of Nations,” Economic
Development & Cultural Change, 12, 1-80, 1963.
Lindbeck, Assar and Dennis Snower, "Reorganization of Firms and Labor-Market Inequality,” Ame
rican Economic Review, 86, 315–21, 1997.
Lindert, P. H., and J. G. Williamson, “Growth, Equality, and History,” Explorations in Economic
History, 22, 341-377, 1985.
Loury, Glenn, “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings,” Econometrica, 49,
843-867, 1981.
Lucas, R. E., Jr., “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics,
22, 3-42, 1988.
Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, “Is inequality harmful for growth?” American Economic
Review, 64, 600-621, 1994.
Tamura, Robert, “Income convergence in the endogenous growth model,” Journal of Political
Economy, 99, 522-540, 1991.
Venieris, Y. and D. Gupta, “Income Distribution and Sociopolitical Instability as Determinants of
Savings: A Cross Sectional Model,” Journal of Political Economy, 94, 873-883, 1986.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Statistical Yearbook, some issues.
Zhong, Jianguo, “Income Growth and Income Inequality: Theory and Evidence,” Ph.D. dissertation,
State University of New York at Buffalo, 1998.
32

ENDNOTES
1

Some studies favor the Kuznets hypothesis: e.g., Lindert and Williamson (1985) and Barro (2000).
Others reject it, or find no systematic relation, e.g., Anand and Kanbur (1993), Fields (1990), Fields and
Jakubson (1994), and Deininger and Squire (1998). Studies of the way income growth rate relate to
income inequality also report mixed results: Persson and Tabellini (1994), Alesina and Rodrik (1994),
and Deininger and Squire (1998) find a negative relation; Forbes (2000) finds a positive one; Barro
(2000) finds that higher inequality lowers the growth rate in poor countries but raise it in rich ones, while
Banerjee and Duflo (2000) find an inverted-U relation between the two.
2

Models supporting Kuznets’ direction of causality rely, e.g., on structural shifts in a two-sector
model (Kuznets 1955, 1963, Anand and Kanbur 1993); skill-biased technical progress (Eicher 1996,
Aghion et al. 1999); and organizational changes (Kremer and Maskin 1996, Lindbeck and Snower
1997, Acemoglu 1999). Models favoring causality going from inequality to growth rely, e.g., on
credit market imperfections (Loury 1981, Galor and Zeira 1993, Banerjee and Newman 1993,
Durlauf 1996, and Galor and Moav 2004); political economy changes (Venieris and Gupta 1986,
Alesina and Perotti 1996, Benhabib and Rustichini 1996); and fertility changes by income (Kremer
and Chen 2002, and De la Croix and Doepke 2003).
3

Lucas (1988) also considers spillover effects in goods production, stemming from the average human
capital level in a representative-agent model. Tamura (1991) applies a similar spillover effect in human
capital production, which results in full income-convergence. De la Croix and Doepke (2003) also use
the Lucas-type spillover effect and consider fertility as well as income inequality but reach the same
income-convergence result as Tamura. They focus on growth effects stemming from assumed initial
inequality in human capital, however, rather than on the joint dynamic evolution of inequalities in
education, income, and fertility over the entire development process. Zhong (1998), and Ehrlich and
Yuen (2000) develop prototype frameworks similar to ours, but ignore the role of fertility.
4

Becker (1973) and Burdett & Coles (1997) offer evidence supporting positive assortative mating by
intelligence and education. Our assumed fixed distribution of family types still allows for
family-group mobility over time, since family group 2 may move closer to, or even overtake, group
1 over the transitional phase (see fn. 14). Alternatively, we can allow for individual mobility as well
by allowing for stochastic deviations in ability within initial k subgroups of family type i (=1,2), using
a stochastic specification similar to that of Becker and Tomes (1979): Ak,it+1 = φAk,it + (1-φ)Ai + εk,it+1,
where Ak,it+1 is the ability level of generation (t+1) in subgroup k, Ai is the mean ability level of group
i, (0 < φ <1) is a weight, and εk,it+1 is a stochastic variable, iid, with zero mean and constant variance.
It is reasonable to assume that: (a) εk,it+1 is revealed a-posteriori; i.e., after parental decisions on
quantity and quality of children are made; and (b) social interaction is determined by the average
earning capacity and family-group size in group 1 relative to 2 in generation t. Allowing for positive
assortative mating within each subgroup we now obtain regression towards the mean ability level Ai
inside group i in any steady state. Overall income inequality in a steady state will be larger now than
in our deterministic model due to the influence of εk,it+1. Inequalities in fertility and educational
investments, however, will be the same as in the deterministic case, unless we also allow for a
stochastic component distinguishing desired and realized fertility. The steady-state
comparative-dynamic results of our model hold in this stochastic specification as well.

33

5

Knowledge transmission is thus modeled as an exogenous process, assuming that spillover effects
cannot be internalized a priori. We also disallow strategic group behavior aimed at benefitting from
spillover effects.
6

The leader-follower specification can be generalized under additional assumptions to a J-group
specification (i=1,…J): let the homogeneous members of group 1 be the exclusive source of
knowledge transfer, and assume that successful knowledge transfer from a member of group 1 to a
member of group i>1 requires pair-wise interactions, such as random pairings of agents forming a
work team and sharing a school desk or a two-seat assignment on a commuter plane, which allow for
intensive knowledge transfer. The odds that the member of i>1 is paired with a member of any other
group j≠i, is (N−Ni)/Ni, where N is the total population. Effective interaction requires, however, that
the paired member of group j would be a member of group 1, the conditional probability of which is
N1/(N−Ni). The odds of exclusive interaction between members from groups 1 and i is thus the
product of the two [(N−Ni)/Ni][N1(N−Ni)] = Pi = N1/Ni. This restrictive specification of social
interaction yields all the propositions derived in this paper.
7

This specification of altruism or “companionship”, relating parents’ utility to children’s human
capital rather than earning capacity, has the advantage of allowing for interior solutions for all our
control and “state” variables, which permits the derivation of all inequality measures as endogenous
variables all along the development process, including both the stagnant and growth steady states.
8

If we allow for differences in survival probabilities from childhood to adulthood, πi, the necessary
stability condition would be equality of the expected numbers of surviving children: π1n1=π2n2.

9

As propositions 2 and 3 below indicate, in any stable equilibrium steady state, all families spend the
same proportion of their potential income on quantity (vn) and quality (θh) of children. Thus all wind
up with the same desired fertility level despite their different income levels, because in equilibrium,
a lower income (Yit= H i+Hit) would be offset by a proportionately lower shadow price of fertility
([vi+θihit]Yit), and the demand for children’s quantity ni is then a function of the ratio of the two.
10

In the log utility case, we have an explicit solution for fertility: nit = [δ(β-1)]/[vi(1+δβ)]. Thus,
for n1 to be equal to n2, v1 = v2.
11

More specifically, ∂G/∂x=(1−1/E2)(1−P2S2)∂S2/∂x+S2(P2+1/E2)2∂E2/∂x in any equilibrium
position, where x is one of our parameters. In a stagnant state, a rise in (e1/e2) unambiguously raises
S2(s), while not affecting E2(s). Thus G(s) will rise or fall depending on whether P2(s)⋅S2(s) is smaller
or bigger than 1. An increase in H 1/ H 2 will not affect S2(s) but will raise unambiguously E2(s) and
G(s). In a growth steady state, we cannot make symmetrical predictions because an increase in (e1/e2),
for example, may also affect E2(g), as our analysis in section II.B indicates.
12

Although the fertility level of Hispanic female immigrants is higher than that of the US female
population, the rise in the US TFR during the 1980s cannot be entirely attributed to the rise in the share
of Hispanic immigrants in the female population (age 15-49) from 2.37 to 4.63% in the 1980s. As US

34

Census data show, although 93% of Hispanic immigrants report themselves as whites, the rise in the
TFR among whites is approximately the same as that of nonwhites, and the TFR of blacks also
significantly rose from 2.17 in 1980 to 2.48 in 1990.
13

Major technological advances raising investment efficiency typically generate structural shifts in
the economy favoring employment opportunities for women as well as a rise in housing costs due to
urbanization, and are thus accompanied by an increase the unit (opportunity) costs of bearing and
raising children (v). Technological advances can thus generate a demographic transition indirectly by
our preset model. In EL(1991), where parents are motivated by old-age support from educated
children as well as by pure altruism, technological advances can generate a demographic transition
directly.
14

There also is the possibility of mixed cases. For example, a technological shock reaches first family
1 (case b), but government subsidization of education targets family 2 (case c). Alternatively, if a
reduction in θ2 affects family 2 many periods ahead of family 1, or by a sufficiently greater proportion,
so that e1/e2 actually falls, family 2 can overtake family 1, and become the “leading family” in terms
of income-generating capacity. Income inequality will then reach a minimum at the point of
overtaking, but will rise afterwards until it converges on its GE steady-state level. In this case the time
path of income inequality will assume an S shape.

15

Our family-income inequality measure, E2, converges on a steady state level, (H1/H2)(g), at the
growth-equilibrium steady state. De Gregorio and Lee (2002) provide independent support. They
estimate a positive relationship between inequality in educational attainments and income inequality.

16

The Barro-Lee study reports average schooling years for four schooling levels in the population
age 15 and up (zero, primary, secondary, and higher) and their population shares. We calculate the
mean and standard deviation of this distribution for each country in all sample years.
17

Also, regression results obtained when using a polynomial of RGDPn of the 4th, 5th, and 6th order
showed the same pattern as in all panels of Figure 3.

35

Table 1: Simulating Comparative Dynamic Effects of Parameter Changes in a Two-agent Economy
Part 1. Stagnant Equilibrium
A1/θ1
A2/θ2
H1
2/1
1/1.01
50
1/1.01
50
3/1
50
3/1
1.5/1.01
2/1
50
1.5/1.01
2/1
1/1.01
60
2/1
1/1.01
50
2/1
1/1.01
50
2/1
1/1.01
50
Part 2. Growth Equilibrium
A1/θ1

A2/θ2

v1(v2)

40/1
20/1.01
.01
20/1.01
.01
50/1
.01
50/1
25/1.01
40/1
.01
25/1.01
40/1
20/1.01
.015
40/1
20/1.01
.01
40/1
20/1.01
.01
Part 3. Takeoff Triggers

v1(v2)

γ

B1(B2)

n1(n2)

Y1= H 1+H1

Y2= H 2+H2

E

S

P=N1/N2

Gini

.01
.01
.01
.01
.01
.015
.01
.01

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.45
.4

.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.15

8.053
8.243
8.243
8.053
8.053
5.344
8.053
8.243

55.555
58.824
58.824
55.555
66.666
58.824
55.555
55.555

1.111
1.176
1.176
1.111
1.111
1.176
1.111
1.111

50
50
50
50
60
50
50
50

5.799
15.981
5.799
2.105
5.799
5.799
4.770
5.799

.116
.320
.116
.042
.097
.116
.095
.116

.749
.699
.749
.637
.765
.749
.740
.749

γ

B1(B2)

n1(n2)

h1

h2

a1=A1h1

E

S

P=N1/N2

Gini

.4
.4
.4
.4
.4
.45
.4

.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.1
.15

9.448
9.551
9.551
9.448
6.274
9.448
9.634

.05
.05
.05
.05
.075
.05
.05

.0495
.0495
.0495
.0495
.0743
.0495
.0495

2
2.5
2.5
2
3
2
2

50
85.138
50
29.368
50
41.502
50

5.799
10.131
5.799
3.320
5.799
4.770
5.799

.116
.119
.116
.113
.116
.115
.116

.749
.804
.749
.667
.749
.724
.749

A1

A2

θ1

θ2

v1(v2)

n1(n2)

h1

h2

E

S

P=N1/N2

Gini

SE

2

1

1

1.01

.01

8.053

.05

.0495

50

5.799

.116

.749

GE
GE
GE
GE
GE

40
40
2
2
2

20
1
1
1
1

1
1
1/15
1/15
1

1.01
1.01
1.01/15
1/15
1.01

.01
.01
.01
.01
.11

9.448
9.448
9.316
9.316
.712

.05
.05
.75
.75
.55

.0495
.0495
.743
.743
.545

50
38643
50
48.857
50

5.799
10374
5.799
5.657
5.799

.116
.268
.116
.116
.116

.749
.788
.749
.746
.749

Note: Parameters values that deviate from our benchmark values are presented in bold print.
Part 1. Comparative dynamics in the stagnant steady state are simulated by changing A1/θ1, A2/θ2, H 1, v1(=v2), γ, or B1(=B2), holding constant all other parameters: H 2 = 1, σ = 0.9, δ = 0.9, and
β = 1.2. Columns for h1 and h2 are suppressed, but the corresponding solutions are: .05, .0495 for all rows except row 6; and .075, .0743 for row 6.
Part 2. Comparative dynamics in the growth steady state are simulated by changing A1/θ1, A2/θ2, v1(=v2), γ, or B1(=B2), holding constant σ = 0.9, δ = 0.9, and β = 1.2.
Part 3. Simulations show the impact of uniform (proportionate) and non-uniform changes in Ai and θi, as well as in the common level of v1=vi that generate a takeoff from the SE to GE steady
state, holding constant: H 1 = 50, H 2 = 1, σ = 0.9, δ = 0.9, γ = 0.4, β = 1.2, and B1 =B2 = 0.1.

Table 2: Fertility Inequality Regressions
Dependent Variable: SD_FERT
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

OLS

OLS with
random effects

OLS with
random effects

2SLS

2SLS with
random effects

2SLS with
random effects

Intercept

1.776852
7.45

2.087804
10.54

2.181626
10.53

1.733183
7.34

1.985153
9.81

2.157891
10.34

RGDPn

0.000410
2.23

0.000249
1.59

0.000270
1.83

0.000397
2.55

0.000310
2.19

0.000288
2.21

RGDPn2

-8.49E-08
-1.90

-5.75E-08
-1.60

-5.59E-08
-1.66

-8.56E-08
-2.29

-7.27E-08
-2.33

-6.17E-08
-2.14

RGDPn3

5.08E-12
1.64

3.40E-12
1.44

3.25E-12
1.47

5.25E-12
2.10

4.34E-12
2.24

3.64E-12
2.02

AV_FERT

0.056786
1.88

0.042325
2.14

0.134551
4.18

0.071700
2.38

0.051122
2.71

0.146717
4.90

GOV

-0.004215
-0.87

-0.005876
-1.28

T

-0.013374
-3.46

-0.013659
-3.78

Adj. R2
N

0.0854
72

0.1637
72

0.2824
72

0.1004
70

0.2340
70

0.3852
70

Notes: The dependent variable is the standard deviation of the distribution of surviving children per woman age 40 and over, but we also add the mean fertility
levels as a control variable (see text). Data sources are the World Fertility Surveys and the Demographic and Health Surveys (various years). Rows show the
estimated coefficients (β) and their z-statistics (β/Sβ). This table’s regressions employ a random effects specification to account for missing idiosyncratic
variables, because the number of observations per country is small. The Durbin-Watson test cannot reject the null hypothesis of no serial correlation in Models 2
and 5. The 2SLS model accounts for endogeneity of RGDPn. Instrumental variables include, in addition to exogenous structural regressors, ln(INFLA) and oneyear-lagged RGDPn.
#
The Intercept coefficients represent the mean values of all intercept terms.

Table 3: Educational Attainments Inequality Regressions
Dependent Variable: SD_SCHYR
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

OLS

OLS with
fixed effects

OLS with
fixed effects

2SLS

2SLS with
fixed effects

2SLS with
fixed effects

Intercept

2.634408
37.43

2.074857#

2.512515#

2.720585
34.86

2.227975#

2.560042#

RGDPn

9.29E-05
2.71

-3.79E-05
-1.02

-4.36E-05
-1.32

1.27E-04
3.60

-7.17E-06
-0.14

-1.10E-06
-0.02

RGDPn2

-1.20E-08
-3.79

4.29E-09
1.48

2.75E-09
1.07

-1.51E-08
-4.74

2.68E-09
0.79

2.35E-11
0.01

RGDPn3

3.03E-13
3.48

-1.59E-13
-2.21

-1.19E-13
-1.87

3.81E-13
4.42

-1.21E-13
-1.52

-5.98E-14
-0.85

AV_SCHYR

0.205215
11.97

0.351542
18.40

0.111584
4.50

0.189881
10.26

0.302893
11.64

0.051998
1.79

GOV

0.000617
0.25

0.002328
0.60

T

0.029080
12.92

0.032278
12.38

Adj. R2
N

0.3320
721

0.4891
721

0.6022
721

0.3170
575

0.4262
575

0.5746
571

Notes: The dependent variable is the standard deviation in the distribution of schooling years attained in the population age 15 and over, but we also add the
mean fertility levels as a control variable (see text). The data source is Barro and Lee (2000). Rows show the estimated coefficients (β) and their z-statistics
(β/Sβ). Data on the dependent variable are available every five years. The Durbin-Watson test cannot reject the null hypothesis of no serial correlation in Models
2 and 5. The 2SLS model accounts for endogeneity of RGDPn. Instrumental variables include, in addition to exogenous structural regressors, ln(INFLA) and
one-year-lagged RGDPn.
#
The Intercept coefficients represent the mean values of all intercept terms.

Table 4: Income Inequality Regressions: GINI Coefficient (G)
Dependent Variable: GINI
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

OLS

OLS with
fixed effects

OLS with
fixed effects

2SLS

2SLS with
fixed effects

2SLS with
fixed effects

Intercept

41.948920
26.34

35.729530#

39.392580#

41.489030
24.10

34.189310#

41.346450#

RGDPn

0.001583
2.94

0.001095
2.62

0.001081
2.03

0.001925
3.45

0.001367
2.37

0.000853
1.17

RGDPn2

-2.45E-07
-5.22

-1.08E-07
-3.54

-1.04E-07
-3.00

-2.71E-07
-5.75

-1.20E-07
-3.03

-8.36E-08
-1.88

RGDPn3

7.04E-12
5.96

2.81E-12
3.99

2.70E-12
3.43

7.55E-12
6.51

2.93E-12
3.38

2.10E-12
2.18

GOV

-0.170141
-2.00

-0.297255
-2.48

T

-0.027090
-0.66

0.003112
0.05

Adj. R2
N

0.4108
318

0.0691
318

0.0932
310

0.4891
263

0.0578
263

0.0882
263

Notes: The dependent variable is the GINI coefficient, based on household income data. The data source is Dollar and Kraay (2001). Rows show the estimated
coefficients (β) and their z-statistics (β/Sβ). The Durbin-Watson test cannot reject the null hypothesis of no serial correlation in Models 2 and 5. We derive the
2SLS regressions in models 4-6, which account for endogeneity of RGDPn, from the subset of countries for which both income and educational attainments data
are available, in order to see if income and educational inequality paths exhibit a similar shape. Instrumental variables include, in addition to exogenous structural
regressors, ln(INFLA) and one-year-lagged RGDPn.
#
The Intercept coefficients represent the mean values of all intercept terms.

Table 5: Income Inequality Regressions: Inter-Quintile Ratio (E)
Dependent Variable: QUINT
Model 1

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

Model 6

OLS

OLS with
fixed effects

OLS with
fixed effects

2SLS

2SLS with
fixed effects

2SLS with
fixed effects

Intercept

9.110258
7.52

4.513832#

2.290842#

9.194144
6.35

7.860770#

9.954935#

RGDPn

0.001440
3.47

0.001294
3.82

0.001478
3.37

0.001622
3.40

0.000626
1.47

0.000485
0.87

RGDPn2

-1.80E-07
-4.92

-1.00E-07
-3.98

-1.15E-07
-3.95

-1.98E-07
-4.87

-6.36E-08
-2.14

-5.25E-08
-1.53

RGDPn3

4.97E-12
5.34

2.32E-12
3.96

2.69E-12
4.02

5.37E-12
5.34

1.66E-12
2.53

1.41E-12
1.87

GOV

0.103520
1.50

-0.086037
-0.95

T

-0.005237
-0.16

-0.005231
-0.12

Adj. R2
N

0.2498
289

0.0663
289

0.0788
281

0.2908
240

0.0447
240

0.0505
240

Notes: The dependent variable is the share of total income received by the top, relative to the bottom, quintile of families in the population. The data source is Dollar
and Kraay (2001), and only household income data are used. Rows show the estimated coefficients (β) and their z-statistics (β/Sβ). The Durbin-Watson test cannot
reject the null hypothesis of no serial correlation in Models 2 and 5. We derive the 2SLS regressions in models 4-6, which account for endogeneity of RGDPn,
from the subset of countries for which both income and educational attainments data are available, in order to see if income and educational inequality paths
exhibit a similar shape. Instrumental variables include, in addition to exogenous structural regressors, ln(INFLA) and one-year-lagged RGDPn.
#
The Intercept coefficients represent the mean values of all intercept terms.

Figure A: Changes in the Dynamic Patterns of the Gini Coefficient, Total Fertility Rate, and
Coefficient of Variation of the Fertility Distribution in the U.S. in Recent Decades
a. Gini Coefficient
0.48

0.46

0.44

0.42

0.4

2005

2000

1995

1990

1985

1980

1975

1970

1965

0.38

TFR

2004

0.58

2002

1.7

2000

0.6

1998

1.8

1996

0.62

1994

1.9

1992

0.64

1990

2

1988

0.66

1986

2.1

1984

0.68

1982

2.2

1980

0.7

1978

2.3

1976

0.72

1974

2.4

1972

0.74

1970

2.5

Coefficient of variation

Total fertility rate

b. Total Fertility Rate and Coefficient of Variation of Fertility Distribution

Coefficient of Variation of Fertility

Note: Figure b shows the coefficient of variation of the distribution of surviving children per woman age 40-44.

Figure 1: Simulated Time Paths of the Evolution of Key Endogenous Variables over the Process of
Development: A Uniform Productivity Shock Affecting Family 1 Ahead of Family 2
a. Family-Income Inequality (E)

b. Income-Group Inequality (S)

c. Gini Coefficient (G)

d. Inequality in Fertility

Note: Parameter values used in these simulations are: θ1=1, θ2=1.01, H10=50, H20 = 1, B1=B2=0.1, v1=v2=0.01, γ = 0.4, σ = 0.9, δ = 0.9, and β
= 1.2. Prior to period 1, the economy is in a stable SE steady state, with A1=2 and A2=1. In period 1, family 1 alone experiences a once-andfor-all increase in A1 to 40. In period 2, also family 2 experiences the same proportional increase in A2 to 20.

Figure 2: Simulated Time Paths of the Evolution of Key Endogenous Variables over the Process of
Development: A Uniform Productivity Shock Affecting Family 2 Ahead of Family 1
a. Family-Income Inequality (E)

b. Income-Group Inequality (S)

c. Gini Coefficient (G)

d. Inequality in Fertility

Note: Parameter values used in the simulations for Figure 2: A1=2, A2=1, H10=50, H20 = 1, B1=B2=0.1, v1=v2=0.01, γ = 0.4, σ = 0.9, δ = 0.9,
and β = 1.2. Prior to period 1, the economy is in a stable SE steady state with θ1=1 and θ2=1.01. In period 1, family 2 alone experiences a
once-and-for-all reduction in θ2 to 1.01/20. In period 2, also family 1 experiences the same proportional decrease in θ1 to 1/20.

Figure 3: Fitted Regression Lines Linking the Evolution of Key Inequality Measures and PerCapital Income Levels within and across Countries, based on 2SLS Panel Regression Results
a. Mean-adjusted Fertility Inequality (SD-FERT)

b. Mean-adjusted Educational Attainment Inequality
(SD-SCHYR)

c. Gini Coefficient (GINI)

d. Inter-Quintile Ratio (QUINT)

Note: Panels a, b, c, and d are based on the regression results of Model 4 in Tables 2 - 5, respectively. The RGDPn values on
the x-axes of all panels cover 90% of the observations on RGDPn used in our regressions.

