                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE STRUCTURE OF EXPECTATIONS OF THE
                 WEEKLY MONEY SUPPLY ANNOUNCEMENT




                           Thomas Urich
                           Paul Wachtel


                      Working Paper No. 1090




               NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                     1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                        Cambridge MA 02138

                            March 1983




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Western
Finance Association Meeting in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, July 1981,
and at a seminar at the University of Pennsylvania, October 1981.
Comments received at those meetings and from Kim Dietrich and Vance
Roley are appreciated. The research reported here is part of the
NBER's research program in Financial Markets and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                NBER Working Paper #1090
                                                     March 1983




                    The Structure of Expectations of the
                      Weekly Money Supply rInouncement



                                 ABS TRACT




        This paper examines the structure of expectations of the weekly money

supply announcement in the late l970s. The data used are from a weekly

telephone survey of money market participants. The rationality and struc-

ture of expectations are explored with the data organized in three ways:

the mean response to each weekly survey, the pooled sample of individual

responses, and time series of responses by each individual in the survey.

The effect of data aggregation on
                                    rationality tests is investigated. The

structure of the expectations data are also examined and it is found that

both strong regressive influences and adaptive learning characterize the

data.

                                     Thomas Urich

                                    Paul Wachte].
                                    New York University
                                    Graduate School of Business Administration
                                    90 Trinity Place — Room 1303
                                    New York, New York 10006

                                    (212) 285—6174
                The Structure of Expectations of the Weekly
                         Money Supply Announcement


                                   Thomas Urich

                                      and

                                 Paul Wachtej.

                Graduate School of Business Administration
                           New York University



      The emphasis on the role of money in macroeconomic theory and policy

 discussions in recent years has led to an increased interest in expectations

 concerning the growth of the money supply. Although the structure and

 accuracy of expectations are of paramount theoretical importance, these

 issues are difficult to analyze because expectations are not easily observ—

 able. Occasionally, directly observable expectations from surveys can be

utilized. In this paper we analyze the structure of expectations concerning

 the weekly announcement of the change in the money supply with data from a

survey of forecasts made   by financial market participants.
     The weekly announcement of the money supply is often viewed as an im-

portant piece of information concerning past and future monetary policy and

financial market conditions. Consequently, financial market participants

make an effort to forecast the announcement and use the announced information

in evaluating the state of the economy. Elsewhere (Urich and Wachtel [1981];

Urich [1982]), we have analyzed the effect of these expectations and forecast

errors on market interest rates.

     The data used in this study were obtained from Money Market Services,

a San Francisco firm which has collectedweekly forecasts of the
                                                                  change
in the money supply from a telephone poli of about 50 government securities

dealers since mid—1977. The Federal Reserve's data release emphasizes the

week—to—week change in the money supply, arid Money Market Services

obtains forecasts of the change in the narrowly defined money supply, Mi. It

is these data that are given the most attention by market participants.1

     We have data for 95 weeks extending from the beginning of March 1978 to

the end of January 1980. The analysis of the structure of expectations re-

quires the identification of individuals' responses over time which could

only be made with a sub—sample of 20 regular survey respondents. For the

analysis of forecast accuracy, all the available data could be utilized, but

there were no apparent differences between the results presented below and

those with the entire data set.

     The empirical examination of the data is divided into two sections. The

first is concerned with standard tests for the rationality of forecasts and

the second presents estimates of some models of expectations formation.

     Although this study represents the first examination of the data just

described, there are several studies of the structure and rationality of

directly measured expectations of other economic data. The most familiar of

these is the Livingston data on price expectations which makes use of a semi-

annual survey of forecasters that began in 1947.2 The Livingston data are,

however, very different from the data used here. They reflect expectations



1Money Market Services conducted its poii on Tuesday and again on Thursday
morning to obtain expectations of the change in the money supply which was
announced on Thursday. In this paper, we only use expectations from the
Thursday survey, since preliminary work indicated little difference between
the two surveys. The survey procedures were changed when the
money supply announcement was shifted to Friday in January 1980, after the
end of our sample period.

2For a description, see Wachtel (1977) and for a discussion of modelling and
rationality, see Figlewski and Wachtel (1981). Friedman (1980) examines
interest rate expectations.
  of economic events over a 6 or more month horizon, while our data concerns

  expectations formed each week of the data announced at the end of the week.

  Thus, the structures of the expectations formation process are likely to be

 very different.


 Rationality of Forecasts

      The money Supply change forecasts made by financial market participants

 should make use of all available relevant information or, in other words,

 be rational forecasts. Two common tests for rationality are applied to these

 data: tests for the unbiasedness and for the efficiency of the forecasts.

 Forecasts are unbiased if the null hypothesis (ct, )   = (0,   1) cannot be re-
 jected from the regression:



                                                                    (1)


where M is the announced change in the money supply and         is the expected

change.

     The test for efficiency is based on the idea that rational forecasts

utilize any available information which affects the actual money SUPi.

As discussed by Pesando (1975), forecasts are weak—form efficient if the

actual and expected money supply series share a common time series structure.

Experimentation with various ARIMA specifications indicates that a second




3The actual change in the money supply used throughout the paper is defined
as M =     —
week t.
        m    m1,   where m is the first announcement of the money supply in
          The results reported are the same when the money supply change is
defined as m —
                m1,
t—l announces in week
                        where m1 is the revision for the money supply in week
                        t.
                                      —4—




order autoregressive structure provides an adequate representation of the

actual weekly money supply change data:


                                                                 (2)



If the expectations are efficient, they should incorporate this information

in the same fashion:


                                                                 (3)



That is, efficiency implies that o'           =
                                                      j,    ).   A direct

test of the efficiency hypothesis is from the regression:


     (M—E) =     + i M1 + 2 M2                                   (4)



Expectations are efficient if the null hypothesis that (y0, y, y2) =
                              4
(0, 0, 0) cannot be rejected.

     Even if the time series model given by equation (2) is misspecif led,

rejection of the null hypothesis on the coefficients of equation (4) implies

that efficiency is rejected. Non—zero coefficients in equation (4) indicate

that there exists readily available information (prior changes in the money

supply) which could be used to systematically reduce the forecast errors.

That is, there is evidence of inefficient use of available information.



4For both the unbiasedness and efficiency hypotheses, the test statistics
are based on the joint distribution of the regression coefficients. Generally,
for the model y = X8 + u where b Is the least squares estimator of , the
test statistic for the null hypothesis that   is equal to the particular
value o is:
    F =       — b)' X'x(0 —
                              b)/KS
Where K is the number of elements in the vector b, S is the standard error
of the regression and F is distributed with K and N— degrees of freedom.
      Efficiency and unbiasedness tests of survey data are usually applied

 to a time series of the mean survey responses. This procedure is common

 because individual survey responses are often unavailable. However, it

 introduces an aggregation bias which can severely distort the results of

 rationality tests, as will be discussed below. Results with the survey

means are shown to illustrate the extent of the bias. For this study, a

 pooled cross section—time series of individual survey responses is utilized

 to test for rationality.

      It is also possible that some but not all of the respondents provide

rational forecasts. Thus, it is useful to test for differences among respon-

dents by examining the rationality of each individual. For this purpose, the

data are organized into 20 time series, each one of which is the weekly fore-

casts of an individual respondent. An additional benefit of this procedure

is that it avoids a problem associated with the pooled sample. That sample

is so large that small forecasts errors lead to rejection of the rationality

hypotheses when standard statistical tests are applied.

     An analysis of variance is used to test the pooled sample against

the set of time series for each respondent. To anticipate our results, the

pooled sample is rejected in favor of this last alternative for both testing

equations. Finally, the tests on the individual time series will show a

greater incidence of forecast bias than would be indicated by chance and

little indication of informational inefficiency. The discussion begins with

the tests for unbiasedness.

    Figlewski and Wachtel (forthcoming) have shown that the use of a sample

of survey means for the unbiasedness tests introduces a specification error.
                                         —6—




The survey mean may not be a rational forecast even when all individual

forecasts are rational. The precise relationship between the pooled

and survey mean has been investigated by Dietrich and Joines [forthcoming].

The slope coefficient in the unbiasedness equation (1) from the pooled

data, 6, and from the aggregated (survey mean) data, M, are related in the

following manner:



              TN                2
              Z E(EM. —
      M             1     EN)
      P         T
              N E(EM - EN) 2
                   t
                t



where EM. is the money supply change expectation of the th respondent in

week t, FI is the mean survey response in week t, EM is the overall mean

and T and N are the number of weeks and respondents, respectively. It is

clear from the above that M >       P•    With our data, the slope coefficients

in both the bias equations are less than one, so M, which is larger, is

closer to one. Aggregation to survey means then increases the likelihood of

accepting the null hypothesis of unbiasedness.

     Results for the unbiasedness tests are shown in the top panel of Table 1.

For the sake of comparison, results with the survey means are shown in equa-

tion (1). They are followed by results with the pooled sample, equation (2).

It is clear that the aggregation of the sample into a time series of survey

means has a large effect on the results. As discussed earlier, 8 is closer

to unity with the aggregated sample.5 Thus, the data in that common form

suggests that the null hypothesis of unbiasedness cannot be rejected.



5Similar aggregation bias results were found by Figlewski and Wachtel (1981)
in a study of the Livingston survey data on inflationary expectations.
  With the preferred pooled sample      = .77 and the   null   hypothesis

  is rejected.6 However, this result may be suspect because of

 heteroscedasticity among the residuals from each survey week. The standard

 errors of the residuals for each week from equation (2) in Table 1 are used

 to make a heteroscedasticity correction. Each observation is divided by the

 standard error of the residuals for that week from equation (2). The re—

 estimated equation is (3) in Table 1 which indicates an ever larger slope

 bias.

         As noted earlier, an alternative way of examining the data is to test

 for the rationality of the forecasts of individual respondents. The test

 results for the 20 individuals in the sample are shown in Table 2. The

 disaggregation of the tooled data sample into separate regressions £ or each

 respondent adds significantly to the explanatory power of the unbiasedness

 equation. That is, the model estimated in Table 1, equation 2:


           = a
                 + it + u.

is tested against the alternative model:


     Mt = a. + .            + u.it:
           1   1     EM
                       it                         i1,. ..,20

shown in Table 2.     The F—statistic which is 6.90 with (2,1852) degrees

of freedom indicates that the model using the pooled data sample can be

rejected. In addition, the null hypothesis of unbiasedness can be rejected

at the 5% level for 11 of the 20 forecasters and at the 1% level for 2 of the

20. There is clearly a greater incidence of bias than would be expected from



    is easy to reject the null hypothesis because the regression is esti-
mated from a large number of observations which determines the degrees of
freedom. However, there are not that many truly independent observations
since the dependent variable has values which repeat for each survey
respondent.
                                     —8—

 sampling variation. The evidence of bias in forecast behavior in the sample period

 is therefore quite strong; about half of the forecasters were making systema-

 tic errors in this period.7

        The presence of serial correlation in the unbiasedness equations would

indicate systematic errors that could readily be corrected. For the 20

individual respondents, all but one of the equations show no indication of

first   order serial correlation. Examination of higher order autocorrelations
of the forecast errors for each of the 20 individuals provided only a few
instances of significant autocorrelations.
     Turning now to the efficiency test, only results with the pooled sample

are shown since the least squares estimates of the coefficients for the

pooled and means samples are exactly the same because the right hand side

variables are the samef or each individual. Although the F—statistics f or

the efficiency tests in Table 1 indicate that the null hypothesis can be

rejected (i.e., prior changes in the money supply contain information that

could be used to reduce the forecast error), the coefficients are very small.8

     Additional and perhaps more relevant evidence is provided by examining

the efficiency of each of the 20 individual respondents. This form of data

organization yields a significant increase in the explanatory power of the



7mis may not be surprising because the sample period is one of tumultuous
change in financial markets. In particular, the last 11 surveys (out of 95)
took place after the Federal Reserve's announced change in operating procedures
(on October 6, 1979). Although there are not enough surveys to examine
forecast behavior after the Fed's shift to monetary aggregates targets, it
is useful to see if these surveys are unduly influencing the reported results.
For the truncated sample, 9 out of 20 forecasters show bias (at the 5% significance
level). Thus, the conclusions are unaffected by the inclusion of the post—October
1979 data.

    is interesting to note that when the sample of survey means is used,
the null hypothesis of efficiency is not rejected. The F—statistic is 1.13
with (3, 92) degrees of freedom.
 efficiency equations. The F—statistic for the comparison of the pooled

 regression to the 20 individual regressions is 5.68, with (3, 1792) degrees

 of freedom. The individual regressions lend support to the efficiency hypot-

 hesis since none of the F—statistics for the null hypothesis of zero coefficients

 is significant at the five percent level (see Table 2)8a Furthermore, there

 is no indication of serial correlation among the residuals in the efficiency

 tests for the individual respondents.

      It is clear from the above discussion that the analysis of the rationality

 of money supply expectations is highly dependent upon the form of the data

 used for the tests.   If we apply the usual and erroneous procedures applied

 to surveys of forecasts, which is to study the mean of the forecasts for

each survey, the data eems to support the rationality hypothesis.    However,
when the same statistical tests are applied to the disaggregated or pooled

data, the rationality hypotheses are resoundingly rejected. Due to the very

large size of the pooled sample, economically inconsequential deviations from

rationality can lead to rejection of the null hypothesis. To avoid this problem,

the tests were also applied to the behavior over time of each individual res-

pondent. Furthermore, analysis of variance tests indicate that this form of

data organization is superior for both the unbiasedness and efficiency tests.

With this preferred sample design, a large proportion of the respondents

exhibit systematic biases, although they all provide informationally efficient

forecasts.

     Finally, Theil's decomposition of the mean square error of forecast

provides a graphic picture of the forecast error. The decomposition of the

mean square error into three components is given by:



8aThlS result is also true when the sample period ends just before the change
in Federal Reserve operating procedures (October 6, 1979).
        E(M —          (—        + ('   —   )2   s   + (1   —   r2)   S
where    is the slope coefficient from the unbiasedness test, S and

are the variance of EN and M, respectively, and r is the correlation of E24

and N. The three terms on the right hand side represent bias (the error

of the mean forecast), inefficiency and random effects, respectively. The

decomposition for the pooled sample (Table 1, equation (2)) is:


     3.075 =    (.537 - .620)2 + (1 - .767)2(1.874) + (1 - .377)(4.055)

The random term accounts for 94.4% of the mean square error, the bias term

2.3% and the inefficiency term 3.3%. There is very little variation in the

results of the decomposition among the 20 individual forecasters. The ran-

dom term is always more than 90% of the total mean square error.

     The results indicate a remarkable similarity among the forecasters. In

all cases, the expected monetary change (EN) averages substantially more

than the actual chamge (M). For the whole sample,                is about 1.7 times the

size of M, and the differences among the 20 individuals are very small. Con-

sequently, as seen in Table 2, the constant in the unbiasedness equation

is always negative and the slope always less than one.9 That is, all the

forecasters tend to over—estimate the change in the money supply in this

two—year period and their predictions are much less volatile than the actual

changes. The variance of the actual changes is more than twice the size of

the variance in the predicted changes.

     Theil also suggested the inequality coefficient as a summary measure

of forecast accuracy. It is given by:



9Friedman's study of interest rate expectations and Figlewski and Wachtel's
study of inflationary expectations also indicate that the slope is less than
one.
                                            -1.1—




            =



 which has a value of zero if all forecasts are perfect and one if the f ore—

 casts have the same mean square error as the naive extrapolation of no change

 in the money supply. The individual survey respondents are quite similar;
                      2
 the values of U range from .67 to .87.


 Structure of Expectations

      The economics literature discusses several models for the structure and

 formation of expectations which can be applied to the survey data on the

 expected change in the money supply. In this section, some standard model

 structures are specified and estimated. The specifications are tested against

 each other to see whether the data favor a particular structure for expecta-

 tions formation. The particular models investigated are for adaptive,

extrapolative and         regressive   expectations.

     The adaptive expectations model is given by:


     EN —                     —
            EM1

which states that the change in expectations is a partial
                                                          response to pre-
vious forecast errors. The extrapolative model suggests that forecasts

change in response to past changes in the actual data:


                  =
     EN -
            EM1       M1 — M2).
Normally, adaptive and extrapolative influences would be indicated by sig-

nificant positive estimates of            and y respectively. Negative coefficients

are evidence of regressive influences which means that the survey respondents

expect past errors or actual changes to be reversed. Alternatively, the
                                                -t2—




regressive model can be specified directly as


     EM —
            EM1
                  =
                      A(M*1
                              —   N)
where M* is a normal change in the money supply and positive estimates of A

indicate that forecasts change because a regression towards M* is expected.

That is, if the last announced change (M1) is less than the normal change,

then expectations are adjusted up by some fraction of the deviation from

normal.

     As written above, the models examine only the influence of the most re-

cent errors or changes in the money supply on EM. Since the money supply

expectations are formed each week, it seems reasonable to expect that the ex-

planatory variables for any number of earlier weeks could also influence the

current expectation. For example, the generalization of the adaptive model

is given by:

                                  k
     (EM — EM
                l o       +           .(M
                                       1    1
                                            .   — EM
                                                       1.)

where estimates of the 's can be both positive and negative. Forecast

errors may at first be viewed as random and then re—interpreted as an indi-

cation of underlying change. Similarly, the persistence of errors in one

direction provides cumulative evidence about trends in the money supply which

should be interpreted differently than the one time occurrence of a forecast

error.

    Estimates of the generalized models with the pooled time series—cross

section survey data are shown in Table 3 where the lags are arbitrarily

limited to eight weeks. The normal money supply change for the regressive

model is specified to be a constant, as explained below. The extrapolative

and regressive models (which include the same right hand side values, lags
                                      —13—




 of M, in different function forms) have R2s that approach .5, which is twice
 as large as the R2 from the adaptive model.
      The first lag coefficient in    the   adaptive model is   negative   which
 suggests   a regressive influence. It indicates that an unanticipated increase

 in the money supply leads forecasters to revise down their expected change.

 That is, such a change is viewed as temporary and it is expected that it

 will be offset, at least partially, in the next week. The second lagged

 forecast error has a positive coefficient, which is only slightly larger in

 absolute value than the coefficient on the first lag. The long term effect

 of a forecast error, given by the sum of the lag coefficients, is positive.

However, the sum   of   the lag coefficients is .12, suggesting a rather small

 impact of forecast eror on the revision of forecasts. Thus, the adaptive

model indicates that a forecast error is viewed initially as a statistical

or policy aberration which is expected to be offset by technical adjustments

in the money supply in the next week. However, maintained forecast errors

lead to a small adjustment of expectations in the direction of the error.

     The consistently negative coefficients in the extrapolative equation

and the explanatory power of the regressive equations support the presence

of regressive influences on the formation of expectations. The normal change

in the money supply, M*, is determined by the Federal Reserve policy targets.

The growth targets imply a small weekly change in the money supply. Given

the short time period under study, and the small variation in Fed targets,

the implied weekly change is virtually constant. In this case the regressive

model reduces to a regression on a constant and lagged values of M.          Nega-
tive coefficients on the independent variables are consistent with the
                                       —   I- L




 regressive model.1° The results      are supportive of the regressive hypot-

 hesis. The first lag coefficient is very large and the sum                is   somewhat

 smaller. This suggests that a change in the money supply that                  is   greater
 than   the normal change is followed by an immediate reduction in the expected
change.
        It is of interest   to see whether any particular model structure domi-

nates the others. To do so, the pairwise test of alternative hypotheses

suggested by Davidson and MacKinnon [19811 can be applied. If there                    are two
model specifications given by y =     f(.)        and y =   g(.),   respectively, then the

null hypothesis that the first specification is true can be tested by esti—

mating:


        y =   f(.)   +


where g is the predicted value from y =            g().     If the first specification

f(.), is true (relative to the alternative, g(.)), then will not differ

significantly from zero.

        The t—statistics for the pairwise specification tests are given at the

bottom of Table 3. The model for the null hypotheses is listed at the left

and the alternatives are the column heads. The results indicate that the

regressive specification dominates the extrapolative. However, the adaptive

model adds explanatory power to both of the others and vice versa.



'°Since there is ample reason to think that the Fed often ignores, perhaps
temporarily, its aggregates targets, an alternative specification of M* was
considered. The effective Fed policy and the banking system's interaction
with it may be revealed by an examination of actual money supply changes in
the recent past. With this in mind, an alternative regressive equation which
specifies the normal change of the money supply as the average of observed
changes in the past 8 weeks was estimated. However, the test of alternative
specifications discussed in the text indicated that the specification
presented is superior.
                                      —1 5—




      Since the various model specifications need not be viewed as mutually

 exclusive, an appropriate model might include both regressive and adaptive

 influences. An equation which includes both of these effects on the deter—

 inination of expectations is given by:


      EM — EM   = .92 -           . + .82CM
                          1.69 M —1           - EM .)
             —l                            —i     —1
                  MSE   = 1.25         R2 = .686


where the coefficients are the sums of three lag coefficients for both the

regressive and adaptive terms. The equation indicates that both adaptive

and regressive influences play distinct and strong roles in the formation

of money supply expectations in this period. The        of the equation is

substantially higher than for the individual models in Table 3. However,

these models are best viewed as descriptive of the influences that have

determined expectations in this period rather than estimates of the structure

of expectations formation that can be used for predictive purposes.


Conclusions

     In this paper we have used an especially rich set of survey data to

examine the structure and formation of expectations of the weekly change

in the money supply. We emphasize the importance of using the data in

disaggregated form. Our main conclusions can be summarized as follows:

     (i) Standard testing products for forecast rationality can be mis-

         leading. Our preferred procedure is to examine the accuracy

        of each of the survey respondents individually. For about half

        of the respondents there is evidence of bias, although their fore-

        casts are always efficient.
                               -16--



(ii)   The examination of models of expectations formation indicate that

       there is a strong regressive influence on expectations. There is,

       in addition, evidence that adaptive learning from past errors

       characterizes the data. A model that includes both influences

       explains well over half of the variation in the week—to—week change

       in expectations of the weekly change in the money supply..
Table 1.        Rationality Tests
                                                                    Unbiasedness:        M   =   c   + EM
        Sample                                                                                                  R2           N
(1)     Survey Means                               —.29              1.06                 1.31                  .377             95
                                                  (1.6)             (7.5)
(2)     Pooled                                     —.12                  .77             55.7                   .275         1892
                                                  (2.8)            (26.8)
(3)     Pooled with heteroscedasticity             —.03               .58                33.3                   .456         1892
             correction                           (1.6)            (38.1)
        ___
                                                           Efficiency:     (M — EM) =        +    iM        +   2 M2
                                                                                                     Fb
        Sample                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                       R     N
(4)     Pooled                                     —.22            .04           —.08                20.2              .02   1852
                                                  (5.3)         (2.0)            (3.9)
(5)     Pooled with heteroscedasticity             — .18           .05           — .04               31.0              .05   1852
             correction                           (7.9)         (4.2)            (3.9)
aH       (a,    8)   =   (0,   1)
b}10:                          =    (0, 0, 0)
         (y,,    Y]
 Absolute       values of t—statistjcs are shown in parentheses.
                 Rationality or mdiv Luua1 loreca3ts

                                      Lnbiasedness Test                       ErEi.c:iency Test
tr.dividuai                a                                 F         DW            F

       1                —.21         .94         .29         1.02      2.05         1.70
       2                —.15         .72*        .28         4.51*     2.66         1.35
       3                   .04       .90         .32             .29   2.02          .74
      4                 —.19         .92         .33         1.18      2.00         1.05
      5                 _•37*        .94         .35         3.31*     2.02         2.32
      6                 _.24*        .85         .34         3.01      2.20         1.44
      7                 _.29*        .85         .33         3.64*     2.13         2.28
      8                 —.15         .78         .27         2.73      2.12         [.34
      9                 —.13         .74         .23         3.61*     2.20         1.45
     10                 —.08         .67*        .27         5.f2*     2.08         1.43
     11                    .02       .70*        .22         2.63      2.23         1.14
     12                —.18 —        .81*        .27         2.42      2.30          .73
     13                 .02          .63*        .18         3•99*     2.32          .82
     14                —.11          .80         .30         2.05      2.34          .49
     15                —.17          .88         .31         1.42      2.38         1.08
     16                —.04          •73*        .29         3.38*     2.19          .34
     17                —.06          .68*        .20         3.61*     2.29          .56
     18                —.08          .71*        .27         4.11*     2.03          .80
     19                —.03          .66*        .25         5.13*     2.23         1.34
     7(1               —lfi                                  4(4*      216          ic
           Unbiasedriess   test:
M =            EM
F—statistic is for H: (ci,           8)     (0, 1).
     Efficiency test:
(M—F2'1)       =y0+y1M1+y2M2
F—statistic         is for H0: (-,    y, y,) =    (0,0,0).
*
    Indicates:
i) ci is more than one standard deviation away from 0,
ii) 8 is more than two standard deviations away from 1,
iii) F—tests are significant at the 5% level.
 Table 3. Models of Expectations Formation


                                                                              b
 Coeff Ic lent                     Adapt ivea                 Extrapolative        RegressiveC
 constant                             .04            (.86)     .01    (.21)         .17   (3.4)

 i= 1                              —.29 (10.6)               —.59 (31.7)          —.62 (31.9)
          2                           .34 (12.5)             —.53 (17.6)            .02   (0.7)

          3                           .03           (1.0)    —.52 (12.6)          —.03    (1.3)

       4                              .06           (2.3)    —.41    (8.6)          .06   (2.6)

       5                           —.08             (2.9)    —.27    (5.9)         .08    (3.4)

       6                           —.18             (6.5)    —.29    (7.3)        —.07    (3.2)

      7                             .17             (6.3)    —.15    (5.2)         .09    (4.3)

      8                               07        (2.5)        —.05    (2.7)         .06    (3.3)



Sum of lags                         .12                      —2.81                —.41

                                    .22                        .48                 .49

MSE                                3.23                       2.07                2.06


                                  Tests of Alternative Specifications

Ho: Adaptive                                                 41.3                 44.3

Ho: Extrapolative                  —10.7                                           4.2

Ho: Regressive                     —10.5                     1.3



a —                 =       +   Z(M1 — EM1).
b     —
              EM1
                    =
                            + Ey1(M         —   M


C(EM —                  =       — ZA1(M —
              EM...1)                               M.1)
Since         M* is constant,
      EM-EM.=X
          —i  0 -ZA.M
                   i —i
                               References


Davidson, Russel and James MacKinnon, "Several Tests for Model Specification
     in the Presence of Alternative Hypotheses," Econometrica, 49 (May 1981).

Dietrich, J. Kimball and Douglas Joines, "Rational Expectations, Informational
     Efficiency and Tests Using Survey Data," Review of Economics and
     Statistics, forthcoming.

Figlewski, Stephen and Paul Wachtel, "The Formation of Inflationary
     Expectations," Review of Economics and Statistics, 63 (February 1981),
     1—10.

___________and         , "Testing for the Rationality of Expectations
     Using Survey Data," Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Friedman, Benjamin, "Survey Evidence on the 'Rationality' of Interest
     Rate Expectations," Journal of Monetary Economics, 6 (October 1980),
     453—65.

Pesando, James E., "A Jote on the Rationality of the Livingston Price
     Expectations," Journal of Political Economy, 83 (August 1975), 849—58.

Urich, Thomas, "The Information Content of Weekly Money Supply Announcements,"
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 10 (1982), 73—88.

___________and Paul Wachtel, "Market Response to the Weekly Money Supply
     Announcement in the 1970's," Journal of Finance, December 1981

Wachtel, Paul, "Survey Measures of Expected Inflation and Their Potential
     Usefulness" in Joel Popkin, ed., Analysis of Inflation: 1965—1974,
     Ballinger for the National Bureau of Economic Research, 1977.
