                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            MANAGING MACROECONOMIC CRISES

                                            Jeffrey A. Frankel
                                              Shang-Jin Wei

                                          Working Paper 10907
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w10907


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The authors wish to thank Yannis Itokatlidis, Evren Pacalioglu, and especially Dora Douglass and Li Zeng
for very capable research assistance; and Joshua Aizenman, Robert Flood, and Brian Pinto for useful
comments. Shang-Jin Wei contributed to this paper before joining the staff of the International Monetary
Fund (IMF). The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views or policies
of the IMF or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Managing Macroeconomic Crises
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 10907
November 2004
JEL No. F3, F4

                                            ABSTRACT

This study reviews broadly the experience of the last decade on crisis prevention and management.
It seeks to draw greater attention to policy decisions that are made during the phase when capital
inflows come to a sudden stop. Procrastination---the period of financing a balance of payments
deficit rather than adjusting---had serious consequences in some cases. Crises are more frequent and
more severe when short-term borrowing and dollar denomination external debt are high, and foreign
direct investment (FDI) and reserves are low, in large part because balance sheets are then very
sensitive to increases in exchange rates and short-term interest rates. If countries that are faced with
a fall in inflows adjusted more promptly, rather than stalling for time by running down reserves or
shifting to loans that are shorter-termed and dollar-denominated, they might be able to adjust on
more attractive terms.

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu

Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund
Room 10-700
19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
and NBER
swei@imf.org
         In the last 30 years, emerging markets have experienced at least two complete boom-bust
cycles. The last cycle was marked by rapid capital inflows from 1990 to 1996, followed by
severe crises for some countries and scarce capital for all from 1997 to 2003. This cycle bore
similarities to the preceding 14 years, as well: large loans to developing countries from 1975 to
1981, followed by the international debt crisis of 1982--89. Despite this volatility, many
developing countries---although certainly not all---have ended this 30-year period with a far
higher level of per capita income than they began it.

Taking Stock of Recent History

         It is a good time to take stock of what has been learned from recent experience about the
determinants of economic performance in emerging market countries. Which policies seem to
work and which do not? Scholarly research has not neglected the topic. Indeed, it is striking
how much emphasis has shifted within the field of international macroeconomics to the problems
of developing countries. But most of the contributions to the subject focus on one particular
model, or one particular empirical effect. While there are overviews of the late-1990s crises,
there are not many that attempt to summarize and integrate what we have learned from the
numbers. It would help if the lists of variables that are run through statistical predictors of crisis
probabilities were more visibly tied to the various competing theoretical models of crises.

         One lesson we are learning from the trend of recent research is that policymakers making
decisions in real time are far more constrained in their options than we have pretended to believe.
(The international financial institutions are of course one step further removed from the policy
levers than the national authorities.) Committing to a non-inflationary monetary policy with
100 percent credibility may simply not be an option in light of past history and current political
structures, no matter how sincere the governor of the central bank. This is the case even in a pro-
reform political environment, such as prevailed in many countries in the late 1980s and early
1990s, and even if an institutional commitment such as a currency board does happen to be an
option politically. These policies can always be reversed later, as history has shown. Similarly,
a decision to remove capital controls may not put a developing country in the same category of
financial integration as an OECD country, because of the risk that capital controls will be re-
imposed in the future. Moreover, measures of the composition of capital inflows, such as the
maturity structure or the share of foreign-denominated debt, may not be amenable to policy
choice in any given year. Accordingly, the fourth section of this chapter will take a longer-run
perspective. The data set will be constructed from country-averages over the period 1990--2002.
The analysis focuses on whether countries that on average had a particular degree of exchange
rate flexibility or financial openness over this period tended on average to have a high or low
level of volatility over the period.

         The study begins with a whirlwind summary of academic literature, emphasizing what is
recent and what seems capable of producing a bottom line. Included are the theoretical models
of speculative attacks, which come in three “generations.” In addition, each of the major policy
questions that a country must decide has produced its own body of literature: the choice of
exchange rate regime; the choice of capital account regime; openness to trade; institutional issues
such as the quality of financial regulation; the composition of capital inflows; and the
management of “sudden stop” events once they occur.1 Included in the empirical section of the
literature review are studies of leading indicators or crisis warning signals, which seek to include
many factors, but which are not designed specifically to look at a variety of policy variables.
Given all the theories and claims that have been offered, this study seeks to ask what
combinations of policy variables seem empirically to be the most important, and which policy
choices seem to work.


                                                  2
        Methodologies

         The study tries out a number of different methodologies to discern determinants of
economic performance. An impressionistic consideration of the most visible crises of the 1994--
2002 period (Mexico, Thailand, Korea, Indonesia, Malaysia, Russia, Brazil, Turkey, and
Argentina) concludes that there are more variables and hypotheses that need to be evaluated than
there are major-crisis data points. More systematic analysis requires turning to a larger set of
developing countries. The study approaches this larger data set several ways.

         First, a simple probit analysis looks to see which of the variables that are suggested by
the literature are capable of helping forecast the increased likelihood of a currency crisis on an
annual basis. Second, the technique of regression tree analysis allows the data to choose freely
which variables seem to matter the most. The technique has been used in macroeconomics much
less often than factor analysis. But it has the advantage that it does not impose a linear functional
form on the relationship. It is a flexible way to look for robust statistical relationships including
threshold and interactive effects. This will be particularly important when we consider some of
the hypotheses that are on the research frontier. This includes the proposition that capital
account liberalization is not helpful for all countries, but is helpful for those that have strong
macroeconomic fundamentals, or those that have strong structural fundamentals, or those that
have attained a threshold stage of financial or economic development. The study uses regression
analysis on a broad sample of countries from the 1970s to the present to offer direction as to
which directions our econometric energies may be best spent.

        Third, the study applies conventional regression analysis to a cross-section of countries to
explain performance during the most recent decade (taken to be 1990--2002, which includes both
the boom and bust phase). Fourth, the analysis focuses on the timing of currency crises---in
particular, looking at a typical month-by-month profile for reserves preceding crises---again to
see which crisis management policies seem to help and which do not.

         We use as our main criteria of economic performance the probability of having currency
crises and the total output lost during crises. The crisis prevention policies that we examine
include: macroeconomic discipline (as measured by inflation, debt, budget deficits, money
creation); institutional quality (corruption); financial integration (freedom from capital controls);
currency regime (hard pegs, intermediate, and floating); openness (trade/GDP ratio); composition
of inflows (maturity, share of FDI, currency mismatch) and reserves. The crisis management
policies that we examine include: promptness versus delay of adjustment (measured either as the
length of the lag after reserves peak, or the amount of reserve loss during this period); changes in
composition (again, maturity and currency); and the mix of policies during the adjustment period
(expenditure reduction versus devaluation).

        Measures of Performance

        Before going further, it is important to be explicit about the objective function. What is
meant by “economic performance”? The econometrics undertaken for this study included
among the performance measures growth in real income over the sample period, or real income
per capita, as in the standard growth literature. However, the chapter places more emphasis on
economic volatility than on the average growth rate. The second measure of performance
examined was the standard deviation of real growth. The third measure was the number of
financial crises, where each crisis is defined as a sharp drop in reserves or in the foreign exchange
value of the currency (with the choice between the two presumed to be a matter of crisis


                                                  3
management, rather than of the magnitude of the sudden stop of international investment). The
fourth measure was the average severity of the crises that do occur, measured by the depth of the
output loss. The fifth measure was the cumulation of output lost in financial crises. This is a
direct aggregation of measures 3 and 4, but is also intended to be correlated with measures 1 and
2. While this fifth composite measure, called “crisis loss,” has no precise economic
interpretation–the study does not attempt to guess what potential output might be during the
crisis, for example–it is intended to be a good single heuristic to capture overall economic
performance in a study on volatility. This composite measure is the one that is emphasized in the
reported results.

         In firmly grounded theoretical models, the key variable to use in evaluating economic
performance is not real income, but consumption. In theory, fluctuations in income (for example,
as a result of exogenous fluctuations in the terms of trade) are not damaging for a small country
integrated into world financial markets, because the country can sustain a smooth path for
consumption by borrowing and lending. Indeed, this is one of several important arguments in
favor of open capital markets. The study does not look at consumption data, for three reasons.
First, during any given sample period, even one as long as several decades, consumption could
grow unusually rapidly (as in Mexico in the early 1990s) or unusually slowly (as in Romania in
the 1980s) because of expansionary or contractionary expenditure policies that will have to be
reversed in the future. A country with a spending boom that ends the sample period with
correspondingly high levels of debt and inflation need not count as high-performing. GDP is less
vulnerable to this problem.

        Second, there is by now a rough consensus that international financial markets do not in
fact work in the perfect textbook fashion. International investors are not willing to lend more to
countries undergoing recession to smooth consumption; if anything, the reverse is true. Third, as
imperfect as are the data on GDP and the other variables in the analysis, the data on consumption
are worse. For all three reasons, the study uses GDP to calculate the measures of economic
performance: average growth, variability, and output lost to crises.

Literature Review and Hypotheses to Be Tested

        Theories of Speculative Attacks

         Economists’ theories of speculative attacks have organized themselves into three
“generations.” Each generation of models was launched by a seminal article or articles, of which
a key feature was an attempt to answer the timing question, “What determines precisely when
crises occur?” Each relied on the assumption that speculators think ahead, and form their
expectations rationally. Before considering the question of timing, it may be useful to explain the
distinction among the three categories in terms of their attempts to answer the less technical and
more inflammatory question of why they occur: Whose fault is the crisis? The first generation
says domestic macroeconomic policy, the second generation says volatile financial markets, and
the third generation says financial structure. In neutral language, the explanations are,
respectively, excessive macroeconomic expansion, “multiple equilibria,” and moral hazard. In
finger-pointing language, the respective culprits are undisciplined domestic policymakers, crazy
international investors, and crony capitalists.2

        First generation: Overly expansionary macroeconomic policy. The first generation of
speculative attack models attributes balance of payments crises ultimately to overly expansionary
macroeconomic policies. Most textbook analysis falls into this category. Budget deficits must be
financed by borrowing or monetary expansion. Either way, the result is a current account deficit.


                                                4
If nothing is done to adjust in the face of what has become an overvalued currency, eventually the
country will run out of reserves. Macroeconomic overexpansion and overvaluation were the
standard diagnoses of balance of payments crises in developing countries before 1995, and were
the basis of most adjustment programs administered by the International Monetary Fund. The
international debt crisis of the 1980s is an important example.3

          What determines the timing of the attack? This was the insight of the seminal article in
the first generation approach by Paul Krugman (1979), the more intuitively accessible version of
the model produced by Robert Flood and Peter Garber (1984), and the progenitor written by
Stephen Salant and Dale Henderson (1978).

        Consider a country in which the balance of payments deficit is a steady $1 billion a year,
because of ongoing monetary and fiscal expansion. If the country has reserves of $5 billion, then
apparently it can hold out for five years. Absent some change, it will run out of reserves at the
end of that time and will be forced to devalue or depreciate, by enough to eliminate the deficit.
Krugman’s contribution was to identify the time at which the attack will come, in a country that
will eventually run out of reserves. It will be sooner than five years. If speculators are rational,
they will not wait until then. To do so would mean holding an asset–domestic currency–while
knowing that it will suffer a discrete loss in value in the immediate future. Any self-respecting
speculator would instead shift his or her money out of the country at an earlier date. When
speculators all do this, they move the date of the crisis forward.

         One might then try to take this logic to the other limit, reasoning that the attack must take
place much earlier: at the moment when the pattern of overexpansion and eventual devaluation
first become clear. But this also is not the right solution. As long as the central bank has plenty
of reserves to defend the exchange rate, speculators will be happy to wait. There is an
intermediate date, when the remaining stock of reserves has been run down to just the right level:
still high enough that the speculators can get their money out, but no higher than that. That is the
date when the attack occurs. The remainder of the reserves is then suddenly depleted in a single
day. This theory helps explain why the level of reserves is statistically a useful predictor---a low
level of reserves signaling danger of crisis. More precisely, the most useful prediction is that,
under the particular assumptions of the Krugman-Flood-Garber model, the speculative attack will
occur when the level of reserves has fallen to a level equal to the semi-elasticity of money
demand times the post-crisis rate of inflation. The latter variable is determined by the rate of
expansion of domestic credit (assumed the same either pre-crisis or post-crisis).

         There have been many extensions and elaborations of the approach. The original
Krugman model emphasized certainty and assumed that the authorities would defend the parity
until reserves declined to zero, giving the unrealistic implication that everyone could predict the
date of the crisis with certainty. Incorporating uncertainty has been one of the more important
extensions.4

         Second generation: Multiple equilibria. The second generation of models argues that
there is more than one possible outcome–crisis and no-crisis–that can be consistent with
equilibrium, even if there has been no change in true fundamentals.5 The multiple equilibrium
approach originally took its inspiration from the crises in the European Exchange Rate
Mechanism (ERM) of 1992--93.

         There had always been some who claimed that financial markets were excessively
volatile, alternating between waves of optimism and pessimism. But the usual view among
academic economists, as well as the international financial establishment, had been that markets


                                                  5
are based on economic fundamentals, and that declining market prices or flows are merely the
messenger or symptom of underlying problems. This view became harder to maintain as a
sequence of European currencies succumbed to attack. The attack on France in 1993 was
particularly puzzling, because the government had over the preceding years succeeded in
attaining a level of macroeconomic discipline that by most indicators looked at least as great as
that of Germany, its partner in the ERM. Moreover, after the bands were widened, the crisis
passed without a substantial further depreciation of the franc, even though there had been no
tightening of macroeconomic policy in the meantime. How then could the fundamentals have
been responsible for the earlier speculative pressure? Also puzzling were the cases of Sweden
and the United Kingdom. Both had shown a willingness to raise interest rates to extremely high
levels to defend the krona and the pound in 1992. Yet speculators were unimpressed, and
nonetheless persisted in attacks against those currencies. Such a response, known as the interest
rate defense, could apparently no longer be relied upon to work.

        The second generation point is most easily understood as a game played among
speculators, along the lines of the classic “prisoners’ dilemma.” Consider two speculators.
Each realizes that if the other sells, the resulting depreciation will reduce the value of his holdings
of domestic currency. Neither wants to stand pat if the other might sell. Thus the prisoners
dilemma equilibrium might entail both selling, even though everyone may be worse off after the
devaluation.

         Can one say anything about what conditions will make a country vulnerable to such an
attack? If the fundamentals are particularly weak, both speculators will sell. If the central bank
holds a sufficiently low level of reserves, then each speculator knows that if he chooses to sell his
domestic currency, he will deplete the central banks’ holdings of foreign reserves, and thereby
force a devaluation. Each knows this, and so will sell to avoid being the one left “holding the
bag.” If the fundamentals are particularly strong, there will be no attack. For example, if the
level of reserves is sufficiently high that both speculators know they cannot break the bank even
acting together, they have no reason to attack. The interesting case comes in the intermediate
range. If the fundamentals are bad but not terrible, then the country is vulnerable to an attack.
But the game theory cannot predict what the outcome will be in this case. The attack and no-
attack outcomes are equally valid equilibria. This is what is meant by multiple equilibria.

        One variant is an international version of a standard model of domestic bank runs. Each
bank depositor is motivated to take his money out of the bank only if he thinks others might do
the same, so that there might not be enough cash to go around. The recommended solution is
deposit insurance and adequate reserve holdings by the banks.6

         Another variant treats monetary policy as endogenous. After all, why should
governments decide to embark on a dangerous path of excessive money growth that they
stubbornly maintain regardless of adverse developments, as the first generation models assumed?
The ultimate fundamentals are not macroeconomic policies, but rather the political conditions that
might make the benefits of devaluation and monetary expansion more likely to outweigh the
costs, from the viewpoint of the monetary authorities. Some models suggest that a key
fundamental variable, determining whether a country is in the intermediate range where
speculative attacks are a danger, is the level of unemployment; some say it is the level of debt.7 If
these indicators are at particularly high levels, then the tight monetary policy necessary to fight a
speculative attack will involve particularly high costs relative to benefits. This is because the
high interest rates may spark banking failures or social unrest. Speculators know that the high
interest rates are not politically sustainable, which makes an attack more likely even if the
policymakers sincerely do their best to hold the line.


                                                  6
        Third generation: “Crony capitalism” and moral hazard. If crises of the 1970s and
1980s are represented by the first generation approach, and if the 1992--93 ERM crises inspired
the second generation models, then the East Asian crises of 1997--98 motivated the third
generation models.

         Unlike Latin America and other parts of the world with a history of large budget deficits,
high inflation monetary policies, and overvalued currencies, East Asia in the latter third of the
20th century earned a relatively good reputation for fiscal discipline and monetary stability. This
record was largely maintained right up until the crisis. True, Thailand and Korea clung to
overvalued currencies in the sense that they depleted their net reserves in futile attempts to defend
the exchange rate, before trying something else. But there had been limited evidence of
profligate monetary and fiscal policy on the part of these governments, or of currencies that were
overvalued in real terms. Indeed, westerners had argued earlier that such high-growth countries
are likely to experience real appreciations, reasoning according to the Balassa-Samuelson effect.

         In light of the judgment that most of these countries had relatively good macroeconomic
policies, diagnoses have placed new emphasis on a different sort of fundamentals: structural
distortions in the financial structures of emerging economies. “Crony capitalism,” defined more
formally as implicit government guarantees for poorly regulated banks and corporate debtors, has
been the inspiration behind a “third generation” approach to currency crises.8 (For some, the
phrase “third generation” refers to the problems of balance sheet mismatch, particularly among
banks. The two sets of issues are closely related.)

       The third generation models interpret recent crises as illustrations of the perils of moral
hazard. Borrowers and lenders are less likely to be careful evaluating the true profitability of
investment opportunities if they believe they will be bailed out in the event that the project goes
badly.

         Some believe that international bailouts by the IMF and G-7 create the moral hazard
problem. But in the third generation models, the root-cause of moral hazard is at the national
level rather than the international level. If moral hazard at the international level were the
original and only root of the problem, then it would follow that the amount of capital flowing
from rich to poor countries overall would be greater than socially optimal. But instead, the
amount of capital flowing, on average, is less than predicted by neoclassical economic models. In
other words, the large existing differences across countries in capital/labor ratios and therefore in
the rate of return to capital predict that capital flow are likely to be larger than what is observed,
not smaller.

         The phrase “crony capitalism” suddenly became popular in 1997, to describe newly
evident flaws in the structure of Asian financial systems. In fairness, some of these same
characteristics had been seen as strengths of Asian economies a short time earlier. Business deals
are said to be dominated by personal connections (guan xi, in China), large family-run
conglomerates (chaebol, in Korea), comprehensive clusters of allied firms (keiretsu, in Japan), or
insider links to the government (charges of corruption, collusion and nepotism in Indonesia,
regarding President Suharto). Firms may fund investments by borrowing from bankers with
whom they have close personal or political ties. The loans may come from a bank to which the
firm is affiliated, in which case they are called connected lending, or may come under guidance
from the government, in which case they are called directed lending. In some countries,
corruption pervades the system.



                                                  7
         An idealized version of American capitalism is held up as a contrasting example (or was,
until the Enron scandals): transactions among corporations are said to be made at arms length,
based on explicit contracts enforced under a transparent legal system. Corporations rely heavily
on securities markets to fund investment, where rules require accounting by recognized standards,
and public disclosure of information. The Asian system is termed “relationship-based,” and the
American system, “market-based.”

         The insurance model of Michael Dooley (1997, 2000) starts from the assumption that
government officials have a pot of resources that can be used to bail out political cronies if they
get into financial difficulty. This pot is mainly identified with the central banks’ holdings of
foreign exchange reserves, but it could also include whatever sources of hard currency the
government can lay its hands on in the event of a crisis, whether funds that the country can
borrow from the IMF, the government’s claim on revenue from export taxes, or any profitable
state-owned enterprises or other holdings that the government could sell off. Well-connected
banks and businessmen are able to borrow from abroad to finance risky projects, such as real
estate development or a new factory in the already-glutted steel industry. They are aware of the
risk. But they believe that they will be bailed out by the government if things go badly. In the
worst countries, they have been explicitly promised that they will be bailed out. In other cases,
the government may have tried to declare in advance that it will not be responsible for private
debts, but this disclaimer is not believed.9

         Asian countries did not suddenly develop critical structural flaws in their financial
systems for the first time in 1997. Why does the crisis occur when it does? The timing of the
attack again comes out of the calculations of speculators who worry that if they wait too long,
there will not be enough foreign exchange reserves to go around. But there is a key difference
from the first generation models, which watched reserves decline steadily over time, and
identified the timing of the attack as the point at which reserves sank to a particular critical level.
The third generation models watch liabilities rise steadily over time, artificially encouraged by
moral hazard. They identify the timing of the attack with the point at which the liabilities have
climbed to the critical level given by the level of reserves. At that point, speculators suddenly
cash in their investments. If they wait any longer, they might not be able to get their money out.
The speculative attack, as usual, then forces the central bank to abandon the exchange rate.

       Empirical implications of speculative attack models. Much of the theoretical literature
on speculative attacks does not lead directly to empirical predictions. There exists a small
empirical literature.10 It is for the most part not designed to distinguish among the competing
models of speculative attack.

         One testable implication is the importance of the level of reserves, which features
prominently in all three generations of models. The first generation models suggest looking at
the level of reserves relative to macroeconomic fundamentals such as the inflation rate and the
rate of growth of domestic credit, or the budget deficit viewed as a key determinant of the rate of
growth of domestic credit. The second generation agrees that reserves are important; but if there
are other empirical measures that matter, they are more likely to concern unemployment,
elections, and other political variables. The role of reserves in the third generation is less
clearcut. The Dooley version says, surprisingly, that a high level of reserves actually makes a
speculative attack more likely---because there is a bigger pot of money to be exploited through
shady connections---conditioned on the other variable the model considers to be most important:
corruption. Important counterexamples to this prediction would seem to be the success of China
and Taiwan, Province of China, each with very high levels of reserves, in weathering the
volatility of 1997 and subsequently. One cannot claim that a higher quality of regulation is the


                                                   8
explanation. Directed lending, connected lending, corruption, and bad loans are at least as
important in these countries as in the rest of Asia.

         When Korea rebounded strongly from the recession of 1998, recovering as quickly as had
Mexico in 1995, some critics proclaimed that the V-pattern disproved the view on the parts of the
international financial institutions and the U.S. Treasury that the cause of the crisis was crony
capitalism: what is here termed the third generation approach. They argued that, just as
institutions go bad only slowly over time, they do not improve suddenly. Therefore the crisis
must have been due to something else, such as an unfounded speculative attack (second
generation) or IMF malfeasance.

          The counter-argument is that the Korean government did undertake fundamental
economic reforms pursuant to the late-December 1997 agreement with the IMF, for the first time
challenging the power of both the chaebols and the labor unions. The combination of an evident
national economic emergency and the election of a new president with traditional anti-
establishment support (Kim Dae Jung) allowed measures to be put through that had previously
been impossible politically. Although the reform process may not have progressed very far by
the time that Korean economic growth was fully restored (1999), the shift in approach worked to
restore investor confidence from early 1998, and is sufficient to explain the turnaround. Indeed,
some Korean economists argue that the country was better off, in light of the reforms, than it was
before the crisis, and even that the country might have been better off if the recovery had come
later, to keep up pressure for reform (although one need not go that far). Similarly, although the
Russian devaluation and default of 1998 appeared at the time to augur disaster, in retrospect the
crisis helped politically to bring about reforms that had previously been viewed as impossible,
such as effective collection of taxes and hardening of firms’ budget constraints (see chapter 10,
this volume).

         Early Warning Indicators

        We now turn from theory without numbers, to numbers without theory.

         Everyone would like to be able to predict ahead of time when a crisis will happen. This
is not easy to do. Even private “rating services,” professionals who make their living by
evaluating the risk of bonds from various issuers, have a poor track record. Indeed, if it were
easy to predict the date of a crisis, according to the theory of efficient markets, investors would
not have their money in the country at that date in the first place. But there are certain warning
indicators that may signal that a country is at increased risk.

         Traditional indicators are measures of aggregate indebtedness, such as the ratio of the
current account deficit to GDP, the ratio of debt to GDP, or the ratio of external debt service to
exports. One rule of thumb is that current account deficits in excess of 4 percent of GDP enter a
danger zone. Such predictors are of limited use, however, and not just because they have little
basis in theory.11 Some countries repeatedly get into trouble at debt/GDP ratios as low as 15
percent, whereas that level would be considered safe for others.12 Many countries are observed
to run large current account deficits for years, and yet are able to finance them without getting
into trouble. It depends, at least, on how the funds are used.

         Periodically, someone will assert that a given country need not worry about a current
account deficit, because the government budget is in balance, and thus it is only the private sector
that is borrowing from abroad. There is a certain logic to the argument that decisions made
freely by consenting adults who face explicit price signals are less likely to get into trouble than


                                                 9
governments spending somebody else’s money. Nevertheless, this principle has gone wrong
frequently enough to earn the name “Lawson Fallacy” (after the British finance minister who
downplayed fears regarding his country’s current account deficit in the late 1980s). Examples of
countries that borrowed to finance private deficits rather than public deficits and yet experienced
crises include Chile in 1981 and Mexico in 1994.

         Out of those experiences, a new guideline emerged: a country is more likely to get into
trouble if an inflow goes to finance consumption, instead of investment. After all, the key to
sustainable borrowing is to use the funds to build up a productive capital stock, so that the
country will be able tomorrow to produce, export, and earn the foreign exchange that it will need
to pay back the debt incurred today. East Asian countries in the 1990s, with their high rates of
saving and investment, seemed by this criterion unimpeachable, despite their large current
account deficits. Only when they too were hit by crises in 1997--98 did the flaw in this logic
become clear. Much of the finance had gone to investment in unprofitable heavy manufacturing
and real estate. A Korean firm that borrows heavily in order to invest in auto or steel factories
may have trouble paying the money back if those sectors already have excess capacity.

         Another set of indicators that appear statistically useful at predicting whether a given size
current account deficit or external debt is likely to lead to crisis concerns the composition of the
capital inflow. Relevant dimensions of the composition of inflows include maturity, currency of
denomination, bank lending vs. securities---and policy regarding reserves.13 These variables are
discussed below. A conclusion to emerge from many of the studies is that the single most useful
indicator may be the ratio of short-term external debt to reserves.

        Sachs, Tornell, and Velasco (1996) found that a combination of weak fundamentals
(changes in real exchange rate or credit/GDP) and low reserves (relative to M2) made countries
vulnerable to tequila contagion in 1995. Kaminsky, Lizondo, and Reinhart (1998) found that the
best predictors are the real exchange rate, the ratio of M2 to reserves, GDP, and equity prices.
Milesi-Ferretti and Razin (1998, 2000) found that reserves, openness, current account balance,
terms of trade, and world interest rates are among the indicators triggering crises and/or sharp
reversals of the current account.14

     Crisis Prevention Policies

      Background on many of the variables to be considered in the quantitative analysis appears in
appendix A, which presents a brief review of other literature relevant to crisis prevention policies.
The list includes the following topics: deep determinants that come originally from the growth
literature (such as institutions/governance), the choice of exchange rate regime, the choice of
capital account regime, the choice of trade openness, and the composition and use of capital
inflows.

     Crisis Management Policies

     Once a country is hit by an abrupt cut-off in foreign willingness to lend, it hardly matters
what was the cause. The urgent question becomes what is the appropriate policy response.
Often the loss in foreign financing must be taken as given. Thus there must be a reduction of the
same magnitude in the previous trade deficit. How can the adjustment be accomplished? Is a
sharp increase in interest rates (to reduce overall spending, and increase the attractiveness of
much-needed capital inflow) preferable to a sharp devaluation (to switch expenditure away from
the consumption of internationally traded goods, and to switch production toward them)?15 Many
victims of crises in the late 1990s had to experience both. Regardless what mix of policies has


                                                 10
been chosen, recessions have been severe.16          Is the output loss smaller if the country goes to the
IMF?

      It would be particularly useful if we could sort out the problem of what is the desirable
policy mix once the decision has been made to adjust a trade deficit, rather than to continue trying
to finance it. This has been a subject of great controversy. The textbook framework of adjusting
to an external imbalance via some combination of expenditure reduction and real devaluation, and
the specific formulation in terms of traded and non-traded goods, remain among the most useful
models for developing countries.17 One of the most popular critiques of the management of the
1990s crises by national authorities and the IMF–that there was too much contractionary
monetary and fiscal policy, imposing needlessly severe recessions–can best be interpreted in this
framework as the proposition that the countries should have followed a different policy mix, one
with less contraction and more devaluation.18 (This logic takes the external financing constraint
as given: that is, it assumes that in the face of a sudden stop, the country must improve the trade
balance one way or another. It is also quite possible, however, that these critics are really saying
that the international financial community should come up with more funds so the country does
not face so sharp an adjustment.) Others note that the devaluations were in most cases very large
as it was; and that devaluation can be at least as bad for the balance sheets of debtor banks and
corporations, and just as contractionary, as increases in the interest rate. Indeed, an increase in
the interest rate at least has the virtue, with respect to balance sheets, that if things go well it will
come back down over the subsequent months, whereas this seldom is true of the nominal
exchange rate.19 It is possible a country that finds itself with short-term dollar-denominated debt,
unwillingness by its creditors to roll over, and low reserves has few policy options left other than
a sharp and painful output contraction.20

     Appendix B elaborates on the possibility that, for a country that has waited until very late in
the day to adjust, there may in fact be no optimal combination of devaluation and expenditure-
reducing policies that satisfy the external financing constraint and yet avoids a recession.

Variables to Be Examined

          This section begins by establishing a statistical criterion for what is to be considered a currency
crisis. Then the study specifies policy variables and measures of economic performance. Appendix C
contains details of definitions and data sources for the variables. Appendix D lists the countries
constituting the data sample for each of our tests.

         Criterion to Define a Crisis

         Not all speculative attacks succeed. If there is a very sharp fall in the demand for a
country’s assets, that can be considered a crisis even if the authorities tightened monetary policy
sufficiently to avoid a devaluation (perhaps automatically, in a currency board, for example).
The approach here is generally to follow Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1995) and Frankel
and Rose (1996)21 in using a foreign exchange market pressure index.22 This index is defined as
the percentage fall in reserves plus the percentage fall in the foreign exchange value of the
currency. The idea is that this index measures the fall in demand for the country’s currency; it is
then up to the monetary authorities to determine whether to accommodate, by letting the money
supply fall, or to depreciate. To avoid treating every year of a multi-year high-inflation period as
a separate crisis, this study requires that the increase in exchange market pressure represent an
acceleration of at least an additional 10 percent over the preceding period; and we also adopt an
exclusion window of 3 years.

         We define a crisis event at annual frequency in four steps:

                                                      11
1. Starting with monthly data, we compute the crisis index (IND) = percentage nominal exchange
rate depreciation + percentage loss in foreign reserve.

2. A month m for country k is labeled as a “crisis month” if IND(k, m)    25 percent,
and IND(k, m) – IND(k, m-1) 10 percent.

3. We next create a VCRISIS(k, t) variable at the annual frequency for country k and year t.
VCRISIS(k, t) = 1 if year t for country k contains a crisis month, and 0 otherwise.

4. We define a crisis event variable at the annual frequency, ECRISIS(k, t), using the value of
VCRISIS(k, t) plus a 3-year window. The 3-year window rule specifies that there can be no more
than one crisis in any 3-year period. For example, if there is a string of six years in which
VCRISIS =1, we define only the first and fourth years as crises, and disregard the other years
from the probit estimation. The 3-year window, used also in Frankel and Rose (1996), is
designed to avoid the situation in which a multi-year crisis is labeled as several different crises.
At the same time, if a country is in crisis year after year for nine years, counting them as one
crisis would probably be insufficient. The 3-year-window rule would assign (somewhat
arbitrarily) three crises to the period as a compromise.

        As a robustness check, we also experimented with higher and lower thresholds. The
probit analysis seeks to predict these events.

        Measures of Economic Performance

        In the regression section, we considered five measures of economic performance for the
cross-section of currencies during the sample period, 1990--2002.

1. The number of crises experienced during this period
2. The average depth of a country’s crises, measured as the loss of GDP relative to the
   beginning of the crisis, up until the date when GDP reattains its pre-crisis level
3. A composite measure, consisting of total output lost in crises: the number of years that the
   country was in crisis times the average depth of its crises
4. The average rate of growth during the sample period
5. The standard deviation of the growth rate during the sample period.

        Crisis Prevention Policies

         We examined a number of key regressors. These variables are chosen to correspond to
those identified by recent theories as potentially important for currency crises in developing
countries. The objective is to check which of these are associated with crisis events, and with
good economic performance more generally, when they are put to compete with one another
other in a unified regression framework. The list of key regressors includes:

1. Trade openness, as measured by the ratio of total trade to GDP
2. Financial openness, measured either de jure by the Klein-Quinn rating of openness, or de
   facto by the ratio of gross foreign assets plus liabilities to GDP
3. Institutional quality, as measured by control of corruption (ICRG) or constraints on executive
   branch of the government (Polity IV)
4. The ratio of external debt to GDP
5. Reserves/GDP



                                                12
6. Measures of composition, such as the ratio of the sum of FDI and equity inflows to gross
   foreign liabilities; and the ratio of short-term debt to GDP, to FDI plus equity, or to reserves
7. Expansionary monetary policies, as measured by the inflation rate and, in the regression
   section, its determinants, the rate of domestic credit creation and the budget deficit as a share
   of GDP
8. Exchange rate regimes, as captured by a time-weighted measure of flexibility, or by a dummy
   for fixed exchange regime and another dummy for intermediate exchange rate regimes
9. “Original sin,” another composition variable that measures the currency mismatch arising
   from foreign liabilities denominated in dollars or other foreign currencies.


        Crisis Management Policies

        One important question is whether the country adjusts promptly when faced with balance
of payments difficulties, or postpones the adjustment. We will look at the length of time that
passes after reserves peak, before there is a devaluation, and how much reserves are lost during
that time. We also consider the hypothesis that changes in the composition of liabilities during
the period of sudden stop---toward shorter-term and toward dollar denominated---are another
method of stalling for time, in addition to running down reserves. We will also look at whether
the country signed a program with the IMF.

         Another interesting proposition to be tested may be that, when the day of adjustment
comes, the mix of policies can make a difference. We will assume that net additional
international financing is not possible during a financial crisis and therefore take as given the
increase in the trade balance (typically eliminating a previous deficit). The question is whether
this adjustment is achieved through contractionary monetary policies, which can be measured by
the increase in the real interest rate; by contractionary fiscal policies, which can be measured by
the increase in the budget surplus, or by real devaluation, which switches the composition of
spending, and also encourages greater supply of tradable goods.

          Keeping in mind the identity that Y ≡ A+TB, where A is spending, there are three
categories that a country could fall into, when it adjusts so as to improve the trade balance, TB:
(i) It could achieve an expansion, through trade-boosting policies such as devaluation or other
expenditure-switching policies, without expenditure-reduction: ∆Y> ∆A > 0
(ii) It could achieve the improvement in the trade balance partly through expenditure reduction
policies, but with no loss in overall output: ∆A<0, but ∆Y>0
(iii) It could achieve adjustment solely through expenditure-reduction, resulting in a contraction
in output: ∆Y<0.

        A simple way of parameterizing the policy mix is to compute the adjustment mix
coefficient
                                        µ ≡ ∆Y/∆TB.
We then identify the three cases by:

(i)     µ>1 => expansion
(ii)    µ<1 => expenditure-reduction, and
(iii)   µ < 0 => contraction.

This calculation, across the set of crises that were followed by improvements in the trade balance,
shows that all three cases occurred, but by far the most common was the first case. But the



                                                13
calculation measures income relative to the pre-crisis level. It thus misses cases of contraction
relative to some other counterfactual, for countries with high trend growth in potential output.

         We will express the relative importance of monetary contraction by the change in the real
interest rate relative to the change in the real exchange rate. We will express the relative
importance of fiscal contraction by the change in the budget surplus relative to the change in the
trade balance. The interesting question is whether there exists some combination of these
policies that puts the country in category (ii) or even (i). Perhaps the country is doomed to
category (iii) if the period of sudden stop has already been spent running down reserves to low
levels and switching the composition of liabilities toward short-term dollar loans.

        How Exogenous Are the Policy Variables?

         One more methodological point is necessary before beginning. When we draw our
variables from the list of candidates that are prominent in discussions of policy determinants of
financial crises, many of them are clearly endogenous. This is especially the case with the
literature on early warning indicators. Examples include the inflation rate, growth rate,
overvaluation relative to purchasing power parity (PPP), and fraction of debt that is short-term.
These variables are so important that they cannot be left out of the analysis, but it is important to
bear in mind the endogeneity point throughout.

         At the next level of exogeneity are those that are traditionally thought of as
macroeconomic policy variables, such as budget deficit, money growth, and choice of exchange
rate regime. Even these variables, however, are now often viewed as the endogenous outcome of
deeper structural or institutional factors, such as the rule of law. Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson,
and Thaicharoen (2003), for example, argue that macroeconomic policies in developing countries
are often the manifestation of deeper institutions and interest groups, so that an IMF requirement
that a country devalue in order to raise the domestic price of export commodities may simply be
offset by some other policy, such as a change in pricing by a marketing board, in order to restore
the preceding political equilibrium. Accordingly, this study will give appropriate attention to such
structural determinants. At the same time, we must recognize that even the so-called structural
or institutional factors are endogenous; there is a fourth level of exogeneity consisting of
geographic and historical factors.

Exploratory Empirical Analysis of Currency Crises

         The main goal is to see which of the competing claims regarding desirable policies for
crisis prevention and crisis management are supported by the data. But there are too many
possible effects and combinations of effects to construct a neatly nested theoretically grounded
framework within which to carry out the tests. We begin, in this section, by exploring the data
in various preliminary ways, to help point in what direction we need to concentrate our energies.

        Do the Most Visible Recent Crises Help Distinguish Among Hypotheses?

        Relative to other developing countries, a very large fraction of public attention and
analysis has gone to fewer than a dozen emerging markets, particularly those experiencing
dramatic currency crises and considered of systemic importance. (“Systemic importance”
generally means countries that are large in the financial system, although the euphemism
sometimes extends to geopolitical significance.) We, too, begin by considering these countries,
before undertaking a broader and more systematic econometric analysis in subsequent sections.
The analysis in this section will not be formal, but rather will take the approach that one clear


                                                 14
data point (or counter-example) might be sufficient to reject the strong form of the hypothesis that
any single factor is of overwhelming importance in determining which countries experience crises
and which do not. 23

         It does not seem possible to categorize the country experiences into first generation,
second generation and third generation type crises. In each historical episode, some observers
blame macroeconomic fundamentals, some volatile financial markets, and some structural flaws.
In truth, all these factors play a role.

         One can find examples to illustrate one’s favorite hypothesis regarding policies to prevent
crises; but counterexamples abound as well. Consider exchange rate regimes. The crises of
1994--2000 involved countries with intermediate regimes (bands, crawls, baskets, and adjustable
pegs), which is why many observers considered them the root of the problem. But a free float
did not save Brazil from a crisis in the run-up to the presidential election of 2002, a currency
board did not save Argentina from disaster in 2001, and intermediate exchange rate regimes such
as those pursued by Thailand and Korea certainly did not save them from becoming crisis victims
of 1997--99.24

         Or consider crisis management. On the one hand, the currency crises in Mexico (1994)25
and Thailand (1997)26 came nine months or more after investors had started pulling out of the
country (as reflected in reserves or stock market prices). These cases support the hypothesis that
early adjustment is critical, and that if a country waits until it has lost most of its reserves before
going to the IMF and devaluing---assuming that is what it is going to have to do eventually
anyway---the crisis will be much worse. Exchange rate based stabilizations fail, according to the
conventional wisdom, because of the absence of an exit strategy. On the other hand, Russia
engaged in the same procrastination in the first half of 1998,27 as did Brazil later in the fall of
1998.28 Yet in neither case were the predictions of disaster that accompanied the devaluations in
August 1998 and January 1999, respectively, borne out. Ecuador lost 66 percent of its reserves
before its currency crisis of early 2000, and suffered a correspondingly large output loss
subsequently, while Brazil lost almost as much (52 percent of its reserves) and yet suffered no
loss in output. Turkey followed the advice of building in an explicit exit strategy into its
exchange-rate based stabilization plan---an accelerated rate of crawl pre-scheduled for July 2001-
--and yet that did not help at all avoid speculative attack in February. (Nor, interestingly, does it
appear to have hurt, in that participants did not cite the “exit clause” as one of the reasons behind
pressure on the balance of payments.)29

         Table 1 reports the base-case variables of interest for a set of countries that had the most
visible crises during the 1994--2002 period (Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Indonesia, Korea,
Mexico, Pakistan, Russia, Thailand, and Turkey). Also reported are four non-crisis “control
cases” (Chile, China, Hong Kong SAR, and Taiwan, Province of China), and three others of
special interest (Colombia, Malaysia, and South Africa).

        The column showing freedom from corruptness offers a possible illustration of the
hypothesis that institutional quality is critical: Indonesia scores even more poorly than most
developing countries, and suffered a correspondingly severe crisis in 1997--98. Yet Argentina is
a counterexample, having a non-corruptness score that is no worse than the average,30 but
suffering the most severe output loss of any country in the sample. That Argentina had enacted
most of the recommended institutional fixes (encouraging foreign-owned bank subsidiaries,
taking out a contingent credit line, smoothing the term structure of obligations, and so forth) and
yet experienced such a collapse is particularly discouraging.31 Brazil, Pakistan, South Africa,
and Turkey show up with egregious budget deficits; Turkey, Russia, and Brazil with the highest


                                                  15
              inflation records; Indonesia with the highest debt; Brazil with the highest credit creation; and
              Turkey with the worst currency mismatch.

                                         Table 1. The Base-Case Variables for the Sample’s Dozen Crisis Countries

                                                                                    Policy Variables                                                                                 Other Variables                       Performance Measures
                                                  (qka)       (share9295)                                                             Exchange                    Rate of                                      Mean      Std.
                                                Absence         Absence            Short-term Short-term External                        rate        Budget      increase   Proportion   GDP                  growth     dev.      No. Average
                                 Non-            capital         capital             debt /         debt /   debt/                      regime       deficit /   domestic     time at per capita Original       real     real      of    depth of
                              corruptness       controls        controls Inflation reserves       total debt GDP                     (flexibility)    GDP         credit        war     (1990)     sin        income   income crises crises
Argentina                         2.79             1.00           0.75     0.37       1.36           0.19    0.41                        1.23          1.17        0.15         0.01     8.66     0.69          0.02     0.07     3.00     0.08
Brazil                            3.29             1.50           0.00     1.13       1.21           0.17    0.32                        2.62          5.79        1.05         0.00     8.31     0.63          0.02     0.02     1.00     0.01
Chile                             3.53             1.83           0.00     0.09       0.24           0.11    0.45                        2.23         -1.17        0.09         0.00     8.10     0.78          0.06     0.04     0.00     0.00
China                             3.00             0.00           0.00     0.06       0.29           0.17    0.16                        1.62          2.03        0.13         0.00     5.86     0.40          0.09     0.02     0.00     0.00
Hong Kong SAR                     4.33             4.00           1.00     0.04         .              .       .                         1.62          0.00        0.05         0.00     9.84     0.87          0.04     0.04     0.00     0.00
Colombia                          2.13             1.50           0.00     0.17       0.47           0.15    0.36                        2.31          1.93        0.16         0.07     7.66     0.80          0.02     0.03     0.00     0.00
Ecuador                           3.08             2.33           0.50     0.04       1.64           0.15      .                         1.77         -1.11        0.14         0.01     7.30     0.75          0.02     0.03     2.00     0.03
Indonesia                         2.01             2.50           1.00     0.12       1.40           0.18    0.79                        2.31          0.06        0.12         0.01     6.66     0.32          0.04     0.06     1.00     0.10
Korea                             3.99             1.67           0.00     0.05       0.99           0.35    0.23                        2.46          0.34        0.09         0.00     8.98     0.62          0.06     0.05     0.00     0.00
Malaysia                          3.81             0.00           0.00     0.03       0.28           0.19    0.43                        1.46         -1.15        0.10         0.00     8.04     0.37          0.06     0.05     0.00     0.00
Mexico                            3.00             2.00           0.00     0.16       1.59           0.19    0.37                        2.62         0.09         0.12         0.00     8.07     0.64          0.03     0.04     1.00     0.02
Pakistan                          2.46             1.17           0.00     0.08       3.10           0.10    0.52                        2.00         6.92         0.09         0.01     6.11     0.80          0.04     0.01     0.00     0.00
Russia                            2.37                              .      0.79       1.69           0.11    0.39                        2.36         2.31         0.00         0.02     8.21     0.73         -0.03     0.09     1.00     0.03
South Africa                      4.62            1.17            0.00     0.09      23.37           0.40    0.18                        3.00         4.38         0.00         0.03     8.32     0.83          0.02     0.02     1.00     0.02
Taiwan, Prov.of China             3.55                              .      0.02         .              .       .                         3.00         0.00         0.00         0.00       .      0.43          0.05     0.03     0.00     0.00
Thailand                          2.61            1.50            0.00     0.04       2.78           0.33    0.58                        1.77         0.39         0.10         0.00     7.60     0.33          0.04     0.06     1.00     0.01
Turkey                            2.64            1.17            0.00     0.54       1.82           0.21    0.47                        2.23         8.03         0.41         0.05     7.85     0.87          0.03     0.06     2.00     0.06

Mean (above countries)            3.13            1.56           0.22          0.22          2.82            0.20          0.40          2.15          1.76        0.16       0.01         7.85        0.64    0.04     0.04     0.76      0.02
Note:
qka: Average of Klein's interpretation of Quinn'
                                               s variable qka for years 1973, 1982, and 1988, gauging capital account openness (higher value=more open).
share9295: Proportion of period 1992--95 that country had open capital accounts or undertook financial liberalization.
Source: Author's calculations.



                       The view that wins the most support from table 1 is that countries that are not open to
              capital flows are more likely to have stable economies. It is perhaps not be surprising that
              countries that do not incur debt in the first place do not have debt crises. Still, it is disturbing,
              from the viewpoint of pro-globalizers, that the two countries that show up as most closed to
              capital flows, China and Malaysia,32 are also the two with the fastest average growth over the
              period since 1990.

                       The answer in life is almost always that more than one factor is important in determining
              performance. A systematic analysis, to evaluate any one effect, must control for others. The
              strongest message to emerge from table 1 is that a dozen highly visible cases is not a large enough
              sample to answer most of the questions we wish to answer. As soon as we start considering
              alternative variables, or hypotheses regarding nonlinearities, or interaction terms, we have used
              up our degrees of freedom, to say nothing of significance levels. Accordingly, the remainder of
              this study turns to econometrics on larger samples, generally consisting of all developing
              countries for which sufficient data are available. (Most of the members on the former Soviet
              Union and other transition economies are excluded, mostly for lack of data and noncomparability
              before and after the fall of the Soviet Union.) We turn now to probit models to search for robust
              correlates of crises.

                                 Probit Analysis of Crisis Probability

                       In this section of the paper, we describe possible correlates of currency crisis using
              standard probit models on a panel data set for the set of developing economies in the sample from
              1974--2001. In the subsequent section, we use a regression tree technique to search for possible
              non-linear threshold effects and interactive effects.

                                 We try a large number of different probit specifications. The variations are:

                                                                                                                                  16
         (a) including the year dummies, or not; (b) including the country fixed effects, or not; (c)
         measuring institutional quality by control of corruption versus constraint on executive branch of
         the government; (d) including the ratio of short-term external debt to reserve ratio, or not (since
         this variable is not available for a number of countries/years, its exclusion enlarges the sample
         size); and (e) defining currency crisis using three different thresholds for a “crisis month”: 15
         percent, 25 percent, and 35 percent. This gives a total of 48 regressions (24 X 3 = 48).

                  To simplify the presentation, table 2 reports a summary of these 48 regressions. Column
         1 reports a sample regression with all the regressors, plus year and country fixed effects. Column
         2 is a similar regression, this time replacing the variable “control of corruption” by “constraint on
         executive branch of the government.” (Other individual Probit regression results are reported in
         appendix E.)

                                      Table 2. Summary of the Probit Regressions

                          Sample Regressions                 Summary of Results

                                                      Pos Significant         Neg Significant         Contributor to
Variable
                                                      10%        20%          10%        20%             crisis?
                           (1)         (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)    (6)               (7)

Trade openness           0.006        -0.003          1/48         5/48       2/48      4/48          Not important
                        (0.006)      (0.009)
Financial                0.001        -0.029          3/48         5/48       2/48      6/48          Not important
openness                (0.003)      (0.019)
Low corruption           0.056                        0/24         0/24       0/24      0/24          Not important
                        (0.103)
Contraint on                           -0.005         0/24         0/24       1/24      2/24          Not important
executives                            (0.093)
Stdebt/Reserve              0.539      1.913          23/48        37/48      0/48      0/48          Very likely +
                          (0.796)      (1.91)
Debt/GDP                -2.52E-04      0.008          9/48         10/48      0/48      0/48          Not important
                          (0.001)     (0.004)
(FDI+ptf)                  -0.008      -0.010         0/24         0/24       9/24      13/24            Likely -
/Gross liability          (0.003)     (0.005)
inflation                2.06E-04    3.01E-04         15/48        28/48      0/48      0/48          Very likely +
                       (1.57E-04)   (1.88E-04)
Fixed exchange             -0.246      0.350          0/48         1/48       1/48      4/48          Not important
rate regime               (0.256)     (0.421)
Intermediate               -0.377      -0.188         0/48         1/48       13/48     16/48            Likely -
ex. rate regime           (0.223)     (0.344)
Country dummy              yes         yes
Year dummy                 yes         yes
No. observations          635          269
Source: Authors’ calculations




                                                             17
         Column 3 of table 2 reports, for each regressor, in how many cases the coefficient is
positive and statistically significant at the 10 percent level, relative to the total number of
regressions in which the variable appears. For example, the first number in Column 3, 1/48,
means that the regressor, “trade openness,” appears in 48 Probit regressions, out of which, one is
positive and statistically significantly different from zero at the 10 percent level. Column 4
reports, for each regressor, how many times it is positive and significant at the 20 percent level,
relative to the total number of regressions it appears. Similarly, Columns 5 and 6 report, for each
regressor, how many cases it is negative and significant at the 10 percent and 20 percent levels,
respectively, relative to the total number of regressions it appears.

          The last column in table 2 presents our judgment on how likely a given variable is
associated with a currency crisis. We label a variable as a “very likely” contributor to crisis if it
is statistically significant at the 20 percent level more than half of the time and has a consistent
sign in most regressions. We label a variable as a “likely” contributor to crisis if it is statistically
significant at the 20 percent level for between 20 percent and 50 percent of the regressions and
have a consistent sign in most cases. We label a variable as “not important” for crisis in all other
cases.

        The labels of “very likely” and “likely” contributors to crisis are generous, not only
because of the definition used above but also because we look only at correlates within the
sample (that is, no cross-sample validation is used to further reduce significant variables). Even
so, only two variables qualify as “very likely” contributors to crisis. They are the ratio of short-
term external debt to foreign exchange reserve, and expansionary monetary policy (inflation).
Both of them are likely to be positively related to the probability of crisis.

         Two variables satisfy the generous definition for a “likely” contributor to crisis. The first
is the ratio of FDI and equity inflows to gross foreign liabilities. This is likely to decrease the
chance of a crisis. The second is the intermediate exchange rate regime. This is less likely to be
associated with crisis than the floating exchange rate regime.

         According to these results, the remaining variables are not likely to be important for
currency crises---even judged by the generous criteria above. It may be particularly worth
highlighting two such variables. First, financial openness is not robustly associated with crisis,
one way or the other. Second, a fixed exchange rate regime is no more likely to be in crisis than a
flexible exchange rate regime.

         The recent literature on financial crisis has proposed a number of possible non-linear
“threshold” effects. For example, the financial openness on crisis probability may be hump-
shaped. Some intermediate range of financial openness may be more crisis-prone than either low
or high levels of financial openness. As another example, a combination of fixed exchange rate
and high financial openness may be particularly prone to currency crisis. Or a combination of
weak institutions (high corruption) and financial openness may make a country particularly
vulnerable to speculative attacks on its currency. One could add quadratic terms or interactive
terms to the above probit specification to capture some of these “threshold” effects. However,
such terms are likely to be arbitrary and inflexible. The discussion that follows turns to the
technique of regression tree analysis. This approach potentially can nest all such threshold and
interactive effects and identify them in a relatively flexible way.

        The Use of Regression Tree Analysis of Crisis Probability to Search for
        Threshold/Interactive Relationships



                                                   18
        A regression tree is a data classification tool that performs a function analogous to factor
analysis, but in a much more flexible way. While it is less familiar to economists, it has been
used in statistical analysis of medical data to identify non-linear, interactive, or threshold patterns.
We first illustrate the basic idea with an example, and then explain how we can apply the
technique to our context.

         The regression tree technique has three main advantages over linear regression that
makes it suitable for our purpose. First, the same regressor does not have to have the same effect
on the dependent variable in different ranges of value. In particular, the regression tree technique
permits one or multiple threshold effects for any given regressor. Second, it identifies complex
interactive relationships–how different combinations of variables in different data ranges could
affect the dependent variable–in a relatively flexible way. Third, the classification result by the
regression tree technique is invariant to monotonic transformations (such as logarithmic or
quadratic transformations) of the explanatory variables.

        Illustration of the basic idea. To illustrate the idea, we use a simplified version of a
real-world medical example reported by Leo Breiman and his colleagues (Breiman and others
1984): how to classify heart attack patients into a high-risk group (those who would not survive in
the next 30 days after testing) and a low-risk group (those who would live longer), using a small
number of variables, so that they can be treated accordingly. The medical study has collected
information on 19 different potentially relevant variables from a sample of patients. The
regression tree technique searches for a data classification rule (splitting data into different
branches and nodes) so that the difference between the predicted and actual values (sum of
residual squared) are sufficiently small. The classification also identifies which subset of
explanatory variables is most important, and how they can be used to classify the data into
different terminal nodes.

         In this example, the final classification rule identified three variables as most important:
minimum systolic blood pressure over the initial 24 hour period, age, and presence of sinus
tachycardia. But they exhibit thresholds and interact with one another non-linearly. More
precisely, if a single variable–minimum systolic blood pressure–exceeds a threshold (91), then the
patient should be in the high-risk group. No need to look at other variables. Otherwise, it depends
on the interaction of two other variables. In particular, a combination of high age (>62.5) and
presence of sinus tachycardia would again classify the patient to the high-risk group. In all other
cases, the patient should be classified into the low-risk group. This statistical result can be
described by a tree-like graph; hence the name of the statistical technique (see figure 1.)

             Figure 1. Example of Regression Tree Analysis on Heart Attack Patients

                                      M in b lo o d p re ssu re > 9 1



                      H ig h risk                                    A g e < 6 2 .5



                                              L o w ris k                             S in u s tac h y card ia = n o ?



                                                                             L o w ris k                         H ig h risk




              S o u r c e: B re im a n a n d o th e rs (1 9 8 4 ).


                                                                     19
          If the number and nature of thresholds, the needed transformation of the variables, and
the pattern of variable interactions are known, one can modify a linear regression specification by
adding suitably transformed variables, higher-order polynomial terms, interactive terms, and the
like, to capture these relationships. If they are not known, then the regression tree is a more
flexible approach to identify data patterns.

         Applying the technique to the problem of currency crises. To implement the regression
tree technique, one must decide on three parameters (similar to deciding on the size of a t-test or
F-test, or choosing the convergence criteria in a maximum likelihood estimation of a regression).
In addition, one must choose a list of candidate explanatory variables. The first parameter is
mincut, the minimum number of observations needed before a first cut on a variable. The second
parameter is minsize, the minimum number of observations before the last split. The statistical
package we use (S-plus) requires minsize to be equal to at least twice the value of mincut. The
third parameter is deviance, the tolerable level of sum of the square of the residuals for the
variables at a given node. It is the amount of heterogeneity that can be tolerated without further
splitting. Each of the three parameters could be a sufficient condition to stop splitting the data
further.

         The statistical literature does not provide definite guidance on how to choose these
parameters. If one picks numbers for these parameters that are too small, then the sample may be
split into too many branches and terminal nodes. In this case, sample variations and noises would
clutter the reported data pattern. If one picks too big values for these parameters, the sample
classification may be too coarse to be useful.

         In the context of the currency crisis data, we have experimented with various possible
values and discovered the following regularities. To err on the side of too fine a classification, we
choose mincut = 1 percent of the sample, minsize =2 x mincut, and deviance = 0.01. In this case,
there would be a large number of combinations of variables that would generate a high crisis
probability. These cases are not easily ranked in terms of the values of variables, reflecting in
part the noise created by sample variation. This set of values (mincut = 1 percent of the sample)
can be regarded as the lower bound for the three parameters that we wish to consider.

         On the other end, we choose mincut = 5 percent of the sample, minsize = 2 x mincut, and
deviance = 0.01. In this case, there will often be only one combination of variables that will
generate a crisis probability of 50 percent or higher. Any higher values for mincut or minsize
would typically not generate any combination of explanatory variables that are associated with a
crisis probability of 50 percent or higher. This set of values therefore may be the upper bound of
the parameters that we wish to consider.

       Deviance = 0.01 is small enough that it is almost never used as a stopping rule. Thus
how fine the sample/“tree” is split is essentially determined by the choice of mincut (and
minsize).

     The results of the regression tree analysis. We now turn to the actual statistical results. The
list of the potential explanatory variables is similar to before, including:
(1) Trade openness, as measured by the ratio of total trade to GDP
(2) De facto financial openness, as measured by the ratio of gross foreign assets plus liabilities to
     GDP
(3) Institutional quality, as measured by constraint on executive branch of the government
(4) Ratio of short-term debt to GDP
(5) Ratio of external debt to GDP


                                                 20
(6) Ratio of the sum of FDI and equity inflows to gross foreign liabilities
(7) Expansionary monetary policies, as measured by inflation rate
(8) Exchange rate regimes, as captured by a dummy for fixed exchange rate regime and another
    dummy for intermediate exchange rate regimes.
In addition, we also add decade dummies to allow for the possibility that crises are more frequent
in one decade than in another, even if the values of other variables are held constant.

         In the first case, there are 456 observations in total. We choose mincut = 5 percent of the
sample size, minsize = 10 percent of the sample size, and deviance = 0.01. The results can be
reported in two ways: a visually intuitive tree-graph (with less information); and a somewhat
cumbersome long form of description (with more information). In this case, we report both in the
upper and lower panels of figure 2, respectively. Out of the long list of possible variables, two
variables are determined by the regression tree technique to be most important: ratio of short-term
external debt to foreign reserve, and rate of inflation. When the ratio of short-term debt to reserve
exceeds 157 percent and rate of inflation exceeds 17.2 percent, then there is a 50 percent
probability of a crisis. (The long description in the lower panel of figure 2 reveals that 26 country-
years fall into the bin in which short-term debt to reserve ratio exceeding 157 percent and
inflation exceeding 17.2 percent. Of the 26 cases, half of them are crisis episodes.) Other than
this combination of variables, there does not exist any other combination of variables (from the
universe of all variables specified above) that would generate a crisis probability of 50 percent or
higher (for any sub-sample of observations that satisfy the parameters specified).33 Therefore, the
regression tree analysis suggests the combination of a high short-term debt to reserve ratio and a
high inflation rate is likely to be lethal in terms of a proclivity for a currency crisis.

                         Figure 2. Crisis Classification, Relatively Broad Cuts

(mincut = 5% of sample size, minsize = 10% of sample, deviance = 0.01)

Panel 1. Regression Tree Graph


                                        STdebt/Res < 1.57


                            0.1                            Inflation < 17.22



Panel 2. Long Description                       0.3                            0.5
Total number of observations = 456
Pseudo R-squared = 1-51/441 = 88%
Average crisis probability = 20%

Reporting convention:
Split rule, #observation, deviance(X100), crisis probability

Stdebt/RES < 1.57 347 30 0.10

Stdebt/RES > 1.57 109 20 0.30

                  inflation<17.2% 83 20 0.30
                  inflation>17.2% 26 7 0.50 *

Source: Authors’ calculations.



                                                      21
         In the second case, we have the same list of variables and the same sample, but choose
smaller values for the key parameters. In particular, we let mincut = 3 percent of the sample size,
minsize = twice of the mincut, and deviance = 0.01. The results (both the tree-graph and long
descriptive form) are reported in figure 3. When the minimum permissible node size is made
smaller, more nodes (and more tree branches) would be generated. As before, a combination of
high short-term debt to reserve ratio (exceeding 157 percent) and a high inflation rate (exceeding
17.2 percent) would still generate a high crisis probability. In addition, even in scenarios in which
short-term debt to reserve ratio is below the threshold of 157 percent, a combination of a high
inflation rate (exceeding 24.5 percent per year) and a high ratio of external debt to GDP
(exceeding 80.1 percent) would also land a country into a situation of high crisis probability. (The
long form reveals that 15 observations are in that bin, of which 9 are crisis episodes.)

                           Figure 3. Crisis Classification, Intermediate Cuts

(mincut = 3% of sample size, minsize = 6% of sample, deviance = 0.01)

Panel 1. Regression Tree Graph
                                                          STdebt/RES < 1.57



                                 Inflation < 24.53                                  Inflation < 17.22




                0.08                     Debt/GDP < 80.09                     0.3                       0.5




                                  0.1                          0.6
Panel 2. Long description

Total number of observations = 456
Pseudo R-squared = 1-48/436 = 89%
Average crisis probability = 20%

Reporting convention:
Split rule, #observation, deviance(X100), crisis probability


Stdebt/RES < 1.57 347 30.0 0.10

         Inflation < 24.5% 268 20.0 0.08
         Inflation > 24.5% 79 10.0 0.20

                           External Debt/GDP < 80.1% 64 7.0 0.10
                           External Debt/GDP > 80.1% 15 4.0 0.60 *

STdebt/RES > 1.57 109 20.0 0.30

         inflation<17.2% 83 20.0 0.30
         inflation>17.2% 26 7.0 0.50 *

Source: Authors’ calculations.


                                                     22
         Other than these two combinations of variables, there does not exist any other
combination of variables in the sample that could generate a crisis probability of 50 percent or
higher (for any sub-set of observations that satisfy the parameters specified). Therefore, the
regression tree analysis identifies three variables---ratio of external debt to GDP, in addition to
ratio of short-term external debt to reserve and inflation---as the most important variables that can
help classify country-years into high versus low probabilities of crisis. Note that the effect of
these variables on the crisis probability is not linear, and depends on how they are combined.

        Perhaps as telling as what has been chosen by the regression tree is what has not been
chosen. For example, financial openness and institutional quality are not chosen. If there is a
hump-shaped relationship between financial openness and currency crisis, or if there is a
particular combination of weak institutions and high financial openness that would make a
country vulnerable to crisis, the analysis suggests that these relationships are either not robust or
are quantitatively unimportant (assuming that these variables are well-measured in the sample).
Similarly, no decade dummies are selected by the regression tree, implying a lack of strong
evidence that one decade is more crisis-prone than any other, once one takes into account the
values of the other variables.

         We could generate even finer classifications by letting mincut = 1 percent of the sample,
minsize = 2 percent of the sample, and deviance = 0.01. This would naturally generate even more
tree branches and even more cases of high crisis probability (with fewer observations in each of
the node). Because the tree-graph becomes too messy, we choose to report only the long
descriptive form in figure 4. While the result is reported for completeness, we think that the
increase in the number of variable combinations that can generate crisis involves terminal nodes
with too few observations. The influence of sample variation (noise) is likely to have increased
in this case. So the resulting classification is likely much less robust to out-of-sample validation
than the previous two cases. Consequently, we would not wish to generalize too much from this
particular result.

                         Figure 4. Crisis Classification, Relatively Fine Cuts

(mincut = 1% of sample size, minsize = 2% of sample, deviance = 0.01)

Long Description
Total number of observations=456, Pseudo R-squared=1-32/415 = 92%
Average crisis probability = 20%

Reporting convention: Node), Split rule, #observation, deviance(X100), crisis probability

1)Root
2)STdebt/RES<157% 347 30.0 0.10
        4) inflation<24.5% 268 20.0 0.08
                  8) cfdiequ<73% 17 4.0 0.30
                           16) cfdiequ<46% 11 0.9 0.09
                           17) cfdiequ>46% 6 1.0 0.70 *
                  9) cfdiequ>74% 251 20.0 0.07
                           18) debt/gdp<240% 6 1.0 0.30 *
                           19) debt/gdp>240% 245 10.0 0.06
                                    38) tradeopen<50% 131 10.0 0.09
                                             76) tradeopen<49% 125 7.0 0.06
                                             77) tradeopen>49% 6 1.0 0.70 *
                                    39) tradeopen>50% 114 3.0 0.03
        5) inflation>24.5% 79 10.0 0.20


                                                   23
                  10) tradeopen<74% 67 8.0 0.10
                            20) debtgdp<86% 62 5.0 0.10
                            21) debtgdp>86% 5 1.0 0.60 *
                  11) tradeopen>74% 12 3.0 0.70
                            22) tradeopen<101% 5 0.0 1.00 *
                            23) tradeopen>101% 7 2.0 0.40 *
3)STdebtRES>157% 109 20.0 0.30
        6) inflation<17% 83 20.0 0.30
                  12) finopen<6.84 40 9.0 0.30
                            24) debt/gdp<28.5% 8 0.0 0.00 *
                            25) debt/gdp>28.5% 32 8.0 0.40
                                     50) cfdiequ<8% 7 1.0 0.70 *
                                     51) cfdiequ>8% 25 6.0 0.40
                                                      102) STdebt/RES<250% 6 1.0 0.70 *
                                                      103) STdebt/RES>250% 19 4.0 0.30
                  13) finopen>6.84 43 6.0 0.20
                            26) debt/gdp<368% 38 4.0 0.10
                            27) debt/gdp>368% 5 1.0 0.60 *
        7) inflation>17.2222 26 7.0 0.50
                  14) inflation<28.0874 6 0.0 1.00 *
                  15) inflation>28.0874 20 5.0 0.30
                            30) STdebtRES<0.0235644 11 3.0 0.50
                                     60) cfdiequ<18.2002 5 0.8 0.80 *
                                     61) cfdiequ>18.2002 6 1.0 0.30 *
                            31) STdebt/RES>0.0235644 9 0.9 0.10 *

Source: Authors’ calculations.

        As a robustness check, we have also varied the crisis definition using the 35 percent (and
15 percent) threshold to identify crisis month (and hence the crisis year). The results are not
reported to save space. The qualitative results are broadly similar to what is described above.

          We have also conducted similar regression tree analyses using control of corruption
instead of constraint on executives as a measure of institutional quality. The results are similar in
spirit; to save space, they are not reported.

        Next Steps

         The findings of this section are consistent with the previous literature on leading
indicators of currency crises: high levels of external debt do not necessarily lead to crises on their
own, but they do significantly raise the probability of crisis if capital inflow is tilted to the short
term and is not used (in part) to build up reserves. Accordingly, we will want to pay special
attention to the composition of capital and use of inflows in the next section of the study. At the
same time, we must recognize that identifying a variable such as the ratio of short-term debt to
reserves as a significant predictor of currency crises does not mean that we can necessarily
distinguish among competing theories or choose the best policies for crisis prevention or crisis
management. Debt and inflation are certainly endogenous, with respect to fiscal and monetary
policy.

         The composition of capital inflows can be endogenous, as well. It is not necessarily a
deliberate policy decision to borrow short term, to borrow in dollars, or to borrow through bank
loans rather than FDI. It may be the result of some deep structural cause, such as crony
capitalism34 or original sin.35 Or a shift in composition could be a consequence of suddenly


                                                  24
reduced foreign willingness to hold domestic assets, together with the authorities’ determination
not to devalue. That is, it could be a symptom of the sudden stop, rather than a cause.

         The procrastination interpretation, for example, fits the shift in capital flows to Mexico
during the course of 1994 toward the short term and toward the dollar-denominated, as the
government substituted tesobonos (short-term dollar-linked bonds) for Cetes (peso bonds) as a
stop-gap measure. The aim was to delay a painful choice between devaluing and continuing to
lose reserves. In other words, the change in composition was a stalling tactic, analogous to a
financially troubled household that starts charging its mortgage payments on its credit card.

         Delayed adjustment---the lag from the date that reserves peak after a sudden stop to the
date of a devaluation, restructuring, or an IMF program---may raise the ratio of short-term debt to
reserves so much that an eventual crisis becomes more likely. Furthermore, if, as a result of
delayed adjustment, the country goes into the crisis with a high proportion of dollar-denominated
and short-term debt, then it may be more likely that the subsequent recession will be steep,
whatever changes in macro policies are then adopted. At that point, there may be no optimal
combination of expenditure reduction and devaluation that avoids a sharp loss in output.36 The
lesson would be a more subtle story than simple admonitions to developing country policymakers
to avoid borrowing short-term. The crisis Probit models cannot answer such questions, because
they are not designed to do so, either with respect to their explanatory variables or with respect to
what is being explained. Clearly more hypothesis testing is required.

Testing Hypotheses Regarding Economic Performance

        We test, first, if there are any policies of crisis prevention that seem consistently to have
given countries better economic performance on average since 1990. Subsequently, we look at
crisis management policies.

        Seven Measures of Crisis Prevention Policies

         As noted, this study constructed a measure of output lost in crisis---crisisloss (or
Compcrisis)--- intended to be a composite measure of a country’s proneness to severe crises. To
see the effects of the seven “crisis prevention” policy variables, our first base-case regression, is
equation 1. We condition on initial income per capita, and also include a variable for war (with
the scored severity of each conflict weighted by the number of years).37 The two macroeconomic
variables are taken to be debt/GDP and inflation, in light of the empirical success of the latter in
the preceding section.

                                                                                (1)
        Crisisloss = a + b1 Noncorruptness + b2 opencapital +b3 gdpcap90 +b4 inflatn +b5
        external debt/gdp + b6 compshort + b7 origsin + b8 war +b9 exrateflex + u

         The results are reported in table 3. Neither of the macroeconomic variables is highly
significant. But the composition of capital inflows is more important. The coefficient of
original sin (that is, the currency mismatch) is significant at low levels, with the hypothesized
sign. Noncorruptness has the expected effect, and is significant. The open capital markets
variable has a negative sign, suggesting that liberalization actually reduces the frequency or
severity of crises. This is the same result found, for example, by Reuven Glick and Michael
Hutchison (2002). The effect appears to be significant at the 95 percent level when we use the
Klein (2003) measure of capital account liberalization (which is based on data for 1973--85),
though not when the updated Quinn (1997) measure is used (1992--95). Exchange rate flexibility-


                                                 25
--if anything---appears to make crises worse, rather than better. Fans of currency boards and
other institutional fixes are likely to like this result, but the effect is not statistically significant.
War and initial income have no discernible effect.


                      Table 3. Explaining Output Lost in Crises: Base Case Regression
                                     Using qka a                         Using share b
                                     Coefficient    Number of obs = 67    Coefficient    Number of obs = 68
Variable
                                     (Std. Error)   F(10,56) = 1.02      (Std. Error)    F(10,57) = 0.72
Noncorruptness                          -.049 *     Prob>F = 0.4370         -.044 #      Prob>F = 0.7048
                                         (.029)     R-sqd = 0.1977           (.029)      R-sqd = 0.1620
Absence of capital controls            -.038 **                               -.010
                                         (.018)                              (.038)
Inflation                                 .141                               .160 #
                                         (.114)                              (.120)
External debt/GDP                         .002                                -.010
                                         (.017)                              (.019)
Short-term debt/Total debt                -.138                               -.166
                                         (.202)                              (.199)
FDI/GDP                                   -.008                               -.005
                                         (.008)                              (.008)
Currency mismatch                         .093                               .146 #
                                         (.088)                              (.098)
War                                       .277                                 .318
                                         (.372)                              (.395)
GDP per capita (1990)                    .023 #                                .007
                                         (.017)                              (.013)
Exchange rate regime (flexibility)        .052                                 .037
                                         (.058)                              (.054)
Constant                                  -.104                               -.049
                                         (.137)                              (.123)
Note:
Macro variables are inflation and external debt.
a. Regression uses average of Klein’s interpretation of Quinn’s variables qka73, qka82, qka85 as gauge for
“absence of capital controls.”
b. Regression uses Klein’s “share9295” variable as gauge for “absence of capital controls.”
Source: Authors’ calculations.

         Equation 2 replaces debt/GDP and inflation, which seem too endogenous to call policy
variables, with budget deficit/GDP and the rate of credit creation (growth in net domestic assets).
At the same time, it drops the war variable. Credit creation shows up with the right sign, but not
with statistical significance. One possible interpretation of its weak effect is that, while the
first generation speculative attack models give it a starring role as villain, the growth literature
considers it just the opposite, viewing increases in the ratio of domestic credit to GDP a reflection
of financial development--- and thus beneficial.38 The budget deficit effect shows up better
(particularly in those regressions where the 1990s measure of capital account liberalization is
used in place of the 1980s measure). Two other variables do show up (at moderate levels of
statistical significance): noncorruptness and original sin (currency mismatch). Countries tend to
have fewer crises or less severe ones if they are free from corruption, and tilt the composition of
their capital inflows away from dollar-denomination. Open capital markets are again marginally
significant, and in a direction that suggests that liberalization actually reduces the frequency or
severity of crises.

                                                                                   (2)
            Crisisloss = a + b1 Noncorruptness + b2 opencapital +b3 gdpcap90 +b4 credit +b5 bdgdp
                                    + b6 compshort + b7 origsin + b8 war +b9 exrateflex + u




                                                           26
        There are two obvious problems with the specification for the exchange rate regime
variable. One is that the move from a fixed exchange rate regime to a flexible one sometime
during the decade may be the result of a currency crisis, rather than the cause. This is an
argument for being more precise about the timing. The other possible objection would come
from proponents of either the hard peg school of thought, or the corners hypothesis: that the
exchange rate flexibility variable does not allow a test of their point of view.

         Accordingly, we tested for each of these hypotheses. For the hard peg option, we
defined a dummy variable that is equal to 1 only for currency boards, dollarization, and monetary
unions---not for conventional pegs. The sign is as often negative as positive, and is not at all
significant. Thus there is no evidence to support the claims for the hard peg. The estimated
coefficient on the hard peg dummy points to amelioration of crises, but it is not at all statistically
significant.

         Next we tested the corners hypothesis, with a dummy variable that is equal to 1 for either
a hard peg or a float. In both cases, the dummy variable countries that had a corner regime during
only part of the sample period receive the corresponding proportional weight on that regime. The
results are not reported, to save space. The coefficient on the corner regimes–either hard peg or
float---often attains low or moderate levels of significance. But it is of the opposite sign from the
corners hypothesis. In other words, it rejects the popular hypothesis that the corner regimes are
less crisis-prone than the intermediate regimes. This is consistent with the results regarding
intermediate regimes in the probit analysis above. Perhaps intermediate regimes are better, after
all.39

         Before testing for some other combinations of policy variables, we checked the effects of
the base-case list of variables on other more familiar measures of country performance. We tried
defining the dependent variable, the measure of performance, to be the standard deviation of
growth. This measure of performance is correlated with the crisis measure, as one would expect.
(The correlation is 0.2101.) We add the standard deviation of the terms of trade as an obvious,
and largely exogenous, determinant of volatility. It rarely shows significance, however (as is
also true when the dependent variable is one of the crisis measures, in results not reported.) The
only variable to show even marginal levels of significance in determining volatility is
noncorruptness, which reduces the standard deviation of growth, as one would hope.
         Next we tried the average growth rate over the 1990--2002 period as the dependent
variable. This equation is intended as a bridge to the large literature on the determinants of
economic growth. Drawing on some of the conclusions from that literature, the list of variables
include initial income, size of the country (population), tropical location, and two measures of
factor accumulation: investment/GDP, and a measure of education or human capital. The
coefficient on education is of only marginal significance, and that on investment is of no
significance. Other authors have found measurement problems as being very important in the
performance of these variables. Population is highly significant, confirming that larger countries
have an advantage. A high ratio of short-term debt to equity and FDI shows a negative effect on
growth that is statistically significant. The same is true of exchange rate flexibility.
Noncorruptness also shows a beneficial effect on growth, if again of marginal significance. This
estimation could be refined by use of some of the measures that the most recent growth research
has found to be relatively less prone to error. 40

        Interactive Effects




                                                 27
        Many of the interesting claims in the recent literature concern the effects of combinations
of our variables. To test for interaction effects, we return to the composite crisis variable (total
output lost in crises) as the measure of performance.

          The proposed hypotheses of interactive effects involving capital account openness did not
receive much support here. When the capital account variables is interacted with
noncorruptness, or with the measure of monetary policy (domestic credit creation, NDA), the
estimates are insignificant. In the case of fiscal policy, the finding is worse: we can reject, at
least at low significance levels, the hypothesis that the combination of open capital markets and a
high budget deficit worsens the crisis problem. This does not mean that the two variables
considered individually do not increase the frequency or severity of crises in an additive way; it is
just that we have found nothing particularly noteworthy about the combination of the two.

        In the cases regarding the composition of capital inflows, the answer is worse still: the
coefficient appears to be statistically significant, but again of a sign that is the opposite of the
proposed direction. We reject the hypothesized deadliness of the combination of open capital
markets and short-tilted composition, and also reject the hypothesis regarding the deadliness of
the combination of open capital markets and currency mismatch. The view that the combination
of open capital markets and fixed exchange rates causes crises also receives no support. This is
not an encouraging result for most of the interaction effects.

Table 4.1. Explaining Output Lost in Crises: Interaction of Absence of Capital Controls and 1990
                                        Per Capita GDP
                                                              Using qka
                                                              Coefficient    Number of obs = 67
                     Variable
                                                              (std. error)   F(10,56) = 0.85
                     Noncorruptness                             -.055 #      Prob>F = 0.5854
                                                                 (.034)      R-sqd = 0.1675
                     Absence of capital controls                -.184 *
                                                                 (.098)
                     Growth of domestic credit                     .042
                                                                 (.104)
                     Budget deficit/GDP                            .005
                                                                 (.004)
                     Short-term debt/Total debt                   -.132
                                                                 (.192)
                     FDI/GDP                                    -.012 #
                                                                 (.009)
                     Currency mismatch                           .145 #
                                                                 (.104)
                     GDP per capita (1990)                         .001
                                                                 (.013)
                     Exchange rate (flexibility)                   .048
                                                                 (.053)
                     Absence of capital controls * GDP           .022 *
                     per capita (1990)                           (.012)
                     Constant                                      .051
                                                                 (.125)
                   Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                         28
Table 4.2. Explaining Output Lost in Crises: Interaction of Absence of Capital Controls and 1990
                                        Per Capita GDP
                                                              Using qka
                                                              Coefficient    Number of obs = 66
                     Variable
                                                              (std. error)   F(8,57) = 0.86
                     Noncorruptness                              -.056 #     Prob>F = 0.5513
                                                                  (.039)     R-sqd = 0.1387
                     Absence of capital controls                -.287 **
                                                                  (.134)
                     Growth of domestic credit                      .044
                                                                  (.113)
                     Budget deficit/GDP                             .005
                                                                  (.004)
                     Short-term debt/Reserves                     .284 *
                                                                  (.166)
                     Currency mismatch                            .168 #
                                                                  (.110)
                     GDP per capita (1990)                         -.007
                                                                  (.015)
                     Exchange rate (flexibility)                    .054
                                                                  (.054)
                     Absence of capital controls * GDP          .035 **
                     per capita (1990)                            (.017)
                     Constant                                       .036
                                                                  (.122)
                   Source: Authors’ calculations.

         The one interactive effect that shows up highly significant is reported in tables 4.1 and
4.2. The variable that interacts open capital markets and income shows a positive sign and is
significant at the 95 percent level. This is the opposite of the finding of Javier Gomez Biscarri,
Sebastian Edwards, and Fernando Perez de Gracia (2003). It might be rationalized by a Kuznets-
style U-shaped relationship: open capital markets can lead to heavy borrowing and thereby to
crises in middle-income countries, but are less dangerous in poor countries and rich (the latter not
being present in our sample).

         A few other variables here are statistically significant, as well. Countries with more open
capital markets again show up here as having reduced frequency or severity of crises, now
significant at the 95 percent level. An increase in the ratio of short-term debt to reserves increases
the frequency or severity of crises. Noncorruptness and currency mismatch have the
hypothesized effects, but at fairly low levels of significance. In this regression, the rate of
growth of domestic credit, the budget deficit, and the exchange rate regime variable do not attain
statistically significance.

        Crisis Management Policies

         We now turn to the merits of differing approaches to managing crises after they happen.
This is rather different from analyzing policies to prevent crises--- notwithstanding the
importance of realizing that crisis prevention policies carry important implications forcrisis
management policies, particularly in the form of moral hazard generated by bailouts.

         The approach begins by looking at the month-by-month statistical profile of reserves in
crisis episodes. We retain our previous definition of what constitutes a crisis: an increase in
exchange market pressure that exceeds the threshold in absolute terms (although to focus on the
larger crises, we raise the threshold in this section to 45 percent) and also exceeds a threshold for
acceleration relative to the preceding month (still 10 percent).



                                                         29
          The period of sudden stop: From reserve peak to crisis. We define the period of sudden
stop as the span of time that ends with the crisis itself and begins with the preceding peak in
reserves. It marks the end of a period of inflow, and the beginning of the period of outflow.
We use a 7-month centered moving average of reserves to identify the peak that precedes each
crisis. In our calculations, the average length of the period of sudden stop is 6.3 months. Much
of the literature, both theoretical and academic, essentially assumes that this period is collapsed to
a single instance, thereby losing sight of some important questions.

         Figures 5.1--5.5 are bar graphs showing the time-profile of reserves for some prominent
crises of the last eight years (Mexico, 1994; Indonesia, 1998; Russia, 1998; Brazil, 1999, Turkey,
2001). Vertical lines also indicate the date of the crisis (by the exchange market pressure index)
and the date that adjustment began (devaluation or IMF program). The average reserve loss,
across countries, during the period of sudden stop, is 35 percent (computed relative to the peak,
not logarithmically). This does not count the reserves lost in the month of speculative attack,
which we have identified as the month when the overall exchange market pressure index exceeds
its threshold.


                                                   Figure 5.1. Mexico Reserves Profile: 94M12 Crisis

       US$ billion
   35000.00

   30000.00

   25000.00

   20000.00

   15000.00

   10000.00

    5000.00

       0.00
              1992M12
                        1993M1
                                 1993M2
                                          1993M3
                                                   1993M4
                                                            1993M5
                                                                     1993M6
                                                                              1993M7
                                                                                       1993M8
                                                                                                1993M9
                                                                                                         1993M10
                                                                                                                   1993M11
                                                                                                                             1993M12
                                                                                                                                       1994M1
                                                                                                                                                1994M2
                                                                                                                                                1994M3
                                                                                                                                                         1994M4
                                                                                                                                                                  1994M5
                                                                                                                                                                           1994M6
                                                                                                                                                                                    1994M7
                                                                                                                                                                                             1994M8
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994M9
                                                                                                                                                                                                               1994M10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1994M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1994M12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1995M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1995M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1995M3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1995M4




                                                                                                                      Level                        3m moving avg



Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.




                                                                                                                               30
                                                                                 5
                                                                                     7
                                                                                          9
                                                                                                  11
                                                                                                       13
                                                                                                            15
                                                                                                                 17
                                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                                           21
                                                                                                                                23
                                                                       1996M8




                                                                                                                                 US$ billion
                                                                       1996M9




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        13000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   14000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              15000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         16000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    17000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               18000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20000.00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                21000.00
                                                                       1996M10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M1
                                                                       1996M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        US$ billion




                                                                       1996M12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M3
                                                                       1997M1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M4
                                                                       1997M2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M5
                                                                       1997M3                                                                                                                                                                                      1996M6
                                                                       1997M4                                                                                                                                                                                      1996M7
                                                                       1997M5                                                                                                                                                                                      1996M8
                                                                       1997M6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M9

                                                                       1997M7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M11
                                                                       1997M8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1996M12




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Source: IMF International Financial Statistics




                                                       Level
                                                                       1997M9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Level




31
                                                                       1997M10




     Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M2
                                                                       1997M11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M3
                                                                       1997M12                                                                                                                                                                                     1997M4




                                                       3m moving avg
                                                                       1998M1                                                                                                                                                                                      1997M5
                                                                       1998M2                                                                                                                                                                                      1997M6
                                                                       1998M3                                                                                                                                                                                      1997M7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   3m moving avg



                                                                       1998M4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M9
                                                                       1998M5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Figure 5.2. Indonesia Reserves Profile: 98M1 Crisis




                                                                       1998M6
                                                                                                                                               Figure 5.3. Russia Reserves Profile: 98M8 Crisis

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M11
                                                                       1998M7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1997M12
                                                                       1998M8            CRISIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998M1
                                                                       1998M9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998M2
                                                                       1998M10                                                                                                                                                                                     1998M3
                                                                       1998M11                                                                                                                                                                                     1998M4
                                                                       1998M12                                                                                                                                                                                     1998M5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              35
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    40
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      70
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                80




                                                                                 16
                                                                                      17
                                                                                           18
                                                                                                19
                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                          21
                                                                                                               22
                                                                                                                        23
                                                                                                                              24
                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                           26
                                                                       1999M2                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M1                                                            US$ billion




                                                                                                                                            US$ billion
                                                                       1999M3                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M2


                                                                       1999M4                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M3


                                                                       1999M5                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M4


                                                                       1999M6                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M5


                                                                       1999M7                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M6


                                                                       1999M8                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M7


                                                                       1999M9                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M8

                                                                       1999M10                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997M9

                                                                       1999M11                                                                                                                                                                                                 1997M10

                                                                       1999M12                                               IMF PROGRAM                                                                                                                                       1997M11

                                                                       2000M1                                                                                                                                                                                                  1997M12

                                                                       2000M2                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M1




                                                       Level
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Level
                                                                       2000M3                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M2




     Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.


32
                                                                       2000M4                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M3

                                                                       2000M5                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M4

                                                                       2000M6                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M5


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3m moving avg




                                                       3m moving avg
                                                                       2000M7                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M6

                                                                       2000M8                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M7

                                                                       2000M9                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M8

                                                                       2000M10                                                                                                                                                                                                 1998M9

                                                                       2000M11                                                                                                                                                                                                 1998M10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Figure 5.4. Brazil Reserves Profile: 99M1 Crisis




                                                                                                                                                          Figure 5.5. Turkey Reserves Profile: 01M2 Crisis

                                                                       2000M12                                                                                                                                                                                                 1998M11

                                                                       2001M1                                                                                                                                                                                                  1998M12                   IMF PROGRAM

                                                                       2001M2                                  CRISIS                                                                                                                                                          1999M1          CRISIS

                                                                       2001M3                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999M2

                                                                       2001M4                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999M3

                                                                       2001M5                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999M4

                                                                       2001M6                                                                                                                                                                                                  1999M5
        Figure 6 shows the average experience, over the last 12 years, among 87 country crises.
Here, each country’s reserves are expressed as a ratio to the level in the peak month, and the
moving average is computed over three months. The peak of the average comes about 13 months
before the crisis.

                                                                            Figure 6. Average Pre-Crisis Reserves Profile
                            1.4




                            1.3




                            1.2




                            1.1
Reserves/Reserves at Peak




                             1




                            0.9




                            0.8




                            0.7




                            0.6
                                  -24   -23   -22   -21   -20   -19   -18   -17   -16   - 15   -14   -13   - 12   -11   -10   -9   -8   -7   -6   -5   -4   -3   -2   -1   0   1   2   3   4
                                                                                                              M onth s from C ris is

                                                                                  R eserv es/Res erves Peak             3m M oving Average


 Note: Reserves level is normalized against each country’s pre-crisis peak before averaging for all
crises.
 Source: IMF International Financial Statistics.

       Delaying adjustment. One key question is whether delaying adjustment, after the
sudden stop has begun, makes crises more severe, or more likely to happen at all. The answer
may well be “No,” since the correct economics is to “finance” a deficit---provided it is
temporary---by drawing down reserves, rather than necessarily to “adjust.”

          We could define the month when adjustment begins as the month of devaluation or of a
substantial fiscal contraction, or as the month that an agreement on an IMF program is signed.
But here we simply assume that adjustment begins at the same time as the crisis itself. A
relevant metric for measuring the length of delay is what percentage of reserves the country has
lost by the time of the crisis, relative to the peak. Does it affect the severity of the crisis?

         We regressed output loss in the year of a crisis against a number of our “crisis
management” policy variables: change in maturity composition during the sudden stop period, a
dummy representing whether the country signed an agreement with the IMF, and a measure of the
mix of adjustment policies. The fraction of reserves lost (during the interval from reserve peak
to crisis) enters with the hypothesized positive sign, but is not significant at the 80 percent or 90
percent level of significance.




                                                                                                                          33
         Shifting composition of debt during the sudden stop period. The exploration in
previous sections of the importance of the composition of inward foreign investment, and the
realization that the composition changes substantially over time, inspire us to consider a new
hypothesis. That is, that during the period of sudden stop, the authorities sometimes delay
adjustment, not just by drawing down reserves, but also by shifting the composition of capital
inflows toward short-term and dollar-denominated debt. This strategy helps sustain the
willingness of foreign residents to continue lending, in the short term, but magnifies the fragility
of the economy rapidly over time. In particular, the strategy worsens the balance sheet problems
that have been identified in the literature as the major explanation for the severe losses in output
that have followed recent crises (an identification that is consistent with our own results and
beliefs). Whatever the composition of the capital inflows a year or two earlier, if on the day
when the crisis occurs the debt is substantially dollar-denominated and short-term, then the
country is in trouble---regardless of what mix of policies it chooses as the means of adjustment.
Either a short-term increase in interest rates or a devaluation, or any combination of the two, will
sharply worsen the balance sheets of debtor firms and banks, and thereby contribute to
bankruptcies and contraction in output and employment.

         A prime example is Mexico during the course of 1994. International enthusiasm for
investing in Mexico began to decline after the beginning of the year, due to some combination of
the uprising in Chiapas, the assassination of presidential candidate Colosio, a new upward trend
in U.S. interest rates, and the sexennial fiscal laxity of the Mexican election year. The
authorities clung to the exchange rate target and delayed adjustment, in the hopes circumstances
would turn around. Most obviously, during much of the year they ran down reserves. But an
important alternative mechanism of delay was to placate nervous investors by offering them
tesobonos (short-term dollar linked bonds) in place of the peso bonds (Cetes) that they had
previously held. Between the first and second halves of the year, the share of foreign borrowing
that was of maturity less than 1 year rose from 0.48 to 0.55 an increase of 7 percentage points.41
Figure 7a shows the dramatic increase in dollar-linked debt during the year leading up to the peso
crisis of December 1994, and figure 7b shows the shift toward shorter maturities. It seems likely
that the magnitude of the Mexican recession in 1995 stemmed in part not just from the adverse
balance sheet effects that have been so frequently noted since then, but particularly from the
adverse shift in balance sheets that took place during the course of 1994.

                                                         Figure 7a. Evolution of Mexican Debt According to Currency

     80 %




     70 %




     60 %




     50 %




     40 %




     30 %




     20 %




     10 %




      0%
                     Jul-90




                                       Jul-91




                                                          Jul-92




                                                                            Jul-93




                                                                                              Jul-94




                                                                                                                  Jul-95




                                                                                                                                     Jul-96




                                                                                                                                                          Jul-97




                                                                                                                                                                             Jul-98




                                                                                                                                                                                                Jul-99




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jul-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul-03
            Jan-90




                              Jan-91




                                                Jan-92




                                                                   Jan-93




                                                                                     Jan-94




                                                                                                        Jan-95




                                                                                                                           Jan-96




                                                                                                                                              Jan-97




                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-98




                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-99




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-00




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Jan-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Jan-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Jan-03




                                                                                                 T e s ob o no s /(te so b on os + c etes )            T es o bo no s /to ta l do m e s tic d eb t



   Source: Mexican Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.

                                                                                                                                    34
                                                         Figure 7b. Evolution of Mexican Debt According to Maturity

     100%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1000



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       900

      98%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       800



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       700
      96%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       600



      94%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              500



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       400

      92%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       300



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       200
      90%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       100



      88%                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
            Jan-90


                     Jul-90


                              Jan-91


                                       Jul-91


                                                Jan-92


                                                          Jul-92


                                                                   Jan-93


                                                                            Jul-93


                                                                                         Jan-94


                                                                                                   Jul-94


                                                                                                            Jan-95


                                                                                                                     Jul-95


                                                                                                                               Jan-96


                                                                                                                                        Jul-96


                                                                                                                                                 Jan-97


                                                                                                                                                          Jul-97


                                                                                                                                                                        Jan-98


                                                                                                                                                                                 Jul-98


                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jul-99


                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jan-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul-00


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Jan-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jul-01


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Jan-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Jan-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jul-03
                                                                                     % lo n g -te rm /(lo n g -te rm + s h o rt-te rm ) - le ft a xis              A v e ra g e m a tu rity in d a ys - rig h t a xis



   Source: Mexican Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.

         Brazil may offer a more positive example: the exception that proves the rule.42 Reserves
peaked in May 1998. Subsequently, contagion from the Russian devaluation and default leapt
across the Atlantic to Brazil. As in Mexico in 1994 (or Korea in 1997), Brazil faced an
important presidential election toward the end of the year, which added to the authorities’
incentives to delay adjustment and to rely instead on hopes that capital inflows would resume on
their own. When Brazil was finally forced to devalue in January 1999, some observers predicted
disaster, based on the analogies of recessions in Mexico in 1995 and East Asia in 1998. Indeed,
reserves had been run down to similarly low levels. Yet Brazil suffered no output loss in 1999.
What explains the difference? The most common answer from knowledgeable participants and
observers is that during the intervening eight months, the authorities had used their reserves to
allow the private sector to hedge or unwind short-term dollar liabilities.43 According to our data,
the share of foreign borrowing that was short-term fell during the second half of the year from
0.68 to 0.62 or by 6 percentage points. By the end of the year, just before the devaluation,
balance sheets were stronger, not weaker.44

         Is the shift toward dollar-denominated debt during the period of sudden stop a general
phenomenon? Many countries were never able to borrow much in domestic currency in the first
place, so that there is little scope for shifting the composition to dollars. But are there more
Mexico’s than Brazil’s? Unfortunately data on the currency composition of debt are not available
at a sufficiently high frequency to do the test. The “original sin” data on currency mismatch that
we have been using are available only on an annual basis.

         It is more feasible to test the proposition that the composition shifts in an undesirable
direction with respect to the maturity structure, than it is to test with respect to currency
denomination. Data on the maturity of bank loans are available from the BIS on a quarterly basis
for the period since 2000, and on a biannual basis before that. Table 5 reports the change during
the period of sudden stop for 74 crises. On average, the fraction of loans that were short-term
increased by 0.6 percentage points after the peak in reserves (over a period of one or two quarters,
depending on data availability). When we ran regressions of the subsequent output loss against
our various crisis management policy measures, changes in maturity composition and the loss in
reserves were both of the hypothesized sign, although not statistically significant.

                                                                                                                                        35
                Table 5. Shift Toward Short-term Debt during Period of Sudden Stop, 74 Crises,
                                                 1990—2002
                                                                                                               ST/total
               Date of    ST/total in   ST/total in                                  Date of    ST/total in
                                                                                                                  in
                                                                                                              comparis
               reserve     quarter      comparison                                   reserve      quarter
                                                                                                                 on
                                                   (a)
Crisis         peak        of crisis     quarter         Change        Crisis         peak       of crisis    quarter (1)   Change
ALG90M7        90M3         0.395          0.369          0.026        MAUR93M1       92M9        0.771         0.736        0.035
ALG94M3       93M10         0.351          0.399         -0.048        MEX94M12      93M12        0.554         0.485        0.069
ANG02M12       02M5         0.460          0.475         -0.016        MOLD98M11     97M10        0.543         0.438        0.106
ANG99M5       97M10         0.491          0.499         -0.009        MYAN96M6       95M7        0.945         0.629        0.316
AZER95M9       95M6         0.667          0.643         -0.024        NIC92M10       92M6        0.814         0.801        0.013
BEL99M2        99M1         0.267          0.192          0.076        NIGA92M3      91M11        0.381         0.347        0.034
BRAZ99M1       98M5         0.623          0.680         -0.057        NIGA99M1       98M5        0.550         0.531        0.019
CAM93M4        93M3         0.482          0.431          0.052        NIGR94M1      92M11        0.407         0.500       -0.093
CAM97M11      97M10         0.650          0.522          0.128        NIGR98M8       97M6        0.262         0.538       -0.277
CHIN92M7       92M3         0.402          0.446         -0.043        PAK90M10       90M3        0.710         0.675        0.036
CONG01M5       01M1         0.606          0.447          0.159        PAK96M10       96M3        0.488         0.658       -0.170
CONG90M6       90M4         0.576          0.671          0.095        PAN97M6        97M5        0.439         0.416       -0.023
CONG94M1       93M3         0.522          0.591         -0.069        ROM97M1        96M9        0.395         0.495       -0.100
CONG97M8       97M6         0.372          0.380          0.008        RUSS98M8       98M4        0.476         0.470        0.006
COT90M5        90M1         0.678          0.641          0.037        RWA90M11      90M10        0.667         0.706       -0.039
COT93M11       93M4         0.797          0.830         -0.033        SEN93M11      93M11        0.843         0.876       -0.033
DOM90M12       90M1         0.440          0.405          0.034        SOAF94M3       94M1        0.564         0.598       -0.034
DOM94M8       93M10         0.530          0.523          0.007        SRI98M7       97M11        0.541         0.542       -0.001
ECU92M5        92M1         0.518          0.475          0.044        SUD90M5        90M1        0.837         0.791        0.047
ETH92M10       91M9         0.187          0.261         -0.074        TANZ97M7       97M3        0.864         0.777        0.087
GAB01M9        01M1         0.593          0.622         -0.029        TOGO94M1       92M6        0.733         0.607        0.127
GAB97M2        96M6         0.454          0.583         -0.130        TT92M1         91M3        0.301         0.292        0.008
GHA00M7        00M2         0.613          0.552          0.061        TUN91M4        90M9        0.563         0.519        0.044
GHA90M10       90M6         0.749          0.636         -0.114        TURK01M2      00M10        0.676         0.664        0.012
GUI97M6        97M2         0.849          0.794          0.055        TURK94M3       93M8        0.626         0.554        0.073
INDI91M4       90M3         0.297          0.305         -0.007        UAE95M9        95M7        0.920         0.886        0.034
INDO98M1       97M6         0.626          0.628         -0.002        UGA90M5        90M4        0.861         0.785        0.076
JAM91M9        91M2         0.374          0.379         -0.006        UKR98M9        97M9        0.489         0.427        0.062
JOR91M8        91M7         0.414          0.456         -0.042        URG02M7        01M9        0.605         0.652       -0.047
KEN94M11       94M7         0.619          0.597          0.022        VENZ02M2      00M11        0.341         0.387       -0.046
KOR97M12       97M7         0.728          0.775         -0.047        VENZ94M5       93M9        0.297         0.315       -0.018
LEB90M8        90M7         0.813          0.823         -0.010        ZAMB01M12      01M8        0.908         0.938       -0.030
LIBR93M3       93M1         0.405          0.397          0.007        ZAMB91M4      90M12        0.654         0.661       -0.007
LIBR96M12     96M10         0.362          0.396         -0.034        ZAMB94M11     94M11        0.542         0.577       -0.035
LIBY02M1      01M12         0.966          0.952         -0.015        ZIMB90M11     90M11        0.715         0.574        0.141
MALAW92M3     91M10         0.393          0.371          0.022        ZIMB97M9       96M8        0.740         0.753       -0.013
AVERAGE ACROSS
                                                                                                                            0.006
CRISES
       Note:
       a. Quarter of preceding reserve peak is used in comparison to crisis quarter. In cases where reserve peak
       and crisis fall in same quarter, that quarter is compared against the following quarter if crisis and/or reserve
       peak fall in June or December. If crisis and/or reserve peak fall in any other month, that quarter is
       compared against the preceding quarter. Data are available from BIS in semi-annual frequency (Q2 and
       Q4). In cases where reserve peak or crisis fall in Q1 or Q3, the preceding quarter'    s data are used. For data
       after 2000, quarterly data is available. If crisis or reserve peak falls in first month of quarter, the preceding
       quarter's data are used; otherwise, that quarter' s data are used.
       Source: World Bank World Development Indicators; IMF World Economic Outlook and International
       Financial Statistics.




                                                                  36
         Going to the IMF. Whether IMF programs help or hurt, relative to the relevant
alternative, is an important and controversial question. Of course one does not necessarily want
to blame the surgeon because his patients die more often than do the chiropractor’s; the former is
likely to get the more serious cases. Even those studies that have tried to do a careful job of
constructing the relevant counterfactual have had a difficult time of it. 45 One of the problems for
statistical differentiation is that so few countries choose the Malaysian option of not going to the
Fund. But, for what it is worth, we looked for a statistical relationship between a country’s
signing a program with the IMF and the magnitude of the output loss in the year of the crisis.
We found no relationship, whether conditioning on other policy variables or not. (We tried
counting only countries that had gone to the Fund within a 6-month period, or within a 12-month
period.)

        The Mix: Spending Contraction versus Devaluation

        Perhaps the most interesting question of crisis management is the question of the mix
between adjustment by real devaluation versus expenditure reduction–assuming a fixed quantity
of adjustment given by the balance of payments constraint. When we think of expenditure
reduction as fiscal policy, our measure is the change in the budget relative to the increase in the
trade balance. We found that countries where the fall in government consumption constituted a
large share of the adjustment in the trade balance suffered a smaller output loss, other things
being equal. The effect, however, was not generally significant at the 95 percent level.

         When we think of expenditure reduction as monetary policy, our measure of the mix is
the increase in the real interest rate relative to the increase in the real exchange rate. We found
that countries that relied heavily on high interest real rates (either absolutely or relatively to the
preceding year) suffered larger output losses than those that relied on big real depreciation of the
currency. The difference was very significant statistically, as reported in table 6.

                                              Table 6. Crisis Management Policies

              Regressions with Robust Standard Errors                              Number of obs=               7
                                                                                   F( 4, 2)=                12.48
                                                                                   Prob > F                0.0756
                                                                                   R-squared               0.9244
                                                                                   Root MSE               0.90388

              -------------    -----------    ------------   --------   --------      -------------   ------------
                                                Robust
              outputloss          Coef.        Std. Err.         t        P>|t|       [95% Con        f. Interval]
              -------------     -----------   ------------   --------   --------      -------------   ------------
              resloss          1.140357       1.176052         0.97      0.435        -3.919787          6.2005
              composition      2.050635       3.989811         0.51      0.658        -15.11614        19.21741
              imf6m           -0.6449699      0.8878959       -0.73      0.543        -4.465278        3.175338
              rmindelrer       1.166299        0.190995        6.11      0.026         0.344514        1.988085
              _cons            0.0068248       0.270099        0.03      0.982        -1.155317        1.168967
              -------------     -----------   ------------   --------   --------      -------------   ------------
   Source: Authors’ calculations.

        It is useful to note that the regressions reported here do not include initial economy-wide
corporate or bank balance sheet information due to lack of data. Those economies that started
with a more serious currency-mismatch in their balance sheets before the crisis could fare less
well with a depreciation approach as a crisis management tool.



                                                                37
Summary of Conclusions

         Our results are consistent with much of the previous empirical literature in that we do not
find that crises are necessarily the outcome of high current account deficits or high indebtedness
per se, nor even of domestic credit creation. Nor does exchange rate flexibility necessarily
mean that crises will be avoided. There is stronger evidence that poor institutional quality
(corruption) is a fundamental problem.

       But some of the new conventional wisdoms do not appear to be borne out by our tests.
The corner exchange rate regimes are, if anything, more prone to serious crises, not less. If
emerging market countries liberalize their capital controls, they are less prone to crises, not more.
An extensive search for interactive effects that have been claimed by others does not uncover
much evidence that capital account openness is particularly dangerous in combination with low
income, expansionary policies, or corruption.

         Countries are likely to have more frequent and more severe crises if their capital inflows
are tilted toward short-term dollar borrowing and away from FDI and equity inflows, and if they
hold a low level of reserves. The ratio of short-term debt to reserves is a particularly important
indicator. We find evidence with the regression tree technique that high levels of inflation
significantly raise the probability of crisis when coming in combination with a low level of
reserves and a composition of capital inflow that is tilted to the short-term.

         This chapter has sought to draw greater attention to policy decisions that are made during
the phase when capital inflows come to a sudden stop. All of the theoretical literature, and most
of the empirical literature, treats the “sudden stop” phase as taking place in a single instant: the
country goes directly from a period of capital inflows and strong reserves to a crisis of capital
outflows and plunging reserves. In reality there is often an interim period, when international
investors have begun to lose enthusiasm, but the crisis has not yet hit. Think of the lag between
the beginning of 1994, when investors began to pull out of Mexico, and the December peso crisis.
(It does not matter for our purposes why investors pulled out, whether it was U.S. interest rates,
domestic instability, election year macroeconomics, or even investor fickleness.) We find,
across a broad sample of developing countries (1990--2002), that the typical lag between the peak
in reserves and a currency crisis was six months to a year, depending on the calculation. The
average loss in reserves during the sudden stop phase was 35 percent. Some countries had lost
almost all of their reserves by the time they decided to abandon the exchange rate target.

         Procrastination---the period of “financing a balance of payments deficit rather than
adjusting”--had serious consequences in some cases. Typically, by the time the crisis hit, the
level of reserves was so low that confidence could not be restored without beginning to rebuild
them. As a result, reserves could not play their designated role of cushioning the contraction. In
addition, the composition of liabilities tended to shift adversely during the period of sudden stop.

         In the example of Mexico during the course of 1994, when the authorities were not
stalling for time by running down reserves, they were instead placating nervous investors by
offering them tesobonos (short-term dollar linked bonds) in place of the peso bonds (Cetes) that
they had previously held. We find that on average across country crises, the fraction of loans that
were short-term increased by 0.6 percentage points after the peak in reserves (over a period of
one or two quarters, depending on data availability).

         Others have correctly pointed out that crises are more frequent and more severe when
short-term borrowing is high, dollar denomination is high, FDI is low, and reserves are low---in


                                                 38
large part because balance sheets are then very sensitive to increases in exchange rates and short-
term interest rates. Our point is that these compositional measures are strongly affected by
decisions made by policymakers in the period immediately after capital inflows have begun to
dry up but before the speculative attack itself has hit. These crisis management policies merit
more attention. If countries that are faced with a fall in inflows had adjusted more promptly,
rather than stalling for time by running down reserves or shifting to loans that are shorter-termed
and dollar-denominated, they might be able to adjust on more attractive terms.

        Our conclusions can be succinctly summarized in ten points.

1. There is as yet no clear evidence of a general tendency for the removal of capital controls to
   be harmful. If anything, in our results, financial liberalization appears to reduce crises.

2. There is also no evidence in favor of the conventional wisdom of the corners hypothesis: that
   the superior exchange rate regimes are hard pegs and floating. . If anything, in our results,
   intermediate regimes seem to do better.

3. Our results regarding corruption are consistent with the trend in recentemphasis on issues of
   governance, the rule of law, and institutions, as key determinants of economic performance in
   developing countries. Indonesia is an example where corruption must be listed as an
   important contributing cause of the crisis.

4. Our probit model found inflation to be an important predictor of currency crises, as in the first
   generation models of speculative attack. But inflation is endogenous, and we did not have
   any success tracing the problem back to domestic credit creation. We had slightly more
   success in identifying high budget deficits as a root cause, as in Brazil and Turkey.

5. Consistent with earlier research, the level of current account deficits or debt is not as useful a
   predictor as the composition of capital inflows. If inflows take the form of short-term dollar-
   denominated debt, they are more likely to lead to trouble. If the flows take the form of
   foreign direct investment or equity, crises are less likely. These composition variables are
   relevant not just for the probability of crisis, but also the severity. As the balance sheet
   literature points out, a country that suffers from maturity and currency mismatch is likely to
   experience bankruptcies and sharp contraction when a crisis comes.

6. The level of reserves plays a key role as well, as in all three generations of models of
   speculative attacks. The ratio of short-term debt to reserves is a particularly useful indicator.
   High levels of reserves helped China, Taiwan, Province of China, and Hong Kong SAR ride
   out the 1997--98 crises, and the otherwise puzzling propensity of these economies to continue
   running up ever-higher levels of reserves subsequently makes some sense in this light.

7. This study has sought to draw added attention to some aspects of the management of crises,
   particularly policy during the period that begins when capital flows turn around and reserves
   peak and that ends with the outright speculative attack and devaluation (or, in the case of a
   successfully defended hard peg, that ends with a discrete large loss of reserves). Across the
   average of the sample, this period lasts 6 to 13 months, depending on the method of
   estimation. In other words, the “sudden stop” typically lasts for the better part of a year; it is
   not the same as the speculative attack. Our claim is that delaying adjustment during this
   sudden stop period can have severe consequences when the attack finally comes, even when
   the shock appears to be temporary---and thus to merit financing under the usual textbook
   rules.


                                                 39
8. The significance of indicators such as reserves and the composition of debt may lie less in
   long-term tendencies that vary across countries than as key aspects of crisis management that
   vary over time within the same country Mexico in 1994 and Thailand and Korea in 1997 had
   run down the level of reserves sharply by the time they went to the IMF and began
   adjustment programs. In the months leading up to the Mexican attack, the composition of
   the debt had shifted from peso-denominated to dollar-linked, and from longer-term to shorter.
   These were decisions by the policymakers to delay adjustment. The pattern is typical.

9. We were unable to find evidence of a significant relationship between the severity of crises
   and whether the country had an IMF program or whether adjustment took the form of
   devaluation rather than fiscal contraction.

10. It is instructive to combine the balance sheet effects---wherein a country that enters a crisis
    with short-term dollar-denominated debt is likely to suffer a more severe crisis---with the
    tendency of countries to experience an adverse shift in composition during the period of
    sudden stop, as captured by an increase in the ratio of short-term debt to reserves. The
    implication is that it is precisely the decision to delay adjustment that leaves crisis victims
    with few good options, because balance sheets have deteriorated in the meantime. It is
    possible that, at this point, no combination of expenditure-reduction and expenditure-
    switching policies will, without a recession, satisfy the new external financing constraint.




                                                 40
APPENDIX A. BRIEF REVIEW OF LITERATURE RELEVANT TO CRISIS PREVENTION
POLICIES

Deep Determinants from the Growth Literature

         Recent research recognizes that macroeconomic and trade policies, although important
influences on economic performance, may themselves reflect deeper determinants. The growth
literature now emphasizes three big influences: openness to trade,46 tropical geography,47 and
especially, the quality of a country’s institutions, such as protection of property rights, efficacy of
the legal system, and absence of corruption.48 Financial market institutions, such as protection of
shareholder rights and the quality of regulation, receive particular emphasis.49 When a country is
considered corrupt, foreign investors are skittish, for example.50

         This research ties in with some current trends in the practice of aid and development
policy in Washington. The current trend is to say, not that such policies as macroeconomic
discipline and openness are unimportant, but that countries cannot be artificially forced from the
outside to agree to such policies, as under typical IMF or World Bank programs. Instead the
country needs to “take ownership” of the reforms. If the political economy dictates transfers
from rural farmers to urban workers, or if a federalist constitution gives provinces claim to
income tax revenue, an agreement on paper with the IMF or World Bank to devalue the currency
or reduce the budget deficit may be doomed to fail. This is the argument of a recent paper by
Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson, and Thaichaeron (2003). They find econometrically that
institutions offer more explanatory power than policies. They also use the case study of Ghana to
illustrate how an IMF-encouraged devaluation, with the aim of raising the real price of traded
goods such as cocoa, can soon be offset by the governing elite, for example because the cocoa
marketing board controls the price paid to the small inland farmers for cocoa.

Choice of Exchange Rate Regime

        One major question remains what currency regime a country should choose: a fixed
exchange rate, a floating exchange rate, or a regime with an intermediate degree of flexibility,
such as a managed float, target zone, crawl, or adjustable peg. The debate is an old one, but it
acquired some new features in the late 1990s.51

        One new development has been the decision of some countries to abandon their
independent currency for a device to fix its value firmly, such as a currency board52 or
dollarization.53 The motivation, to promote credibility, was similar to the motivation of those
who had based stabilization programs on exchange targets in the preceding decade, but the logic
was that the revealed impermanence of these targets in the 1990s argued for a firmer commitment
device.54

         One of the arguments for a firm fix was that it would force domestic institutions to evolve
in a favorable way, and would help prevent the chronic monetization of fiscal deficits that had
undone so many previous attempts at macroeconomic stabilization.55 Argentina’s currency
board, for example, appeared to work very well during most of the decade. It was believed that
this “convertibility plan” had also encouraged reforms that by the late 1990s had turned
Argentina’s banking system into one of the best among all emerging markets.56 But when the
crisis came in 2001, neither the supposedly deep pockets of foreign parents that had been allowed
local bank subsidiaries, nor any of the country’s other innovative reforms, was able to protect its



                                                  41
banking system. This outcome cannot but have had a dampening effect on international
enthusiasm for currency boards. 57

         Another new argument for monetary union has been empirical findings by Andrew Rose
and co-authors that the boost to bilateral trade is significant, and larger than had been previously
assumed, as large as a threefold increase.58 While many others have advanced critiques of the
Rose research, the basic finding has withstood perturbations and replications remarkably well,
even if the estimated magnitudes are sometimes smaller.59 Most Central and Eastern Europeans
now aspire to join the European Monetary Union. Some developing countries seeking enhanced
regional integration---in South America, Africa, the Persian Gulf, or Southeast Asia---may try to
follow Europe’s lead.60

         There are plenty of advantages to floating exchange rates as well, and most of the victims
of crises in emerging markets over the last eight years have responded by increasing flexibility.
One advantage that is beginning to receive renewed emphasis is that floaters are partially
insulated against fluctuations in the world market for their exports.61

         Another new proposition of the 1990s was that countries are, or should be, moving away
from the intermediate regimes, in favor of one corner or another (hard peg or float).62       Also
relatively new is the realization that attempts in practice to categorize countries’ choice of regime
(into fixed, floating, and intermediate) differ from the official categorization.63 Countries that
say they are floating, for example, often in reality are not.64 Countries that say they are fixing
often in reality are not.65 Indeed neat categorization may not be possible at all. While there are
by now a number of attempts at de facto classification, the answers they yield show a surprisingly
low correlation, not only with the de jure classification, but also with one another. This is
probably the major reason why different attempts to measure economic performance by exchange
rate regime give different answers.66

         That Argentina was in the end forced to abandon its currency board, in 2001, also
dramatizes the lesson that the choice of exchange rate regime, including even the supposedly firm
institutional fixes, is not so permanent or deep as had previously been thought.67 Even full
monetary union need not be a truly permanent choice, as the Czech-Slovak divorce illustrated.
The choice of exchange rate regime is more likely endogenous with respect to institutions, rather
than the other way around.68 Furthermore, it may even be desirable that exchange rate regimes
change along with circumstances. It has long been recognized, in the optimum currency area
literature, that a single exchange rate regime does not suit all countries. (Fixed rates are more
suitable for countries that are small and open to trade, for example.) It may also be true that,
even for a given country, a single regime does not necessarily suit it at all points in its history.
Criteria such as patterns of trade themselves evolve over time.

          By now, all regimes–institutional fix, float, and intermediate regimes–have proven
themselves to be something of a mirage.69 That is, when a country officially opts for one regime,
first of all, it may not in fact be following it. Second, it may be impossible to verify quickly what
regime it is indeed following. Third, different attempts at de facto classification may give
different answers. Finally, the regime may change in the subsequent year.70 It may be more
useful to think of what percentage of the time countries spend at various ends of the spectrum,
rather than treating each new regime choice as a long-lasting one. The “corners hypothesis” is
another possible casualty of the realization that no regime choice is in reality permanent, and that
investors know that.71

Choice of Capital Account Regime


                                                 42
        The literature on capital controls and capital account liberalization is also very large.72

         Review of arguments on efficiency of financial markets. Financial integration between
an emerging market country and the rest of the world has many advantages. Some of the
potential gains from international trade in financial assets are analogous to the gains from
international trade in goods. First, for a successfully developing country–that is, one that has
not just a low capital labor ratio but also sound fundamentals---the rate of return to domestic
capital is sufficiently high that investment can be financed more cheaply by borrowing from
abroad than out of domestic saving alone. Second, investors in richer countries can earn a higher
rate of return on their savings by investing in the emerging market than they could domestically.
Third, everyone benefits from the opportunity to diversify away risks and smooth disturbances.
Fourth, letting foreign financial institutions into the country can improve the efficiency of
domestic financial markets. Over-regulated and potentially inefficient domestic institutions are
subject to the harsh discipline of competition and the demonstration effect of having examples to
emulate. At the same time, governments face the discipline of the international capital markets in
the event they make policy mistakes (for example, in their domestic regulatory duties). The
capital account liberalization can be a useful signal of commitment to market reform.73

         Recent crises, however, suggest that financial markets do not always work quite as
perfectly as the happy view of the economic theorist suggests. It is difficult to argue that
investors have punished countries when and only when the governments are following bad
policies. First, large inflows often give way suddenly to large outflows, with little news
appearing in between that might explain the change in sentiment. Second, contagion sometimes
spreads to countries where fundamentals appear strong. Third, the recessions that have hit
emerging market countries have been of such magnitude that it is difficult to argue that the
system is working well. Beyond the specific issue of crises in emerging markets, international
capital inflows do not appear to increase during temporary downturns nor fall during booms, as
the smoothing theory says they should.

         Evidence on liberalization. Do the advantages of open financial markets outweigh the
disadvantages? Peter Henry and Anusha Chari, for example, have shown that when countries
open up their stock markets, the cost of capital facing domestic firms falls (stock prices rise), with
a positive effect on their investment and on economic growth.74 Some researchers, such as
Reuven Glick and Michael Hutchison (2002), have found that countries that liberalize restrictions
on capital flows are less prone to speculative attacks. But the evidence is mixed.75

         Capital account liberalization has often been implicated in the crises experienced by
emerging markets over the last ten years. Certainly a country that does not borrow from abroad
in the first place cannot have an international debt crisis. It has been widely alleged that
developing countries in Asia and elsewhere were pressured to liberalize their financial markets
prematurely, in the interest of U.S. banks but to the detriment of the countries.76

        Either a blanket indictment or a blanket vindication of capital controls would be too
simplistic. One important point is that capital account liberalization may be good under some
conditions and in some countries, and bad in other circumstances, much as is the case with the
choice of exchange rate regime. A second important point is that both the proponents of controls
and their opponents tend indiscriminately to lump together Chile-style controls on inflows,
Malaysia-style control on outflows, a Tobin tax on all foreign exchange transactions,77 and other
kinds of taxes and restrictions. But the precise nature of the restrictions matters a lot. Each of
these two points is considered in turn below.


                                                 43
         Some of the most interesting research examines under what circumstances capital
account liberalization is more likely to be good or bad for economic performance. One claim is
that only for rich countries does financial opening lower volatility78 and raise growth;79 capital
account liberalization is more likely to lead to market crashes in lower-income countries.80 A
second claim is that capital account liberalization raises growth only in the absence of
macroeconomic imbalances, such as overly expansionary monetary and fiscal policy.81 A third
important finding is that institutions such as shareholder protection and accounting standards
determine whether liberalization leads to development of the financial sector,82 and in turn to
long-run growth.83 A related finding is that corruption tilts the composition of capital inflows
toward the form of banking flows, and toward dollar denomination, both of which have been
associated with crises.84 The implication is that capital account liberalization can help if
institutions are strong and other fundamentals are favorable, but can hurt if they are not.

         All these findings are consistent with a conventional lesson regarding the sequencing of
reforms: that countries will do better in the development process if they postpone opening of the
capital account until after other institutional reforms.85 Of course, the observed positive
correlation between the opening of capital markets and growth could be attributable to reverse
causation–rich countries liberalize as a result of having developed, not as a cause. Hali Edison
and colleagues (2002) conclude from their own tests that this is not the case.

       Malaysia-style restrictions, and other controls on outflows. Controls on capital outflows
have been common in the past. This alternative is often proposed by those who observe that
modern financial markets do not seem to work as smoothly as the theory predicts. Many
developing countries–most importantly, China and India–had not made much progress at
removing them by 1997. When the East Asia crisis hit, many in these countries felt vindicated.

         Reimposing capital controls that had earlier been removed is one policy option for coping
with a crisis, though not likely to be sanctioned by the IMF. The goal is often to allow a lower
domestic interest, and sustain growth, without accelerating a capital outflow that would threaten
the currency. One disadvantage is that reimposed controls may not be very effective. Once
markets have developed and have become familiar with derivatives and offshore banks, it may be
difficult to turn the clock back, and attempts to do so are likely to have negative repercussions in
a democratic society. Malaysia adopted controls to prevent investors from taking money
offshore in 1998. Tight administrative control made this strategy more effective than it might
have been in a more open society. Dani Rodrik and Ethan Kaplan (2002) find evidence that
Malaysia’s decision to impose controls on outflows in 1998 helped it weather the Asia crisis.

         Even when such controls are enforceable, a second disadvantage is that controls on
outflows can weaken the discipline that international financial markets place on the quality of
macroeconomic policy. Governments have all too often used controls to shield themselves
temporarily from the implications of bad policies.86 A third disadvantage is that they are likely
to scare investors away from the country in the future.

         Chile-style penalties, and other controls on inflows. The usual motivation for controls
on inflows is to prevent overvaluation and overindebtedness, and thereby prevent a crisis from
occurring in the first place. The enforcement problem is not as great as with outflows: it is easier
to keep capital out than to keep it in. Some countries appear to have had some success
discouraging inflow, so as to limit real appreciation and aggregate debt. At times in the early
1990s, Chile, Colombia, Thailand, and Malaysia each imposed controls to discourage capital
inflows.


                                                 44
         The clearest disadvantage to controls on capital inflows is that the country passes up an
opportunity to finance its development by borrowing abroad at a relatively lower interest rate.
Instead, it has to finance investment out of higher-cost domestic funds. Controls designed to
moderate capital inflows may impact small firms, in particular.87

         Chile’s controls have attracted the most attention, in part because they had the effect (if
not the intention) of shifting the composition of capital inflows away from the short end of the
maturity spectrum, and in part because Chile’s overall economic record has been so successful.
As Sebastian Edwards (1999, 2000) has pointed out, the reforms undertaken by Chile were far too
numerous and varied to allow one to attribute its overall economic performance specifically to
those controls in place during the 1990s.88 But there is a more persuasive argument related to the
composition of capital inflows.

          This study emphasizes that the composition of inflow is statistically a leading indicator
of the probability that severe currency crashes will occur. The higher the reliance on foreign-
currency borrowing that is short-term or intermediated through banks, the higher the probability
of crisis. Although statistical correlation need not imply causality, this conclusion is consistent
with proposals for controls that would seek to change the composition of capital inflows, as
opposed to the total magnitude. Taxes or restrictions on short-term inflows may shift the
composition toward longer maturities.

         Chile imposed its famous tax on inflows in 1991. It took the form of a requirement that a
percentage of any foreign borrowing be left in a non-interest bearing deposit maintained at the
central bank for up to one year. In addition, there was a longstanding requirement that all FDI
stay in the country for at least one year. These controls apparently succeeded in changing the
composition of the capital inflow to Chile in the 1990s, in the direction of longer-term maturities,
even if having little effect on the total magnitude.89

        Some countries aim their restrictions specifically at banks. High reserve requirements on
banks’ foreign borrowing fall well within the kind of enhanced prudential banking regulation that
is widely recommended for emerging markets.

         Chile removed its inflow penalties at the end of the decade. Some commentators saw
this as a rejection of the usefulness of controls, or at least as confirmation that liberalization is
appropriate as a country reaches a certain stage of development. But this move came during a
period of capital drought for developing countries worldwide.

        An alternative to the view that the immediate goal should be permanent liberalization
deserves more consideration. That alternative is the view that Chile-style controls will remain as
one possibly useful tool to be applied during a particular stage of the cycle. If one closes the
umbrella when it stops raining, that does not mean one has changed one’s mind about the
usefulness of umbrellas. Controls may have a role to play as a temporary measure when a
country faces a large upsurge of inflows. They might help a government “play for time” until it
can determine whether the funds are going to useful investments, which will generate the foreign
exchange earnings needed in the future to service the debt, or whether they are instead going, for
example, to consumption. After several years, policymakers may have a better idea whether their
country is the next tiger, justifying the inflows, or merely the subject of a speculative bubble. 90

Choice of Trade Openness



                                                  45
          The case in favor of free trade in goods and services is generally considered more certain
than the case in favor of free trade in assets, at least when it comes to the average rate of growth.
There is no necessary reason why openness to trade need to reduce the volatility of real income,
however. Indeed, for a country facing high variability in its terms of trade on world markets, it is
entirely possible that higher levels of openness lead to larger cyclical swings. On the other hand,
it has been observed that countries with a high ratio of trade to GDP, such as the East Asian
tigers, tend to have an easier time adjusting to sudden stops, while those with a low ratio, like
Argentina and other Latin American countries, tend to have a harder time.

         One interpretation is that a higher ratio of trade to GDP (for a given debt/GDP ratio)
means that in the aftermath of a cut-off of capital inflow of a given size, a smaller percentage
increase in the output of traded goods is required to fill the gap (which in turn calls for a smaller
devaluation or contraction in output). Another interpretation is that for countries that are highly
dependent on trade, a cut-off of trade credit would be very costly. If the threatened loss of trade
is the answer to the question why troubled debtors tend to pay their debts,91 and thus the
explanation as to why creditors are willing to lend to them, then a higher ratio of trade is a form
of “giving hostages” that makes a cut off of lending less likely.92 The implication is that
openness to trade and openness to capital together is a good combination (analogously to the
optimum currency area conclusion that openness to trade suits a country for a fixed exchange
rate).

Composition and Use of Capital Inflows

        As noted above, indicators that concern the composition of capital inflow, rather than the
total amount, appear to be statistically useful at predicting the probability of currency crashes.

         Bank loans versus other modes of finance. Banks, in particular, have been implicated in
most crises.93 Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is a less risky source of capital inflow than bank
loans.94 The same is true of equity flows.95 FDI is thought to be relatively more stable. One
theory is that bank flows, in particular, are more vulnerable to moral hazard problems created by
the prospect of government bailouts than are other modes of finance. Another theory is that
equities and FDI allow more efficient risk-sharing: in the event of adverse developments, the
price of the asset falls automatically, without the need for the costly and protracted negotiations
and restructuring of bank loans or bonds. Indexation of debt to variables such as the commodity
export price would accomplish much of the same purpose, but for some reason this is rarely done.

        The fraction of capital inflow that is short-term (the problem of maturity mismatch).
Countries that borrow funds short-term are more likely to get into trouble, especially if those
funds are intermediated through the banking system and denominated in dollars or other foreign
currencies. Countries that borrow long-term are less likely to get into trouble, especially if the
inflow takes the form of foreign direct investment rather than bank loans. A mismatch of short-
term bank liabilities with longer-term bank assets (such as real estate) leaves a country
vulnerable. One possibility is that a run-up of short-term bank credit is a symptom of coming
problems, rather than the fundamental cause, much as an individual who tries to charge his
mortgage payments on his credit card reveals that he is overextended. Either way, a
concentration of short-term debt, especially relative to reserves, is a danger signal.96

         The fraction of debt that is dollar-denominated (the problem of currency mismatch).
One prime culprit in explaining the apparent curse that follows developing countries in
international financial markets is their inability to borrow internationally in their own currency.
Ricardo Hausmann has called the problem “original sin,” by which he means that it is the


                                                 46
fundamental root of the problem. If countries incur foreign liabilities despite the inability to
borrow in their own currency---that is, if they borrow in foreign currency on net---that is the
problem of “currency mismatch.” 97

         We are not interested solely in predicting whether or not a crisis will occur. Another
important question is why were the crises so severe---inflicting recession and bankruptcy on much
of the economy---once they occurred. The composition of capital inflows is also relevant for the
magnitude of output loss if there is a crisis. Firms or banks that incur liabilities in dollars (or
other foreign currencies) while their revenues are primarily in domestic currency face the
problem of currency mismatch. This, in turn, can lead to insolvency and contraction when the
domestic currency devalues sharply.98 If most of the debt is denominated in dollars or other
foreign currencies, as is the case for most developing countries, then a devaluation can be
contractionary, as the adverse balance sheet effect renders otherwise-solvent debtor corporations
and banks insolvent, and leads to plant closings and recession. These balance sheet effects are at
the center of many analyses of why emerging markets seem prone to severe crises.99 (The
balance sheet effect is only one of many ways in which devaluation can be contractionary.)100

         Reserves. The view that countries do not need reserves, because they can borrow them,
has been thoroughly discredited. Reserves are important precisely because, in the event of a
sudden stop, countries cannot borrow, at least not at regular world interest rates. And it may be
that floating countries need reserves, not just countries with exchange rate targets as standard
models imply.

        Countries that accumulate a high level of international reserves are less likely to have
problems. How high a level of reserves is enough? The traditional rule of thumb was phrased
in terms of trade: a country needs a minimum level of reserves that is enough to pay for three
months of imports. As the source of balance of payments crises has shifted from the trade
account to the capital account, a new rule of thumb has been proposed, attributed to Pablo
Guidotti (2003): a country need to have enough reserves so that it could cover all debt coming
due over the next year (short-term debt, as well as maturing longer-term debt), in the event that
creditors suddenly lose willingness to roll it over or extend new loans. As already noted, one of
the most useful summary indicators of danger is the ratio of short-term debt to reserves. The
Guidotti rule says that as this ratio rises above 1, the danger of a crisis rises with it.




                                                 47
APPENDIX B. THE INTERNAL/EXTERNAL BALANCE FRAMEWORK WHEN DEVALUATION IS
CONTRACTIONARY

        In the traditional framework, there are two classes of policy instruments: expenditure-
reducing policies, such as monetary contraction; and expenditure-switching policies, such as
devaluation. The pair matches up nicely with the existence of two policy targets: internal balance
and external balance.

         Consider a graphical representation with the interest rate and exchange rate (price of
foreign currency) on the axes. To satisfy external balance, there is an inverse tradeoff between
the two instruments. A devaluation and an increase in the interest rate are each ways of
improving the trade balance---the latter by reducing expenditure Thus the more you have of one,
the less you need of the other. (If external balance is defined as equilibrium in the overall balance
of payments, including the capital account along with the trade balance, the relationship is still
downward-sloping, since a devaluation and an increase in the interest rate are both ways of
making domestic assets more attractive to global investors.)

        To satisfy internal balance, the tradeoff is traditionally considered to be upward-sloping.
An increase in the interest rate reduces the domestic demand for domestic goods, while a
devaluation increases the net foreign demand for domestic goods; if you have more of one, you
also need more of the other, to prevent excess supply or excess demand for domestic goods. The
existence of two independent instruments implies the possibility of attaining both targets
simultaneously, at the intersection of the internal and external balance schedule. In the aftermath
of an adverse shock in the foreign sector, for example, the right new combination of devaluation
and monetary contraction will restore balance of payments equilibrium while maintaining real
economic growth (as illustrated in figure B-1).

            Figure B-1. Attaining Internal and External Balance: Traditional Version

                                            Overheating
                                                                        Internal
  E                                                                     balance

(Price of
foreign                                                                 Recession
exchange)




                                                                        Surplus


                                                                        New external
                                                                          balance
                                         Deficit             Original
                                                             external
                                                             balance
                    i (interest rate) or other expenditure-reducing policy

Source: Authors’ calculations.


                                                    48
        This is not the way things actually work.1 By now we have had enough
experience with crises in emerging markets that the traditional framework needs to be
modified. The simple generalization seems to be that most developing countries that are
hit by financial crises go into recession. The reduction in income is the only way of
quickly generating the improvement in the trade balance that is the necessary counterpart
to the increased reluctance of international investors to lend. External balance is a
jealous mistress that can be satisfied only if internal balance is left to go wanting.

         Some critics of the IMF say that the recessions are the result of Fund policies, specifically
the insistence on monetary contraction. The argument is that the mix of a lower interest rate
combined with a devaluation would successfully maintain internal balance. They often make the
point that high interest rates are not in practice especially attractive to foreign investors when they
carry increased probability of default (and associated recession). This is true. But in our view, it
is not the most important correction in the traditional framework. Even if interest rates do not
have as big a positive effect on the capital account as earlier models of high financial integration
suggested---so that the graphical relationship may be flatter---we believe that the sign of the
effect is still the same. One cannot normally attract many investors by lowering interest rates.
Therefore the external balance line still slopes downward. Claims that high rates are damaging to
the real economy willfully ignore the lack of an alternative, if the external balance constraint is to
be met.

          Where the traditional framework needs most to be modified is the relationship giving
internal balance---not external balance. By now the evidence seems strong that devaluation is
contractionary, at least in the first year, and perhaps in the second as well. We have long been
aware of various potential contractionary effects of devaluation in developing countries. A total
of ten such effects are identified in textbooks,2 of which the difficulty of servicing dollar debts
has turned out to be by far the most important in recent crises (the balance sheet effect). But a
mainstream view has been that any negative effects from a devaluation were eventually offset by
the positive effect of stimulus to net exports, so that by the second year, when the latter had
gathered strength, the overall effect on output had turned positive.3 Now however, one must
judge the negative effects stronger than had been thought, and the positive effects weaker.
Imports fall sharply; indeed crisis-impacted countries have for this reason experienced sharp
increases in their trade balances beginning as soon as two or three months after the crisis. But
this is clearly a response to the unavailability of finance and collapse of income and spending, not
to relative prices. In other words, it is expenditure-reduction, not expenditure switching.

          If devaluation is contractionary, then the internal balance line slopes down, not up (as
illustrated in figure B-2). Moreover the slope is disturbingly similar to the slope of the external
balance line. It is hard to see where the two intersect, if indeed they intersect at all. This means
that it is hard to see what combination of policy instruments, if any, can simultaneously satisfy
both internal and external balance, after an adverse shock has shifted the latter outward. The
depressing conclusion is that there is no escape from recession. All policy instruments work
through reduction in income in the short run: devaluation, fiscal contraction, and monetary


        1
            Krugman (1998b).
        2
            Caves, Frankel, and Jones (2002). For further exposition, see Corden (1993).
        3
         Edwards (1986) and Kamin (1988).


                                                    49
contraction. Even structural policy reform, such as insisting that bad banks go under, is likely to
have a negative effect on economic activity in the short run.

   Figure B-2. Attaining Internal and External Balance: When Devaluation is Contractionary




   E
(Price of
foreign
exchange)


                                                                        New
                                                                        external
                                                                        balance

                                                             Recession


                                                           Internal
                                                           balance


                 i (interest rate) or other expenditure-reducing policy

            Source: Authors’ calculations.

         Is the financing-versus-adjustment framework then no longer useful? The framework
may still be relevant during the (relatively brief) period after a terms-of-trade or other shock
arises, but before the financial or currency crisis hits. It is hard to identify and date the former,
even with the benefit of hindsight. But consider the interval of one to two years preceding
December 2001 in Argentina, preceding July 1997 in East Asia, preceding December 1994 in
Mexico, and preceding July 1982 in Latin America. In each case, policymakers responded to
deterioration in their trade or capital accounts by running down foreign exchange reserves or
shifting to short-term borrowing. They succeeded in this way in postponing macroeconomic
adjustment and in postponing crisis. But when the crisis came, it was that much worse, requiring
at that point the unfortunate response of turning all dials to contractionary settings---as the only
way of satisfying the constraints imposed by finicky international investors.

         It would have been better in these cases if the countries had spent these short intervals
adjusting rather than financing, at a time when there was still a meaningful tradeoff between the
two and the choice set had not yet been narrowed in such an unattractively constrained manner.
The trick is thus having the economic acumen and political will to recognize that an adverse
shock has occurred and to enact prompt adjustment. This element is even more crucial than
calculating the right amount of adjustment or choosing among the available instruments to carry it
out.



                                                 50
APPENDIX C. DATA APPENDIX: DEFINITIONS AND SOURCES OF VARIABLES

“Crisis Prevention” Policy Variables and Related Control Variables

Governance/Structure (noncorrupt). Source: ICRG, Corruption in Government. Scale ranges
from 0 to 6; lower point totals indicate higher risk. Averaged over period 1990 to 2002.

Openness (opentrade). Source: IMF, International Financial Statistics. Ratio of (Exports +
Imports)/GDP.

Capital Controls (qka). Source: From Klein' s (2003) interpretation of Quinn (1997) data;
appropriating qka7388r, which is mean of qka73, qka82, qka88 using rmean where qka is Capital
Account Liberalism for years 1973, 1982, and 1988, respectively; range is 0-5, with higher values
indicating less restrictive.

Capital Controls (share9295). Source: Klein' s (2003) share9295 variable Proportion of period
1992--95 that country had open capital accounts or undertook financial liberalization.

Inflation (inflat). Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook. Annual inflation rates calculated from
annual CPI data as [(CPIyear-CPIyear-1)/CPIyear-1]. Mean inflation levels determined for each
country for period 1990 through 2002.

Log of Mean Inflation (loginflat). Source: Natural log of mean inflation levels calculated above.

Short-term Debt/Total Debt (shortotaldebt). Source: World Bank, World Development
Indicators (WDI). Average for annual data for period 1990--2001. Short-term debt includes all
debt having an original maturity of one year or less and interest in arrears on long-term debt.

FDI (net inflows)/GDP (fdigdp). Source: World Bank, WDI. Foreign direct investment, net
inflows (percent of GDP).

External Debt/GDP (debtgdp). Source: World Bank, WDI. Ratio of total external debt to GDP,
expressed as decimal. Averaged over period 1990 to 2002.

Exchange Rate Regime (Flexibility) (exrateflex). Source: IMF, Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Calculated as 1*(% time on regime 1)+2*(% time on
regime 2)+3*(time on regime 3); 1=hard peg; 2=intermed; 3=float.

Short-term Debt/Reserves (stdebtres). Source: World Bank, WDI; IMF, World Economic
Outlook. Calculated as annual ratio of short-term debt outstanding to stock of reserves at year-
end. Short-term debt includes all debt having an original maturity of one year or less and interest
in arrears on long-term debt. Variable represents mean of ratio for each country during period
1990 toto 2002, divided by 1000.

Reserves/GDP (resgdp). Source: World Bank, WDI. Ratio of reserves to GDP, expressed as
decimal. Averaged over period 1990 to 2002.

Budget Deficit/GDP (bdgdp). Source: World Bank, WDI. Overall budget balance is current and
capital revenue and official grants received, less total expenditure and lending minus repayments.
Data are shown for central government only. Mean of annual data for period 1990 to 2002.


                                                51
Expansion of Domestic Credit (ndagrowth). Source: World Bank, WDI. Calculated using “Net
domestic credit (current LCU),” which the World Bank defines as “The sum of net credit to the
nonfinancial public sector, credit to the private sector, and other accounts. Data are in current
local currency.” The variable calculated as the mean of the series of values of ln(nda in year m)
less ln(nda in 1990) for each year m, where 1990<m<=2002.

Standard Deviation of Terms of Trade (sdTOT). Source: World Bank, WDI. Standard
deviation of annual Net Barter Terms of Trade data for period 1990 to 2002. Net barter terms of
trade (1995 = 100). Net barter terms of trade is the ratio of the export price index to the
corresponding import price index measured relative to the base year 1995.

FSU (fsu). Dummy variable registering 1 if country is Former Soviet Republic, 0 otherwise.

Population (pop). Source: University of Pennsylvania, Penn World Tables, in thousands. Mean
of annual data for period 1990 to 2002.

War (war). (Intensity Level / pop) * Fraction of Period at War, summed over period 1990 to
2002. Source: War data from Gleditsch and others (2002).

Concessional Borrower (conces). Countries eligible for IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth
Facility (PRFG) as of April 2003. Dummy variable for 1 if eligible, 0 if not. Source:
http://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/facts/prgf.htm.

Tropical (tropical). Source: “tropical” variable from Gallup, Sachs, and Messenger (1998). The
proportion of the country’s land area within the geographical tropics. Originally sourced from
ArcWorld Supplement database (ESRI 1996).

GDP PPP-adjusted 1990 (gdp90). Source: World Bank, WDI. GDP, PPP current international
US$, averaged over period 1990 to 2002. This variable represents the natural log of that figure.

GDP Per Capita 1990 (gdpcap90). GDP per capita is gross domestic product divided by midyear
population. Data sourced from World Bank WDI. GDP is the sum of gross value added by all
resident producers in the economy plus any product taxes and minus any subsidies not included in
the value of the products. It is calculated without making deductions for depreciation of
fabricated assets or for depletion and degradation of natural resources. The data are in constant
1995 U.S. dollars, and this variable is constructed by taking the natural log of that figure.

Investment (invest). Mean of annual values of ratio of Investment (current prices, billions of
local currency) to GDP (current prices, billions of local currency) for period 1990 to 2002.
Source: Variable constructed from Penn World Tables data.

Illiteracy (illiter). Source: World Bank, WDI. Illiteracy rate, adult total (percent of people ages
15 and above).

Original Sin (osin). Source: IADBtotloan, methodology adopted from Eichengreen, Hausmann,
and Panizza (2003). This variable is constructed employing Eichengreen, Hausmann, and
Panizza’s methodology for INDEXA, which is the ratio of securities plus loans in major
currencies to total securities plus loans issued by the government. Mean of annual data for period
1990 to 2002.



                                                 52
Secondary Education, Percentage Completed (seced). Source: Data taken from Barro and Lee
(2000). Average of lsc90, lsc95, and lsc99 which are percentage of "secondary school complete in
the total population” for years 1990, 1995, and 1999, respectively.

Hard Peg, Variation 1 (hardpeg1). Source: Data from IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Hardpeg generates a value between 0 and 1: 0 if the
country never had a hard peg (that is, institutionally fixed by means of a currency board,
dollarization, or monetary union); 1 if it did the entire period; and a fraction of that if it did so for
only a portion of the period, where the time range extends from 1990 to 2002.

Hard Peg, Variation 2 (hardpeg2). Source: Data taken from Rose (2001). This variable is a
dummy registering 1 for a country if it was classified by Rose as belonging to a common
currency area, and 0 otherwise. Data extend only to 1996.

Corners, Variation 1 (corners1). Source: Data from IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Corners generates a value between 0 and 1: 0 if the
country always had an intermediate regime; 1 if it always had floating or fixed; and a fraction of
that equal to the fraction of the period it spent on floating and/or fixed, where the time range
extends from 1990 to 2002.

Corners, Variation 2 (corners2). Source: Data appropriated from Rose (2001). This variable is
a dummy registering a 1 if hardpeg =1, a value between 0 and 1 for the fraction of the period the
country had floating rates, and 0 if the country had an intermediate regime the entire period. Data
extend only to 1996.

Interactive Variables

(Absence of Capital Controls) x [(GDP per capita (1990)]. opencapital * gdpcap90

(Absence of Capital Controls) x (Noncorruptness). opencapital * noncorrupt

(Absence of Capital Controls) x (Rate of Increase in Domestic Credit). opencapital *
ndagrowth

(Absence of Capital Controls) x (Budget Deficit / GDP). opencapital * bdgdp

(Absence of Capital Controls) x (Short -term Debt / FDI+Equity). opencapital * composition


Performance Variables

Number of Crises (crises). Number of crises determined where:

For annual determination of crises, a year registers as a crisis if INDEXmonth is greater than 0.25
and INDEXmonth-INDEXmonth-12m is greater than 0.10, where INDEX is the month-on-month
change in the natural log of the exchange rate less the month-on-month change in the natural log
of reserves. In the case where a year registers as a crisis year, and the subsequent year(s) do so as
well, a single crisis is counted as beginning in the initial crisis year and continuing up to three
years after that. Therefore, in the case of four consecutive years registering as crises, only the
first and fourth years will be noted as discrete incidents of crisis, with the first crisis lasting three
years.


                                                   53
For monthly determination of crises, a month registers as a crisis if is greater than 0.45 and
INDEXmonth-INDEXmonth-12m is greater than 0.10. Similar to the methodology applied above, in
the case of consecutive months registering as crises, a single crisis can extend up to 36 months.
Therefore, in the case of 38 consecutive months registering as crisis, in actuality we will count
two crisis: the first extending from month one through 36, the second occurring in months 37 and
38.

In both of the above cases, the period examined extends from January 1990 to December 2002.
Exchange Rate and Reserves Level data are sourced from the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics database employing Exchange Rate (line AE.ZF) for the former and Total Reserves
minus Gold (line 1L.DZF) for the latter.

Mean Growth Real Income (avgrowth). Source: World Bank WDI, calculated for each country
over period 1990 to 2002 as mean difference of annual values of ln(gdpr), where gdpr is Gross
Domestic Product, constant prices in billions of local currency.

Standard Deviation of Growth Real Income (sdgrowth). Source: World Bank WDI, calculated
for each country over period 1990 to 2002 as standard deviation of annual difference of ln(gdpr),
where gdpr is Gross Domestic Product, constant prices in billions of local currency.

Output Loss in Crises (crisisloss [or compcris]). The sum of output lost during crises, excluding
from that summation cases where crises were associated with output gain. Source: GDP, constant
prices for each country from the World Bank’s World Economic Outlook.

Depth of Crises (depthofcrises). The average loss to crises, essentially calculated as Output Loss
to Crises over Number of Crises (crisisloss/crises).

For Monthly Analysis

Length of “Sudden Stop” Interval (lag) is determined as the number of months between a crisis
month and the preceding reserve peak.

Reserve Peaks (respeak) are determined using 7-month moving average. Monthly reserves data
used are from IMF’s International Financial Statistics.

“Crisis Management Policy” Variables

Reserves Loss, percentage (resloss). Determined as the loss in reserves over the lag or length of
sudden stop interval, as defined above. Source: Monthly reserves data used are from IMF’s
International Financial Statistics. Calculated as the difference of the reserves level at the peak
and the reserves level at crisis month, expressed as a ratio to the reserves level at peak.

First IMF Program Dummy (Imf6m). A dummy variable registering one if the lag in months
between the crisis month and preceding institution of an IMF program is equal to or less than six
months.

Second IMF Program Dummy (Imf12m). A dummy variable registering one if the lag in
months between the crisis month and preceding institution of an IMF program is equal to or less
than 12 months.



                                                54
Adjustment Policy Mix. Fiscal contraction vs. expenditure-switching. ( Govt Cons / TB ),
over the period (Crisis Yr +1) – (Crisis Yr): Monthly data sourced from IMF’s International
Financial Statistics. Line 91F used for Government Consumption and Trade Balance is
constructed as Exports (line 98C) less Imports (line 90C). Calculated as difference in each
variable from (Crisis + 1 year) versus (Crisis – 2 years).

Adjustment Policy Mix. Outcome of contraction vs expenditure-switching. ( GDP / TB),
Crisis Yr + 1 vs. Crisis Yr: Monthly data sourced from IMF’s International Financial Statistics,
line 99B used for GDP and Trade Balance is constructed as Exports (line 98C) less Imports (line
90C). Calculated as difference in each variable from Crisis + 1 year versus Crisis – 2 years.

CPI sourced from IMF’s International Financial Statistics, “Consumer Prices.”

RER sourced from IMF’s International Financial Statistics, “REER BASED ON REL.CP.”

Real interest rate (r). Determined from monthly money market rates sourced from IMF’s
International Financial Statistics. Calculated as the current month’s nominal interest rate,
divided by 100, less the average of: the difference in the natural log of current CPI less the natural
log of CPI for one year prior and the difference in the natural log of the CPI one year forward less
the natural log of the current month’s CPI.

Adjustment Policy Mix: Monetary contraction (level) vs. devaluation (Rmindelrer). Calculated
as r minus the difference in the natural log of that month’s RER less the natural log of the RER
for one year prior.

Adjustment Policy Mix: Monetary contraction (change) vs. devaluation (delrmindelrer).
Calculated as the difference in r for that month less r for one year prior minus the difference in
the natural log of that month’s RER less the natural log of the RER for one year prior.

Change in Maturity Composition. Data are available from BIS in semi-annual frequency (Q2
and Q4) and constructed as ratio of short-term bank debt (maturity up to one-year) to bank debt of
all maturities of consolidated claims of reporting banks on individual countries. Calculated as
difference of this ratio; quarter of preceding reserve peak is used in comparison to crisis quarter.
In cases where reserve peak and crisis fall in same quarter, that quarter is compared against
following quarter if crisis and/or reserve peak fall in June or December. If crisis and/or reserve
peak falls in any other month, that quarter is compared against preceding quarter. In cases where
reserve peak or crisis falls in Q1 or Q3, preceding quarter'  s data are used. For data after 2000,
quarterly data are available. If crisis or reserve peak falls in first month of quarter, preceding
quarter's data are used; otherwise, that quarter's data are used.

Change in Currency Mismatch. Difference in osin ratio over time. Currency mismatch variable
constructed from annual Q4 data. In cases where crisis occurred in the first six months of the
calendar year, data were used from the preceding Q4. In cases where crisis occurred in the latter
six months of the calendar year, data were used from the following Q4.




                                                 55
Appendix D. Dataset Country List
                                                                Linear regression
                                                                 analysis of crisis
                       Probit analysis   Regression trees   prevention & management
Country                   (panel)            (panel)              (cross-section)
Albania                                                                  *
Algeria                      *                                           *
Angola                                                                   *
Argentina                    *                  *                        *
Armenia                                                                  *
Azerbaijan                                                               *
Bangladesh                   *                                           *
Belarus                                                                  *
Benin                        *                  *                        *
Bhutan                                                                   *
Bolivia                                                                  *
Botswana                     *                                           *
Brazil                       *                  *                        *
Bulgaria                                                                 *
Burkina Faso                                                             *
Burundi                                                                  *
Cambodia                                                                 *
Cameroon                     *                                           *
Central African Rep.                                                     *
Chad                                                                     *
China,P.R.: Mainland         *                  *                        *
Chile                        *                  *                        *
China,P.R.:Hong Kong                                                     *
Colombia                     *                  *                        *
Congo, Republic of                                                       *
Costa Rica                   *                                           *
Côte d'Ivoire                *                                           *
Croatia                                                                  *
Czech Republic                                                           *
Dominican Republic           *                  *                        *
Ecuador                      *                  *                        *
Egypt                        *                  *                        *
El Salvador                                                              *
Eritrea                                                                  *
Estonia                                                                  *
Ethiopia                                                                 *
Gabon                                                                    *
Gambia, The                  *                                           *
Georgia                                                                  *
Ghana                        *                  *                        *
Guatemala                    *                                           *
Guinea                       *                                           *
Guinea-Bissau                                                            *
Haiti                        *                                           *
Honduras                     *                                           *
Hungary                                                                  *
India                        *                  *                        *

                                             56
                                                           Linear regression
                                                            analysis of crisis
                  Probit analysis   Regression trees   prevention & management
Country              (panel)            (panel)              (cross-section)
Indonesia                *                                          *
Iran, I.R. of            *                 *                        *
Jamaica                  *                 *                        *
Jordan                  *                  *                      *
Kazakhstan                                                        *
Kenya                   *                  *                      *
Korea                                                             *
Kuwait                  *                                         *
Kyrgyz Republic                                                   *
Laos                    *                  *                      *
Latvia                                                            *
Lebanon                                                           *
Lesotho                                                           *
Liberia                                                           *
Libya                   *                                         *
Lithuania                                                         *
Macedonia, FYR                                                    *
Madagascar              *                                         *
Malawi                                                            *
Malaysia                *                                         *
Mali                    *                  *                      *
Mauritania                                                        *
Mauritius                                                         *
Mexico                  *                  *                      *
Moldova                                                           *
Mongolia                                                          *
Morocco                 *                                         *
Mozambique                                                        *
Myanmar                 *                                         *
Namibia                 *                  *                      *
Nepal                                                             *
Nicaragua               *                  *                      *
Niger                                                             *
Nigeria                 *                                         *
Oman                    *                                         *
Pakistan                *                  *                      *
Panama                  *                  *                      *
Paraguay                                                          *
Peru                    *                  *                      *
Philippines             *                                         *
Poland                                                            *
Romania                                                           *
Russia                                                            *
Rwanda                                                            *
Saudi Arabia            *                  *                      *
Senegal                 *                  *                      *
Sierra Leone            *                                         *
Singapore                                                         *



                                         57
Appendix D. Dataset Country List (cont.)

                                                                        Linear regression
                                                                         analysis of crisis
                               Probit analysis   Regression trees   prevention & management
Country                           (panel)            (panel)              (cross-section)
Sri Lanka                             *                                          *
Sudan                                                                            *
Syria                                 *                 *                        *
Taiwan Prov.of China                                                             *
Tajikistan                                                                       *
Tanzania                              *                                          *
Thailand                                                                         *
Togo                                  *                                          *
Trinidad and Tobago                   *                                          *
Tunisia                               *                 *                        *
Turkey                                *                 *                        *
Turkmenistan                                                                     *
Uganda                                *                 *                        *
Ukraine                                                                          *
United Arab Emirates                  *                                          *
Uruguay                               *                                          *
Venezuela, Rep. Bol.                  *                 *                        *
Vietnam                               *                                          *
Zambia                                *                                          *
Zimbabwe                              *                                          *

Source: Authors’ compilation.




                                                        58
APPENDIX E. RESULTS OF PROBIT REGRESSIONS, DIFFERENT THRESHOLDS FOR CRISIS

Table E-1.     Results of Probit Regressions (15%)

            Variable                 (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       0.003               0.005        0.007       -0.001
                                   (0.003)             (0.004)      (0.005)      (0.008)
Financial openness                   0.001              -0.002     3.89E-04       -0.004
                                   (0.001)             (0.007)      (0.002)      (0.007)
Constraint on executives            -0.005                0.04       -0.082        -0.01
                                   (0.036)             (0.047)      (0.059)       (0.08)
Stdebt/Reserve                       1.986               1.977        2.179        2.475
                                   (1.067)              (1.24)      (1.429)      (1.646)
Debt/GDP                             0.001               0.001        0.003        0.005
                                   (0.001)             (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.003)
(FDI+ptf)/Gross liability           -0.003              -0.004       -0.002       -0.003
                                   (0.003)             (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.005)
Inflation                         1.61E-04            1.57E-04     3.00E-04     3.11E-04
                                  1.20E-04            1.24E-04     1.59E-04     1.59E-04
Fixed ex. rate regime               -0.032              -0.078        0.315        0.248
                                   (0.205)             (0.257)      (0.278)      (0.391)
Intermediate ex. rate regime        -0.087              -0.194        0.065       -0.029
                                   (0.194)             (0.229)      (0.246)      (0.309)
Country dummy                         No                   No          Yes          Yes
Year dummy                            No                  Yes          No           Yes
No. observations                     456                 325          439          293
Source: Authors’ calculations.


Table E-2.     Results of Probit Regressions (15%)

Variable                             (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       0.002                0.005         0.004       0.004
                                   (0.002)              (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.007)
Financial openness                   0.001                0.007      1.12E-03       0.005
                                   (0.001)              (0.006)       (0.002)     (0.006)
Constraint on executives             0.012                0.034        -0.046        0.01
                                   (0.029)              (0.041)        (0.05)     (0.075)
Stdebt/Reserve                       0.988                 1.3          1.936       2.407
                                   (0.678)              (0.842)       (0.935)     (1.215)
Debt/GDP                          1.09E-04               -0.001         0.002       0.001
                                   (0.001)              (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.002)
Inflation                         1.62E-05             -1.58E-05    -1.66E-07    -3.76E-05
                                 (7.91E-05)           (8.12E-05)   (9.57E-05)   (9.58E-05)
Fixed ex. rate regime                0.069                -0.05         0.315       0.264
                                   (0.172)              (0.214)       (0.225)      (0.33)
Intermediate ex. rate regime        -0.133               -0.217         0.065      -0.004
                                   (0.177)              (0.207)       (0.215)      (0.28)
Country dummy                         No                   No            Yes         Yes
Year dummy                            No                   Yes           No          Yes
No. observations                     640                 401          629          374
Source: Authors’ calculations.



                                                 59
Table E-3.    Results of Probit Regressions (15%)

Variable                            (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       -0.001             -0.001         0.001       0.001
                                    (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.004)     (0.005)
Financial openness                    0.001              0.001      2.01E-03       0.003
                                    (0.002)            (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.003)
Low corruption                    -3.77E-04              0.016         0.051       0.058
                                    (0.056)            (0.058)       (0.088)     (0.097)
Stdebt/Reserve                        1.176              1.157         1.038       1.014
                                    (0.498)            (0.523)       (0.676)     (0.727)
Debt/GDP                           1.57E-04           3.07E-04     -4.15E-04      -0.001
                                 (4.68E-04)            (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.001)
(FDI+ptf)/Gross liability            -0.001              0.001        -0.004      -0.001
                                    (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.003)     (0.003)
Inflation                          1.48E-04           1.58E-04      2.30E-04    2.49E-04
                                 (1.13E-04)          (1.15E-04)   (1.52E-04)   (1.55E-04)
Fixed ex. rate regime                -0.149             -0.171         0.007      -0.143
                                    (0.132)            (0.139)       (0.208)     (0.228)
Intermediate ex. rate regime         -0.253             -0.289        -0.225     -0.358
                                    (0.134)            (0.141)       (0.174)      (0.19)
Country dummy                          No                 No            Yes         Yes
Year dummy                             No                 Yes           No          Yes
No. observations                    810                 751          741          673
Source: Authors’ calculations.


Table E-4.    Results of Probit Regressions (15%)

Variable                            (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       -0.002             -0.001        -0.001        0.004
                                    (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.004)      (0.005)
Financial openness                    0.002              0.002         0.003        0.005
                                    (0.001)            (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)
Low corruption                    -3.40E-02              -0.01        -0.004     2.28E-04
                                     (0.05)            (0.052)       (0.081)      (0.088)
Stdebt/Reserve                        1.031              1.047         1.199        1.116
                                    (0.394)            (0.446)       (0.601)      (0.665)
Debt/GDP                          -4.96E-05           -7.84E-05    -7.07E-04       -0.001
                                 (4.05E-04)          (4.58E-04)      (0.001)      (0.001)
Inflation                          1.35E-05           -6.31E-06     1.92E-06    -1.83E-05
                                 (7.46E-05)          (7.73E-05)   (9.55E-04)   (9.62E-04)
Fixed ex. rate regime                -0.098             -0.154         0.047       -0.133
                                    (0.119)            (0.127)       (0.182)      (0.202)
Intermediate ex. rate regime          -0.27              -0.32          -0.2        -0.36
                                    (0.125)            (0.132)       (0.167)      (0.183)
Country dummy                          No                 No            Yes          Yes
Year dummy                             No                 Yes            No          Yes
No. observations                    959                 865          906          817
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                60
Table E-5.    Results of Probit Regressions (25%)

Variable                            (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       0.002               0.003       -0.001       -0.003
                                   (0.003)             (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.009)
Financial openness                   0.001              -0.009     4.20E-04       -0.029
                                   (0.001)             (0.013)      (0.002)      (0.019)
Constraint on executives            -0.005               0.002       -0.062       -0.005
                                   (0.038)             (0.051)      (0.067)      (0.093)
Stdebt/Reserve                       1.476               0.946        1.011        1.913
                                   (1.114)             (1.418)      (1.363)       (1.91)
Debt/GDP                          1.87E-04               0.001        0.006        0.008
                                 (9.27E-04)            (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.004)
(FDI+ptf)/Gross liability           -0.004              -0.005       -0.005        -0.01
                                   (0.003)             (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.005)
Inflation                         1.94E-04            1.54E-04     3.30E-04     3.01E-04
                                 (1.18E-04)          (1.34E-04)   (1.59E-04)   (1.88E-04)
Fixed ex. rate regime                0.01               -0.016         0.3          0.35
                                   (0.215)             (0.283)      (0.292)      (0.421)
Intermediate ex. rate regime        -0.174              -0.231       -0.081       -0.188
                                   (0.206)             (0.249)      (0.267)      (0.344)
Country dummy                         No                  No           Yes          Yes
Year dummy                            No                  Yes          No           Yes
No. observations                    456                 287          426          269
Source: Authors’ calculations.


Table E-6.    Results of Probit Regressions (25%)

Variable                            (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                        0.001              0.002       -0.001       -0.004
                                    (0.002)            (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.008)
Financial openness                    0.002              0.007        0.001       -0.002
                                    (0.001)            (0.005)      (0.002)      (0.012)
Constraint on executives              0.002              0.007        -0.04        0.022
                                    (0.032)            (0.045)      (0.051)      (0.084)
Stdebt/Reserve                        1.234              1.352         1.51        2.426
                                    (0.704)            (0.937)      (1.029)       (1.33)
Debt/GDP                          -1.48E-04             -0.001        0.003        0.002
                                 (9.27E-04)            (0.001)      (0.002)      (0.002)
Inflation                          1.50E-04           8.05E-05     1.58E-04     7.22E-05
                                 (7.26E-05)          (7.76E-05)   (9.19E-05)   (9.32E-05)
Fixed ex. rate regime                 0.074              0.033        0.236        0.222
                                    (0.184)             (0.24)      (0.242)      (0.376)
Intermediate ex. rate regime         -0.169             -0.274       -0.026       -0.155
                                    (0.191)            (0.229)      (0.227)      (0.309)
Country dummy                          No                 No           Yes          Yes
Year dummy                             No                 Yes           No          Yes
No. observations                    640                 373          572          332
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                61
Table E-7.    Results of Probit Regressions (25%)

Variable                            (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                      -0.003               -0.003       0.002         0.006
                                   (0.002)              (0.002)     (0.005)       (0.006)
Financial openness                   0.001            -3.85E-04       0.001         0.001
                                   (0.002)              (0.003)     (0.002)       (0.003)
Low corruption                       0.016                 0.03        0.06         0.056
                                   (0.058)               (0.06)     (0.091)       (0.103)
Stdebt/Reserve                       1.061                1.092       0.525         0.539
                                   (0.481)              (0.556)     (0.671)       (0.796)
Debt/GDP                          3.90E-05             4.25E-04   -5.49E-04     -2.52E-04
                                 (4.92E-04)             (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
(FDI+ptf)/Gross liability           -0.004               -0.003       -0.01        -0.008
                                   (0.002)              (0.002)     (0.003)       (0.003)
Inflation                         1.53E-04             1.44E-04    2.24E-04      2.06E-04
                                 (1.12E-04)          (1.16E-04)      -0.000    (1.57E-04)
Fixed ex. rate regime               -0.166               -0.196      -0.101        -0.246
                                   (0.141)              (0.149)     (0.225)       (0.256)
Intermediate ex. rate regime        -0.373              -0.363       -0.347        -0.377
                                   (0.144)               (0.15)     (0.192)       (0.223)
Country dummy                         No                    No         Yes           Yes
Year dummy                            No                   Yes          No           Yes
No. observations                    810                 751          688          635
Source: Authors’ calculations.


Table E-8.    Results of Probit Regressions (25%)

Variable                            (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       -0.003             -0.003        -0.003        0.004
                                    (0.002)            (0.002)       (0.005)      (0.006)
Financial openness                    0.001           6.89E-04         0.002        0.001
                                    (0.001)            (0.002)       (0.001)      (0.002)
Low corruption                       -0.025              0.004         0.001       -0.014
                                    (0.052)            (0.052)       (0.084)      (0.094)
Stdebt/Reserve                        1.051              0.995         0.832        0.817
                                    (0.396)            (0.491)       (0.608)      (0.746)
Debt/GDP                          -2.13E-05           1.46E-04     -5.91E-04    -2.75E-04
                                 (4.03E-04)            (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)
Inflation                          1.30E-04           8.56E-05      1.58E-04     1.08E-04
                                 (6.43E-05)          (6.53E-05)   (8.51E-05)   (8.23E-05)
Fixed ex. rate regime                -0.184             -0.243        -0.192       -0.374
                                    (0.127)            (0.137)       (0.194)      (0.228)
Intermediate ex. rate regime         -0.375             -0.383        -0.293        -0.37
                                    (0.134)            (0.141)       (0.181)      (0.213)
Country dummy                          No                 No            Yes          Yes
Year dummy                             No                 Yes           No           Yes
No. observations
                                                                                  758
                                    959                 865          839
Source: Authors’ calculations.



                                                62
Table E-9.     Results of Probit Regressions (35%)

Variable                              (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                         0.004               0.009       -0.003        0.002
                                     (0.003)             (0.005)      (0.006)      (0.011)
Financial openness                    -0.001              -0.031       -0.003       -0.084
                                     (0.001)             (0.013)      (0.002)      (0.025)
Constraint on executives              -0.002               0.051       -0.075        0.108
                                     (0.041)             (0.051)      (0.074)      (0.094)
Stdebt/Reserve                         1.642               1.748         0.95        3.197
                                      (1.17)             (1.576)      (1.517)      (2.314)
Debt/GDP                           -3.24E-04               0.003        0.005        0.017
                                     (0.001)             (0.002)      (0.002)      (0.005)
(FDI+ptf)/Gross liability             -0.006              -0.006       -0.007       -0.013
                                     (0.003)             (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.007)
Inflation                           3.23E-04            2.41E-04     5.64E-04     6.30E-04
                                  (1.43E-04)           (1.58E-04)   (2.33E-04)   (2.72E-04)
Fixed ex. rate regime                  0.055              -0.066        0.123        0.074
                                     (0.236)             (0.313)      (0.303)      (0.464)
Intermediate ex. rate regime           0.106              -0.118        0.342        0.508
                                     (0.217)             (0.258)      (0.273)      (0.388)
Country dummy                           No                  No           Yes          Yes
Year dummy                              No                  Yes           No          Yes
No. observations                      456                 298          401          254
Source: Authors’ calculations.


Table E-10.      Results of Probit Regressions (35%)

            Variable                  (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                         0.003                0.007    1.77E-05        0.003
                                     (0.002)              (0.004)     (0.005)      (0.009)
Financial openness                 -3.97E-05               -0.002      -0.003       -0.023
                                     (0.001)              (0.006)     (0.002)      (0.018)
Constraint on executives              -0.004                0.051      -0.097        0.101
                                     (0.033)              (0.045)     (0.059)      (0.088)
Stdebt/Reserve                         0.974                 0.85       0.655        1.599
                                     (0.746)              (0.955)     (1.044)      (1.518)
Debt/GDP                           -3.50E-04            -2.24E-04       0.003        0.005
                                     (0.001)              (0.001)     (0.001)      (0.003)
Inflation                           1.09E-04             7.24E-06    7.95E-05     -3.56E-05
                                  (8.12E-05)           (7.56E-05)   (9.71E-05)   (8.29E-05)
Fixed ex. rate regime                  0.027                0.047       0.101        0.016
                                     (0.195)              (0.255)     (0.259)      (0.412)
Intermediate ex. rate regime           0.006               -0.131       0.294        0.313
                                       (0.2)              (0.239)     (0.236)      (0.338)
Country dummy                           No                    No         Yes          Yes
Year dummy                              No                   Yes         No           Yes
No. observations                      640                 365          540          294
Source: Authors’ calculations.



                                                  63
Table E-11.      Results of Probit Regressions (35%)

Variable                              (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                        -0.001              -0.001      3.31E-04       0.005
                                     (0.002)             (0.002)       (0.006)     (0.007)
Financial openness                    -0.004              -0.002     -2.00E-03      -0.001
                                     (0.004)             (0.005)       (0.004)     (0.005)
Low corruption                     -4.70E-02              -0.035        -0.042      -0.035
                                     (0.068)              (0.07)       (0.101)     (0.117)
Stdebt/Reserve                         1.471               1.557          1.6        1.744
                                      (0.51)             (0.544)       (0.726)     (0.736)
Debt/GDP                               0.001            9.13E-04      7.22E-04    8.19E-04
                                  (4.92E-04)             (0.001)       (0.001)     (0.002)
(FDI+ptf)/Gross liability             -0.005              -0.002        -0.011      -0.006
                                     (0.002)             (0.003)       (0.004)     (0.004)
Inflation                           3.09E-04            2.48E-04      4.66E-04    3.58E-04
                                  (1.33E-04)           (1.20E-04)   (2.04E-04)   (1.70E-04)
Fixed ex. rate regime                 -0.105               -0.11        -0.096      -0.233
                                     (0.156)             (0.165)       (0.245)     (0.268)
Intermediate ex. rate regime          -0.152              -0.133        -0.019      -0.079
                                     (0.153)             (0.165)       (0.204)     (0.243)
Country dummy                           No                  No           Yes          Yes
Year dummy                              No                  Yes           No          Yes
No. observations                      810                 751          665          612
Source: Authors’ calculations.


Table E-12.      Results of Probit Regressions (35%)

Variable                              (1)                 (2)          (3)          (4)

Trade openness                       -0.002                -0.001      -0.003         0.006
                                    (0.002)               (0.002)     (0.005)       (0.006)
Financial openness                   -0.002             -4.88E-04      -0.001     -4.40E-04
                                    (0.002)               (0.003)     (0.003)       (0.003)
Low corruption                       -0.069                -0.041        -0.1        -0.118
                                    (0.059)               (0.061)     (0.096)       (0.114)
Stdebt/Reserve                        1.117                 1.092       1.639         1.787
                                    (0.423)               (0.504)     (0.646)       (0.689)
Debt/GDP                              0.001              3.90E-04    5.77E-04      6.79E-04
                                  (5.83E-04)              (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
Inflation                          7.95E-05              2.52E-05    6.84E-05      3.17E-06
                                  (7.79E-05)           (6.85E-05)   (9.42E-05)   (7.88E-05)
Fixed ex. rate regime                -0.158                -0.181      -0.172        -0.287
                                    (0.139)                (0.15)     (0.209)        (0.24)
Intermediate ex. rate regime         -0.199                 -0.18       -0.04        -0.068
                                    (0.142)               (0.155)     (0.188)       (0.229)
Country dummy                          No                    No          Yes           Yes
Year dummy                             No                    Yes          No           Yes
No. observations                      959                 865          797          716
Source: Authors’ calculations.




                                                  64
REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson. 2001. “The Colonial Origins of
      Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review
      91(5) :1369--1401.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, James Robinson, and Yunyong Thaicharoen. 2003.
      “Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth.”
      Journal of Monetary Economics 50 :49--123.

Agenor, Pierre Richard, and Joshua Aizenman. 1998. “Contagion and Volatility with Imperfect
       Credit Markets.” IMF Staff Papers, 45 (2) :207--35.

Aizenman, Joshua, and Reuven Glick. 2003. “Military Expenditure, Threats and Growth.”
      Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.

Aizenman, Joshua, and Andrew Powell. 2003. “Volatility and Financial Intermediation.” Journal
      of International Money and Finance 22 (5) :657--79.

Alesina, Alberto, and Alexander Wagner. 2003. “Choosing (and Reneging on) Exchange Rate
        Regimes.” NBER Working Paper 9809. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass.

Alfaro, Laura, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Vadym Volosovych. 2003. “Why Doesn’t Capital
        Flow from Rich Countries to Poor Countries? An Empirical Investigation.” Harvard
        Business School and University of Houston.

Alston, Lee J., and Andres Gallo. 2000. “Evolution and Revolution in the Argentine Banking
        System under Convertibility: The Roles of Crises and Path Dependence.” NBER
        Working Paper 8008. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop. 2003. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
       Puzzle.” American Economic Review 93 (1): 170--92.

Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen, and Charles Wyplosz. 2003. “When Does Capital Account
        Liberalization Help More than It Hurts?” In Elhanan Helpman and Efraim Sadka, eds.,
        Economic Policy in the International Economy. Cambridge University Press.

Barro, Robert. 1991. “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics CVI (May) :407--44.

---------. 2001. “Economic Growth in East Asia Before and After the Financial Crisis.” NBER
          Working Paper 8330. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Barro, Robert, and Jong Wha Lee. 1993. “International Comparisons of Educational Attainment.”
        Journal of Monetary Economics 32 (3) :363--94.

--------. 2000. "International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implications."
          Harvard University. Processed.




                                               65
Bartolini, Leonardo, and Allan Drazen. 1997. “Capital Account Liberalization as a Signal.”
        American Economic Review 87 (1) :138--54.

Berg, Andrew, Eduardo Borensztein, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreti, and Catherine Pattillo. 1999.
       “Anticipating Balance of Payments Crises: The Role of Early Warning Systems.”
       Occasional Paper 186. International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Bencivenga, Valerie, and Bruce Smith. 1991. “Financial Intermediation and Endogenous
       Growth.” Review of Economic Studies 58 (April) :195--209.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1998. “The Capital Myth.” Foreign Affairs 77 ( 3) :7--12. Reprinted in
      Jagdish Bhagwati, 2002. The Wind of the Hundred Days: How Washington Mismanaged
      Globalization. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Biscarri, Javier Gomez, Sebastian Edwards, and Fernando Perez de Gracia. 2003. “Stock Market
        Cycles, Liberalization, and Volatility.” NBER Working Paper 9817. National Bureau of
        Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Blanco, Herminio, and Peter Garber. 1986 "Recurrent Devaluations and Speculative Attacks on
        the Mexico Peso." Journal of Political Economy 94 :148--66

Blustein, Paul. 2002. The Chastening: Inside the Crisis that rocked the Global Financial System
        and humbled the IMF. New York: Public Affairs.

Bordo, Michael D., and Anna J. Schwartz. 1997. “Why Clashes Between Internal and External
       Stability Goals End in Currency Crises, 1797--1994.” NBER Working Paper 5710.
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Bosworth, Barry, and Susan Collins. 2003. “The Empirics of Growth: An Update.” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 2:2003, 113--79 .

Breiman, Leo, Jerome H. Friedman, Richard A. Olshen, and Charles J. Stone. 1984.
       Classification and Regression Trees. New York: Chapman & Hall/CRC.

Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 1998. “Prospective Deficits and the
       Asian Currency Crisis.” NBER Working Paper 6758. National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 1999. “Hedging and Financial Fragility in Fixed Exchange Rate Regimes.” NBER
          Working Paper 7143. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Caballero, Ricardo, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2001. “A ‘Vertical’ Analysis of Crises and
        Intervention: Fear of Floating and Ex Ante Problems.” NBER Working Paper 8428.
        National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Andrew Powell. 2000. “Can Emerging Market Bank Regulators
       Establish Credible Discipline? The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999.” NBER Working
       Paper 7715. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Frederic Mishkin. 2003. “The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for
        Emerging Market Countries.” NBER Working Paper 9808. National Bureau of Economic
        Research, Cambridge, Mass.




                                               66
Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carmen Reinhart. 2001. “When Capital Inflows Come to a Sudden
        Stop: Consequences and Policy Options.” In Peter Kenen and Alexander Swoboda, eds.,
        Key Issues in Reform of the International Monetary System. Washington, D.C.:
        International Monetary Fund.

---------. 2002. “Fear of Floating.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 ( 2) :379--408.

Calvo, Guillermo A., and Carlos Vegh. 1994. "Inflation Stabilization and Nominal Anchors."
        Contemporary Economic Policy XII (April) :35--45. Reprinted in R. Barth and C. H.
        Wong, eds., 1994, Approaches to Exchange Rate Policy. Washington, D.C.: International
        Monetary Fund.

Calvo, Guillermo, Alejandro Izquierdo, and Ernesto Talvi. 2003. “Sudden Stops, The Real
        Exchange Rate, and Fiscal Sustainability: Argentina’s Lessons.” NBER Working Paper
        9828. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Calvo, Guillermo, Leo Leiderman, and Carmen Reinhart. 1996. “Inflows of Capital to
        Developing Countries in the 1990s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (2) :123--39.
Cardenas, Mauricio, and Felipe Barrera. 1997. “On the Effectiveness of Capital Controls: The
       Experience of Colombia During the 1990s.” Journal of Development Economics 54 (1)
       :27--57.

Cardoso, Eliana, and Ann Helwege. 1999. “ Currency Crisis in the 1990s: The Case of Brazil.”
       World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Cavallo, Michele, Kate Schneider Kisselev, Fabrizio Perri, and Nouriel Roubini. 2002.
        “Overshooting of Exchange Rates in Currency Crises: A Theoretical and Empirical
        Analysis.” New York University.

Caves, Richard, Jeffrey Frankel, and Ronald Jones. 2002. World Trade and Payments: An
       Introduction. Boston: Addison Wesley Longman (ninth edition).
       http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/virtualbooktour/frankel.htm
Céspedes, Luis Felipe, Roberto Chang, and Andrés Velasco. 2002. “Dollarization of Liabilities,
       Net Worth Effects and Optimal Monetary Policy.” In J. Frankel and S. Edwards, eds.,
       Preventing Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Chang, Roberto, and Andres Velasco. . 2000a. “Liquidity Crises in Emerging Markets: Theory
       and Policy.” In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
       Annual, 1999. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
---------. 2000b. “Banks, Debt Maturity and Crises.” Journal of International Economics 51 (1)
          :169--94.

--------- 2001. “A Model of Financial Crises in Emerging Markets.” Quarterly Journal of
          Economics 2                          NBER Working Paper 6606 (1998). National
          Bureau of Economic Research, Inc., Cambridge, Mass.
Chari, Anusha, and Peter Blair Henry. 2002a. “Capital Account Liberalization: Allocative
        Efficiency or Animal Spirits.” NBER Working Paper 8908. National Bureau of
        Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 2002b. “Risk Sharing and Asset Prices: Evidence from a Natural Experiment.” NBER
          Working Paper 8988. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

                                               67
Chinn, Menzie, and Hiro Ito. 2002. “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions, and Financial
       Development: Cross-Country Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 8967. National Bureau
       of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Chinn, Menzie, and Kenneth Kletzer. 2000. “International Capital Inflows, Domestic Financial
       Intermediation and Financial Crises under Imperfect Information.” NBER Working
       Paper 7902. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Chinn, Menzie, Michael Dooley, and Sona Shrestha. 1999. “Latin America and East Asia in the
       Context of an Insurance Model of Currency Crises.” NBER Working Paper 7091.
       National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Christopher Gust, and Jorge Roldos. 2002. “Monetary Policy in a
        Financial Crisis.” NBER Working Paper 9005. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass
Chucamaro, R., R. Laban, and F. Larrain. 1996. “What Determines Capital Inflows: An Empirical
      Analysis for Chile.” Catholic University of Chile, Santiago.

Cole, David, and Betty Slade. 1992. “Indonesian Financial Development: A Different
       Sequencing?” In D. Vittas, ed., Financial Regulation: Changing the Rules of the Game.
       EDI Development Studies. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Corden, W. Max. 1993. “Absorption, the Budget, and Debt: The Wonderland of Possibilities.” In
       Horse Herberg and Ngo Van Long, eds., Trade, Welfare, and Economic Policies: Essays
       in Honor of Murray C. Kemp. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

---------. 1994. “A Model of Balance of Payments Policy.” In Corden, Max. Economic Policy,
          Exchange Rates and the International Monetary System. Oxford: Oxford University
          Press.

Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini. 1999a. “Paper Tigers? A Model of the
        Asian Crisis,” NBER Working Paper 6783. Also in European Economic Review 43 (7):
        1211--36.

---------. 1999b. “What Caused the Asian Currency and Financial Crisis” Japan and the World
          Economy 11 (September): 305--73.

De Gregorio, Jose, and Pablo Guidotti. 1995. “Financial Development and Economic Growth.”
       World Development 23 (Sept.) :443--48.

De la Torre, Augusto, Eduardo Levy Yeyati, and Sergio Schmukler. 2003. “Living and Dying
        with Hard Pegs: The Rise and Fall of Argentina’s Currency Board.” Economia (Spring)
        :43--107. Reprinted in V. Alexander, J. Mélitz, and G. von Furstenberg, eds., Monetary
        Unions and Hard Pegs: Effects on Trade, Financial Development, and Stability. Oxford:
        Oxford University Press.

Dekle, Robert, and Kenneth Kletzer. 2001. “Domestic Bank Regulation and Financial Crises:
        Theory and Empirical Evidence from East Asia.” NBER Working Paper 8322. National
        Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. In Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey
        Frankel, eds., 2002, Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.




                                              68
Desai, Padma. 2003. Financial Crisis, Contagion and Containment: From Asia to Argentina.
        Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Diamond, Jared. 1997. Guns, Germs and Steel. New York: W.W. Norton and Co.

Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig. 1983. “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity.”
      Journal of Political Economy 91 (June) :401--19.

Diamond, Douglas, and Raghuram Rajan. 2000. “Banks, Short Term Debt and Financial Crises:
      Theory, Policy Implications and Applications.” NBER Working Paper 7764. National
      Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos. 1985. “Good-bye Financial Repression; Hello Financial Crash.” Journal
       of Development Economics 19 (Sept.):1--24.

Dooley, Michael. 1996. "A Survey of Literature on Controls over International Capital
       Transactions." IMF Staff Papers, 43 (4) :639--87.

---------. 1997. “A Model of Crises in Emerging Markets.” NBER Working Paper 6300. National
          Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. Also in Economic Journal 110 (460)
          (January 2000) :256--72.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1973. "Devaluation, Money and Nontraded Goods." American Economic
       Review 63 (December) :871--80.

---------. 2002. “Crises in Emerging Markets: A Primer.” In Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey
          Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of
          Chicago Press.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Alejandro Werner. 1994. “Mexico: Stabilization, Reform and No
       Growth.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 1994, 253--97

Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn, and Rodrigo Valdes. 1995. “Currency Crises and Collapses.”
       Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 2:1995, 219--93.

Drazen, Allan. 2003. “Interest Rate Defense against Speculative Attack as a Signal: A Primer.” In
        Michael Dooley and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Managing Currency Crises in Emerging
        Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Du Julan, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2003. “Does Insider Trading Raise Market Volatility?” NBER
       Working Paper 9541. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.
       Forthcoming in Economic Journal, October 2004.

                                  s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions." Quarterly
Easterly and Levine. 1997. "Africa'
        Journal of Economics CXII (4) :1203--50.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. 2002. “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments
        Influence Economic Development,” Center for Global Development Working Paper No.
        15, Washington, D.C. Forthcoming in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public
        Policy.

Easterly, William, and Sergio Rebelo. 1994. “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: An Empirical
        Investigation.” Working Paper 885. Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.



                                               69
Edison, Hali. 2000. “Do Indicators of Financial Crises Work? An Evaluation of an Early Warning
        System.” International Finance Discussion Papers No. 675. Federal Reserve Board,
        Washington, D.C.

Edison, Hali, Michael Klein, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sloek. 2002. “Capital Account
        Liberalization and Economic Peformance: Survey and Synthesis.” NBER Working Paper
        9100. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Edwards, Sebastian. 1984. “The Order of Liberalization of the External Sector in Developing
      Countries.” In Essays in International Finance, No. 156. Princeton University.

---------. 1986. “Are Devaluations Contractionary?” Review of Economics and Statistics 68 (3) :
          501--08.

---------. 1999. “ Crisis Prevention: Lessons from Mexico and East Asia.” NBER Working Paper
          7233. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 2000. "Capital Flows, Real Exchange Rates, and Capital Controls: Some Latin American
          Experiences." In Sebastian Edwards, ed., Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies.
          Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

---------. 2001. “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
          Different?” NBER Working Paper 8076. National Bureau of Economic Research,
          Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 2002. “The Great Exchange Rate Debate After Argentina.” NBER Working Paper 9257.
          National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 2003. “Exchange Rate Regimes.” In Martin Feldstein, ed., Economic and Financial
          Crises in Emerging Market Economies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Edwards, Sebastian, and Jeffrey Frankel. 2002. Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging
      Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Edwards, Sebastian, and Eduardo Levy-Yeyati. 2003. "Flexible Exchange Rates as Shock
      Absorbers." NBER Working Papers 9867. National Bureau of Economic Research,
      Cambridge, Mass.
Edwards, Sebastian, and Igal Magendzo. 2003a. “A Currency of One’s Own? An Empirical
      Investigation of Dollarization and Independent Currency Unions.” NBER Working
      Paper 9514. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 2003b. “ Strict Dollarization and Economic Peformance: An Empirical Investigation.”
          NBER Working Paper 9820. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Edwards, Sebastian, and Miguel A. Savastano. 1999. “Exchange Rates in Emerging Economies:
      What Do We Know? What Do We Need to Know?” NBER Working Paper 7228.
      National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Eichengreen, Barry. 1999. Toward a New International Financial Architecture: A Practical Post-
       Asia Agenda. Washington, D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Tamim Bayoumi. 1999. “Is Asia an Optimum Currency Area? Can It
       Become One?” In Stefan Collignon, Jean Pisani-Ferry, and Yung Chul Park, eds.,
       Exchange Rate Policies in Emerging Asian Countries. London: Routledge.


                                               70
Eichengreen, Barry, and David Leblang. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization and Growth: Was
       Mr. Mahatir Right?” NBER Working Paper 9427. National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann. 1999. “Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility.”
       NBER Working Paper 7418. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Ashoka Mody. 1999. “Lending Booms, Reserves, and the Sustainability
       of Short-Term Debt: Inferences from the Pricing of Syndicated Bank Loans.” NBER
       Working Paper 7113. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Michael Mussa. 1998. “Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical and
       Practical Aspects.” Occasional Paper No. 172, International Monetary Fund, Washington,
       D.C.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Andy Rose. 2003. “Does it Pay to Defend against a Speculative Attack?”
       In Michael Dooley and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Managing Currency Crises in Emerging
       Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Eichengreen, Barry, and Alan Taylor. 2003. “The Monetary Consequences of a Free Trade Area
       of the Americas.” NBER Working Paper 9666. National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Cambridge, Mass.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza. 2003. “The Pain of Original Sin.” Inter-
        American Development Bank, Washington, D.C.

Eichengreen, Barry, Andy Rose, and Charles Wyplosz. 1995. "Exchange Market Mayhem: The
       Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks." Economic Policy 21 :249--96.

Engerman, Stanley, and Kenneth Sokoloff. 1997. “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
      Differential Paths of Growth among New World Economies: A View from Economic
      Historians of the United States.” In Stephen Haber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind.
      Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press.
ESRI (Environmental Systems Research Institute Inc.) 1996. ArcWorld Supplement Database.
       Redlands, Calif.

Fischer, Stanley. 2001. “Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct?” Journal of
        Economic Perspectives 15 (2) :3--24.

---------. 2004a. “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF.” In Stanley Fischer,
          IMF Essays from a Time of Crisis: The International Financial System, Stabilization, and
          Development. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

---------. 2004b. IMF Essays. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Flood, Robert, and Rebecca Coke. 2000. “Is ‘Predicted Currency Crisis’ an Oxymoron?”
        International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Flood, Robert, and Peter Garber. 1984. “Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
        Examples.” Journal of International Economics 17 (August) :1--14.




                                                  71
Flood, Robert, and Nancy Marion. 1996. “Speculative Attacks: Fundamentals and Self-Fulfilling
        Prophecies.” NBER Working Paper 5789. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass.

---------. 1999. “Perspectives on the Recent Currency Crisis Literature.” IMF Working Paper
          98/130. In International Journal of Finance and Economics 4 (1) :1-26. Also in
          Guillermo Calvo, Rudiger Dornbusch, and Maurice Obstfeld, eds., 2001, Money, Capital
          Mobility, and Trade: Essays in Honor of Robert Mundell. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

---------. 2002. “A Model of the Joint Distribution of Banking and Currency Crises.” International
          Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Forbes, Kristin. 2003. “One Cost of the Chilean Capital Controls: Increased Financial Constraints
        for Smaller Firms,” NBER Working Paper 9777. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass.
Frankel, Jeffrey. 1999a. “No Single Exchange Rate Regime is Right for All Countries or at All
        Times.” Essays in International Finance, No. 215. Princeton University.
---------. 1999b. “Proposals Regarding Restrictions on Capital Flows.” African Finance Journal
             Volume 1, Part 1: 92--104.
----------. 2001. “The Balance between Adjustment and Financing.” In P. Kenen and A. Swoboda,
          eds., Key Issues in Reform of the International Monetary System. Washington, D.C.:
          International Monetary Fund.

----------. 2004. “Experience of and Lessons from Exchange Rate Regimes in Emerging
          Economies.” In Takatoshi Ito and Yung Chul Park, eds., Monetary and Financial
          Cooperation in East Asia: The Way Ahead, Volume 2. New York: Palgrave Macmillan
          Press.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer. 1999. “Does Trade Cause Growth?”American Economic
        Review 89 (3) :379--99.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose. 1996. “Currency Crashes in Emerging Markets: An
        Empirical Treatment.” Journal of International Economics 41(3/4) :351--66.
----------. 2002. “Estimating the Effects of Currency Unions on Trade and Output.” Quarterly
             Journal of Economics CXVII (2) :437--66.
Furman, Jason, and Joseph Stiglitz. 1998. “Economic Crisis: Evidence and Insights from East
       Asia.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2:1998, 1--135.

Gallego, Francisco, Leonardo Hernandez, and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel. 1999. “Capital Controls in
       Chile: Effective? Efficient?” Working Paper 59. Central Bank of Chile, Santiago.
Gallup, John, Jeffrey Sachs, and Andrew Messenger. 1998. “Geography and Economic
        Development.” NBER Working Paper 6849. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass. In International Science Review 22 (2) (August 1999): 179--232.

Gelos, R. Gaston, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2002. “Transparency and International Investor Behavior.”
        NBER Working Paper 9260. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Ghosh, Atish, Anne-Marie Gulde, and Holger Wolf. 2000. “Currency Boards: More than a Quick
       Fix?” Economic Policy 31 (October) :270--335.


                                               72
Gleditsch, Nil Peter, Peter Wallensteen, Mikael Eriksson, Margareta Sollenberg, and Håvard
        Strand. 2002. “Armed Conflict 1946–2001: A New Dataset.” Journal of Peace Research
        39 (5) :615–37.

Glick, Reuven, and Michael Hutchison. 2002. “Capital Controls and Exchange Rate Instability in
        Developing Economies.” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Center for Pacific
        Basin Monetary and Economic Studies Working Paper PB00-05 (revised December
        2002).

Glick, Reuven, and Andrew Rose. 2001. “Does a Currency Union Affect Trade? The Time Series
        Evidence.” NBER Working Paper 8396. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass. In European Economic Review (June 2002) 46 (6) :1125--51.

Goldstein, Morris, and Philip Turner. 2004. Controlling Currency Mismatches in Emerging
        Economies: An Alternative to the Original Sin Hypothesis. Washington, D.C: Institute for
        International Economics.

Goldstein, Morris, Graciela Kaminsky, and Carmen Reinhart. 2000. Assessing Financial
        Vulnerability: An Early Warning System for Emerging Economies. Washington, D.C.:
        Institute for International Economics.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Olivier Jeanne. 2003. “The Elusive Gains from International
       Financial Integration.” NBER Working Paper 9684. National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Guidotti, Pablo. 2003. In Jose Antonio Gonzalez, Vittorio Corbo, Anne Krueger, and Aaron
        Tornell, eds., Latin American Macroeconomic Reforms: The Second Stage. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.

Hall, Robert, and Chad Jones. 1999. “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
        per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (1): 83--116.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Michael Gavin, Carmen Pages-Serra, and Ernesto Stein. 1999. “Why Do
      Countries Float the Way They Do?” Presented at conference on New Initiatives to Tackle
      International Financial Turmoil. Inter-American Development Bank Annual Meetings of
      the Board of Governors, Paris.

Henry, Peter Blair. 2003. “Capital Account Liberalization, the Cost of Capital, and Economic
       Growth, NBER Working Paper 9488. National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Cambridge, Mass.

Hutchison, Michael M. 2003. “A Cure Worse Than the Disease? Currency Crises and the Output
       Costs of IMF-Supported Stabilization Programs.” In Michael Dooley and Jeffrey
       Frankel, eds., Managing Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2003. Report on Capital Account Crises of the IMF
       Independent Evaluations Office. Washington, D.C.: IMF.

International Country Risk Group (ICRG). 1994-2003. Corruption Ratings.
         http://www.icrgonline.com/page.aspx?page=icrgmethods

Ito, Takatoshi. 2002. "Asian Currency Crises, Five Years Later: Retrospect of Thailand,
        Malaysia, Indonesia, Philippines and Korea." Presented at conference on Financial


                                              73
       Sector Reform Across Asia, Center for Business and Government, December, Harvard
       University.

Jeanne, Olivier. 2000. “Currency Crises: A Perspective on Recent Theoretical Developments.”
        Special Papers in International Economics, No. 20. Princeton University.

Johnson, Simon, and Todd Mitton. 2003. “Cronyism and Capital Controls: Evidence from
       Malaysia.” Journal of Financial Economics 67 (2) :351--82.

Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff. 2002. “Property Rights and
       Finance.” American Economic Review 92 (5) :1335--56.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman. 2000. “Corporate Governance
       in the Asian Financial Crisis.” Journal of Financial Economics 58 (1) :141--84.

Kamin, Steven. 1988. “Devaluation, External Balance, and Macroeconomic Performance: A
       Look at the Numbers.” Studies in International Finance, No. 62. Princeton University.

Kaminsky, Graciela, and Sergio Schmukler. 2003. “Short-run Pain, Long-run Gain: The Effects
      of Financial Liberalization.” NBER Working Paper 9787. National Bureau of Economic
      Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Kaminsky, Graciela, S. Lizondo, and C. Reinhart. 1998. “Leading Indicators of Currency Crises.”
      IMF Staff Papers, 5 (1) :1--48.
Kharas, Homi, Brian Pinto, and Sergei Ulatov. 2001. “An Analysis of Russia’s 1998 Meltdown:
        Fundamentals and Market Signals.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:2001, 1--
        68.
King Robert, and Ross Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3) :717--37.

Klein, Michael. 2003. “Capital Account Openness and the Variety of Growth Experience.” NBER
        Working Paper 9500. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Klein, Michael, and Nancy Marion. 1997. “Explaining the Duration of Exchange-Rate Pegs.”
        Journal of Development Economics 54 (2) :387--404.

Klein, Michael, and Giovanni Olivei. 2000. “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
        Development, and Economic Growth.” NBER Working Paper 7384. National Bureau of
        Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar Prasad, and Marco Terrones. 2002. "Financial Integration and
       Macroeconomic Volatility." Paper prepared for Annual Research Conference,
       International Monetary Fund.

Krugman, Paul. 1979. “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises.” Journal of Money, Credit &
      Banking 11 (3) :311--25. Reprinted in Paul Krugman, ed., 1992, Currencies and Crises.
      Cambridge and London: MIT Press.

---------. 1998a. "What Happened to Asia?” http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/DISINTER.html

---------. 1998b. “Latin America’s Swan Song.” http://web.mit.edu/krugman/www/swansong.html




                                              74
---------. 1999. “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem and Financial Crises.” In P. Isard, A.
          Razin, and A. Rose, eds., International Finance and Financial Crises: Essays in Honor
          of Robert Flood. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Lahiri, Amartya, and Carlos A. Végh. 2000. “Delaying the Inevitable: Optimal Interest Rate
        Policy and BOP Crises.” NBER Working Paper 7734. National Bureau of Economic
        Research, Cambridge, Mass.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2003. “What Works in
        Securities Markets?” NBER Working Paper 9882. National Bureau of Economic
        Research, Cambridge, Mass.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1998. “Law
        and Finance.” Journal of Political Economy 106 (6) 1113--55.

---------. 1999. “Investor Protection: Origins, Consequences, and Reform.” NBER Working Paper
          7428. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. In Journal of
          Financial Economics 58 (12) (October 2000): 3--27.

Larrain, Felipe, and Andres Velasco. 2001. “Exchange Rate Policy in Emerging Markets: The
        Case for Floating.” Studies in International Finance, No. 224. Princeton University.

Levine, Ross, and Sergio Schmukler. 2003. “Migration, Spillovers and Diversion: Impact of
        Internationalization on Stock Market Liquidity.” NBER Working Paper 9614. National
        Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Levy-Yeyati, Eduardo, and Federico Sturzenegger. 2003. “To Float or to Trail: Evidence on the
      Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes.” American Economic Review 93 (4) :41173--93.

Lipsey, Robert E. 2001. Foreign Direct Investors in Three Financial Crises. Working Paper
        8084. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Lizondo, Saul, and Peter Montiel. 1989. "Contractionary Devaluation in Developing Countries:
       An Analytical Survey." IMF Staff Papers, 36 (March) :182--227.
Manasse, Paolo, Nouriel Roubini, and Axel Schimmelpfennig.2003. “Predicting Sovereign Debt
      Crises.” IMF Working Paper 03/221. International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
Martin, Philippe, and Helene Rey. 2002. “Financial Globalization and Emerging Markets: With
        or Without Crash?” NBER Working Paper 9288. National Bureau of Economic Research,
        Cambridge, Mass.

Masson, Paul. 2001. “Exchange Rate Regime Transitions.” Journal of Development Economics
       64 (2) :571--86.

McKinnon, Ronald. 1991. The Order of Economic Liberalization: Financial Control in the
      Transition to a Market Economy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

McKinnon, Ronald, and Huw Pill. 1997. “Credible Economic Liberalizations and
      Overborrowing.” American Economic Review 87 (2) :189--93.

McQuillan, Lawrence, and Peter Montgomery, eds. 1999. The International Monetary Fund:
       Financial Medic to the World? Stanford, Calif.: Hoover Institution Press.
Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria, and Assaf Razin. 1997. “Sharp Reductions in Current Account
        Deficits: An Empirical Analysis.” NBER Working Paper 6310. National Bureau of

                                               75
        Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. Also in European Economic Review 42 (3--5)
        (May 1998) :897--908.

---------. 1998. “Current Account Reversals and Currency Crises: Empirical Regularities.” NBER
          Working Paper 6620. . National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.
          Reprinted in Paul Krugman, ed., 2000, Currency Crises. Chicago: University of Chicago
          Press.

Mendoza, Enrique. 2002. “Why Should Emerging Economies Give up National Currencies: A
      Case for '
               Institutions Substitution.'
                                         ” NBER Working Paper 8950. National Bureau of
      Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Mishkin, Frederic S. 2001. “Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises in
       Emerging Market Countries.” NBER Working Paper 8087. National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 1998. “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling
        Crises.” American Economic Review 88 (3): 587--97.

Morris, Stephen, and Hyun Song Shin. 2001. “Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomic
        Modeling.” In Ben S. Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds., NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
        2000. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Mussa, Michael. 2002. Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy. Washington, D.C.:
       Institute for International Economics.

Noguer, Marta, and Marc Siscart. 2002. “Trade Raises Income: A Precise and Robust Result.”
       Department of Economics, New York University.

Obstfeld, Maurice. “The Logic of Currency Crises.” 1994. Cahiers Economiques et Monetaires
        43 :189--213.

---------. 1996. “Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features.” European Economic
          Review 40 (April): 1037--47.

---------. 1998. “Destabilizing Effects of Exchange-Rate Escape Clauses.” NBER Working Paper
          3603. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff. 1995. "The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates." Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 9 (Fall) :73--96.

Pinto, Brian, Evsey Gurvich, and Sergei Ulatov. 2004. “Lessons from the Russian Crisis of 1998
        and Recovery” (chapter 10, this volume).

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoff, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose. 2003. “Effects of Financial
        Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence.” Occasional paper
        No. 220, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C. Downloadable at
        http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/nft/op/220/index.htm.

Prati, Alessandro, and Massimo Sbracia. 2002. “Currency Crises and Uncertainty About
         Fundamentals.” International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Quinn, Dennis, 1997 “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,” American
       Political Science Review 91 (September): 531--51.

                                               76
Radelet, Steven, and Jeffrey Sachs. 1998. "The East Asian Financial Crisis: Diagnosis, Remedies,
        Prospects." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1998, 1--74 and 88--90.

Rajan, Ramkishen, 2001, “(Ir)relevance of ?Currency-Crisis Theory to the Devaluation and
        Collapse of the Thai Baht.” Princeton Studies in International Economics, No. 88.
        Princeton University.

Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka, Chi-Wa Yuen. 2001. “Why International Equity Flows to Emerging
        Markets are Inefficient and Small Relative to International Debt Flows.” NBER Working
        Paper 8659. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Reinhart, Carmen, and Vincent Reinhart. 2003. “Twin Fallacies about Exchange Rate Policy in
       Emerging Markets.” NBER Working Paper 9670. National Bureau of Economic
       Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. 2002. “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
       Arrangements: A Reinterpretation.” NBER Working Paper 8963. National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Reinhart, Carmen M., and R. Todd Smith. 2001. “Temporary Controls on Capital Inflows.”
       NBER Working Paper 8422. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Reinhart, Carmen, Kenneth Rogoff, and Miguel Savastano. 2003. “Debt Intolerance.” NBER
       Working Paper 9908. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik. 2001. “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic'
                                                                                         s
       Guide to the Cross-National Evidence.” In Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.
       NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Rodrik, Dani. 1998. "Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?" In Essays in International
        Finance No. 207. Princeton University.

Rodrik, Dani, and Ethan Kaplan. 2002. “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” In
        Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Preventing Currency Crises in Emerging
        Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Rodrik, Dani, and Andres Velasco. 2000. “Short-Term Capital Flows.” In Annual World Bank
        Conference on Development Economics 1999. Washington, D.C: World Bank.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. 2002. “Institutions Rule: The Primacy
        of Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development.” NBER
        Working Paper 9305. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Rose, Andrew. 2000. “One Money, One Market: Estimating the Effect of Common Currencies
       on Trade.” Economic Policy 30 (April): 9--45.

---------. 2001. “Common Currency Areas in Practice.” In Revisiting the Case for Flexible
          Exchange Rates. Ottawa: Bank of Canada.

---------. 2002. “One Reason Countries Pay Their Debts: Renegotiation and International Trade.”
          NBER Working Paper 8853. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.




                                               77
Roubini, Nouriel, Paolo Manasse, Richard Hemming, and Axel Schimmelpfennig. 2003. “An
       Early Warnings Model of Sovereign Debt Crises: A Panel Data Econometric Estimation
       for the 1970--2000 Period.” International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.

Sachs, Jeffrey. 1986 “Managing the LDC Debt Crisis.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
        2:1986, 397--432.

---------. 1998. “The IMF and the Asian Flu.” The American Prospect 37 (March-April): 16--21.

---------. 2003. “Institutions Don’t Rule: Direct Effects of Geography on Per Capita Income.”
          NBER Working Paper 9490. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner. 1995. "Economic Reform and the Process of Global
        Integration." Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1995, 1--95.

Sachs, Jeffrey, Aaron Tornell, and Andres Velasco. 1996. “Financial Crises in Emerging
        Markets: The Lessons from 1995.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:1996, 147-
        216.

---------. 1996. “The Collapse of the Mexican Peso: What Have We Learned?” Economic Policy
          22 (April): 13-63.
Salant, Stephen, and Dale Henderson. 1978. "Market Anticipation of Government Policies and
        the Price of Gold." Journal of Political Economy 86 (4) :627--48.
Salter, W. E. G. 1959. “Internal and External Balance–The Role of Price and Expenditure
        Effects.” Economic Record August :226--38 (Australia).

Schneider, Martin, and Aaron Tornell. 2000. “Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and
       Financial Crises,” NBER Working Paper 8060. National Bureau of Economic Research,
       Cambridge, Mass.

Servén, Luis, and Guillermo Perry. 2004. “Argentina’s Macroeconomic Collapse: Causes and
        Lessons ” (chapter 11, this volume).

Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Wolfenson. 2000. “Investor Protection and Equity Markets.” NBER
        Working Paper 7974. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Swan, Trevor. 1963. "Longer Run Problems of the Balance of Payments." In H. W. Arndt and W.
       M. Corden, eds., The Australian Economy. Melbourne: Cheshire.

Temple, Jonathan. 1999. “The New Growth Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature 37 (1):
       112--56.

Tenreyro, Silvana, and Robert J. Barro. 2003. “Economic Effects of Currency Unions.” NBER
       Working Paper 9435. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.

Ücer, Murat, and Caroline Van Rijckeghem. 2004. Murder on the Orient Express: The Turkish
        Currency Crises of 2000-01. Revised as A Chronicle of Sudden Death: The Turkish
        Financial Crises of 2000--01. Istanbul: Bogazici University Press.

Ul Haq, Mahbub, Inge Kaul, and Isabelle Grunberg, eds. 1996. The Tobin Tax: Coping with
       Financial Volatility. New York: Oxford University Press.




                                               78
Valdes-Prieto, S., and M. Soto. 1996. “New Selective Capital Controls in Chile: Are They
       Efficient?” Catholic University of Chile, Santiago.
Velasco, Andres. 1996. “When Are Fixed Exchange Rates Really Fixed?” NBER Working Paper
       5842. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. Also in Journal of
       Development Economics 54 (1) (1997): 5--25.
Wei, Shang-Jin, 2000a. "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?" Review of
       Economics and Statistics 82 (1) :1--11. Downloadable at www.nber.org/~wei.

---------. 2000b. "Domestic Crony Capitalism and International Fickle Capital: Is There a
          Connection?" World Bank - Country Economics Department Paper 2429. In
          International Finance 4 (Spring) (2001): 15--46. Downloadable at
          http://www.brook.edu/dybdocroot/views/articles/wei/20010409.pdf.
---------. 2000c. “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows.” Brookings Papers on Economic
          Activity 2:2000, 303--54. Downloadable at www.nber.org/~wei.

Wei, Shang-Jin, and Yi Wu. 2002. “Negative Alchemy: Corruption, Composition of Capital
       Flows, and Currency Crises.” In Sebastian Edwards and Jeffrey Frankel, eds., Preventing
       Currency Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Willett, Thomas. 2000. “International Financial Markets as Sources of Crises or Discipline: The
         Too Much, Too Late Hypothesis." Essays in International Finance, No. 218. Princeton
         University.

Williamson, John. 2001. “The Case for a Basket, Band and Crawl (BBC) Regime for East Asia.”
       In David Gruen and John Simon, eds., Future Directions for Monetary Policies in East
       Asia. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.
Wyplosz, Charles. 2001. “How Risky is Financial Liberalization in the Developing Countries?"
      G-24 Discussion Paper Series No. 14, United Nations, New York and Geneva.




                                               79
Endnotes

1
  “Sudden stop” refers to any abrupt cut-off of foreign willingness to hold liabilities of the domestic
country. The phrase originated with Rudiger Dornbusch (see, for example, Dornbusch, Goldfain, and
Valdes 1995), but was further popularized by Guillermo Calvo (see, for example, Calvo and Reinhart
2001).
2
   A note on semantics. The distinction between the first and second generation models of speculative
attacks is widely agreed. See, for example, Flood and Marion (1999), which is a survey of the literature;
Flood and Marion (1996); or Jeanne (2000). But there is less of a consensus as to what constitutes the
third generation. This chapter uses the distinction that seems the most useful (multiple equilibria vs.
structural flaws).
3
   Even after 1995, some economists continued to attribute currency crises to macroeconomic
fundamentals. See Bordo and Schwartz (1997) or Mishkin (2001).

4
     Flood and Garber (1984); Flood and Marion (2002); Morris and Shin (1998, 2001).
5
    Obstfeld (1994).
6
 Diamond and Dybvig (1983). An international version is Chang and Velasco (2000a, b) and Velasco
(1996).
7
    Obstfeld (1996, 1998).

8
 Even before the East Asia crises, this diagnosis was offered by a precious few far-sighted economists:
Diaz-Alejandro (1985); McKinnon and Pill (1997); and Dooley (1997, 2000). As usual, Krugman (1998a,
b) produced an influential analysis. Those writing after the crisis began also include Corsetti, Pesenti, and
Roubini (1999a,b); Chinn, Dooley, and Shrestha (1999); and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (1998,
1999).
9
  Diaz-Alejandro (1985). A “no bailout” declaration lacks credibility, particularly in the case of domestic
banks. When the crisis comes, the pressure for the government to rescue insolvent banks will be irresistible
for two reasons. First, most depositors are small savers, not sophisticated investors. Second, bank failures
can have a devastating effect on the rest of the economy, particularly because banks constitute the
payments system.

10
     Empirical tests include Blanco and Garber (1986) and Prati and Sbracia (2002).
11
     For example, Edwards (1999) found that current account ratios are of little use in predicting crisis.
12
  Reinhart, Rogoff, and Savastano (2003) call these “debt intolerant” countries, and attribute the problem
to histories of default and inflation.
13
  Frankel and Rose (1996), writing before the East Asia crisis, found that the composition of capital inflow
matters for currency crashes (more than the total). Short-term bank debt raises the probability of crash; FDI
and reserves lower the probability.
14
  Other important contributions include Rodrik and Velasco (2000); Edison (2000); Goldstein, Kaminsky,
and Reinhart (2000); and Roubini, Manasse, Hemming, and Schimmelpfennig (2003). In the calculations
of Berg and others (1999), the studies done before the Asian crisis did not perform very well post-sample.
Flood and Coke (2000) criticize the exercise as inherently flawed.




                                                        80
15
  Lahiri and Végh (2000); Christiano, Gust, and Roldos (2002); Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2001);
Drazen (2003); Eichengreen and Rose (2003).

 16
   Barro (2001) estimates that the combined currency and banking crises in East Asia in 1997--98 reduced
 economic growth in the affected countries over a five-year period by 3 percent per year, compared to 2
 percent per year for more typical crises.

17
     Salter (1959); Swan (1963); Dornbusch (1973); Corden (1994).

18
     For example, Furman and Stiglitz (1998) and Sachs (1998).
19
     Fischer (2004b).
20
     Krugman (1998b); Frankel (2001).
21
     Who sought to explain, respectively, currency crises in European countries and in developing countries.

22
  Wyplosz (2001), rather than simply adding the two components of this "exchange market pressure"
index, assigns weights to their movements according to their inverse variability.

23
  Some citation of background and evidence beyond an appeal to table 1 and the authors’ perceptions, is
desirable. Overviews of the recent crises in emerging markets include Blustein (2002); Calvo, Leiderman,
and Reinhart (1996); Desai (2003); Eichengreen (1999); Ito (2002); Radelet and Sachs (1998); and Willett
(2000). Two retrospective exercises have been designed to shed light on competing propositions
regarding the roles played by policy decisions. The Report on Capital Account Crises of the IMF
Independent Evaluations Office (IMF 2003) sought to evaluate the many claims of errors on the part of the
IMF, including claims of errors in the policies imposed on client countries, such as the critiques collected in
McQuillan and Montgomery (1999). The NBER Project on Exchange Rate Crises in Emerging Market
Countries [covered the roles of national policymakers and other players (http://www.nber.org/crisis/); it
included eight meetings on the specifics of crises in eight of these countries. Both informed this section of
this study. Selected further references to some individual country cases are given below.

24
  In table 1, the column showing exchange rate flexibility offers some support for the hypothesis that
exchange rate flexibility is useful. Taiwan, Province of China, was able largely to avoid the East Asian
crisis by devaluing at the first sign of trouble in 1997, while Argentina, the most firmly fixed of the group,
again had the worst recession. Thus in a later section, this study tests the effect of exchange rate flexibility
as one of the base-case hypotheses.
25
     Dornbusch and Werner (1994); Sachs, Tornell, and Velasco (1996).
26
     Rajan (2001).
27
     Kharas, Pinto, and Ulatov (2001). See also chapter 10 of this volume (Pinto, Gurvich, and Ulatov 2004).
28
     Cardoso and Helwege (1999).

29
     Ücer and Van Rijckeghem (2004) and http://www.nber.org/crisis/turkey_report.html.

30
     2.8 for Argentina, as compared to 3.1 for the countries in the table or 3.0 for the full sample.
31
  Mussa (2002); De la Torre, Levy Yeyati, and Schmukler (2003). See also chapter 11 of this volume
(Servén and Perry 2004).


                                                         81
32
  There is only one data point of a country that responded to a sudden stop by clearly opting to thumb its
nose at the IMF and put on capital controls: Malaysia. As noted above, the case is controversial.
Malaysia' s economic performance by the various measures was quite good (it does not even show up in
table 1 as having experienced a crisis). At the very least, the prediction that this choice would spell doom
for Malaysia can be ruled out. Nevertheless, this case cannot be ruled as a definitive demonstration of the
advantages of capital controls, in part because they were imposed after the worst of the Asian crisis.
33
  The regression tree also generates branches that have no terminal nodes with crisis probability of 50
percent or higher. This study “prunes” the tree to leave out these branches, so the presentation is cleaner
and more manageable.
34
     For example, Wei and Wu (2002).
35
     For example, Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999).
36
     Krugman (1998b); Frankel (2001).
37
  The War variable is in the equation largely to take into account the experience of many African
countries. Easterly and Levine (1997), for example, find a large role for ethnic conflict. Aizenman and
Glick (2003) point out that one needs to control for both military spending and threats.
38
 Those carrying on the tradition of Goldsmith include Bencivenga and Smith (1991), De Gregorio and
Guidotti (1995), and King and Levine (1993), among many others.
39
  The intermediate regimes still have their supporters, such as Williamson (2001). Frankel (2004)
includes a skeptical account of the “rise and fall of the corners hypothesis.”
40
  For example, as surveyed in Bosworth and Collins (2003). Investment turns out to be an unreliable
measure of additions to the capital stock, and the quantity of education turns out to be much less powerful
than the quality. (This study also tried literacy, but it performed worse than years of secondary schooling.)
41
  The data are from the BIS and refer only to bank loans. Nothing else is available at higher frequency
than annual.
42
  The expression “proves the rule” is used in its original and proper meaning of “puts the rule to a difficult
test,” rather than the common modern usage of “seems to violate the rule, but we can’t know why.”
43
  For example, comments by Arminio Fraga and Ilan Golfajn at a NBER conference in 2000 on Brazil
http://www.nber.org/crisis/brazil_report.html. covered the roles of national policymakers and other players
(http://www.nber.org/crisis/).
44
  Other factors may also help explain why the Brazilian economy exceeded expectations after the
devaluation, including worldwide reductions in interest rates in the interim, and the confidence-boosting
appointment of Arminio Fraga as central bank governor.
45
     Hutchison (2003) finds no difference.

46
 For example, Sachs and Warner (1995), Frankel and Romer (1999), and Noguer and Siscart (2002).
With a critique by Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001).

47
     Diamond (1997); Gallup, Sachs, and Messenger (1998); Hall and Jones (1999); Sachs (2003).




                                                     82
48
  Among the most important recent contributions are Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001); Barro
(1991); Easterly and Levine (2002); Engerman and Sokoloff, (1997); and Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi
(2002).
49
   Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff (2002). Examples for equity markets include La Porta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, and Shleifer (2003); Shleifer and Wolfenson (2000); and La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny (1999).

50
   Wei (2000a, b, c) and Gelos and Wei (2002) find that investors respond negatively to corruption. Du
and Wei (2003) find that countries with more insider trading have more variable stock markets. Alfaro,
Kalemli-Ozcan, and Volosovych (2003) find that the explanation for the Lucas paradox---why so little
capital flowed to “developing” countries during the period 1978--98---is low institutional quality,
specifically weak protection of property rights, rather than low human capital. Johnson, Boone, Breach, and
Friedman (2000) find that those East Asian countries with the least protection for investor rights suffered the
greatest declines in currency values and stock markets in the crises of 1997--98.
51
  Reviews of issues concerning the choice of currency regime, particularly for developing countries,
include Edwards (2003); Frankel (1999a, 2004); Larrain and Velasco (2001); and Edwards and Savastano
(1999).
52
   Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2000) find that currency board countries outperform others. Such findings
have generally changed, however, with the collapse of Argentina’s convertibility arrangement in 2002.

53
  Edwards and Magendzo (2003a, 2003b) find that dollarization and currency unions have delivered lower
inflation, as promised, but with higher income volatility.

54
  Guillermo Calvo and Carlos Vegh (1994) show that the end of stabilizations that rely on a pegged
exchange rate has often led subsequently to dramatic balance of payment crises.

55
     Mendoza (2002).

56
     Alston and Gallo (2000); Calomiris and Powell (2000).

57
     Edwards (2002).

58
     Rose (2000); Glick and Rose (2001); Frankel and Rose (2002).

59
     Tenreyro and Barro (2003); Anderson and van Wincoop (2003).

60
   Monetary unions are more often adopted for political reasons than economic, as Eichengreen and Taylor
(2003) point out.
61
   Among peggers, terms of trade shocks are amplified and long-run growth is reduced, as compared to
flexible-rate countries, according to Edwards and Levy-Yeyati (2003).

62
     Fischer (2001).

63
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2002); Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2001)




                                                      83
64
     Calvo and Reinhart (2002).
65
   Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995) report that only six major economies with open capital markets, in addition
to a number of very small economies, had maintained a fixed exchange rate for five years or more, as of
1995. Klein and Marion (1997) report that the mean duration of pegs among Western Hemisphere countries
is about 10 months.
66
   To oversimplify a bit, Levy-Yeyati and Sturzenegger (2003) show floaters outperforming their
competitors. Ghosh, Gulde, and Wolf (2000) show hard peggers performing the best. Reinhart and Rogoff
(2002) show intermediate regimes in the lead.

67
     All these issues are reviewed in Frankel (2004).

40
     Alesina and Wagner (2003); Calvo and Mishkin (2003).

69
  The reference is to the 1995 study by Obstfeld and Rogoff, "The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates."
But Calvo and Reinhart’s “Fear of Floating” (2002) has done the same for floating, and the corners
hypothesis did the same for the intermediate regimes (see, for example, Fischer 2001).

70
     Masson (2001) shows that the corners are not in fact “absorbing states.”

71
     Reinhart and Reinhart (2003)

72
  Overviews include Dooley (1996); Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sloek (2002); Eichengreen and Mussa
(1998); Fischer (2004a); Frankel (1999b); Eichengreen and Leblang (2003); Rodrik (1998); and Prasad,
Rogoff, Wei, and Kose (2003).

73
     Bartolini and Drazen (1997).

74
   Chari and Henry ( 2002a, 2002b); Henry (2003). Gourinchas and Jeanne (2003) estimate the gains from
financial integration at about 1 percent (of consumption), which they consider small.
75
  Prasad and others (2003) marks an important acknowledgement by the IMF that evidence on this
question is mixed.
76
     Among many such critiques are Bhagwati (1998), Furman and Stiglitz (1998), and Sachs (1998).

77
   Some have sought to apply the Tobin tax idea to currency crises in developing countries, although it is
not what Tobin had in mind. The chapters in ul Haq, Kaul, and Grunberg (1996) are among the few
serious attempts to address the specific Tobin tax proposal.

78
   Biscarri, Edwards, and Perez de Gracia (2003). Kose, Prasad, and Terrones (2002) find that increasing
financial openness is associated with rising volatility, and that the smoothing benefits of financial
integration begin to kick in only after a certain threshold is reached.

79
     Klein and Olivei (2000); Edwards (2001).

80
     Martin and Rey (2002).


                                                        84
81
   Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2003). They reject the claim that it is the level of development per se
that matters for the usefulness of financial opening. Wyplosz (2001) concludes that the reason financial
liberalization seems to work for developed countries and not developing countries is that the latter are more
likely to suffer from excessive growth of domestic credit.
82
     Chinn and Ito (2002); La Porta, Lopes-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998).

83
   Klein’s (2003) finding that financial liberalization is more successful in countries with good institutions
is not necessarily corroborated by others such as Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2003) and Edison and
others (2002).

84
     Wei and Wu (2002).

85
    Edwards (1984) and McKinnon (1991), or, more recently, Kaminsky and Schmukler (2003). Indonesia
tried early liberalization of international flows (see Cole and Slade 1992). The subsequent crisis is
probably a good vindication of the early conventional wisdom.

86
  Johnson and Mitton (2003) find that Malaysian capital controls mainly worked to provide a screen
behind which politically favored firms could be supported.

87
   Forbes (2003) finds that Chile’s famous controls on capital inflows raised the cost of capital for small
firms, in particular. For Reinhart and Smith (2001), the main problem is being able to remove the controls
at the right time. On the other hand, Levine and Schmukler (2003) find, for 55 countries, that when some
firms are able to raise equity capital abroad, the remaining firms lose liquidity.

88
  See also Sebastian Edwards, “Capital Controls Are Not the Reason for Chile’s Success.” Wall Street
Journal, April 3, 1998, p. A19.

89
   Chucamaro, Laban, and Larrain (1996); Valdes-Prieto and Soto (1996). A more recent study finds
effects on both the level of net inflows and the currency composition (Gallego, Hernandez, and
Schmidt-Hebbel 1999). Also, for the case of Colombia, see Cardenas and Barrera (1997).

90
   That capital controls may come and go could as easily be the outcome of undesirable political
constraints as of intelligent policymaking. Much as the choice of exchange rate regime, the choice of
capital account regime is less permanent and more endogenous than economists usually consider.

91
     Rose (2002) offers evidence in support of this proposition.

92
  Sachs (1986). Many have argued that Argentina’s low trade/GDP ratio helps explain why it was such a
victim of the global sudden stop after 1998 (see, for example, Calvo, Izquierdo, and Talvi 2003).

93
  Among many other references, see Agenor and Aizenman (1998); Dekle and Kletzer (2001); Chinn and
Kletzer (2000); Diamond and Rajan (2000); Aizenman and Powell (2003).

94
     Lipsey (2001).

95
     Razin, Sadka, and Yuen (2001).


                                                       85
96
     Eichengreen and Mody (1999); Chang and Velasco (2000a, b).

97
   For example, Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999). Hausmann’s terminology may overstate the degree of
exogeneity of currency denomination, however. (As Tom Lehrer sang, “[only] the man who’s got
religion’ll tell you if your sin’s original.”) Goldstein and Turner (2004), for example, argue that "national
macroeconomic policies... matter a lot for generating and managing currency mismatches." They also
strongly criticize the measure of mismatch that Eichengreen-Hausmann have constructed, and that this
study tries out in the econometrics.

98
 Schneider and Tornell (2000); Céspedes, Chang, and Velasco (2002); Cavallo, Kisselev, Perri, and
Roubini (2002).

99
  Krugman (1999), Chang and Velasco (2000a,b; 2001), and Dornbusch (2002) are some of those who
have emphasized the post-devaluation burden of short-term dollar-denominated debt.

100
   For the full list of ten contractionary effects, see Caves, Frankel, and Jones (2002). See also Lizondo
and Montiel (1989). The empirical verdict of Edwards (1986) that devaluations on net may be
contractionary at first, but turn expansionary after a couple of years, is probably still true today.




                                                     86
