                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               PREDICTING VOLATILITY:
                        GETTING THE MOST OUT OF RETURN DATA
                         SAMPLED AT DIFFERENT FREQUENCIES

                                             Eric Ghysels
                                           Pedro Santa-Clara
                                           Rossen Valkanov

                                         Working Paper 10914
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10914


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




We thank Arthur Sinko for outstanding research assistance and two anonymous referees for extremely
helpful suggestions. We are grateful to Torben Andersen, Tim Bollerslev, Mike Chernov, Rob Engle, David
Hendry, Nour Meddahi, Alberto Plazzi, Eric Renault, Neil Shephard, Jonathan Wright as well as seminar
participants at City University of Hong Kong, Emory University, the Federal Reserve Board, ITAM, Korea
University, New York University, Oxford University, Tsinghua University, University of Iowa, UNC and
USC as well as participants at the Symposium on New Frontiers in Financial Volatility Modelling, Florence,
the Academia Sinica Conference on Analysis of High-Frequency Financial Data and Market Microstructure,
Taipei, the CIREQ-CIRANO-MITACS conference on Financial Econometrics, Montreal and the Research
Triangle Conference, for helpful comments. All remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2004 by Eric Ghysels, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Rossen Valkanov. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Predicting Volatility: Getting the Mos out of Return Data Sampled at Different Frequencies
Eric Ghysels, Pedro Santa-Clara, and Rossen Valkanov
NBER Working Paper No. 10914
November 2004
JEL No. G1

                                             ABSTRACT

We consider various MIDAS (Mixed Data Sampling) regression models to predict volatility. The
models differ in the specification of regressors (squared returns, absolute returns, realized volatility,
realized power, and return ranges), in the use of daily or intra-daily (5-minute) data, and in the length
of the past history included in the forecasts. The MIDAS framework allows us to compare models
across all these dimensions in a very tightly parameterized fashion. Using equity return data, we find
that daily realized power (involving 5-minute absolute returns) is the best predictor of future

volatility (measured by increments in quadratic variation) and outperforms model based on realized

volatility (i.e. past increments in quadratic variation). Surprisingly, the direct use of high-frequency

(5-minute) data does not improve volatility predictions. Finally, daily lags of one to two months are

sucient to capture the persistence in volatility. These findings hold both in- and out-of-sample.

Eric Ghysels
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Gardner Hall, CB 3305
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
eghysels@unc.edu

Pedro Santa-Clara
Anderson School
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C4.21
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
pedro.santa-clara@anderson.ucla.edu

Rossen Valkanov
Anderson School
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza, Suite C4.21
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
rossen.valkanov@anderson.ucla.edu
The conditional volatility literature, starting with Engle’s (1982) ARCH-class of models,
has been successful at capturing the dynamics of return variance using simple parametric
models. A measure of that success is the widespread use of such models in all areas of
finance by academics and practitioners alike. And while most researchers would agree that
it is important to have a good prediction model of conditional volatility, the question of what
model to use is still unsettled.

When it comes to forecasting volatility, there are many existing models in addition to the
benchmark ARCH/GARCH models of Engle (1982) and Bollerslev (1986) which cast future
                                                          2
variance as a polynomial of past squared returns, i.e., σ̂t+1|t ≡ A(L)rt2 . One alternative
is to look for variables, other than squared returns, that relate to future volatility. Ding
et al. (1993) and several others show that low-frequency components of volatility might be
better captured by absolute returns instead of squared returns. Also, Alizadeh et al. (2002)
and Gallant et al. (1999) find daily ranges (high-low price ranges) to be good predictors of
volatility. Another rapidly growing research area focuses on data-driven models of realized
volatility computed from intra-daily returns sampled at very short intervals such as 5 minutes
(Andersen and Bollerslev (1998)).1 All these models suggest a variety of possible ways to
forecast volatility. Hence, it seems natural to ask whether some of the suggested predictors
are clearly dominated by others and whether there are real benefits from using high-frequency
data.2 These questions have proven difficult to answer because the models considered are so
different in terms of regressors, frequencies, parameterizations, and return histories, that is
it difficult to directly compare them.

We use Mixed Data Sampling (henceforth MIDAS) regression models introduced in Ghysels,
Santa-Clara and Valkanov (2002a,b) to provide answers to these questions. MIDAS
regressions allow us to run parsimoniously parameterized regressions of data observed at
different frequencies. There are several advantages of using mixed data sampling regressions.
They allow us to study, in a unified framework, the forecasting performance of a large class
of volatility models which involve: (i) data sampled at different frequencies; (ii) various
past data window lengths; and (iii) different regressors. The specification of the regressions
   1
      Also, see Andersen et al. (2001, 2002, 2003), Andreou and Ghysels (2002), Barndorff-Nielsen and
Shephard (2001, 2002a,b, 2003a), Taylor and Xu (1997), among others.
    2
      High-frequency data also suffer from microstructure artifacts, such as bid-ask bounce (Roll, 1984), screen
fighting, jumps, and irregular or missing data, all of which can lead to biases in the volatility estimates. The
impact of microstructure noise on realized variance has been recently studied by Aı̈t-Sahalia, Mykland and
Zhang (2003), Hansen and Lunde (2004), Bandi and Russell (2003), Zhang, Mykland and Aı̈t-Sahalia (2003),
among others.


                                                       1
combine recent developments regarding estimation of volatility and a not so recent literature
on distributed lag models.3 We focus on predicting future conditional variance, measured as
increments in quadratic variation (or its log transformation) from one week to one month
horizons, because these are the horizons that are most widely used for option pricing,
portfolio management, and hedging applications.

First, we use MIDAS regressions to examine whether future volatility is well predicted by
past daily squared returns, absolute daily returns, realized daily volatility, realized daily
power (sum of intra-daily absolute returns, a measure proposed by Barndorff-Nielsen and
Shephard (2003b, 2004) and Woerner (2002)), and daily range. Since all of the regressors
are used within a framework with the same number of parameters and the same maximum
number of lags, the results from MIDAS regressions are directly comparable. Hence, the
MIDAS setup allows us to determine if one of the regressors dominates others. We find that,
for the Dow Jones Index and six individual stock return series, the realized power clearly
dominates all other daily predictors of volatility at all horizons. Importantly, the predictive
content of the realized power is evident not only from in-sample goodness of fit measures,
but also from out-of-sample forecasts. The daily range is also a good predictor in the sense
that it dominates squared and absolute daily returns. Our method is a significant departure
from the usual autoregressive model building approach embedded in the ARCH literature
and its recent extensions such as high-frequency data-based approaches. A comparison of
the MIDAS regressions with purely autoregressive volatility models reveals that the MIDAS
forecasts are better at forecasting future realized volatility in- and out-of-sample.

Second, the weights in the MIDAS regressions are parameterized by a flexible function.
Obviously, the choice of regressors is as important as is the profile of weights placed on them.
In our MIDAS framework, the shape of the weight function is determined by two parameters
that are estimated from the data. Hence, the weight profile on the lagged predictors is
captured by the shape of the function, whose parameters are estimated from the data with
no additional pre-testing or lag-selection procedures. We find that daily lags longer than
about 50 days do not help (nor hurt) the forecasts, for any of the regressors.

Third, mixed data regressions allow us to directly project future realized volatility onto
high-frequency (say 5-minute) squared and absolute returns without daily pre-filtering and
   3
    See e.g. Dhrymes (1971) and Sims (1974) for surveys on distributed lag models. Many econometrics
textbooks also cover the topic, see e.g. Greene (2000, chap. 17), Judge et al. (1985, chap. 9 - 10), Stock and
Watson (2003, chap. 13) Wooldridge (2000, chap. 18), among others.



                                                      2
without increasing the number of parameters. Hence, we are able to analyze if there are real
benefits from directly using high-frequency data in volatility forecasting. Surprisingly, we
find that forecasts using high-frequency data directly do not outperform those that use daily
regressors (although the daily regressors are themselves obtained through the aggregation of
high-frequency data). It must be noted that none of these results are driven by over-fitting
or parameter proliferation. Indeed, all MIDAS specifications – daily and 5-minutes – are
directly comparable since they all have the same number of estimated parameters.

In summary, we find that daily realized power is the best predictor of future increments in
quadratic variation, followed by the daily range. The prediction equations involve about
50 daily lags and there is no real benefit of using intra-daily data directly. These MIDAS
regressions also outperform other linear forecast models involving daily realized volatility.
Finally, all of the above results hold in- and out-of-sample. The out-of-sample forecasting
precision, which is perhaps the ultimate measure of a model’s forecasting potential, indicates
that our results are unlikely to be due to sampling error or over-fitting.

The MIDAS regressions can also be used to model asymmetries and the joint forecasting
power of the regressors. In fact, Engle and Gallo (2003) use the multiplicative error model
(MEM) of Engle (2002) and find improvements in forecasting volatility from the joint use
of absolute returns, daily ranges, and realized volatilities using S&P 500 index returns data.
Interestingly enough, their results agree with ours, despite the different data set and different
method, as they argue that range-based measures in particular provide a very good forecast
of future volatility.

The paper is structured as follows. In a first section we introduce and discuss MIDAS
volatility models. In section two, we use daily regressors to forecast weekly to monthly
volatility in the MIDAS framework. The third section is devoted to MIDAS volatility
forecasts involving intra-daily data. Section four concludes.



1     MIDAS Models of Conditional Volatility

To fix notation, let daily returns be denoted by rt,t−1 =log(Pt ) − log(Pt−1 ). Throughout the
paper the time index t will refer to daily sampling. When the data is sampled at a higher
frequency, say, m-times in a day, we will denote the return over this interval as rt,t−1/m =
log(Pt ) − log(Pt−1/m ). For instance, in our study, returns are sampled every five minutes

                                               3
between the trading hours of 9:30 am and 4:05 pm (corresponding to 80 five-minute intervals
within a trading day), and we will write rt,t−1/80 = log(Pt ) − log(Pt−1/80 ), which corresponds
to the last 5-minute return of day t − 1.

Our goal is to predict a measure of volatility over some future horizon H, Vt+H,t . As a primary
measure of volatility for the period t to t + H, we consider the increments in the quadratic
variation of the return process Qt+H,t . We focus on predicting future realized volatility from
one week (H = 5) to one month (H = 20) horizon. These are horizons that matter mostly
for option pricing and portfolio management. Focusing on predicting future increments of
quadratic variation also allows us to make our analysis directly comparable with a large body
of existing literature. The quadratic variation is not observed directly but can be measured
with some discretization error. One such measure would be the sum of (future) squared
                                                                                  (Hm)
returns, namely Hm                                   2
               P
                  j=1 [r(t+H)−(j−1)/m,(t+H)−(j−2)/m ] , which we will denote by Q̃t+H,t since it
involves a discretization based on Hm intra-daily returns. The superscript in parentheses
indicates the number of high-frequency data used to compute the variable.
                                                                      
                                                                  (Hm)
Besides increments in quadratic variation, we also consider log Q̃t+H,t as a target variable
to forecast. Previous papers, including Andersen et al. (2003), have observed that forecasting
the log transformation yields better in- and out-of-sample forecasts of the variance as it puts
less weight on extreme realizations of the quadratic variation.4


1.1    The MIDAS Specification

A daily MIDAS volatility model is a regression model:
                                               max
                                              kX
                           (Hm)                                (m)
                         Vt+H,t   = µH + φH          bH (k, θ)X̃t−k,t−k−1 + εHt                 (1.1)
                                              k=0

                                                                              
         (Hm)                                              (Hm)           (Hm)
where Vt+H,t is a measure of (future) volatility such as Q̃t+H,t or log Q̃t+H,t . Specification
(1.1) has three important features when compared to other models of conditional volatility
                                                                                      (Hm)
(discussed below). First, the volatility measure on the left-hand side, Vt+H,t , and the
                                    (m)
variables on the right-hand side, X̃t−k,t−k−1 , might be sampled at different frequencies.
Second, the polynomial lag parameters bH are parameterized to be a function of θ, thereby
  4                                                  (Hm)
   We also considered MIDAS regressions with (Q̃t+H,t )1/2 as left hand side variable. The results are
omitted here to save space. The conclusions concur with those reported in the empirical section below.


                                                     4
allowing for a longer history without a proliferation of parameters. Third, MIDAS regressions
                                                              (m)
typically do not exploit an autoregressive scheme, so that X̃t−k,t−k−1 is not necessarily related
to lags of the left hand side variable. Instead, MIDAS regressions are first and foremost
                                                   (m)
regression models and therefore the selection of X̃t−k,t−k−1 amounts to choosing the best
predictor of future quadratic variation from the set of several possible measures of past
fluctuations in returns. MIDAS regressions could potentially involve more than one type
of regressors, see Ghysels et al. (2004) for further discussion. MIDAS regression models
may also be nonlinear and indeed some of the regressors we will consider may provide better
results with nonlinear specifications. For instance, Engle and Gallo (2003) provide interesting
results along these lines. For simplicity, in this paper we consider only a single regressor linear
MIDAS setting.


Sampling at Different Frequencies
In equation (1.1), the volatility is measured at weekly, bi-weekly, tri-weekly, and monthly
                                                (m)
frequency, whereas the forecasting variables X̃t−k,t−k−1 are available at higher frequencies.
For instance, we can use daily data to compute a forecast of next month’s volatility (H = 22).
In other words, the return volatility over the month of, say, April (from the close of the market
during the last day of March to the close of the market during the last day of April) will
be forecasted with daily data up to the last day of March. But we could also use hourly or
five-minute data to form monthly volatility forecasts. Thus, our model allows us not only
to forecast volatility with data sample at different frequencies, but also to compare such
forecasts and ultimately to see whether Merton’s (1980) well-known continuous asymptotic
arguments hold up in practice.

In general, the MIDAS framework allows us to investigate whether the use of high-frequency
data necessarily leads to better volatility forecasts at various horizons. These issues have
motivated much of the recent literature on high-frequency data, see Andersen et al. (2001,
2002, 2003), Andreou and Ghysels (2002), Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001, 2002a,b,
2003a), among others. In some cases, the right-hand side variables are computed using m
high-frequency returns, in which case they are denoted by a superscript (m). For instance,
if we want to compute a monthly forecast of volatility using lagged daily volatility estimates
obtained from five-minute data, m would be equal to 80, the number of five-minutes in a
day.



                                                5
The MIDAS volatility models allow for a great degree of flexibility. For the sake of
systematizing the results, in the next section we consider forecasts at weekly, bi-weekly,
tri-weekly, and monthly frequency using daily data. In a subsequent section, we will turn to
intra-daily regressors.


Parsimony of Parameterization
Another distinguishing feature of (1.1) is that the lag coefficients bH (k, θ) (weights) are
not unrestricted parameters. Rather they are parameterized as a function of θ, where θ is a
small-dimensional vector. A flexible parameterization is an important element in the MIDAS
specification, as the inclusion of high-frequency data might imply a significant increase in the
number of lagged forecasting variables and unrestricted parameters to estimate. It allows us
to dramatically reduce the number of parameters to estimate, which is particularly relevant
                                                                        (m)
in estimating a persistent process, such as volatility, where distant X̃t−k,t−k−1 are likely to
have an impact on current volatility.

Even with daily forecasting variables, the unrestricted specification of the weights results in
a lot of parameters to estimate. The problem only worsens with higher-frequency data. As
we will see below, a suitable parameterization bH (k, θ) circumvents the problem of parameter
proliferation and of choosing the truncation point k max . Hence, the parameterization bH (k, θ)
is one of the most important ingredients in a MIDAS regression.

The weights bH (k; θ) are normalized to add up to one, which allows us to estimate a scale
parameter φH . Another restriction that is very useful in the context of volatility models is
to insure that the weights bH (k; θ) be non-negative. Such a condition guarantees that the
volatility process itself is non-negative.5 In general, there are many ways of parameterizing
bH (k, θ). We focus on one particular specification based on the Beta function, which has only
two parameters, or θ = [θ1 ; θ2 ]:

                                                         k
                                                    f ( kmax , θ1 ; θ2 )
                                   bH (k; θ) = Pkmax           j
                                                                                                       (1.2)
                                                   j=1   f ( kmax , θ1 ; θ2 )

where: f (z, a, b) = z a−1 (1 − z)b−1 /β(a, b) and β(a, b) is based on the Gamma function, or
   5
    It should parenthetically be noted that Nelson and Cao (1992) note that imposing non-negativity
constraints on GARCH parameters is unnecessarily restrictive. They do argue, however, that non-negativity
of the Wold representation weights is necessary. Restricting the weights bH (k; θ) to be non-negative is very
similar to the condition imposed by Nelson and Cao.


                                                     6
β(a, b) = Γ(a)Γ(b)/Γ(a+b). Specification (1.2) was introduced in Ghysels et al. (2002b, 2004)
and has several important characteristics. Namely, (1) it provides positive coefficients, which
is necessary for a.s. positive definiteness of the estimated volatility, (2) with θ1 = 1 and θ2
> 1 one has a slowly decaying pattern typical of volatility filters, which means that only one
parameter is left to determine the shape, and (3) with θ1 = θ2 = 1 one has equal weights,
which corresponds to a rolling estimator of the volatility. The flexibility of the Beta function
is well known. It is often used in Bayesian econometrics to impose flexible, yet parsimonious
prior distributions. The function can take many shapes, including flat weights, gradually
declining weights as well as hump-shaped patterns. While MIDAS regression models are
not limited to Beta distributed lag schemes, for our purpose we focus our attention on this
specification. We refer to Ghysels et al. (2002b, 2004) for alternative weight specifications
and further details.

The parameterization also allows us to compare MIDAS models at different frequencies as
the number of parameters to estimate will be the same even though the weights on the
data and the forecasting capabilities might differ across horizons. We don’t have to adjust
our measures of fit for the number of parameters. In all estimations, we have either one or
two parameters determining the pattern of the weights, the former being the case when we
restrict our attention to θ1 = 1 and only estimate θ2 > 1.

To illustrate the issue of parameter proliferation, consider Figure 1. It displays the estimated
unconstrained parameters of equation (1.1) for lags up to 10 days. The figure contains results
                           (m)                   (m)
from various regressors X̃t−k,t−k−1 , such as Q̃t−k,t−k−1 , as well as absolute daily returns, daily
range, and daily realized power, all of which we discuss at length below. We notice from the
results displayed in the figure that the parameter estimates appear to be erratic as the lag
increases. Hence, volatility models such as (1.1), whose weights are not tightly parameterized,
do only well even with a small number of lags and almost surely will produce poor out-of-
sample forecasts. It must be noted that the robust performance of ARCH/GARCH models
can largely be attributed to capturing the dynamics of a large number of past shocks with
only a few parameters. This basic idea is also the insight behind the MIDAS regressions.


Various Regressors
                                           (m)
In the MIDAS volatility model (1.1), X̃t−k,t−k−1 can be any variable that has the ability to
           (Hm)                                                                            (m)
forecast Q̃t+H,t . To put it differently, MIDAS volatility regressions can involve X̃t−k,t−k−1


                                                 7
other than past squared returns or past realized volatility, which are the usual regressors
considered in the autoregressive conditional volatility literature. The MIDAS approach puts
us in the mind set of regression analysis and prompts us to explore various regressors that
have the potential to predict future volatility. A number of predictors other than past
realized volatility or squared returns have been proposed in various models. Unlike MIDAS,
however, these models are typically autoregressive in nature. The MIDAS setup allows us
                                                  (m)
to compare the forecasting ability of different X̃t−k,t−k−1 ’s and to choose the model with the
best forecasting ability.
                                                                                (Hm)
In the context of forecasting the quadratic variation Q̃t+H,t , we consider the following
regressors
                                                    max
                                                   kX
                       (Hm)                                             (m)
                     Q̃t+H,t   =     µQ
                                      H   +   φQ
                                               H           bQ                      Q
                                                            H (k, θ)Q̃t−k,t−k−1 + εHt                 (1.3)
                                                    k=0
                                                   kXmax
                       (Hm)
                     Q̃t+H,t = µG    G
                                H + φH                     bG                    2   G
                                                            H (k, θ)(rt−k,t−k−1 ) + εHt               (1.4)
                                                    k=0
                                                   kXmax
                       (Hm)
                     Q̃t+H,t = µaH + φaH                   baH (k, θ)|rt−k,t−k−1 | + εaHt             (1.5)
                                                   k=0
                                                    max
                                                   kX
                       (Hm)
                     Q̃t+H,t = µrH + φrH                   brH (k, θ)[hi − lo]t−k,t−k−1 + εrHt        (1.6)
                                                    k=0
                                                   kXmax
                       (Hm)                                             (m)
                     Q̃t+H,t = µpH + φpH                   bPH (k, θ)P̃t−k,t−k−1 + εpHt               (1.7)
                                                   k=0


                               (m)                                       (Hm)
In equation (1.3), past Q̃t,t−1 are used to predict Q̃t+H,t . Examples of such models have
been advocated by Andersen et al. (2001, 2002, 2003) and are discussed at length below.
                                         (Hm)
Specification (1.4) is a projection of Q̃t+H,t onto lagged daily returns and corresponds to the
ARCH/GARCH class of models (under some parameter restrictions).6
                                                                 (Hm)
Equations (1.5) and (1.6) involve projecting Q̃t+H,t onto past daily absolute returns and
daily ranges, respectively, which are two alternative measures of volatility. Therefore they
are natural candidate regressors in the MIDAS specification. It is often argued that in the
presence of deviations from normality absolute values could be more robust than squared
   6
    Technically speaking, projections involve regressions without a constant term. Here and in the remainder
of the paper projections will include a constant as regressor.



                                                             8
values for conditional variance estimation (see e.g. Davidian and Caroll (1987)) whereas
the virtues of daily range have been explored most recently by Alizadeh et al. (2001) and
Gallant et al. (1999). Typically, past absolute returns (ranges) are used to predict future
absolute returns (ranges). In particular, when absolute returns (daily ranges) are considered,
the autoregressive features of absolute returns (daily ranges) are studied and modeled (see
e.g. Ding et al. (1993) for absolute returns and Alizadeh et al. (2001) for daily ranges).
Hence, the exploration of alternative measures of volatility has been cast in the context
of autoregressive schemes. Here we introduce absolute returns and ranges as alternative
predictors and examine their success (relative to the other predictors) at predicting realized
volatility. The MIDAS regression format makes this a relatively straightforward exercise.

The last regression (1.7) involves similar arguments using techniques and developments
of more recent date. The preference for absolute returns is a subject that has received
much attention recently, see in particular Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2003b, 2004)
                                     (m)
and Woerner (2002). Recall that Q̃t,t+1 is defined as the sum of m intra-daily squared
returns. Instead of taking squared returns, say every five minutes, Barndorff-Nielsen and
Shephard suggest to consider the sum of high-frequency absolute returns, or the so-called
                              (m)
“realized power” variation P̃t+1,t , which is defined as m
                                                        P
                                                          j=1 |rt−(j−1)/m,t−(j−2)/m |. Regression
(1.7) projects future realized volatility on past daily realized power.

Finally, to forecast the log of the quadratic variation, we consider log transformations of the
five regressors in equations (1.3-1.7). In this fashion, our results would be directly comparable
with those in the previous literature. To summarize, the MIDAS framework offers the ability
to mix data sampled at different frequency, combined with a tightly parameterized model
that allows different regressors to forecast volatility.


1.2    Comparison of MIDAS with Other Volatility Models

To further understand the flexibility of the MIDAS volatility models, it useful to compare
them with other widely used models of conditional volatility, which for the purpose of




                                               9
presentation will be written as:
                                                      max
                                                     kX
                       (Hm)                                         (m)
                     Q̃t+H,t     =     µQ
                                        H   +   φQ
                                                 H          bQ                   Q
                                                             H (k)Q̃t−k,t−k−1 + εHt         (1.8)
                                                     k=0
                                                      max
                                                     kX
                       (Hm)
                     Q̃t+H,t     = µG    G
                                    H + φH                  bG                    2   G
                                                             H (k; θ)(rt−k,t−k−1 ) + εHt    (1.9)
                                                     k=0

                               (m)                                      (Hm)
In equation (1.8), past Q̃t,t−1 are used to predict Q̃t+H,t and the weights bQ
                                                                             H (k) are not
parameterized. When H = 1 such models for so called realized volatility, analyzed by
Andersen et al. (2001, 2003), Andreou and Ghysels (2002), Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard
(2001, 2002a,b, 2003a), and Taylor and Xu (1997), often rely on Merton’s (1980) arguments
that arbitrarily accurate estimates of volatility can be obtained by increasingly finer sampling
of returns. The above papers show that the use of high-frequency data is beneficial in
predicting volatility. Again, when H = 1, the difference between (1.8) and (1.3) is the
specification of the weights bQ
                              H . In this regard, it is important to note that Andersen et al.
(2003) advocate the use of long memory models to parsimoniously parameterize the weights.
In particular, they consider models of the following type:

                                 5
                                                                        (m)
                                 X
                         (1 −          bA (k)Lk )(1 − L)d log Q̃t+1,t = µ + εt             (1.10)
                                 k=1


Hence, using a fractional differencing approach one can capture with a single parameter d
slowly decaying response patterns associated with long memory. In addition to the fractional
differencing parameter d in equation (1.10) Andersen et al. (2003) advocate the use of an
AR(5) autoregressive expansion appearing on the left hand side of the equation. Hence,
a total of 6 parameters (not including the constant) are used to model the autoregressive
dynamics of realized volatility. Model (1.10) is expressed in terms of log volatility as Andersen
et al. argue that the log transformation induces normality and therefore justifies the use of
linear autoregressive models. This model will be our benchmark for all in-sample and out-
of-sample forecast comparisons and is henceforth referred to as the “ABDL” model.

It is important to stress the differences between MIDAS regression models and the benchmark
ABDL ARFI(5,d) model specification appearing in equation (1.10). None of the MIDAS
regressions operate through autoregression whereas the ABDL specification follows much
                                                                  (m)
closer the tradition of ARCH-type models since Q̃t+1,t is projected onto its lagged values.


                                                        10
Furthermore, MIDAS regressions involve at most two parameters for the Beta polynomial, a
scaling parameter and an intercept, i.e. less than the typical ABDL setting. The challenge is
to outperform the ABDL specification while choosing: (1) the type of regressors; and (2) the
decay patterns through judicious choice of parameterizations of the polynomial weighting
schemes. The success of this challenge is the main argument of this paper.7

Finally, it should be noted that equation (1.9) is a version of the most widely used
specification of conditional volatility, namely, the ARCH-type models of Engle (1982) (see
also Bollerslev (1986)). In (1.9), future volatility is projected onto lagged daily squared
returns (and a constant), where the weights are tightly parameterized via an autoregression
such as in the popular GARCH(1,1) specification. Andersen et al. (2003) show that models
appearing in equation (1.10) outperform ARCH-type models, which is why we use the former
as a benchmark.


1.3     In-Sample Fit and Out-of-Sample Forecast Evaluations

The usefulness of the MIDAS framework is best judged by its ability to produce good in-
sample fit and an out-of-sample forecasts of realized volatility. We elaborate here in some
detail on how the various models will be compared. In the empirical results that follow, we
consider the mean square error of a given MIDAS model, M SE M IDAS , and compare it to
the mean squared error from the ABDL model, denoted by M SE ABDL . These measures are
computed in-sample and in an out-of-sample experiment. Ultimately, we report the ratios
M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL as a measure of the forecasting performance of the MIDAS models
relative to the ABDL. Ratios below 1 indicate that a given MIDAS model outperforms the
benchmark. Since the ABDL has proven to be one of the most successful models in volatility
forecasting, the MIDAS models have to clear a high mark.

We follow a slightly different approach for the in-sample and out-of-sample comparisons.
Namely, the in-sample and out-of-sample comparisons different with respect to the variable
being predicted.

In the out-of-sample comparison, we follow Andersen et al. (2003) who predict future
log volatility, exponentiate the prediction, and then compute the square root to obtain
  7
    In more recent work Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003) have advocated the use of so-called “HAR
regressions,” proposed in Corsi (2003) and sharing features with MIDAS regressions, involving regressors
that exclude the jump component of quadratic variation. We will elaborate further on this later.


                                                  11
a prediction of future standard deviation. We use exactly the same strategy for our log
volatility specification. For specifications where we predict the level of volatility (as opposed
to the log), only a square root transformation is necessary. All out-of-sample M SE ratios
reflect the relative performance of predict future standard deviations over four different
horizons, ranging from one to four weeks.

The in-sample comparison is slightly different. The prediction of the MIDAS models is in
                                                    (Hm)
terms of the left hand side specification, namely Vt+H,t . Hence, a MIDAS model predicting
logs is compared with the ABDL model which predicts logs too. However, for the MIDAS
regression predicting the level of volatility the ABDL model prediction is exponentiated.
This may perhaps put the ABDL model at a slight disadvantage, yet that disadvantage is
negligible.

It is important to emphasize another difference between ABDL models and MIDAS
regressions. When predicting future, say, weekly volatility Andersen et al. (2003) predict the
daily volatility for each day of the week and add up the forecasts. In a MIDAS regression
the future weekly volatility is taken directly as target of interest in the prediction. This is a
good illustration of the advantage of using a mixed-data sampling framework.

It is also worth noting that one might object to the use of M SE as a measure of forecast
comparison. Arguably, this criterion may be criticized in the context of volatility predictions
as for portfolio or risk management the objective function may neither be symmetric nor be
directly related to a pure measure of statistical fit. Even as far as statistical criteria go, since
we compare many models estimated with different number of parameters, one could argue in
favor of the adjusted R2 for comparisons. MIDAS regressions, however, always involve less
parameters than the benchmark. Hence, penalizing a model for the number of parameters
would actually penalize the benchmark model. We are therefore using the M SE criterion
which effectively increases the hurdle for the performance of MIDAS regressions. Moreover,
the in-sample MSE ratio of two models is equivalent to their unadjusted R 2 ratio. We opted
for the ratio of the MSEs (rather than R2 s) because we can compare these measures across
in-sample and out-of-sample results. Such a comparison can give us an idea of whether the
in-sample results are being purely driven by over-fitting or sampling error. Finally, we do
not test whether M SEs are statistically significant from each other, as this task is not so
straightforward in this context.8
  8
      See e.g. West (2004) for a discussion of the validity of asymptotic-based tests and the issues involved.



                                                       12
2       Results with Daily Data

We use the MIDAS framework to forecast the volatility in the US stock market. Our dataset
consists of five-minute intra-day returns of the Dow Jones Composite Portfolio (DJ) over a
ten year period, from April 1, 1993 to October 31, 2003. We also have five-minute returns
for individual stocks that belong to the Dow. In this section, we focus exclusively on the DJ
index and examine the evidence obtained from individual stocks later in the paper. Hence,
the DJ index is the lead example, while evidence from individual stocks will be used to show
the robustness of our findings. All return data are reported from 9:30 am to 4:05 pm every
trading day. The returns for some days are removed from the sample to avoid the inclusion
of regular and predictable market closures which affect the characterization of the volatility
dynamics. In cleaning the dataset, we follow Andersen et al. (2001) who use a similar five-
minute dataset with returns from the foreign exchange market. The final dataset contains
2,669 trading days with 80 observations per day for a total of 213,520 five-minute returns for
each asset. From this dataset, we compute daily realized volatility, daily squared returns,
daily absolute returns, daily ranges, and realized power.

As noted before, we consider four prediction horizons, from 1 through 4 weeks.                         The
horizons cover most practically relevant cases, particularly in the context of Value-at-Risk
computations, option pricing, and portfolio management. The regressions are run with non-
                      (Hm)
overlapping (log)Q̃t+H,t , for H = 5 days (1wk), H = 10 (2wks), 15 (3wks) and 20 (4wks)
days respectively. The MIDAS regressions are obtained with the Beta lag structure (1.2). We
use a truncation of 50 daily lags in the estimation, or k max = 50 since using longer lags has
little effect on the results. The models are estimated with quasi-maximum likelihood and the
standard errors are obtained using the Bollerslev and Wooldridge (1992) approach to account
for heteroscedasticity. A detailed discussion about estimating MIDAS regression models can
be found in Ghysels et al. (2002b). In general, the errors of MIDAS regressions may feature
autocorrelation or heteroskedasticity. However, in the current application, all regressions
involve non-overlapping prediction samples to avoid autocorrelation in the residuals due to
overlapping prediction horizons. Regression diagnostics, discussed later, will reveal that the
residuals indeed appear uncorrelated and in some cases Gaussian as well.9
    9
     For the ABDL benchmark model we re-estimate the AR parameters, whereas the fractional differencing
parameter is pre-set at 0.40096. The latter parameter is quite stable across assets, as noted by Andersen et
al. (2003). We therefore follow their strategy of keeping a common value of d across all assets.




                                                    13
2.1     In-Sample Fit

Table 1 presents the in-sample ratios M SE M IDAS
                                                /M SE 
                                                         ABDL
                                                              . The results from forecasting
                                 (Hm)             (Hm)
the two measures of volatility Q̃t+H,t and log Q̃t+H,t are presented in Panels A and B,
respectively. The results from the April 1993 to March 2001 subsample and for the entire
                                                                                       (Hm)
sample are presented. In Panel A of Table 1, we look at the forecasts of Q̃t+H,t using various
daily predictors over the April 1993 to March 2001 subsample and the full sample ending in
2003. When we use realized daily variances as regressors (equation (1.3)), the relative MSE
ranges from 0.871 to 0.683 across the forecasting horizons and samples. The results are very
much similar across the full sample and the subsample. The log transformation puts the
MIDAS and ABDL models more on an equal footing (in-sample), as noted from Panel B in
Table 1. The MSE ratio varies from 0.924 to 0.812, again depending on horizon and length
of sample, with a more pronounced advantage for the MIDAS models at the longer horizons.

One difference between the MIDAS regressions and the benchmark is the weighting scheme.
When we use lagged realized volatility as a MIDAS predictor, there is no other difference
between the two models. In the ABDL model, the weight on past daily observations is
captured by the ARFI polynomial, whereas in the MIDAS framework, it is given by the Beta
polynomial. Figures 2 and 3 show the profilesof the 
                                                     estimated MIDAS regression weights
                                                           (Hm)           (Hm)
(entire sample) for the 4wks horizon for the log Q̃t+H,t and Q̃t+H,t regressions, respectively.
We can directly compare the weights of the ABDL specification and the corresponding log
volatility MIDAS model. Figure 2 displays these two models and several other MIDAS
regressions which will be discussed in detail later. The weights in the figures are normalized
to sum up to one and hence have a common scale. Consequently, the figures tell us the
relative share of weights across all the lags. For the moment, we focus on the patterns for
the ABDL model (solid line) and the QV MIDAS model as it is labeled in the figure. The
differences are remarkable. The ABDL weighting scheme is somewhat jagged for the first lags
due to the AR(5) augmentation and then we recognize the long slowly decaying tail typical
for long memory models. In fact, the weights persist beyond 50 days. In contrast, the QV
MIDAS model produces a smoothly declining weighting scheme that dies out roughly around
25 to 30 days. Hence in the MIDAS regressions more weight is attributed to the more recent
past. This explains why there are no gains made with increasing the lag length beyond 50
days.10
  10
    In a related paper, pertaining to the risk-return trade-off (Ghysels et al. (2002a)) it is shown (see for
instance Figure 3) that a monthly GARCH has exactly the same problem, namely the weights die out too


                                                     14
Figure 3 displays similar patterns (without the ABDL specification) for MIDAS regressions
not involving the log transformation. The memory features are, not surprisingly, similar.
Returning to the log transformation, it is also worth noting that log squared returns (which
are identical to log absolute returns up to a scaling factor) have a decay pattern that resembles
more closely that of the ABDL specification.11 Obviously, squared returns perform poorly
relative to the ABDL specification, as daily squared returns are a noisy measure of past
realized volatility. In the language of MIDAS, squared returns are poor regressors with a
decay pattern (obtained via Beta polynomial weight fitting) similar to the ARFI(5,d) ABDL
specification.

Table 2 complements Figures 2 and 3. The table reports regression diagnostics and numerical
values for some of the MIDAS regressions. The parameter estimates of θ are not displayed
because they have no economic interpretation in and of themselves. We show the other
parameter estimates including a summary of the estimated weight function. In addition, we
include the Q Portmanteau test for serial correlation in the residuals. The Q test shows that,
except for the short horizon, all residuals appear uncorrelated. This is of course an appealing
feature for the MIDAS regressions. Although not reported, we also tested the residuals
for normality and found, using the Jarque-Bera test, that the residuals of the log volatility
MIDAS regression appear normal for all regressors. For the level volatility MIDAS regression
models, again using the Jarque-Bera test, the null of normality was barely rejected. If we
look at the weight function results, the day1 weight is much higher with the log specification
compared to the level. The log specification also shows higher weights throughout as it is
more predictable. From the table, we can also see that between 80 and 99 percent of the
weight is placed on the first twenty daily lags of the regressors. However, between 40 and 50
percent is placed on lagged daily forecasters between days 6 and 20. Hence, a daily model
that takes into account only, say, five daily lags is likely to miss a lot of the dependence in the
data. As another remark to Table 2, the MIDAS regressions not involving past returns may
result in negative intercepts. (Naturally, the problem is not present for the log specification)
There is obviously a scaling issues that get resolved through the regression but it does not
slowly when compared to a monthly MIDAS (the daily GARCH in the same figure yields the opposite result
but this is a more complex comparison since it involves aggregation - it is therefore not directly related to
what is reported here).
   11
      It also is interesting to note that in the context of the risk-return tradeoff Ghysels et al. (2002a) obtain
estimates of volatility based on squared daily returns, since high-frequency data are not available for long
historical samples. In the context of the risk-return tradeoff with monthly returns they also find long lags
using daily squared returns, as depicted in Figure 2.



                                                       15
prove to adversely affect the out-of-sample performance of the model, as shown below.

So far, we discussed MIDAS models that are almost directly comparable to the ABDL
benchmark. Perhaps the most interesting MIDAS results involve the performance of daily
range and realized power (equations (1.6) and (1.7)). Table 1 presents the in-sample ratios
M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL for both models. Forecasts with [hi − lo]t−k,t−k−1 produce relative
M SEs in the range of 0.722 and 0.993. It appears also that the forecasting performance of
the MIDAS regressions in the subsample is slightly better than in the full sample. Overall
                                                                           (m)
the ratios are lower than the goodness of fit obtained from Q̃t−k,t−k−1 , (rt−k,t−k−1 )2 , and
|rt−k,t−k−1 | at any horizon. The superior performance of ranges has been noted before, see
e.g. Gallant et al. (1999).12 One advantage of using [hi − lo]t−k,t−k−1 is that it arguably
does not involve any measurement error issues (see e.g. Alizadeh et al. (2001)), Andersen
et al. (2003), Andreou and Ghysels (2002), Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001, 2002a,b,
2003a) for further discussion of measurement error issues).
                                                                                  (m)
The most remarkable predictor of volatility is the realized power P̃t−k,t−k−1 . At various
horizons, the M SE ratios obtained from the realized power MIDAS regressions are between
0.606 and 0.826 for the level specification and 0.761 and 0.921 for the logs. Particularly at
longer horizon, the in-sample performance is considerably better than those obtained with
[hi−lo]t−k,t−k−1 , and significantly better than the other predictors. Hence, the best predictor
of future increments in quadratic variation is the past realized power measure.

Turning to Table 2, the weights attributed to the different lags are slightly larger when
compared to those from the quadratic variation specification. In Figures 2 and 3, we observe
that the decay patterns across the various MIDAS regression specifications (excluding daily
squared and absolute returns) are quite similar. This evidence suggests that there are two
reasons for the success of the MIDAS approach, namely: (1) the weighting scheme; and (2)
the judicious choice of regressors. Both factors are important contributors in the success of
the MIDAS forecasts.

As a final comment, it is interesting to compare the weight functions across forecasting
  12
    The Gallant et al. (1999) approach to range-based volatility prediction shares some features with the
regression appearing in (1.6). The main difference is that the setup in Gallant et al. (1999) involves a
parametric continuous time model and a so called re-projection procedure using simulated samples where
parameter proliferation is less of an issue. The use of MIDAS regressions allows us to treat parsimoniously
the predictive power of range-based measures in a reduced-form setting without specifying an underlying
structural continuous time data generating process for returns.




                                                    16
horizons.13 At a short horizon of 1 week, a larger fraction of the MIDAS weights are placed
on the first daily lag (between 13 and 20 percent, depending on the specification) and very
little weight is placed on lags beyond the first 20 days (between 0.3 and 3 percent). As
the horizon increases to 4 weeks, the weight on the first day decreases substantially and a
significant weight (from 10 to 20 percent) is placed on lags beyond the first 20 days.


2.2     Out-of-Sample Comparisons

The in-sample fit measures indicate that the MIDAS models are flexible enough to capture
the features of the data. However, the ultimate test of forecasting models is whether they
maintain their performance out-of-sample. The out-of-sample MSEs of the MIDAS models
relative to the benchmark are displayed in Table 3 which features a few interesting results.
                                (m)
First, the realized power P̃t−k,t−k−1 is the dominant out-of-sample predictor of future realized
volatility. Also, MIDAS regressions involving range and past daily realized volatility continue
to outperform the ABDL benchmark model. These findings parallel the in-sample results.

Second, for the realized power specification, the gain in M SE is typically of the order of
20 to 30 percent. Hence, the in-sample M SEs (Table 1) and out-of-sample M SEs (Table
3) are very comparable in magnitude. This indicates that the performance of the MIDAS
model is not due to in-sample over-fitting.

Third, longer horizon forecasts do not necessarily produce worse out-of-sample performance
(at least up to 4 weeks). This is because we use the mixed-frequency regression to directly
produce long horizon forecasts instead of cumulating short horizon forecasts. Moreover, we
saw that the estimated MIDAS weights are different as the horizon increases, which suggests
that our framework is flexible enough to accommodate various volatility dynamics.

Finally, the MIDAS regressions predicting the log and the level of volatility tend to produce
similar out-of-sample forecasts. Hence, despite the extra transformation (exponentiation)
and its potential source of bias, it seems that the log transformation is a viable way of
formulating forecasts.14
  13
    We thank the Referee for suggesting this analysis.
  14                                                                                           (Hm)
    We have also experimented with MIDAS models predicting directly the square root of Q̃t+H,t . They did
not perform as well as the log specification, indicating the important role played by the predictability rather
than bias.




                                                      17
2.3    Robustness of Findings: Evidence from Individual Stocks

In this section, we examine the robustness of our findings. To do so, we consider evidence
from a collection of individual stocks that belong to the DJ Index. The stocks considered
are: Disney (DIS), Exxon Mobil (XOM), General Electric (GE), Honeywell (HON), J.P.
Morgan Case and Co (JPM) and McDonald’s (MCD). These six stocks were part of the DJ
Index over the entire sample and represent different sectors of the US economy. The results
appear in Table 4. To avoid reporting many results, we simply focus on the out-of-sample
performance.

Table 4 is analogous to Table 3 for the DJ index. The results obtained with the DJ index
remain true for the individual stocks. The realized power variation produces the best out-
                                      (Hm)
of-sample forecasts among all level Q̃t+H,t MIDAS regressions. This is true for all stocks
and across horizons. For the log specification, the realized power also dominates all other
predictors. For a few stocks and for selected horizons, the range and the quadratic variations
produce marginally better forecasts. The overall results from the volatility of six major stock
returns convey the same message. First, the MIDAS weights are flexible enough to produce
in- and out-of-sample volatility forecasts that match those from the most benchmark. Second,
the realized power volatility is the best predictor of future realized volatility.

As a final robustness note, in a previous version of the paper we obtained very similar results
using a different high-frequency dataset from the foreign exchange market.15 Unfortunately,
that dataset was outdated and our efforts to update it and to provide new out-of-sample
results were unsuccessful. However, given that the predictive accuracy of the MIDAS
regressions with realized daily power predictors has been demonstrated in- and out-of-sample,
with an index and individual data returns, and across markets leads us to believe that our
results are indeed quite robust.



3      MIDAS Regressions and High-Frequency Data

So far, we discussed that MIDAS regressions are able to accommodate a variety of predictors
in a parsimonious representation of long lag structures. In this section, we explore another
appealing feature of the MIDAS framework – its ability to easily mix sampling frequencies.
  15
    We were using the Olsen and Associates 5-minute DM/US $ return data covering the period December
1986 to November 1996.

                                                18
More concretely, we investigate whether the direct use of high-frequency data results in
better forecasts of future volatility. We revisit the choice of regressors in the context of high-
frequency (5-minute) data and discuss information sets, polynomials, and implicit filters.
The final subsection explores the empirical evidence of volatility predictability using high-
frequency data.


3.1    Choice of Intra-Daily Regressors

Let us reconsider the argument that arbitrarily accurate estimates of volatility can be
obtained by increasing the sampling frequency of returns. Unlike equation (1.3), where future
increments in quadratic variation are projected onto a number of lags of daily quadratic
variation, we explore a new dimension inherent to MIDAS regression. Instead of aggregating
                                                                          (m)       (m)
intra-daily squared returns or absolute returns to daily measures Q̃t,t−1 and P̃t,t−1 why not
run MIDAS regressions directly on the high-frequency data? Using the notation B(L1/m )
for a distributed lag polynomial in L1/m which has the property L1/m rt,t−1/m = rt−1/m,t−2/m ,
we consider the regressions:

                         (Hm )
                       Q̃t+H,t1   = µsH + φsH BH
                                               s
                                                 (L1/m2 )[rt,t−1/m2 ]2 + εsHt                (3.1)
                         (Hm )
                       Q̃t+H,t1   = µaH + φaH BH
                                               a
                                                 (L1/m2 )|rt,t−1/m2 | + εaHt                 (3.2)

                                                      (Hm )
where the first equation involves projecting Q̃t+H,t1 onto past squared returns sampled at
frequency 1/m2 . Note that the sampling frequency used to compute quadratic variation
(m1 ) may differ from the sampling frequency used to compute high-frequency returns. The
specification appearing in (3.1) is closely related to both the daily realized volatility model
in (1.8) and the daily MIDAS regression in (1.3). With, say, 50 days of lags there is a
direct comparison between (3.1) and (1.3) since they both involve the same information
set. Similar arguments apply to absolute intra-daily returns used in equation (3.2) and
the MIDAS regression involving realized powers in equation (1.7). We now turn to topics
pertaining to information sets and polynomials in the next two subsections.




                                                 19
3.2     Information Sets

We will consider first projections involving squared returns, namely:

                       (Hm )
                 EL (Q̃t+H,t1 |[rt,t−j/m2 ]2 , j ≥ 0) ≡ µsH + φsH BH
                                                                   s
                                                                     (L1/m2 )[rt,t−1/m2 ]2        (3.3)

where EL (.|.) denotes a linear projection. When we consider information sets involving past
                                                     (m)
realizations of measured quadratic variation, i.e. Q̃t−j,t−j−1 , j = 1, . . . . we obtain:

                            (Hm )       (m )                                     (m )
                     EL (Q̃t+H,t1 |Q̃t−j,t−j−1
                                       1
                                               , j ≥ 0) ≡ µQ    Q            1
                                                           H + φH BH (L)Q̃t,t−1 .                 (3.4)

                                  (m)
Since the information set [Q̃t−j,t−j−1 , j ≥ 0] is a subset of [rt,t−j/m ]2 , j ≥ 0 (assuming a
common m) we know the following property holds for linear projections and quadratic loss
functions:

                     (m)                                           (m)     (m)
       M SE(EL (Q̃t+H,t |[rt,t−j/m ]2 , j ≥ 0)) ≤ M SE(EL (Q̃t+H,t |Q̃t−j,t−j−1 , j ≥ 0))         (3.5)

                                                                    (m)
The reduction of information from [rt,t−j/m ]2 , j ≥ 0 to [Q̃t−j,t−j−1 , j ≥ 0] has the resulting
(linear) projection only in terms of daily lags, whereas the linear projection (3.1) involves
many lags of high-frequency data. On the one hand, the relation in (3.5) may not be attained
in practice as the linear projection in (3.3) involves a very large number of parameters. On the
other hand, a parsimonious model built on a parametric specification of the high-frequency
dynamics may yield very complicated projection formulas. Mixed data sampling regressions
exploit a much larger information set, without the cost of parameter proliferation, which is a
defining feature of mixed data sampling regression models. Hence, we try the keep the rich
information set without being penalized by prohibitively large parameter spaces.

It should also be noted that the MIDAS regression approach is explicit about the information
sets involved. Namely, if one considers two sampling frequencies m1 and m2 with,
for instance, m1 < m2 , then there is a MIDAS regression model associated with each
one of the sampling frequencies. Such MIDAS regressions, involving linear projections
      (Hm )                                    (Hm )
EL (Q̃t+H,t1 |[rt,t−j/m1 ]2 , j ≥ 0) and EL (Q̃t+H,t1 |[rt,t−j/m2 ]2 , j ≥ 0), could be viewed as nested
models, though this may not lead to any practical testable restrictions. However, we can use
standard regression methods to appraise the fit of the two projections. Namely, in practice
we may run into microstructure noise and linear regressions with m too high may therefore


                                                    20
under-perform. The MIDAS regression framework and the explicit treatment of information
sets allows us to address these issues rather directly, instead of assessing separately first
the quality of realized volatility extractions and then proceed in a second stage with model
specification.

The arguments regarding information sets also apply to absolute returns and realized power
specifications. Consider the following linear projection:

                        (Hm )
                 EL (Q̃t+H,t1 ||rt,t−j/m2 |, j ≥ 0) ≡ µaH + φaH BH
                                                                 a
                                                                   (L1/m2 )|rt,t−1/m2 |          (3.6)

                                                                                     (m)
and the linear projection onto past realized absolute power defined as P̃t−j,t−j−1 , yielding:

                            (Hm )    (m )                                     (m )
                      EL (Q̃t+H,t1 |P̃t−j,t−j−1
                                         1
                                                , j ≥ 0) ≡ µPH + φPH BH
                                                                      P          1
                                                                        (L)P̃t,t−1               (3.7)

The arguments regarding information sets apply to these two projections as well.16


3.3     Polynomials and Implicit Filters

The daily regression (1.3) involving quadratic variation can be viewed as factorizing the
polynomial B(L1/m ) in equation (3.1) into subpolynomials that are directly interpretable.
For example, in the linear projection (3.3) one could consider a factorization of the following
type: B(L1/m ) ≡ Bd (L)Brv (L1/m ), where Bd (L) is a polynomial in lag L (hence involving
daily sampling) and Brv (L1/m ) is a predetermined polynomial representing realized volatility,
i.e. Brv (L1/m ) ≡ m        1/m j
                  P
                     j=1 (L    ) which results in taking the sum of 1/m sampled squared
                                      (m)
returns and hence computing Qt,t−1 . As noted before, and discussed at length notably
by Andreou and Ghysels (2002b) and Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2001, 2002a,b,
2003a), realized volatilities are estimates of the quadratic variation of a diffusion subject
to measurement error. The presence of measurement error has prompted Andreou and
Ghysels (2002b) to consider rolling sample estimators of quadratic variation, called HQV,
referring to historical quadratic variation. MIDAS regression volatility models also include
factorizations involving HQV estimators. For example, one could consider a factorization
of the following type: B(L1/m ) ≡ Bd (L)[Bw (L)Brv (L1/m )], where Bw (L) represents a rolling
  16
     It should√be noted however, that there are differences in the asymptotics, namely when m → ∞. With
P̃ we need a m normalization, whereas with Q̃ there is no need to normalize by m as shown by Barndorff-
Nielsen and Shephard (2003b, 2004). We do not endeavor into the asymptotics of m → ∞ in the context of
this paper.


                                                  21
sample predetermined polynomial combining daily realized volatilities. Alternatively, one
could also consider the intra-daily smoothing proposed by Andreou and Ghysels (2002b),
which consists of taking Bd (L)[Bw (L1/m )Brv (L1/m )], with weighting schemes rolling through
intra-daily quadratic variation estimators. It may be clear by now that the direct estimation
of MIDAS regression volatility models, is a simple approach to accomplish two operations
in one single step. The first operation is filtering past high-frequency returns such that they
represent past daily volatilities. The second operation is the projection of future realizations
onto past filtered volatilities to obtain predictions. The combination of the two operations
into one step has many advantages. For instance, with a flexible enough lag structure, one
can compute predictions that exploit directly the high-frequency data set. Combining high-
frequency data first into daily estimates entails a loss of information that cannot be recovered
in the second step. Moreover, the design of extraction filters, i.e., is the choice of quadratic
variation estimator, is by-passed and therefore the worry about noisy volatility estimates is
avoided.


3.4    Empirical Results with High-Frequency Data

We now turn our attention to the estimation of MIDAS regressions involving intra-daily
(5-minute) data. A major issue is that intra-daily seasonal patterns in financial markets
have been widely documented in the literature since the work of Wood et al. (1985). Clearly
tomorrow’s quadratic variation does not feature seasonal intra-daily fluctuations, whereas
the high-frequency intra-daily returns do. The most practical way to address such a situation
is to remove the high-frequency intra-daily seasonal patterns from returns prior to fitting the
lag structures. One may therefore wonder whether one could improve MIDAS regressions
involving intra-daily data by considering seasonal adjustment prior to fitting a MIDAS
polynomial. On the other hand, one could also accommodate the intra-daily patterns directly
via the specification of the polynomial lag structure. A mixture of Beta lag polynomials can
accommodate this by centering one polynomial on the mean of a seasonal lag. For example,
suppose one day’s worth of lags is 288, then there are 24 hourly peaks in the lag structure.
Therefore one can take θ = ((ai , bi ), i = 1, . . . , 24), and center the Beta polynomials at the
hourly lags, i.e. ai /(ai + bi ) = 12i for i = 1, . . . , 24. This would not be very appealing,
however, as one would involve at least 48 parameters, to obtain a polynomial lag structure
flexible enough to accommodate all the ups and downs of periodic market activity throughout
a business day. Note that in less complex seasonal settings, involving quarterly or monthly

                                               22
data, the strategy may indeed be appealing. The alternative is to seasonally adjust the data
prior to fitting MIDAS regressions, a subject to which we turn next.


3.4.1     Seasonality in MIDAS Regressions

There are theoretical arguments that support seasonally adjusting the data prior to fitting
a MIDAS regression model, and those arguments are spelled out in detail in Hansen and
Sargent (1993) and Sims (1993). We consider again a generic regressor x(m) , which may
be squared returns, absolute returns or range, that is adjusted for (intra-daily) seasonal
patterns. We denote by x(m) the raw regressors, and x̃(m) the adjusted ones. We have
considered two alternative schemes for removing the periodic patterns. The first consists of
                                                     (m)           (m)
subtracting hourly means of squared returns, i.e. [x̃t−j/m ]2 ≡ [x̃t−j/m ]2 - Mh(j) , where h(j)
                                                                                               (m)
is the hour to which the j th observation belongs and Mh is the mean of [xt−j/m ]2 for hour
h. The second scheme is slightly more general as it adds a day-of-the-week effect, namely
   (m)          (m)
[x̃t−j/m ]2 ≡ [xt−j/m ]2 - Mh(j),d(t) , where d(t) is the day of the week of day t and Mh,d is
                 (m)
the mean of xt−j/m ]2 for hour h on day d. Obviously one could consider other adjustment
schemes as well.17

Let us consider the example of squared return regressors and rewrite (3.1) in terms of adjusted
returns as
                       (Hm )
                    Q̃t+H,t1 = µsH + φsH BH
                                          s
                                            (L1/m2 )([r̃t,t−j/m2 ]2 − Mh(j),d(t) ) + εstH

which can also be rewritten as

                          (Hm )
                        Q̃t+H,t1 = µsH + φsH BH
                                              s
                                                (L1/m2 )[r̃t,t−j/m2 ]2 + β2 zt + εstH                        (3.8)

where β2 zt represents a set of seasonal dummies, i.e. zt ≡ (ztd , d = 1, . . . , 5) with ztd = 1 if d
= d(t) and zero otherwise. Finally, the parameters β2 are coefficients implicitly defined by
the relationship B1 (L1/m )Mh(j),d(t) ≡ β2 zt . Comparing equations (3.8) and (3.1) yields the
result that in principle one could run a regression with seasonal dummies and raw data to
            s
estimate BH   (L1/m ), instead of adjusting squared returns first and estimate the polynomial
                          (m)
lag structure with rt . Unfortunately, both are not necessarily equivalent even in large
  17
    There is lots of evidence that the intra-daily seasonality is best captured by a multiplicative type of factor,
see e.g. Martens et al. (2002). This suggests that division by a seasonal factor, rather than demeaning, is a
natural approach to seasonal adjustment. In the log volatility specifications involving log regressors we de
facto apply such a multiplicative type adjustment.



                                                        23
samples. The main reason is that we are dealing with potentially misspecified models since
the polynomial lag structure is an approximation to a highly over-parameterized projection.
In such circumstances, it is often better to adjust series prior to fitting “approximate” models.
The formal arguments in Hansen and Sargent (1993) and Sims (1993) are based on the fact
that the approximation error may be unduly influenced by the large seasonal variation in the
data. In the empirical work involving intra-daily data, we show that adjusting the squared
returns prior to running mixed data sampling regressions does not seem to have much of
an impact. On the contrary, using raw data yields better results that those obtained with
adjusted returns.


3.4.2   Empirical Results

Table 5 presents the in-sample ratios M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL , where the MIDAS regressions
involve either unadjusted returns or hourly adjusted returns, as discussed in the previous
                                                                                           (Hm)
subsection. We report again results from forecasting the two measures of volatility Q̃t+H,t
               
           (Hm)
and log Q̃t+H,t for the April 1993 to March 2001 subsample and for the entire sample. Note
that the log specification is reduced to one model as the regressors are identical apart from a
scaling factor. With unadjusted intra-daily squared returns we have in-sample fits that are
                                                                (m)
roughly equal to those obtained with the aggregated measure Q̃t,t−1 . This is true for both
the subsample and the full sample. Likewise, with unadjusted intra-daily absolute returns
we have in-sample fits that are also roughly equal to those obtained with the corresponding
                      (m)
aggregated measure P̃t,t−1 . The log specification, for which there is only one regression, also
                                                           (m)                  (m)
comes close to daily regression MIDAS models with Q̃t,t−1 , rather than P̃t,t−1 . Perhaps this
is not so surprising as the log transformation puts the squared and absolute returns on an
equal footing.

An interesting observation emerges from looking at the right panel of Table 5. Hourly
adjusting the returns does not yield any gains in the in-sample fit. In fact, quite often it yields
slight deteriorations of the in-sample fit compared to the MIDAS regressions with unadjusted
returns (and therefore also with the corresponding daily regressors). Note that in none of
the cases any explicit penalty was introduced for the use of parameters in estimating the
adjustments. This finding suggests that more complicated models may be needed to adjust
for seasonality in returns, see e.g. Andersen and Bollerslev (1997) for further discussion on
this matter. However, more complicated adjustment models may also defy the purpose of


                                                24
parsimony. In a different context, the finding may not be true, as there are probably many
other settings where seasonals are easier to model. Macroeconomic data series would be a
good example to investigate this question further, as a monthly cycle would be easier to
capture than an intra-daily one. The findings reported in Table 5 are significant, however,
as one advantage of computing daily measures is that seasonality issues are foregone through
the aggregation process. It appears from our findings that the presence of seasonals is not
an obstacle to the application of MIDAS models to high-frequency financial data.

Figure 4 displays the profile of polynomials estimated with seasonally adjusted and
unadjusted returns. This figure plots the weights that the MIDAS estimators of one week
(1wk) prediction horizon for a MIDAS model predicting log increments of quadratic variation
based on log 5-minute high-frequency intra-daily squared (absolute) returns appearing in
regression (3.1). The MIDAS polynomial weights for both hourly adjusted and unadjusted
squared returns are displayed. We note that there is very little difference between the
polynomials, except for the fact that the MIDAS regression involving unadjusted returns
tends to put more weight on the most recent days, in comparison to the MIDAS regression
involving adjusted returns.

The out-of-sample results appear in Table 6. The results parallel the in-sample findings,
namely the direct use of unadjusted intra-daily high-frequency data neither helps nor hurts.
Hourly adjustment do again much worse and are therefore not recommendable.

Overall, we note that MIDAS regressions can handle directly intra-daily high-frequency data.
The advantage of our unified framework is that it enables us to conclude that the incremental
value of using directly high-frequency data appears to be non-existent, at least in the present
context of 5-minute equity returns.



4    Conclusions

We study the predictability of return volatility with MIDAS regressions. Our approach
allows us to compare forecasting models with different measures of volatility, frequencies,
and lag lengths. While the main focus of this paper is volatility forecasting, it is clear
that the MIDAS framework is general in nature and can find a good use in any empirical
investigation that involves data sampled at different frequencies. Simplicity, robustness, and
parsimony are three of its main attributes.

                                              25
We report several intriguing findings regarding the predictability of weekly to monthly
realized volatility in equity markets. First, we find that daily realized power outperforms
daily realized volatility and that daily and intra-daily absolute returns outperform
respectively daily and intra-daily squared returns. This set of results suggests that absolute
returns are very successful at capturing fluctuations in future return volatility, despite the
predominant emphasis in the literature on squared returns. Also, we find that daily ranges
are extremely good forecasters of future volatility and are only second to realized power.
This last finding is consistent with results in Gallant et al. (1999), Alizadeh et al. (2002)
and Engle and Gallo (2003), among others, who use different methods and different data.
Finally, we show that the direct use of high-frequency data does not necessarily lead to better
volatility forecasts.

Our paper leaves one unanswered issue: Why is realized power such a good predictor of
future volatility? While there still isn’t a satisfactory answer to this question, several recent
papers have made considerable progress. First, there is now an elegant asymptotic theory
that was developed in a set of papers by Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard (2003b, 2004)
showing how realized power, and a measure called bi-power, exclude the jump component of
increments in quadratic variation. Building on the Barndorff-Nielsen and Shephard analysis,
Forsberg and Ghysels (2004) study the theoretical properties of realized power in the context
of continuous time stochastic volatility models. They confirm the intuition that realized
power is a persistent process more closely related to the long run component of volatility,
which explains its success as a regressor in the context of MIDAS regressions. Forsberg and
Ghysels (2004) also show that realized power has far less measurement noise in comparison
with realized volatility and bi-power. They also discuss other appealing features of realized
power, such as higher persistence and predictabiity in comparison with bi-power and realized
volatility.

In a recent paper, Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003) suggest to use the bi-power
variation as predictor of volatility because jump components are “noise” not helpful in
predicting future volatility . The bi-power regressor is used in “HAR regressions,” proposed
in Corsi (2003), and is shown to improve the forecasting of volatility. Our paper shares a
common theme with Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003). Both papers argue in different
ways that taking a volatility measure immune to jumps - such as realized power or bi-power,
is a good regressor to predict future volatility.18
  18
       Early drafts of the current paper and versions of the Andersen, Bollerslev and Diebold (2003) paper


                                                     26
We have kept the mixed data sampling regressions as simple as possible in the interest
of clarity and conciseness. However, there are a host of issues, such as asymmetries,
multiple predictors, and option-implied measures of volatility, that merit further attention.
These extensions are easily accommodated in the MIDAS framework and some of them are
addressed in Ghysels et al. (2002a). Others remain to be explored.




were written almost simultaneously and independently.

                                                  27
References
 [1] Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y., Mykland, P. A. and Zhang, L. (2003), “How often to sample a
     continuous-time process in the presence of market microstructure noise”, Working Paper
     w9611, NBER.

 [2] Alizadeh, S., M. Brandt and F. X. Diebold, (2002), ”Range-based estimation of
     stochastic volatility models”, Journal of Finance, 57, 1047-1091.

 [3] Andersen, T. and T. Bollerslev (1997), “Heterogeneous Information Arrivals and Return
     Volatility Dynamics: Uncovering the Long Run in high-frequency Returns”, Journal of
    Finance, 52, 975-1005.

 [4] Andersen, T. and T. Bollerslev (1998), “Answering the Skeptics: Yes, Standard
     Volatility Models Do Provide Accurate Forecasts”, International Economic Review, 39,
    885-905.

 [5] Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold and P. Labys (2001), “The Distribution of
     Exchange Rate Volatility”, Journal of American Statistical Association, 96, 42-55.

 [6] Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T. and F.X. Diebold, (2002), “ Parametric and
     Nonparametric Volatility Measurement,” in L.P. Hansen and Y. Aı̈t-Sahalia (eds.),
    Handbook of Financial Econometrics . Amsterdam: North-Holland, forthcoming.

 [7] Andersen, T., T. Bollerslev, F. X. Diebold and P. Labys (2003), “Modeling and
     Forecasting Realized Volatility”, Econometrica, 71, 529-626.

 [8] Andersen, T.G., Bollerslev, T. and F.X. Diebold, (2003), “Some Like it Smooth, and
    Some Like it Rough: Untangling Continuous and Jump Components in Measuring,
    Modeling, and Forecasting Asset Return Volatility,” Manuscript, Duke, Northwestern
    and University of Pennsylvania.

 [9] Andreou, E. and E. Ghysels (2002), “Rolling sample volatility estimators: some
     new theoretical, simulation and empirical results” Journal of Business and Economic
     Statistics, 20, 3, 363-376.

[10] Baillie, R.T., T. Bollerslev and H. O. Mikkelsen (1996), “Fractionally integrated
    generalized autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity” Journal of Econometrics, 74,
    3-30.

                                            28
[11] Bandi, F.M. and J.R. Russell,(2003), “Microstructure noise, realized volatility, and
     optimal sampling”, Working paper, Graduate School of Business, The University of
    Chicago.

[12] Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and N. Shephard (2001), “Non-Gaussian Ornstein–Uhlenbeck-
     based models and some of their uses in financial economics (with discussion), Journal
    of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B, 63, 167-241.

[13] Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and N. Shephard (2002a), “Econometric analysis of realized
     volatility and its use in estimating stochastic volatility models”, Journal of the Royal
     Statistical Society, Series B, 64, 253-280.

[14] Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and N. Shephard (2002b) “Estimating quadratic variation using
     realised variance” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 17, 457-477.

[15] Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and N. Shephard (2003a) “How accurate is the asymptotic
     approximation to the distribution of realised volatility?” in D.W.K. Andrews, J. Powell,
    P. Ruud and J. Stock (ed.), Identification and Inference for Econometric Models. A
    Festschrift for Tom Rothenberg, Cambridge University Press, (forthcoming).

[16] Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and N. Shephard (2003b) “Realised power variation and stochastic
    volatility” Bernoulli 9, 243-265.

[17] Barndorff-Nielsen, O. and N. Shephard (2004) “Power and bipower variation with
     stochastic volatility and jumps” (with discussion) Journal of Financial Econometrics,
    2, 1-48.

[18] Bollerslev, T. (1986), “Generalized Autoregressive Conditional Heteroskedasticity”,
     Journal of Econometrics, 31, 307-327.

[19] Bollerslev, T., R. Engle and D. Nelson (1994), “ARCH Models, in R. Engle and D.
    McFadden (eds.), Handbook of Econometrics, Vol. 4, Elsevier Science.

[20] Bollerslev, T. and J. M. Wooldridge (1992), ”Quasi-Maxmimum Likelihood Estimation
     and Inference in Dynamic Models with Time-Varying Covariances,” Econometric
    Reviews, 11, 143172.

[21] Bollerslev, T. and J. Wright (2001), “High-frequency data, frequency domain inference,
     and volatility forecasting”, Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 596-602.

                                             29
[22] Corsi, F. (2003), “A Simple Long Memory Model of Realized Volatility”, Manuscript,
     University of Southern Switzerland.

[23] Davidian M. and R.J. Carroll (1987), “Variance Function Estimation”, Journal of the
     American Statistical Association, 82, 1079-1091.

[24] Dhrymes, P. (1971), Distributed Lags: Problems of Formulation and Estimation,
    Holden-Day, San Francisco.

[25] Ding, Z., and C. W. J. Granger (1996), “Modeling Volatility Persistence of Speculative
    Returns: A New Approach”, Journal of Econometrics, 73, 185-215.

[26] Ding, Z., C. W.J Granger and R. F. Engle (1993), “A long memory property of stock
     market returns and a new models”, Journal of Empirical Finance, 1, 83-106.

[27] Engle, R.F. (1982), “Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity with Estimates of
     the Variance of United Kingdom Inflation”, Econometrica, 50, 987-1008.

[28] Engle, R.F. and G. Gallo (2003), “A Multiple Indicator Model for Volatility Using Intra
     Daily Data”, Discussion Paper NYU and Universitá di Firenze.

[29] Forsberg, L. and E. Ghysels (2004), “Jumps or No Jumps, Smooth or Rough: It Does
    Not Matter For Predicting Volatility - Choosing the Right Regressor Does,” Discussion
    paper UNC.

[30] Gallant, A. R., C.-T. Hsu, and Tauchen, G. (1999), “Using Daily Range Data to
     Calibrate Volatility Diffusions and Extract the Forward Integrated Volatility”, Review
     of Economics and Statistics, 84, 617-631.

[31] Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara and R. Valkanov (2002a), “There is a Risk-return Tradeoff
     after all,” Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).

[32] Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara and R. Valkanov (2002b), “The MIDAS Touch:
     Mixed Data Sampling Regression,” Discussion Paper UCLA and UNC available at:
     http://www.unc.edu/ eghysels

[33] Ghysels, E., P. Santa-Clara, A. Sinko and R. Valkanov (2004), “MIDAS Regressions:
     Results and New Directions” Work in progress.



                                            30
[34] Giraitis, L., P. Kokoszka and R. Leipus (2000), “Stationary ARCH models: dependence
     structure and Central Limit Theorem”, Econometric Theory, 16, 3-22, 2000

[35] Granger, C.W.J. (1969), Investigating Causal Relations by Econometric Models and
     Cross Spectral Methods, Econometrica, 37, 428-438.

[36] Greene, W. H. (2000), Econometic Analysis, Fourth Ed., Prentice Hall.

[37] Hansen, L.P. and T.J. Sargent (1993) ,“Seasonality and approximation errors in rational
     expectations models”, Journal Of Econometrics 55, 21-55.

[38] Hansen, P. and A. Lunde, (2004), “Realized Variance and IID Market Microstructure
     Noise” Discussion Paper.

[39] Harvey, A.C. (1998) “Long Memory in Stochastic Volatility,” in J. Knight and S. Satchell
    (eds.) Forecasting Volatility in Financial Markets, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford.

[40] Judge,G., W.E.Griffith, R.C. Hill, H. Lutkepohl and T.-C. Lee (1985) The theory and
    Practice of Econometrics, Second Edition, Jhon Wiley & Sons.

[41] Martens, M., Y.-C. Chang and S. J. Taylor (2002) ,“A Comparison of Seasonal
     Adjustment Methods when Forecasting Intraday Volatility”, Journal of Financial
    Research, 25, 283299.

[42] Merton, R. C. (1980), ”On estimating the expected return on the market:              An
    exploratory investigation”, Journal of Financial Economics, 8, 323-361.

[43] Nelson, D.B. and C.Q. Cao (1992), “ Inequality Constraints in the Univariate GARCH
     Model” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 10, 229-235.

[44] Sims, C. A. (1974), ”Distributed lags”, in Intrilligator, M. D. and D. A. Kendrick,
     Frontiers of Quantitative Economics II, North-Holland, Amsterdam.

[45] Sims, C.A. (1993), “Rational expectations modeling with seasonally adjusted data”,
     Journal Of Econometrics, 55, 9-19.

[46] Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (2003), Introduction to Econometrics, Addison-Wesley.

[47] Taylor, S. J. and X. Xu (1997), “The incremental volatility information in one million
     foreign exchange quotations”, Journal of Empirical Finance, 4, 317-340.

                                             31
[48] West, K. (2004), “Forecast Evaluation” in Elliott, G., C.W.J. Granger and A.
     Timmerman (eds.) Handbook of Economic Forecasting (Elsevier, forthcoming).

[49] Woerner J. (2002), “Variational sums and power variation: a unifying approach to
     model selection and estimation in semimartingale models”, Discussion Paper, Oxford
     University.

[50] Wooldridge, J.M. (1999), Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, South-
     Western.

[51] Wood, R.A., T. H. McInish and J. K. Ord (1985) “An Investigation of Transactions
     Data for NYSE Stocks”, Journal of Finance, 40, 723-739.

[52] Zhang, L., Mykland, P. A. and Aı̈t-Sahalia, Y. (2003), “A tale of two time scales:
    Determining integrated volatility with noisy high-frequency data”, Working Paper
    w10111, NBER.




                                          32
              Figure 1: Unconstrained Weights on Lagged Daily Predictors
This figure plots the weights (normalized to sum up to one) obtained from an OLS log volatility regression
for a four week (4wks) prediction horizon with 10 lags of the following daily regressors: (1) realized volatility,
denoted by QV M IDAS; (2) realized power variation, denoted by P V M IDAS; (3) absolute returns; and
(4) daily range, denoted by daily R. The weights are estimated with no restrictions using the entire sample.
   0.35
                                                                                     QV MIDAS
                                                                                     Daily absolute returns
                                                                                     Daily R
                                                                                     PV MIDAS

    0.3




   0.25




    0.2




   0.15




    0.1




   0.05




      0




 −0.05




   −0.1
          1        2          3          4          5           6          7          8           9           10




                                                        33
  Figure 2: MIDAS and ABDL Log Volatility prediction Four Week Horizon
This figure plots the weights of the MIDAS estimators with a four-week prediction horizon for different
regressors: (1) a MIDAS model based on daily squared returns appearing in regression (1.9); (2) MIDAS
regression involving past daily realized volatility appearing in regression (1.1) denoted by QV; (3) daily
realized power to run regression (1.7) denoted by PV; (4) daily absolute returns to run regression (1.5)
denoted ABS and finally; and (5) the daily range for regression (1.6) denoted by R. The solid line is the
benchmark ABDL ARFI(5,d) model specification appearing in equation (1.10). All estimates are obtained
using the entire sample.
 0.35
                                                                                ABDL
                                                                                QV MIDAS
                                                                                Daily squared returns
                                                                                Daily R
                                                                                PV MIDAS


  0.3




 0.25




  0.2




 0.15




  0.1




 0.05




    0
        0      5        10        15       20        25       30        35        40       45           50




                                                   34
     Figure 3: MIDAS Volatility Four Weeks Horizon and Daily Regressors
This figure plots the weights that the MIDAS estimators with a four-weeks (4wks) prediction horizon for
different regressors: (1) a MIDAS model based on daily squared returns appearing in regression (1.9); (2)
MIDAS regression involving past daily realized volatility appearing in regression (1.1) denoted by QV; (3)
daily realized power to run regression (1.7) denoted by PV; (4) daily absolute returns to run regression (1.5)
denoted by ABS; and (5) the daily range for regression (1.6) denoted by R. All estimates are obtained using
the entire sample.




             0.8
                                                                                       Daily   squared returns
                                                                                       Daily   QV
                                                                                       Daily   ABS
                                                                                       Daily   R
                                                                                       Daily   PV

             0.7




             0.6




             0.5




             0.4




             0.3




             0.2




             0.1




              0
                   0     5       10       15       20       25        30       35       40          45           50




                                                     35
   Figure 4: MIDAS Weights One Week Horizon and Intra-Daily Regressors
This figure plots the weights of the MIDAS estimators for one week (1wk) prediction horizon for predicting log
increments of quadratic variation based on log 5-minute high-frequency intra-daily squared (absolute) returns
appearing in regression (3.1). The MIDAS polynomial weights for both hourly adjusted and unadjusted
squared returns are displayed. All estimates are obtained using the entire sample.

          −3
      x 10
  3
                                                                                                             Unadj.
                                                                                                             Adj.




2.5




  2




1.5




  1




0.5




  0
      0        5         10         15          20         25         30          35         40         45            50




                                                     36
             Table 1: In-Sample M SE Comparisons of MIDAS Models with Daily Regressors - DJ Index
     Each entry in the table corresponds to the ratios M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL , where M SE ABDL is the in-sample MSE for the
     benchmark ARFI(5,d) model in equation (1.10) and M SE M IDAS is the in-sample MSE from the MIDAS model using lagged
     daily predictors, shown in the corresponding column and discussed in section 1.1. The empirical results are based on a dataset
     consisting of five-minute intra-day returns of the Dow Jones Composite Portfolio (DJ) over a ten year period, from April 1, 1993
     to October 31, 2003 and for a subsample April 1, 1993 to March 31, 2001 (left). The MIDAS regressions are run on a weekly,
                                                                                        (Hm)
     bi-weekly, tri-weekly, and monthly data sampling schemes with non-overlapping Q̃t+H,t , for H = 5 days (1wk), H = 10 (2wks),
     15 (3wks) and 20 (4wks) days using two measures of volatility Q t+H,t and log (Qt+H,t ), presented in Panels A and B, respectively.
     The MIDAS regressions are obtained with the Beta lag structure (1.2).


                                     Sample Apr. 1, 1993 - Mar. 31, 2001                                                   Sample Apr. 1, 1993 - Dec. 31, 2003

                      (m)             2                                                       (m)          (m)             2                                                   (m)
                    Q̃t,t−1          rt,t−1         |rt,t−1 |      [hi − lo]t,t−1           P̃t,t−1      Q̃t,t−1          rt,t−1         |rt,t−1 |      [hi − lo]t,t−1       P̃t,t−1


                                                                                      (m)
                                                                        Panel A: Q̃t,t−H MIDAS with daily lags of regressors
37




        1   wk       0.871           1.043           0.969             0.856                0.825         0.819           1.023           1.006             0.866             0.788
        2   wks      0.851           0.962           0.875             0.791                0.758         0.831           1.118           1.032             0.933             0.711
        3   wks      0.793           0.881           0.774             0.722                0.691         0.683           1.016           0.933             0.819             0.649
        4   wks      0.805           0.908           0.806             0.743                0.681         0.696           1.043           0.987             0.837             0.606

                                                                                       (m)
                                                                      Panel B: log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS with daily lags of regressors

                        (m)                                                                    (m)           (m)                                                                 (m)
                  log(Q̃t,t−1 )   log(rt,t−1 )2   log |rt,t−1 |   log[hi − lo]t,t−1    log(P̃t,t−1 )   log(Q̃t,t−1 )   log(rt,t−1 )2   log |rt,t−1 |   log[hi − lo]t,t−1   log(P̃t,t−1 )

        1   wk       0.924           1.509             —               1.062                0.921         0.938           1.574            —                1.066             0.904
        2   wks      0.881           1.396             —               1.015                0.867         0.935           1.465            —                1.082             0.896
        3   wks      0.821           1.134             —               0.893                0.772         0.902           1.311            —                1.024             0.862
        4   wks      0.812           1.177             —               0.921                0.761         0.873           1.326            —                1.060             0.825
     Table 2: Regression Diagnostics and Estimated Weights of MIDAS Models with Daily Regressors - DJ
     Index
     The table contains estimated MIDAS regression parameters (equations (1.1) and (1.2)). We present a summary of the weight
     function bH (k, θ) rather than the parameters θ because this is the object of interest. Column“Day 1” represents how much weight
     is placed on the first daily lag of the predictor, Column“Days 2-5” report how much of the weight is on the second to the fifth
     lag and so on. The column “Q(10)” reports the Portmanteau test of serial correlation in the residuals. The empirical results are
     based on a data set consisting of five-minute intra-day returns of the Dow Jones Composite Portfolio (DJ), April 1, 1993 to March
     31, 2001. The regressions are run on a weekly, bi-weekly, tri-weekly, and monthly data sampling schemes with non-overlapping
       (Hm)
     Q̃t+H,t , for H = 5 days (1wk), H = 10 (2wks), 15 (3wks) and 20 (4wks) days, respectively. The top two panels display the
     estimates from the forecasting regressions of Q t+H,t , while the bottom two panels display the estimates from the forecasting
     regressions of log (Qt+H,t ). The left and right panels are produced using lagged daily realized volatility or lagged daily realized
     power as predictors. Results from using other predictors (daily squared returns, absolute returns, and ranges) are very similar
     and are hence omitted for brevity. They are available from the authors.


                                                                                Sample Apr. 1, 1993 - Mar. 31, 2001

                  µH          φH       Day 1    Days 2-5    Days 6-20     > 20 Days        Q(10)    µH           φH       Day 1     Days 2-5    Days 6-20     > 20 Days       Q(10)
38




                                (m)                                            (m)                                (m)                                            (m)
                              Q̃t,t−H MIDAS with daily lags of regressors Q̃t,t−1                               Q̃t,t−H MIDAS with daily lags of regressors P̃t,t−1

        1   wk    0.798       4.079    0.155      0.429        0.402         0.014         0.001   -3.250      609.918    0.164      0.443        0.382         0.011         0.009
        2   wks   1.987       7.692    0.118      0.363        0.478         0.041         0.191   -5.290     1115.270    0.175      0.459        0.358         0.008         0.060
        3   wks   3.281      11.387    0.085      0.286        0.524         0.105         0.738   -8.123     1705.793    0.103      0.330        0.504         0.063         0.700
        4   wks   5.675      13.403    0.086      0.288        0.523         0.103         0.329   -8.620     2080.555    0.089      0.296        0.521         0.094         0.719

                               (m)                                                   (m)                         (m)                                                   (m)
                          log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS with daily lags of regressors log(Q̃t,t−1 )                   log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS with daily lags of regressors log(P̃t,t−1 )

        1   wk    1.657      0.911     0.203      0.491        0.304         0.003         0.102   9.671        1.883     0.129      0.385        0.456         0.030         0.025
        2   wks   2.359      0.884     0.194      0.482        0.320         0.004         0.062   10.153       1.832     0.122      0.372        0.470         0.036         0.077
        3   wks   2.786      0.881     0.111      0.348        0.490         0.050         0.066   10.415       1.795     0.101      0.325        0.507         0.067         0.161
        4   wks   3.074      0.859     0.084      0.283        0.525         0.109         0.370   10.640       1.779     0.061      0.219        0.517         0.202         0.229
         Table 3: Out-of-Sample MSE Comparisons of MIDAS Models with Daily Regressors - DJ Index
     Each entry in the table corresponds to the ratios M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL , where M SE ABDL is the out-of-sample MSE for the
     benchmark ARFI(5,d) model in equation (1.10) and M SE M IDAS is the out-of-sample MSE from the MIDAS model (equations
     (1.1) and (1.2)) using lagged daily predictors, shown in the corresponding column and discussed in section 1.1. We obtain the
     out-of-sample forecasts by estimating the models with data from April 1, 1993 to March 31, 2001 and then use the estimates from
     these regressions (shown in Table 2 above) to forecast future realized volatilities. The regressions are run on a weekly, bi-weekly,
                                                                                   (Hm)
     tri-weekly, and monthly data sampling schemes with non-overlapping Q̃t+H,t , for H = 5 days (1wk), H = 10 (2wks), 15 (3wks)
                                                                                                                                 2
     and 20 (4wks) days using two measures of volatility Q t+H,t and log (Qt+H,t ). For the log specification, models with log r t,t−1 and
     log |rt,t−1 | regressors are identical, hence the vertical bar to avoid duplication.


                                        (m)                                                                   (m)
                                       Q̃t,t−H MIDAS                                                     log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS

                      (m)      2                                      (m)           (m)          2                                                  (m)
                    Q̃t,t−1   rt,t−1   |rt,t−1 |   [hi − lo]t,t−1   P̃t,t−1   log Q̃t,t−1   log rt,t−1    log |rt,t−1 |   log[hi − lo]t,t−1   log P̃t,t−1
39




            1 wk    0.802     1.048     1.005          0.819        0.778       0.746         1.457           —                0.815           0.729

            2 wks   0.920     1.168     1.039          0.855        0.726       0.794         1.296           —                0.882           0.731

            3 wks   0.814     0.995     0.874          0.794        0.724       0.751         1.089           —                0.797           0.714

            4 wks   0.872     1.089     0.985          0.857        0.774       0.893         1.162           —                0.981           0.854
     Table 4: Out-of-Sample MSE Comparisons of MIDAS Models with Daily Regressors - Individual Stocks
     This table displays similar results as in Table 3, but for six individual stocks rather than the DJ Index. More specifically, for each
     of the six stocks – Disney Co (DIS), General Electric Co (GE), J.P. Morgan Chase (JPM), Exxon Mobil (XOM), MacDonald’s
     (MCD), and Honeywell Co (HON) – each entry in the table corresponds to the ratios M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL , where M SE ABDL
     is the out-of-sample MSE for the benchmark ARFI(5,d) model in equation (1.10) and M SE M IDAS is the out-of-sample MSE from
     the MIDAS model (equations (1.1) and (1.2)) using lagged daily predictors, shown in the corresponding column and discussed in
     section 1.1. We obtain the out-of-sample forecasts by estimating the models with data from April 1, 1993 to March 31, 2001 and
     then use the estimates from these regressions (not shown for brevity) to forecast future realized volatilities. The regressions are
                                                                                                               (Hm)
     run on a weekly, bi-weekly, tri-weekly, and monthly data sampling schemes with non-overlapping Q̃t+H,t , for H = 5 days (1wk),
     H = 10 (2wks), 15 (3wks) and 20 (4wks) days using two measures of volatility Q t+H,t and log (Qt+H,t ). For the log specification,
                       2
     models with log rt,t−1 and log |rt,t−1 | regressors are identical, hence the vertical bar to avoid duplication.

                                             (m)                                                                        (m)
                                            Q̃t,t−H MIDAS                                                          log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS

                          (m)       2                                      (m)               (m)           2                                                 (m)
                         Q̃t,t−1   rt,t−1   |rt,t−1 |   [hi − lo]t,t−1   P̃t,t−1        log Q̃t,t−1   log rt,t−1    log |rt,t−1 |   log[hi − lo]t,t−1   log P̃t,t−1
40




                                                                                   Individual stock: DIS

                 1 wk    0.895     1.261     1.175          1.027        0.812            0.926         2.090            —               1.155            0.936

                 2 wks   0.852     1.149     1.015          0.865        0.698             0.806        1.770           —                1.013            0.804

                 3 wks   0.808     1.131     1.000          0.890        0.684             0.794        1.826           —                0.984            0.750

                 4 wks   0.761     1.024     0.889          0.824        0.612            0.718         1.474            —               0.910            0.752

                                                                                   Individual stock: GE

                 1 wk    0.976     1.402     1.336          1.126        0.839             0.920        2.046           —                1.219            0.853

                 2 wks   0.843     1.163     1.055          0.980        0.751             0.814        1.591           —                0.976            0.749

                 3 wks   0.766     1.015     0.937          0.854        0.672             0.742        1.633           —                0.956            0.692

                 4 wks   0.961     0.987     0.829          0.867        0.807             0.926        1.306           —                0.878            0.882

                                                                                   Individual stock: JPM

                 1 wk    1.042     1.392     1.165          0.923        0.835             0.903        1.831           —                1.083            0.872

                 2 wks   0.827     1.281     1.095          0.785        0.688             0.814        1.597           —                0.938            0.780

                 3 wks   1.044     1.232     0.995          0.741        0.727             0.845        1.487           —                0.863            0.770

                 4 wks   0.932     1.062     0.972          0.722        0.692             0.806        1.378           —                0.805            0.753

     Table continued on next page ...
     For a description, please see previous page.


                                             (m)                                                                        (m)
                                            Q̃t,t−H MIDAS                                                          log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS

                          (m)       2                                      (m)               (m)           2                                                 (m)
                         Q̃t,t−1   rt,t−1   |rt,t−1 |   [hi − lo]t,t−1   P̃t,t−1        log Q̃t,t−1   log rt,t−1    log |rt,t−1 |   log[hi − lo]t,t−1   log P̃t,t−1


                                                                                 Individual stock: XOM

                 1 wk    1.005     1.469     1.435          1.066        0.723            0.822         2.350            —               1.319            0.852

                 2 wks   0.951     1.254     1.210          0.979        0.730             0.804        1.958           —                1.114            0.791

                 3 wks   0.854     1.169     1.121          0.922        0.767             0.848        1.545           —                1.002            0.792

                 4 wks   0.949     1.328     1.107          0.954        0.793             0.871        1.366           —                0.976            0.809

                                                                                 Individual stock: MCD

                 1 wk    1.044     1.394     1.497          1.380        0.934             0.960        1.740           —                1.346            0.922

                 2 wks   0.952     1.365     1.499          1.352        0.834             0.889        1.740           —                1.336            0.815
41




                 3 wks   1.143     1.271     1.443          1.286        0.893             0.881        1.775           —                1.292            0.848

                 4 wks   0.955     1.082     1.236          1.129        0.822             0.894        1.462           —                1.108            0.833

                                                                                   Individual stock: HON

                 1 wk    1.087     1.255     1.305          1.019        0.833             0.991        1.310           —                1.157            0.906

                 2 wks   0.942     1.128     1.170          0.935        0.796             0.925        1.072           —                1.027            0.842

                 3 wks   0.732     1.119     1.141          1.038        0.552             0.841        1.072           —                1.169            0.755

                 4 wks   1.160     1.146     1.126          1.050        0.900             1.042       0.861             —               1.096            0.944
     Table 5: In-Sample M SE Comparisons of MIDAS Models with High-Frequency Regressors - DJ Index
     The empirical results are based on a data set consisting of five-minute intra-day returns of the Dow Jones Composite Portfolio
     (DJ) over a ten year period, from April 1, 1993 to October 31, 2003. In conducting the out-of-sample forecasts, we split the sample
     into two subsamples, April 1, 1993 to March 31, 2001 and April 1, 2001 to October 31, 2003. Therefore, the left panel covers
     the entire sample, the right one the first subsample. The regressions are run on a weekly, bi-weekly, tri-weekly, and monthly
                                                         (Hm)
     data sampling schemes with non-overlapping Q̃t+H,t , for H = 5 days (1wk), H = 10 (2wks), 15 (3wks) and 20 (4wks) days
     respectively. The MIDAS regressions are obtained with the Beta lag structure (1.2), imposing θ 1 = 1. We presents the in-sample
     ratios M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL , where M SE ABDL is the MSE for the benchmark ARFI(5,d) model appearing in equation (1.10).
     The results from forecasting the two measures of volatility Q t+H,t and log (Qt+H,t ) are presented in Panels A and B, respectively.
                                                  2
     For the log specification, models with log r t,t−1 and log |rt,t−1 | regressors are identical, hence the vertical bar to avoid duplication.


                                          Unadjusted Model                                                             Hourly Adjusted Model

                      Apr. 1, 1993 - Mar. 31, 2001          Apr. 1, 1993 - Dec. 31, 2003           Apr. 1, 1993 - Mar. 31, 2001         Apr. 1, 1993 - Dec. 31, 2003

                         2
                        rt,t−1/m         |rt,t− 1 m |          2
                                                              rt,t−1/m       |rt,t−1/m |              2
                                                                                                     rt,t−1/m          |rt,t−1/m |         2
                                                                                                                                          rt,t−1/m        |rt,t−1/m |
                                                /
42




                                                             (m)
                                                           Q̃t,t−H MIDAS with high frequency lags of regressors

            1   wks       0.868            0.825               0.802            0.791                 0.903               0.853             0.832            0.831
            2   wks       0.849            0.759               0.831            0.709                 0.885               0.793             0.875            0.756
            3   wks       0.770            0.673               0.661            0.634                 0.789               0.696             0.677            0.651
            4   wks       0.782            0.680               0.646            0.597                 0.724               0.691             0.736            0.610

                                                              (m)
                                                         log(Q̃t,t−H ) MIDAS with high frequency lags of regressors

                           2
                      log(rt,t−1/m )   log |rt,t−1/m |          2
                                                           log(rt,t−1/m )   log |rt,t−1/m |            2
                                                                                                  log(rt,t−1/m )      log |rt,t−1/m |        2
                                                                                                                                        log(rt,t−1/m )   log |rt,t−1/m |

            1   wks       0.986              —                 0.983              —                   1.039                 —               1.091              —
            2   wks       0.911              —                 0.951              —                   0.953                 —               1.030              —
            3   wks       0.736              —                 0.893              —                   0.745                 —               0.959              —
            4   wks       0.743              —                 0.854              —                   0.786                 —               0.893              —
     Table 6: Out-of-Sample MSE Comparisons of MIDAS Models with High-Frequency Regressors - DJ
     Index
     The empirical results are based on a data set consisting of five-minute intra-day returns of the Dow Jones Composite Portfolio
     (DJ) over a ten year period, from April 1, 1993 to October 31, 2003. In conducting the out-of-sample forecasts, we split the
     sample into two subsamples, April 1, 1993 to March 31, 2001 and April 1, 2001 to October 31, 2003. We presents the in-sample
     ratios M SE M IDAS /M SE ABDL , where M SE ABDL is the MSE for the benchmark ARFI(5,d) model appearing in equation (1.10).
     All models predict the square root of volatility out of sample, similar to Andersen et al. (2003). The MIDAS regressions are
     reported in Table 2. Entries in bold show the best performing model for each prediction horizon across separate panels. For the
                                         2
     log specification, models with log rt,t−1 and log |rt,t−1 | regressors are identical, hence the vertical bar to avoid duplication.


                                        Unadjusted Model                               Hourly Adjusted Model

                              (m)                              (m)                          (m)                            (m)
                         Q̃t,t−H                        log(Q̃t,t−H )                  Q̃t,t−H                      log(Q̃t,t−H )

                    2                                2                            2                              2
                   rt,t−1/m     |rt,t−1/m |     log rt,t−1/m   log |rt,t−1/m |   rt,t−1/m     |rt,t−1/m |   log rt,t−1/m   log |rt,t−1/m |
43




           1 wks    0.797           0.783         0.870                 —         0.880           0.834        1.058                —

           2 wks    0.905           0.727         0.855                 —         0.956           0.809        1.005                —

           3 wks    0.987           0.883         0.815                 —         1.000           0.892        0.927                —

           4 wks    1.035           0.787         0.868                 —         1.259           0.873        0.938                —
