                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           FAST TIMES AT RIDGEMONT HIGH?
                     THE EFFECT OF COMPULSORY SCHOOLING LAWS
                                 ON TEENAGE BIRTHS

                                            Sandra E. Black
                                            Paul J. Devereux
                                            Kjell G. Salvanes

                                         Working Paper 10911
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10911


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The authors would like to thank Marina Bassi for helpful research assistance. Black and Devereux gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the National Science Foundation and the California Center for
Population Research. Special thanks to Enrico Moretti for providing the data on U.S. compulsory schooling
legislation. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Fast Times at Ridgemont High? The Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on Teenage Births
Sandra E. Black, Paul J. Devereux, and Kjell G. Salvanes
NBER Working Paper No. 10911
November 2004
JEL No. I21, J13, J24

                                             ABSTRACT

Research suggests that teenage childbearing adversely affects both the outcomes of the mothers as

well as those of their children. We know that low-educated women are more likely to have a teenage

birth, but does this imply that policies that increase educational attainment reduce early fertility? This

paper investigates whether increasing mandatory educational attainment through compulsory

schooling legislation encourages women to delay childbearing. We use variation induced by changes

in compulsory schooling laws in both the United States and Norway to estimate the effect in two

very different institutional environments. We find evidence that increased compulsory schooling

does in fact reduce the incidence of teenage childbearing in both the United States and Norway, and

these results are quite robust to various specification checks. Somewhat surprisingly, we also find

that the magnitude of these effects is quite similar in the two countries. These results suggest that

legislation aimed at improving educational outcomes may have spillover effects onto the fertility

decisions of teenagers.

Sandra E. Black                                          Kjell Salvanes
Department of Economics                                  Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles                  The Norwegian School of Economics and
9373 Bunche Hall                                         Business Administration
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477                               Helleveien 30, N-5045 Bergen Norway
and NBER                                                 kjell.salvanes@nhh.no
sblack@econ.ucla.edu

Paul J. Devereaux
Department of Economics
University of California at Los Angeles
9373 Bunche Hall
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
devereux@econ.ucla.edu
1. Introduction



       Research suggests that teenage childbearing adversely affects women’s economic

outcomes such as the level of completed schooling, labor market participation, and

wages.1 Given these deleterious consequences, it is important to determine what factors

contribute to this decision. We know that low-educated women are more likely to have a

teenage birth, but does this imply that policies that increase educational attainment reduce

early fertility? In particular, would increasing mandatory educational attainment

(through compulsory schooling legislation) encourage women to delay childbearing? If

compulsory schooling reduces harmful or risky behaviors, then these factors should be

considered when evaluating the benefits of this type of legislation.

       This paper proposes to provide evidence on the causal effects of changes in

compulsory schooling laws on teenage childbearing using data from the United States

and Norway. Having data from these two countries provides an interesting contrast: one

country is very supportive of teenagers who have children, with extensive financial

support (Norway), while the other is much more punitive in its treatment (the United

States). Understanding the differences in responses to compulsory schooling laws can

provide useful information, not only on the direct effect of schooling laws on teenage

fertility, but also the relative difference across different institutional environments.

       In the United States, there has been extensive variation in compulsory schooling

laws across states and over time. Changes in these laws have been used as instruments for

education in other contexts by Acemoglu and Angrist (2001), Lochner and Moretti

(2004), and Lleras-Muney (2002). There were many changes in minimum schooling




                                               2
requirements between the 1920s and the 1970s; we utilize changes over this entire time

period by using data from the Census from 1940 through 1980 to analyze cohorts born

between 1910 and 1960.

        During the 1960s in Norway, there was a drastic change in the compulsory

schooling laws affecting primary and middle schools. Pre-reform, the Norwegian

education system required children to attend school through the seventh grade; after the

reform, this was extended to the ninth grade, adding two years of required schooling.

Implementation of the reform occurred in different municipalities at different times,

starting in 1960 and continuing through 1972, allowing for regional as well as time series

variation. Evidence in the literature suggests that these reforms had a large and

significant impact on educational attainment.2 We study cohorts impacted by the reform -

- women born between 1947 and 1958.

        Our results suggest that increased compulsory schooling does seem to reduce the

incidence of teenage childbearing in both the United States and Norway. These findings

suggest that policy interventions to increase female education at the lower tail of the

educational distribution may be an effective means of reducing rates of teenage

childbearing.

        Once this relationship is established, it is then useful to attempt to understand the

mechanisms through which this relationship works. We examine two possible

mechanisms. The first is the “incarceration effect”; to the extent that compulsory

schooling reduces the time available to engage in risky behavior, the incidence of teenage



1 See Klepinger, Lundberg, and Plotnick (1999), Angrist and Evans (1996), and Levine and Painter (2003).
2 See Black, Devereux and Salavanes (2003). Results on the impact of similar reforms on educational
attendance also exists for Sweden, see Meghir and Palme (2003) and for England and Ireland, see Harmon
and Walker (1995) and Oreopulos (2003).


                                                   3
pregnancy might go down. The second is the “human capital effect”; additional

education increases both current and expected future human capital and this higher level

of human capital could change fertility decisions. We describe these mechanisms in

more detail and discuss possible tests to distinguish between them. Our estimates suggest

that the effect of the laws on fertility is not just an “incarceration” effect, resulting also

from the effects of the laws on human capital accumulation.

        The paper unfolds as follows. In Sections 2 and 3, we provide a short overview of

the literature and brief descriptions of the support systems for single mothers in Norway

and the U.S., as well as a description of the compulsory schooling law changes used for

identification. Sections 4 and 5 present our estimation strategy and the data sets used.

Section 6 presents the estimation results and robustness checks. In Section 7, attempts are

made to disentangle some possible explanations for a causal relationship between

compulsory schooling laws and fertility choice. Section 8 concludes.



2. Background Information

2.1 Previous literature

        Teenage motherhood has been associated with many long-term economic and

health disadvantages such as lower education, less work experience and lower wages,

welfare dependence, lower birth weights, higher rates of infant mortality, and higher rates

of participation in crime (Ellwood, 1988; Jencks, 1989; Hoffman et al., 1993; Kiernan,

1997). There is an ongoing debate as to the extent that these adverse effects of teen

childbearing are truly caused by having a teen birth rather than reflecting unobserved

family background differences. (See Hotz et al. 2002 for an example). However, the




                                                4
balance of evidence suggests that at least part of the negative consequences of teen births

on mothers is causal (Klepinger, Lundberg, and Plotnick, 1999; Angrist and Evans, 1996;

Levine and Paintner, 2003). Thus, as a policy matter, efforts to reduce the rate of teen

childbearing are often considered as a strategy to improve the life chances of young

women.

       In addition to the effects of teen childbearing on mothers, there is also a literature

concerned with the negative effects on children. In recent work, Francesconi (2004) takes

a family fixed effects approach to show that children born to teenagers have poorer

outcomes as adults than children born to women when older. In addition, Hunt (2003)

provides evidence that children of teen mothers are more likely to engage in crime. Thus,

the policy interest in this topic also arises from presumed negative effects on children.

       Despite the policy relevance, there has been little work studying the role of

education policy in reducing teen fertility. A recent paper by McCrary and Royer (2003)

focuses on two states (California and Texas) and examines the effect of education on

teenage childbearing and child health by applying a regression discontinuity approach

using school starting-age rules. They find little evidence that the induced educational

changes affect children’s health or woman’s fertility choices. However, while their data

set is very well-suited for studying children’s health (administrative data on all births in

California and Texas from 1989 to 2001), it is less appropriate for focusing on teenage

fertility decisions (as it contains a sample of only those women who did in fact have

children). We attempt to enhance our understanding of the link between teenage fertility

and education by using data that is better suited for this particular question, examining a

broader region (the entire United States and Norway), and using a different source of




                                              5
variation by focusing on changes in dropout ages rather than school entry ages.

2.2 Institutional setting

       In addition to the fact the our identification strategy allows us to use large and

representative data sets, another advantage of our study is that we can compare the effect

of changes in compulsory schooling laws on teenage fertility choice across two countries.

Norway and the United States are similar in that both have very high GDP per capita and

education levels, but differ in terms of institutional environment; of particular importance

are the welfare support systems for teenage mothers.

       The U.S. system of support for teenage mothers is considered to be relatively

unsupportive when compared to many other industrialized countries. Established under

Title IV of the Social Security Act, Aid to Dependent Children was operated largely

under state and local control (Baicker 2004). Targeted primarily at the children (and not

the parents), eligibility was often limited by “suitable home” requirements (stating that

benefits could only be given when eligible children resided in a suitable home), seasonal

employment policies, and illegitimacy exclusions. Although there is significant variation

across states, there is a common belief that it is not a generous system relative to more

socialized countries such as Norway.

       In contrast, since the early 1960s, the relevant time period for the compulsory

schooling legislation change in Norway, the Norwegian welfare system has been very

generous (Rønsen and Strøm, 1991). To enable single parents to take care of their

children without working, the government provides income support via the social security

system until the child is ten years of age (so long as the woman is not living with the




                                             6
child’s father).3 The government also helps to enforce child support payments from the

father. In addition, the government pays all education expenses for the mother

(reimbursement is only partial if the woman is working) and provides subsidized housing

and child care4 Finally, single parents get double child allowances from the government.5

In summary, the Norwegian system of support for single mothers is very generous.

          Access to contraception and abortion has changed in both countries in the past 40

years. Although the birth control pill was approved in 1960 by the Food and Drug

Administration and spread rapidly among married women, it wasn’t until the late 1960s

that it diffused among single women (with a series of changes in state legislation

reducing the age of majority and extending mature minor decisions. See Goldin and Katz

(2002) for more details.) Thus, the pill influenced behavior during the teenage years of

only the youngest cohorts in our U.S. sample. In Norway, the birth control pill was

introduced in the late 1960s and spread quite quickly and so was available during the

teenage years of some of the later cohorts in the sample we study (Noack and Ostby,

1981).6

          Abortion was not legalized in Norway until 1979. In the U.S., abortion was

legalized in 1973 through the landmark Roe vs. Wade Supreme Court decision.7 As a

result, almost none of the women in either our Norwegian or U.S. sample had access to

legal abortion during their teenage years.


3 This system was introduced in 1964 and became a part of the social security system in 1971.
4 In 1990 the income support system was made less generous in order to provide incentives for work;
however, this is not relevant to the cohorts we study.
5 All parents get a child allowance in Norway (about 1000 NOK per year).
6 Interestingly, we have examined the effects of the compulsory schooling legislation on earlier cohorts
only and find similar effects, suggesting that this changing environment has no significant impact on our
results.
7 Abortion was legal in New York, California, Washington, Hawaii, and Arkansas beginning in 1970. See
Levine (2004a, 2004b) for more details.


                                                    7
3. The Compulsory Schooling Laws

(a) Changes in U.S. Compulsory Schooling Laws

       Since the history of compulsory schooling laws in the U.S. is by now well

documented (see, in particular, Lleras-Muney 2001, and Goldin and Katz 2003), we will

not describe them in great detail here. Essentially, there were five possible restrictions on

educational attendance: 1. maximum age by which a child must be enrolled, 2. minimum

age at which a child may drop out, 3. minimum years of schooling before dropping out, 4.

minimum age for a work permit, and 5. minimum schooling required for a work permit.

In the years relevant to our sample, 1924 to 1974, states changed compulsory attendance

laws many times, usually upwards but sometimes downwards. Appendix Table 1 shows

the minimum dropout age by states over time. Although there is variation, there is also

substantial persistence, highlighting the importance of adjusting standard errors for

clustering at the state level. Papers on the topic have used a variety of combinations of

these restrictions as their measures of compulsory schooling. To be consistent with the

source of variation in our Norwegian data, our baseline specification will examine the

effect of the minimum dropout age on teenage pregnancy. As a specification check, we

will also examine the sensitivity of our results to the use of required years of schooling,

defined as the difference between the minimum dropout age and the maximum

enrollment age following Lleras-Muney and Goldin and Katz, as well as to the inclusion

of the minimum age for a work permit. We follow Acemoglu and Angrist (2001) and

Lochner and Moretti (2004) in assigning compulsory attendance laws to women on the

basis of state of birth and the year when the individual was 14 years old (with the




                                              8
exception that the enrollment age is assigned based on the laws in place when the

individual was 7 years old).

       Lleras-Muney (2001) thoroughly investigates the relationship between changes in

compulsory schooling laws and other state-level variables. She finds no evidence that the

relationship between the laws and education is related to manufacturing wages,

manufacturing employment, expenditures on education, or demographic characteristics of

the population. In the robustness checks in Section 6, we carry out several checks that

suggest that the relationship between compulsory schooling laws and early fertility is not

spurious.



(b) The Norwegian Primary School Reform

       In 1959, the Norwegian Parliament legislated a mandatory school reform that

increased the minimum level of education in society by extending the number of

compulsory years of education from 7 to 9 years (thereby increasing the minimum

dropout age from 14 to 16, as students started at age 7). Prior to the reform, children

started school at the age of seven and finished compulsory education after seven years,

i.e. at the age of fourteen. In the new system, the starting age was still seven years old,

but the time spent in compulsory education was now nine years. In addition, the reform

standardized the curriculum and increased access to schools, since 9 years of mandatory

school was eventually made available in all municipalities.

       The parliament mandated that all municipalities (the lowest level of local

administration) must have implemented the reform by 1973; as a result, although it was




                                              9
started in 1960, implementation was not completed until 1972.8 This suggests that, for

more than a decade, Norwegian schools were divided into two separate systems; which

system you were in depended on the year you were born and the municipality in which

you lived. The first cohort that could have been involved in the reform was the one born

in 1947. They started school in 1954, and either (i) finished the pre-reform compulsory

school in 1961, or (ii) went to primary school from 1954 to 1960, followed by the post-

reform middle school from 1960 to 1963. The last cohort who could have gone through

the old system was born in 1958. This cohort started school in 1965 and finished

compulsory school in 1972.9 Early work by Lie (1973, 1974) suggests that the timing of

the implementation was unrelated to municipality characteristics such as industrial

structure and size. We present a more rigorous discussion of the education reform and

the determinants of the timing of implementation in the Appendix.



4. Empirical Methodology: Probability of Having First Birth as a Teenager

        In both the U.S. and Norway, there is time-series as well as cross-sectional

variation in the number of years of compulsory schooling required of individuals during

the periods studied.



U.S. Model:

        The empirical model for the United States is as follows:


8
  The reform had already started on a small and explorative basis in the late 1950s, but applied to a
negligible number of students because only a few small municipalities, each with a small number of
schools, were involved. See Lie (1974), Telhaug (1969), and Lindbekk (1992), for descriptions of the
reform.
9
  Similar school reforms were undertaken in many other European countries in the same period, notably
Sweden, the United Kingdom and, to some extent, France and Germany (Leschinsky and Mayer, 1990).


                                                  10
TEENBIRTH = α 0 + α 1COMPULSORY + α 2 COHORT + α 3 STATE + α 4WHITE + υ (1)

where COHORT refers to a full set of year of birth indicators, STATE refers to a full set

of state indicators, and WHITE is a dummy indicator for whether the woman is white.

For the U.S., COMPULSORY is a vector of three dummy variables describing the

minimum dropout age in a state, with a minimum dropout age of less than 16 as the

omitted category. Because TEENBIRTH is a binary indicator for whether the woman had

her first birth as a teenager, we estimate the model using maximum likelihood probit.

       It is important to note that we are including both cohort and state effects. The

cohort effects are necessary to allow for secular changes in educational attainment over

time that may be completely unrelated to compulsory schooling laws. The state effects

allow for the fact that variation in the timing of the law changes across states may not

have been exogenous to fertility decisions. Even if the reform was implemented first in

areas with certain unobserved characteristics, consistent estimation is still achieved so

long as (a) these characteristics are fixed over time or (b) implementation of law changes

is not correlated with changes in these characteristics or (c) these characteristics are not

related to the probability of having a teen birth.



Norway Model:

       We use a similar specification for the Norwegian data, replacing the state

dummies with municipality dummies. The specification is as follows:

TEENBIRTH = α 0 + α 1COMPULSORY + α 2 COHORT + α 3 MUNICIPALITY + υ (2)

For Norway, COMPULSORY equals 1 if the individual was affected by the education




                                              11
reform (minimum dropout age of 16), and 0 otherwise (minimum dropout age of 14).10

Again, cohort effects are quite important since the income support system for single

mothers changed somewhat over time and we want to compare the effect of the

compulsory schooling laws on teenage fertility within cohorts.


5. Data

(a) United States

           We use the IPUMS extracts from the decennial Census from 1940 to 1980. The

particular samples we use are the 1% 1940 sample, the 1% 1950 sample, the 1% 1960

sample, the two 1% 1970 state samples, and the 5% 1980 samples. Analysis using the

Census is complicated by the fact that children are only observed if they are living in the

household with their mother. It is possible to link mothers to their children in these data

and use the age of the eldest own child in the household to determine the age at which the

mother first gave birth. We omit women from the sample if their first birth occurred

before age 15. Since children tend to start leaving home about age 16, this implies that we

can only get an accurate count on teenage births for the sample of women aged no more

than about 31 (15+16). Thus, we restrict our Census sample to women aged between 20

and 30.

           For most of our sample (1960-1980), the data include quarter of birth and we use

this variable to determine the woman's age at first birth to within 3 months. For the 1940

and 1950 samples, we do not observe quarter of birth and so age at first birth is known to

within a year. As is standard in the literature, we assign the compulsory schooling law

indicators on the basis of state of birth rather than state of residence. We do so because

10
     Note that we do not include race dummies for Norway as there is very little variation in race in Norway


                                                       12
mobility across states may be influenced by educational attainment and hence by the

compulsory schooling laws. Random mobility at any point after birth may imply that an

individual is not actually impacted by the laws that we think they are; this creates a

measurement error problem that will tend to bias our estimates of the effects of the laws

towards zero.



(b) Norway

         Based on different administrative registers and census data from Statistics

Norway, a comprehensive data set has been compiled of the entire population in Norway,

including information on family background, age, marital status, educational history,

neighborhood information, and employment information.11 Note that, unlike with the

U.S. data, we are able to observe all children and not just those living in the household.

         The initial database is linked administrative data that covers the entire population

of Norwegians aged 16-74. These administrative data provide information about

educational attainment, labor market status and a set of demographic variables (age,

gender).

         To determine whether women were affected by the compulsory schooling

legislation, we need to link each woman to the municipality in which she grew up. We do

this by matching the administrative data to the 1960 census. From the 1960 census, we

know the municipality in which the woman's mother lived in 1960.12 In 1960, the women




during this period.
11
   See Møen, Salvanes and Sørensen (2003) for a description of the data set.
12
   Since very few children live with their father in the cases where parents are not living together, we
should only have minimal misclassification by applying this rule.


                                                      13
we are using in the estimation are aged between 2 and 13.13 As in the U.S. case, random

mobility at any point after we assign location may imply that an individual is not actually

impacted by the reform although we think they are. This creates a measurement error

problem that will tend to bias our estimates of the effects of the reform towards zero.

        Our primary data source on the timing of the reform in individual municipalities

is the volume by Ness (1971). To verify the dates provided by Ness, we examined the

data to determine whether or not there appears to be a clear break in the fraction of

students with less than 9 years of education. In the rare instance when the data did not

seem consistent with the timing stated in Ness, we checked these individual

municipalities by contacting local sources. We are able to successfully calculate reform

indicators for 545 out of the 728 municipalities in existence in 1960. If the reform took

more than one year to implement in a particular municipality or we were not able to

verify the information given in Ness (1971), we could not assign a reform indicator to

that municipality. However, we have reform information for a large majority of

individuals in the relevant cohorts.

        We include cohorts of women born between 1947 and 1958 in our sample. For

these women, we observe their children in 2000. From the year and month of birth of the

children and the year and month of birth of the mother, we can determine the age of the

mother at her first birth to the nearest month. We exclude from our sample the small

number of women who have a first birth before age 15 and we define a teenage birth as

one occurring when the mother has not yet reached her 20th birthday at the birth of her

13
  One concern is that there may be selective migration into or out of municipalities that implement the
reform early. However, since the reform implementation did not occur before 1960, reform-induced
mobility should not be a problem for us. Evidence from Meghir and Palme (2003) on Sweden and Telhaug
(1969) on Norway suggest that reform-induced migration was not a significant consideration.



                                                  14
first child.



Descriptive Statistics

        Table 1 provides summary statistics for the women in our sample. First consider

the U.S. data. About 4 percent of women in the sample faced a dropout age of less than

16, 75 percent had a minimum dropout age of 16, 12 percent had a dropout age of 17 and

9 percent had a minimum dropout age of 18. Also, we see that 17 percent of women have

their first birth as a teenager.

        In the Norwegian data, we see that 52 percent of women are affected by the

reform. Similar to the U.S., 17 percent of women have their first birth as a teenager.



Effect of Laws on Educational Attainment

        To provide some background, we assess the impact of the compulsory schooling

laws on educational attainment by regressing completed education on the laws and on the

cohort dummies and state dummies (for the U.S.) and municipality dummies (for

Norway).14 The results are presented in Appendix Table 2.

        Consistent with our earlier work on Norway (See Black, Devereux, and Salvanes

2003), we estimate a coefficient on the reform of 0.122 (0.022) indicating that, on

average, education increased by 0.12 of a year as a result of the law change. In the U.S.,

the coefficient on Dropout Age=16 is 0.404, suggesting that the educational impact of a

similar change in the U.S. is bigger than that in Norway (however, the U.S. estimate is

quite imprecise and is statistically insignificant).



14 We restrict our U.S. sample to women aged between 22 and 30 in order to reduce the problem of


                                                  15
         Readers may find it surprising that we find no statistically significant relationship

between U.S. compulsory schooling laws and educational attainment. Many previous

studies have used these laws as instruments for education and reported very strong first

stage relationships (for example, Lochner and Moretti, 2004; Lleras-Muney, 2002). This

discrepancy appears to arise because we cluster our standard errors at the state level while

these other papers cluster at the state-year level.15 In the third column of the table, we

report estimates when we cluster at the state-year level and the standard errors are about

four times lower. This probably reflects the long time-series component to our state year

panel and the presence of serial correlation (see Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan,

2004).



6. Results for the Probit Models

         The probit marginal effects of compulsory schooling on teenage childbearing

(equation 1) are presented in Table 2.16 The marginal effects for the U.S. are in the top

panel. These numbers reflect the effect of the minimum dropout age specified by the

compulsory schooling law on the probability of having the first birth before each age. To

assess the magnitude of the coefficients, it is important to know the probabilities of births

during these years: The percentage of women have their first birth before 17 is 2%,

before 18 is 6%, before 19 is 11%, before 20 is 17%, and before 21 is 24% (See Table 1).

We find no evidence that the small probability of having a first birth before age 17 is

influenced by the laws. However, the results in the other 4 columns suggest that the laws


censored educational attainment.
15 Goldin and Katz (2003) also cluster at the state level and they find marginally significant effects of the
laws on educational attainment during the early part of the 20th century.
16 In all the probit models, we report robust standard errors that allow for clustering at the state level in the



                                                       16
have a significantly negative effect on the probability of having a first child before ages

18 to 21. The magnitude of the effects is also quite large. The coefficient of -0.008 on

Dropout Age=16 in the fourth column implies that the effect of compelling women to

stay in school until 16 is to reduce the probability of a teen birth by 4.7%

((0.008*100)/0.17). The effect of imposing a law mandating women to stay in school

until 17 is to reduce the probability of a teen birth by 8.8% ((0.015*100)/0.17). In

contrast, we do not find any significant effect of having a minimum dropout age of 18.

However, the standard errors are very high for this variable.

        The proportion of first births by age in our Norwegian sample is as follows: 1%

before age 17, 4% before age 18, 9% before age 19, 17% before age 20, and 25% before

age 21 (See Table 1). The probit marginal effects for Norway are in the second panel of

Table 2. Note that the effect of the reform was to increase the minimum dropout age from

14 to 16 in Norway. Once again, there is evidence that the compulsory schooling law

reduced the likelihood of births during the teenage years. The marginal effects imply that

the implementation of the reform reduced the probability of a first birth as a teenage by

about 3.5% ((0.006*100)/0.17). This is similar but somewhat smaller than the 4.7% effect

of Dropout Age=16 in the United States. Generally, the effects of the reform in Norway

are very similar to those of Dropout Age=16 in the United States.

        To better understand our results, we stratify our sample based on the urban/rural

status of the individuals. One might expect enforcement to be easier in urban areas and

hence the laws may have a larger impact. While we can get a precise breakdown of the

urban/rural status in our Norwegian data using the metropolitan status of the individuals

from the 1960 census, it is more difficult for the U.S. data. As a proxy for the urban/rural


United States and the municipality level in Norway.

                                                      17
status in the United States, we are forced to use the status at the time of the Census, when

women are aged between 20 and 30. Given that there is significant mobility, we view

this as a rough proxy for the actual urban/rural status of the individual when she was in

school.17

         As one might have predicted, the results, presented in Table 3, appear to be

stronger for the urban sample. This is particularly true for Norway, where the effects are

much larger for the urban sample. While the rural results are roughly consistent, they are

never statistically significant. We also tried stratifying our U.S. sample based on the race

of the individual; when we do this, it becomes clear that the compulsory schooling laws

had a more significant effect on teenage childbearing among whites. The results for

blacks were never statistically significant. This is consistent with the work of Goldin and

Katz (2003) who find smaller effects of compulsory schooling laws on educational

attainment for blacks than whites.



Robustness/Specification Checks

         We have carried out numerous specification checks to verify our findings. They

are as follows.

Inclusion of State-Year Trends

         Because we are identifying off of variation in compulsory schooling across states

over time, it is not possible to include state by time dummies. However, we can allow for

state-specific trends (in the Norwegian case, municipality-specific trends). When we

include these trends (Table 4), we get estimates that are quite similar to those in Table


17 In the U.S., we define urban as being resident in a metropolitan area. In Norway, individuals are
classified as urban if their mother lived in one of the main cities and towns in 1960.


                                                    18
2.18

Alternative Weighting Schemes

        When using the U.S. Census data, we are able to get 1% samples from 1940,

1950, and 1960, a 2% sample from 1970, and a 5% sample from the 1980 data. As a

result, we are giving more weight to the most recent cohorts. If there is no difference in

the effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage childbearing over time, the results

should be the same whether we weight each cohort equally or not. This, however, is

testable. In Table 5, we present the results when we weight each cohort equally (thereby

weighting each observation by the inverse of the number of individuals in that cohort in

our sample). While the results are consistent with those in Table 2, it does seem that,

when more weight is placed on the earlier periods, the more stringent compulsory

schooling laws are more effective.

Effect of Future Laws on Current Fertility

        Future law changes should have no impact on current fertility behavior. If they

do, it would suggest that something other than changes in compulsory schooling may be

driving our results. To check this, we have calculated the minimum dropout ages that

exist 10 years into the future, and have added these to the specification. The estimates are

in Table 6.19 Although we see that there are three instances where the future laws have a

statistically significant effect on fertility behavior (one negative effect, and two positive

effects), the addition of the future laws does not change the effects of the actual laws. If

anything, the results are strengthened by the addition of the future laws, suggesting that


18
   We have also tried adding state of residence fixed effects and Census year fixed effects in the U.S.
sample and these have had little effect on the estimates.
19
   The sample size is smaller in Table 5 because the compulsory schooling law file finishes in 1978 and so
we cannot calculate the dropout ages ten years into the future for cohorts born after 1964.


                                                    19
the change in fertility we observe is in fact caused by the change in compulsory schooling

laws.

Alternative Measures of Compulsory Schooling

        While we have used the minimum dropout age as our indicator for compulsory

schooling in the U.S., other work has used a variety of measures, and we test the

sensitivity of our results to this choice. To do so, we apply the same estimation strategy

but use the required number of years of schooling (defined as the minimum dropout age

minus the maximum enrollment age 7 years prior) as our measure of compulsory

education instead. We split the years of compulsory schooling into 4 categories – less

than 9, 9, 10, and 11 or more. We exclude the less than 9 category from the specification.

Table 7 presents these results. Consistent with our earlier findings, the estimates show

that the probability of early childbearing is negatively affected by the number of years of

compulsory education. As we would expect, there is a general pattern that the more strict

the law, the greater the impact on teen childbearing. The results for years of compulsory

schooling are robust to all the specification checks discussed above.

        In Table 8, we report estimates where we use the minimum age at which an

individual could get a work permit as our measure of compulsory schooling. We include

two dummy variables – one for whether the dropout age was 15, and the other for

whether the age was greater than 15. The omitted category is a dropout age of less than

15. We find that the presence of a dropout age of 15 has a statistically significant

negative effect on early fertility. Overall, we find that changes in compulsory schooling

laws impact fertility, irrespective of how they are defined.20


20
  Recent work by Goldin and Katz (2003) suggests that child labor laws may be more significant than the
compulsory schooling laws in terms of affecting school attendance. However, in our sample, this is not the


                                                   20
7. Why Do Compulsory Schooling Laws affect Timing of Births?

         Given that we find an effect of compulsory schooling laws on teenage fertility, the

next step it to try to uncover mechanisms through which this relationship is working.

         Consider a static model of schooling and fertility decisions. At the beginning of

their teenage years, young women choose their schooling level and their fertility

behavior. In the absence of institutional constraints, these decisions are made optimally

and depend on the utility function of each individual as well as her ability. If, however, a

compulsory schooling law is in place, this constrains the educational choice of some

women and leads them to choose greater education than would have been chosen

otherwise. In turn, this new optimal educational level may be associated with a new set

of fertility choices.21

         In particular, because it is likely to be quite costly to be in school as a young

mother, an exogenous increase in education of the individual may be associated with a

postponement of fertility. We call this the “incarceration effect”; while women are in

school, they do not have the desire/time/opportunity to have a child.22

         In addition, since more education increases human capital, this is also a

mechanism through which increases in education may lead to postponed fertility.23 We



case; among women in our sample, the compulsory schooling laws were as effective as the child labor laws
in influencing fertility.
21
   It is important to note that this “rational choice” approach assumes women make optimal decisions on
timing of births taking into account all the costs and benefits involved. This is often discussed in
conjunction with an alternative approach that sees many teenage pregnancies as "mistakes" resulting from
thoughtless behavior, lack of knowledge about the long run consequences, or lack of knowledge about birth
control. It is this view that fertility behavior may not be optimal that underscores much of the policy
interest in this topic.
22
   Jacob and Lefgren (2003) discuss the “incarceration effect” in the context of the effects of education on
teenage criminal behavior.
23
   Happel et al. (1984) model the timing of children and argue that, if capital markets are perfect, the timing


                                                      21
call the fact that the additional schooling may make you “smarter” and hence decide to

postpone childbearing the “current human capital effect”, and we call the fact that

expectations about the future acquisition of human capital are changed by compulsory

schooling laws and this may change fertility decisions the “future human capital effect.”

         If the effects of the compulsory schooling laws occur solely due to the

"incarceration" effect, then the laws should have no impact on behavior at ages above

which the laws induce schooling. To examine this, we estimate probit models of the

probability of having a first birth at age x, conditional on having no birth prior to that. We

estimate this model for x equal to 16, 17, 18, 19, and 20. If the laws impact the

probability of first birth at ages above which they bind, then this is strong evidence that

the "incarceration" effect is not the only effect.

         Table 9 presents the probit estimates of the probability of a birth at a particular

age conditional on no prior birth. Given that women are pregnant for about 9 months, the

"incarceration" model implies that the Dropout Age=16 should impact births at age 16

and 17, but should have little impact on births at higher ages.24 However we find that

Dropout Age=16 has a small and statistically insignificant effect on the probability of

first birth at age 16, but has a statistically significant negative effect on births at ages 17

and 18. Likewise, although Dropout Age=17 does have a negative effect at age 17, it has,

if anything, larger negative effects at ages 18 and 19. In the Norwegian data, the reform

raised the minimum school leaving age from 14 to 16 for most people. Despite this, there


of first child depends on the rate at which earnings depreciate due to absence from the labor market, and the
initial level of earnings at the start of the woman's life cycle. If women start with very low earning power,
and skills depreciate with absence from the market, then it is optimal to have children early. On the other
hand, if initial earnings are high, postponing childbirth is optimal. Thus, in this framework, women with
more human capital are more likely to postpone childbirth.
24 If people do actually drop out of school on their 16th birthday, this compulsory schooling law should
only impact births at age 16 through the “incarceration” effect.


                                                     22
is a negative effect of the reform on the probability of giving birth at age 18 (although

this is statistically insignificant), which is too old for the "incarceration" effect to be

relevant. Thus, the evidence for the "incarceration" effect of compulsory schooling laws

is very weak in this probit analysis and suggests that the human capital effects are likely

playing a role. We can be certain that whether or not there is an "incarceration" effect,

there are also other mechanisms that influence fertility behavior.25 Unfortunately, the

nature of our data prohibits us from distinguishing much beyond this point.



8. Conclusions

         Many studies find that early fertility adversely affects women’s economic

outcomes such as the level of completed schooling, labor market participation, and

wages. However, there is limited information about policy relevant factors that might be

important determinants of early fertility decisions. This paper has attempted to increase

our knowledge by studying the role of compulsory schooling laws.

         We find that minimum school requirements have a significantly negative effect on

the probability of having a child as a teenager both in the United States and in Norway.

Our results are robust to a number of specification checks. It is noteworthy that our

estimates are fairly similar in two countries – the U.S. and Norway – that are so different

institutionally. These findings suggests that policy interventions to increase female

education at the lower tail of the educational distribution may be an effective means of


25
  In Appendix Table 4, we present the equivalent estimates for the U.S. where each cohort is weighted
equally. Once again, there is evidence against a pure incarceration effect as Dropout Age=17 affects
fertility behavior at 19 and 20, and Dropout Age=18 affects behavior at age 20. There is also a shred of
evidence for the “future human capital effect” in that Dropout Age=18 has a statistically significant
negative effect on the probability of a birth at age 17. That is, women who know that they will have to stay
in school until age 18 are less likely to have a child at age 17 than other women with the same amount of
schooling who do not face this future compulsory schooling.


                                                     23
reducing rates of teenage childbearing, regardless of the welfare structure in place.

       In addition to studying the effects of compulsory schooling laws on teenage

fertility choice, we also examine different mechanisms through which the compulsory

schooling legislation may be affecting fertility behavior. The first mechanism we

consider is an “incarceration” effect or the fact that educational attendance reduces time

available to engage in risky behavior. Alternative mechanisms are related to human

capital theory where both current and expected human capital may impact teenage

fertility choice. Our results suggest that the effect of compulsory schooling laws goes

beyond a pure “incarceration” effect.




                                             24
Appendix: The Norwegian Education Reform

       To receive funds from the government to implement the reform, municipalities

had to present a plan to a committee under the Ministry of Education. Once approved,

the costs of teachers and buildings were provided by the national government. While the

criteria determining selection by the committee are somewhat unclear, the committee did

want to ensure that implementation was representative of the country, conditional on

having an acceptable plan. (Telhaug, 1969, Mediås, 2000). Appendix Figure 1 presents

the spread of the reform over time, focusing on the number of municipalities

implementing the reform per year.

       While it is not necessary for our estimation strategy, it would be useful if the

timing of the implementation of the reform across municipalities were uncorrelated with

general educational levels. One might worry that poorer municipalities would be among

the first to implement the reform, given the substantial state subsidies, while wealthier

municipalities would move much slower. However, work examining the determinants of

the timing of implementation finds no relationship between municipality characteristics

such as average earnings, taxable income, and educational levels, and the timing of

implementation. (See Lie 1973, 1974.) Municipalities that are located geographically

near municipalities that already implemented the reform were themselves more likely to

implement the reform; numerous interviews revealed that this was likely due to a

particularly effective county administrator. As a result, the research supports a complex

adoption process without finding support for a single important factor to explain the

implementation process. To examine this ourselves, Appendix Figures 2, 3, and 4

examine the implementation of the reform by the average income, parental education, and




                                             25
size of the municipalities; these figures suggest that there is little relationship between

these factors and the timing of the implementation of the reform.

       As a more rigorous test, in Appendix Table 3 we regress the year of

implementation on different background variables based on municipality averages,

including parental income, the level of education, average age, and the size of the

municipality, as well as county dummies (there are 20 counties in Norway). Consistent

with the existing literature, there appears to be no systematic relationship between the

timing of implementation and parent average earnings, education levels, average age,

urban/rural status, industry or labor force composition, municipality unemployment rates

in 1960, and the share of individuals who were members of the Labor party (the most

pro-reform and dominant political party).




                                              26
       References


Acemoglu, D. and J. Angrist (2001) How Large Are Human Capital Externalities?
     Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws, in: B. S. Bernanke and K. Rogoff
     (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, MIT Press.

Angrist, J. and Evans, W. (1996). “Schooling and the Labor Market Consequences of the
       1970 State Abortion Reforms”, paper presented at the 1997 Population
       Association of America meetings, Washington, D.C.

Baicker, Katherine (2004). “Extensive or Intensive Generosity? The Price and Income
       Effects of Federal Grants.” Review of Economics and Statistics.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2004). “How Much Should
       we Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 119(1), 249-75.

Black, Sandra E, Paul J. Devereux and Kjell G. Salvanes (2003). “Why the Apple
       Doesn’t Fall Far: Understanding Intergenerational Transmission of Human
       Capital.” NBER Working Paper 10066, November.

Ellwood, David (1988). Poor Support. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Francesconi, Marco (2004). ”Adult Outcomes for Children of Teenage Mothers.”
       working paper, January 2004.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and
       Women’s Career and Marriage Decisions.” Journal of Political Economy, 110,
       August 2002.

Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz (2003). “Mass Secondary Schooling and the
       State: The Role of State Compulsion in the High School Movement.” NBER
       Working Paper 10075, November.

Happel, S.J., J.K. Hill, and S.A. Low. (1984). “An Economic Analysis of the Timing of
      Childbirth.” Population Studies, July 38(2), 299-311.

Harmon, Colm and Ian Walker. 1995. “Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
     for the United Kingdom.” American Economic Review, 85, 1278-86.

Hoffman, S. D., Foster, E. M., and Furstenberg jr., F. F. (1993). ”Reevaluating the Costs
      of Teenage Childbearing”, Demography 30(1), 1-13.

Hotz, V. Joseph, McElroy, Susan W., and Seth G. Sanders (2002). “Teenage
       Childbearing and its Life Cycle Consequences: Exploiting a Natural Experiment”.



                                           27
       Working Paper.

Hunt, Jennifer. (2003). “Teen Births Keep American Crime High”, NBER Working
       Paper #9632.

Jacob, B. and L. Lefgren. (2003). “Are Idle Hands the Devils’ Workshop?
       Incapacitation, Concentration, and Juvenile Crime.” American Economic Review
       93(5) 1560-1577.

Jencks, C. (1989). “What Is the Underclass—and Is It Growing?” Focus, 12, 14-26.

Kiernan, K.E. (1997) “Becoming a Young Parent: A Longitudinal Study of Associated
       Factors.” British Journal of Sociology, 48, 406-28.

Klepinger, D. Lundberg, S. and Plotnick, R. (1999). “Teen Childbearing and Human
       Capital: Does Timing Matter?” mimeo, University of Washington, October 1999.

Leschinsky, A. and Mayer, K. A. (eds.) (1990). The Comprehensive School Experiment
       Revisited: Evidence from Western Europe. Frankfurt am Main.

Levine, D. I. and Painter, G. (2003). “The Schooling Costs of Teenage Out-of-wedlock
       Childbearing: Analysis with a Within-School Propensity-Score-Matching
       Estimator” Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(4), 884-899.

Levine, Phillip B. (2004a). Sex and Consequences: Abortion, Public Policy and the
       Economics of Fertility. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Levine, Phillip B. (2004b). “Abortion Policy and the Economics of Fertility.” Society,
       Volume 42, No. 4 (May/June) 79-86.

Lie, Suzanne S. (1973) The Norwegian Comprehensive School Reform. Strategies for
       Implementation and Complying with Regulated Social Change. A Diffusion Study.
       Part 1 and II. Washington, D.C., The American University.

Lie, Suzanne S. (1974) ”Regulated Social Change: a Diffusion Study of the Norwegian
       Comprehensive School Reform”, Acta Sociologica, 16(4), 332-350.

Lindbekk, Tore (1992) “School Reforms in Norway and Sweden and the Redistribution
      of Educational Attainment.” Journal of Educational Research, 37(2), 129-49.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2002). “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in
       the United States”, NBER working paper no. 8986.

Lleras-Muney, A. (2001). “Were Compulsory Attendance and Child Labor Laws
       Effective? An Analysis from 1915 to 1939.” Journal of Law and Economics,
       (forthcoming).



                                           28
Lochner, Lance and Enrico Moretti (2004). “The Effect of Education on Crime:
      Evidence from Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports.“ American Economic
      Review, 94, 155-89.

McCrary, Justin and Heather Royer. (2003). “Does Maternal Education Affect Infant
      Health? A Regression Discontinuity Approach Based on School Age Entry
      Laws.” Unpublished manuscript, November.

Mediås, Olav A. (2000). Fra griffel til PC. In Norwegian. (From pencil to PC). Steinkjer:
      Steinkjer kommune.

Meghir, Costas and Marten Palme. 2003. “Ability, Parental Background and Education
      Policy: Empirical Evidence from a Social Experiment”, mimeo, Stockholm
      School of Economics.

Møen, Jarle, Kjell G. Salvanes and Erik Ø. Sørensen. 2003. “Documentation of the
      Linked Empoyer-Employee Data Base at the Norwegian School of Economics.”
      Mimeo, The Norwegian School of Economics and Business Administration.

Ness, Erik (ed.). (1971). Skolens Årbok 1971. In Norwegian. (The primary school
       yearbook 1971.) Oslo: Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag.

Noack, Turid and Lars Ostby. 1981. Fruktbarhet blant norske kvinner. Resultater fra
       fruktbarhetsundersøkelsen 1977. (fertility among Norwegian women. Results from
       the fertility survey 1977. Statistics Norway. Samfunnsøkonomiske studier no. 49.

Oreopoulos, Philip 2003. “Do Dropouts Drop Out Too Soon? Evidence from Changes in
      School Leaving Laws” Mimeo, University of Toronto.

Rønsen, Marit and Steinar Strøm. 1991. ”Enslige forsørgeres tilpasning mellom trygd og
      arbeid.” (Lone mothers’ choice of work and welfare). In Hatland (ed.) Trygd som
      fortjent? En antologi om trygd og velferdsstat. Oslo: Ad Notam.

Telhaug, Arne O. (1969). Den 9-årige skolen og differensieringsproblemet. En oversikt
      over den historiske utvikling og den aktuelle debatt. In Norwegian. (The 9-years
      compulsory school and the tracking problem. An overview of the historical
      development and the current debate). Oslo: Lærerstudentenes Forlag.




                                           29
                      Table 1: Descriptive Statistics

                              United States
Variable                        Mean      Std. Dev.     Min       Max

Birth Cohort                    1948.14        12.34    1910.00   1960.00
Age at Census                     24.80         3.16      20.00     30.00
Education                         12.30         2.52       0.00     17.00
White                              0.86         0.34       0.00      1.00
Child before 17                    0.02         0.15       0.00      1.00
Child before 18                    0.06         0.23       0.00      1.00
Child before 19                    0.11         0.31       0.00      1.00
Child as teenager                  0.17         0.38       0.00      1.00
Child before 21                    0.24         0.43       0.00      1.00
Dropout Age is <16                 0.04         0.19       0.00      1.00
Dropout Age is 16                  0.75         0.43       0.00      1.00
Dropout Age is 17                  0.12         0.32       0.00      1.00
Dropout age is 18                  0.09         0.28       0.00      1.00
Enrolment Age is 6                 0.14         0.35       0.00      1.00
Enrolment Age is 7                 0.66         0.47       0.00      1.00
Enrolment Age is 8+                0.20         0.40       0.00      1.00

N=1,584,094



                                 Norway
Variable                       Mean       Std. Dev.     Min       Max

Birth Cohort                      1953          3.35      1947      1958
Age in 2000                      47.01          3.35      42.00     53.00
Education                        11.50          2.58       5.00     21.00
Child before 17                    0.01         0.09       0.00      1.00
Child before 18                    0.04         0.19       0.00      1.00
Child before 19                    0.09         0.29       0.00      1.00
Child as teenager                  0.17         0.38       0.00      1.00
Child before 21                    0.25         0.43       0.00      1.00
Reform Implemented                0.52          0.50       0.00      1.00

N=260,641




                                    30
       Table 2: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of First Birth by
                               A Certain Age: Probit Marginal Effects
United States
 Dependent          Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age
 Variable:                16          17            18            19             20

 Dropout Age=16               -.00002            -.0025            -.0058*            -.0077*           -.0095*
                              (.0009)            (.0017)           (.0018)            (.0024)           (.0047)

 Dropout Age=17                -.0008            -.0053*           -.0106*            -.0147*           -.0186*
                               (.0011)           (.0022)           (.0027)            (.0031)           (.0050)

 Dropout Age=18                 .0012            -.0004              -.0004            -.0023             -.0085
                               (.0014)           (.0060)            (.0128)           (.0147)            (.0153)

 White                        -.0421*            -.0749*           -.1035*            -.1222*           -.1275*
                              (.0029)            (.0053)           (.0077)            (.0094)           (.0106)
 N=1,584,094


Norway
 Dependent                     Birth by          Birth by          Birth by          Birth by           Birth by
 Variable:                     Age 16            Age 17            Age 18            Age 19             Age 20

 Reform                        -0.0006           -0.0020          -0.0047*           -0.0063           -0.0087*
                              (0.0006)           (0.0015)         (0.0024)           (0.0037)          (0.0043)
 N=260,641

         Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
         regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators. The U.S. specifications also
         include state dummies; the Norway specifications include municipality indicators. Standard errors are all
         adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level.
         * denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                             31
    Table 3: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of Birth:
                                 Urban/Rural Distinction
United States
                        Birth by     Birth By      Birth By    Birth by       Birth by
                        Age 16        Age 17        Age 18      Age 19        Age 20
Urban
N=1,063,181
Dropout Age=16            .0007       -.0016        -.0019       -.0031        -.0030
                        (.0009)       (.0017)       (.0030)     (.0055)       (.0089)
Dropout Age=17           -.0003      -.0057*       -.0100*      -.0146*        -.0163
                        (.0012)       (.0018)       (.0029)     (.0052)       (.0087)
Dropout Age=18            .0028        .0025         .0068        .0012        -.0033
                        (.0024)       (.0084)       (.0173)     (.0071)       (.0182)
White                   -.0448*      -.0818*       -.1166*      -.1425*       -.1556*
                        (.0034)       (.0064)       (.0093)     (.0114)       (.0127)

Rural
N=520,913
Dropout Age=16                  .0008             -.0002             -.0039            -.0029                -.0031
                               (.0016)            (.0033)            (.0034)           (.0037)               (.0064)
Dropout Age=17                 -.0007             -.0033             -.0066            -.0003                -.0097
                               (.0020)            (.0038)            (.0047)           (.0053)               (.0084)
Dropout Age=18                  .0007             -.0004             -.0020             .0089                 .0061
                               (.0032)            (.0040)            (.0053)           (.0095)               (.0115)
White                          -.0376             -.0643             -.0830            -.0924                -.0862
                               (.0017)            (.0028)            (.0041)           (.0051)               (.0054)



Norway

                                 Birth by          Birth By          Birth By          Birth by          Birth by
                                 Age 16            Age 17            Age 18            Age 19            Age 20
Urban
N=87,752
Reform                             -.0010          -.0053*           -.0094*            -.0212*              -.0275*
                                  (.0010)          (.0026)           (.0038)            (.0067)              (.0089)
Rural
N=172,889
Reform                             -.0003            -.0005            -.0027            .0008                .0003
                                  (.0008)           (.0016)           (.0028)           (.0035)              (.0041)
Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators. The U.S. specifications also
include state dummies; the Norway specifications include municipality indicators. Standard errors are all
adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level.
* denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.


                                                    32
               Table 4: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of Birth
                                     Including State-Year Trends

United States
 Dependent                 Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age
 Variable:                      16           17           18           19           20

 Dropout Age=16                .0016*             -.0003             -.0036           -.0086*           -.0151*
                               (.0006)           (.0016)            (.0031)           (.0040)           (.0060)

 Dropout Age=17                 .0008             -.0032             -.0072           -.0131*           -.0233*
                               (.0011)           (.0019)            (.0037)           (.0046)           (.0072)

 Dropout Age=18                .0042*             .0020              .0003             -.0087             -.0175
                               (.0018)           (.0079)            (.0037)           (.0177)            (.0187)

 White                        -.0417*            -.0744*           -.1031*            -.1219*           -.1274*
                              (.0028)            (.0052)           (.0076)            (.0093)           (.0106)
 N=1,584,094


Norway
 Dependent                     Birth by          Birth by          Birth by          Birth by           Birth by
 Variable:                     Age 16            Age 17            Age 18            Age 19             Age 20

 Reform                        -0.0002           -0.0015          -0.0046*           -0.0049           -0.0063
                              (0.0002)           (0.0015)         (0.0021)           (0.0028)          (0.0034)
 N=260,637


         Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
         regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators. The U.S. specifications also
         include state dummies; the Norway specifications include municipality indicators. Standard errors are all
         adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level.
         * denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                             33
       Table 5: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of Birth: Equal
                Weighting of Cohorts: Probit Marginal Effects, United States
Dependent           Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age
Variable:                16           17           18            19              20

Dropout Age=16                .0001              -.0008            -.0023             -.0051           -.0079*
                             (.0009)            (.0023)           (.0033)            (.0039)           (.0039)

Dropout Age=17               -.0017              -.0051           -.0104*           -.0185*            -.0248*
                             (.0012)            (.0025)           (.0038)           (.0060)            (.0052)

Dropout Age=18               -.0004             -.0099*           -.0202*             -.0294           -.0365*
                             (.0012)            (.0039)           (.0088)            (.0149)           (.0115)

White                        -.0354*            -.0606*           -.0803*           -.0853*            -.0765*
                             (.0023)            (.0046)           (.0072)           (.0088)            (.0103)
N=1,584,094
        Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
        regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators and state dummies. Standard
        errors are all adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level.




                                                            34
              Table 6: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of Birth
                    Including Future Legislation: Probit Marginal Effects, United States
Dependent                  Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age
Variable:                       16           17           18           19           20

Dropout Age=16                 0.0006             -0.0024            -0.0051*            -0.0087*            -0.0113*
                              (0.0008)            (0.0018)           (0.0020)            (0.0025)            (0.0051)

Dropout Age=17                -0.0002             -0.0050*           -0.0101*            -0.0175*            -0.0236*
                              (0.0008)            (0.0016)           (0.0019)            (0.0027)            (0.0051)

Dropout Age=18                 0.0012             -0.0076*           -0.0174*             -0.0215            -0.0315*
                              (0.0015)            (0.0032)           (0.0073)            (0.0148)            (0.0133)
Future Laws
Dropout Age=16                -0.0002              0.0027              0.0047            0.0105*             0.0127*
                              (0.0007)            (0.0020)            (0.0022)           (0.0039)            (0.0060)

Dropout Age=17                -0.0010              0.0008              -0.0010            0.0013              0.0042
                              (0.0014)            (0.0028)            (0.0030)           (0.0050)            (0.0072)

Dropout Age=18                -0.0041*             0.0006              -0.0004            0.0052              0.0073
                              (0.0015)            (0.0030)            (0.0035)           (0.0054)            (0.0072)

White                          -.0403*             -.0728*            -.1013*             -.1170*             -.1181*
                               (.0030)             (.0057)            (.0085)             (.0102)             (.0113)
N=1,001,121
        Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
        regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators and state dummies. Standard
        errors are all adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level. * denotes statistically significant at the
        5% level.




                                                                35
           Table 7: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of Birth:
          Required Years of Schooling (Minimum Dropout Age-Maximum Enrollment
                                   Age), United States Data
Dependent          Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age
Variable:               16           17            18           19             20

9 Years of                    -.0006            -.0044*            -.0085*           -.0122*            -.0140*
Schooling                     (.0010)           (.0016)            (.0019)           (.0025)            (.0032)

10 Years of                   -.0006            -.0047*            -.0089*           -.0114*            -.0167*
Schooling                     (.0011)           (.0023)            (.0035)           (.0047)            (.0046)

11+ Years of                  -.0020             -.0054             -.0073             -.0148           -.0174
Schooling                     (.0024)           (.0054)            (.0103)            (.0123)           (.0137)

White                         -.0421*           -.0748*            -.1034*           -.1222*            -.1275*
                              (.0029)           (.0053)            (.0077)           (.0094)            (.0106)
N=1,584,094
        Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
        regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators and state dummies. Standard
        errors are all adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level.




      Table 8: Effect of Child Labor Laws on the Probability of Birth, United States Data
Dependent           Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age Birth by Age
Variable:                16           17            18              19            20

Dropout Age=15                -.0007            -.0044*            -.0100*           -.0136*            -.0096
                              (.0006)           (.0010)            (.0012)           (.0022)            (.0057)

Dropout Age>15                -.0006             -.0016             -.0015             .0011            -.0016
                              (.0013)           (.0026)            (.0039)            (.0052)           (.0054)

White                         -.0420*           -.0749*             -.0103           -.1222*            -.1276*
                              (.0029)           (.0053)            (.0077)           (.0094)            (.0106)
N=1,584,094

        Estimates are marginal effects from probit maximum likelihood. Each column denotes a separate
        regression. Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators and state dummies. Standard
        errors are all adjusted for clustering at the state level.
        * denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                            36
               Table 9: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of Birth
                              Conditional on Not Already Having a Child

United States
 Dependent                    Birth at            Birth at            Birth at            Birth at            Birth at
 Variable                   16/No prior         17/No prior         18/No prior         19/No prior         20/No prior
                               birth               birth               birth               birth               birth

 Dropout Age=16                 -.0001            -.0025*             -.0035*               -.0021              -.0024
                               (.0006)            (.0009)             (.0013)              (.0019)             (.0036)

 Dropout Age=17                 -.0009            -.0045*             -.0057*             -.0047*               -.0056
                               (.0008)            (.0012)             (.0013)             (.0018)              (.0040)

 Dropout Age=18                 .0002               -.0015              .0005               -.0007              -.0061
                               (.0010)             (.0049)             (.0078)             (.0054)             (.0050)

 White                        -.0271*             -.0349*             -.0344*             -.0292*             -.0182*
                              (.0020)             (.0029)             (.0034)             (.0033)             (.0033)

 N                           1,572,513           1,545,369           1,493,288           1,414,844           1,311,693


Norway
Dependent                 Birth at 16/No Birth at 17/No Birth at 18/No Birth at 19/No                      Birth at 20/No
Variable:                   prior birth    prior birth    prior birth    prior birth                         prior birth

Reform                        -0.0006            -0.0014              -0.0029             -0.0022              -0.0032
                             (0.0006)            (0.0012)             (0.0017)            (0.0025)            (0.0025)

N                            260,637              256,869             251,249             236,876              217,128

         Estimates are marginal effects from ordered probit estimation. Each column denotes a separate regression.
         The sample includes women between 20 and 30 years of age. Also included in the specifications are year-
         of-birth indicators. The U.S. specifications also include state dummies; the Norway specifications include
         municipality indicators. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state/municipality level.
         * denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                             37
                                              Appendix Figure 1
                   The Number of Municipalities Implementing the Education Reform, by Year
                                                   Norway




                         60



                         50



                         40
Reformed_municip




                         30


                         20



                         10



                          0
                              1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                                                 Reform implementation, year/municipalities




                                                     38
                       Appendix Figure 2
       Reform implementation in Poor vs Rich Municipalities
            Based on Average Family Income, Norway.



             Poor_municip                           Rich_municip

40




30




20




10




 0
     1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                     Reform implementation, by average family income


      Poor (rich) municipality is calculated as below (above) median parent’s
      income by municipality Parent’s average income is calculated for each
      municipality in 1970.




                                 39
                                 Appendix Figure 3
    Reform Implementation in High vs. Low Education Municipalities
Based on Average Years Father’s of Education in the Municipality, Norway




                Loweduc_municip                        Higheduc_municip

   40




   30




   20




   10




    0
        1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                       Reform implementation, by average level of education



          Low (high) education municipality is calculated as below (above) median
          education by municipality. Father’s average years of education is
          calculated for each municipality in 1960.




                                     40
                             Appendix Figure 4
        Reform Implementation in Small vs. Large Municipalities, Norway



                     Small_municip                           Large_municip

        40




        30




        20




        10




         0
             1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973
                                     Reform implementation, by size



Small (large) municipality is defined as below (above) median municipality as measured
by population size in 1960.




                                          41
Appendix Table 1: Minimum Dropout Ages for the United States by State
                       Dropout Age:   Dropout Age:   Dropout Age:   Dropout Age:   Dropout Age:   Dropout Age:
                          1924           1934           1944           1954           1964           1974
Alabama                    16             16             16             16             16             16
Arizona                    16             16             16             16             16             16
Arkansas                   15             16             16             16             16             16
California                 16             16             16             16             16             16
Colorado                   16             16             16             16             16             16
Connecticut                16             16             16             16             16             16
Delaware                   16             16             16             16             16             16
District of Columbia       14             16             16             16             16             16
Florida                    16             16             16             16             16             16
Georgia                    14             14             14             16             16             16
Idaho                      18             18             16             16             16             16
Illinois                   16             16             16             16             16             16
Indiana                    16             16             16             16             16             16
Iowa                       16             16             16             16             16             16
Kansas                     16             16             16             16             16             16
Kentucky                   16             16             16             16             16             16
Louisiana                  14             14             14             16             16             16
Maine                      17             17             14             16             16             16
Maryland                   16             16             16             16             16             16
Massachusetts              16             16             16             16             16             16
Michigan                   16             16             16             16             16             16
Minnesota                  16             16             16             16             16             16
Mississippi                14             17             16             16              0              0
Missouri                   16             16             14             16             16             16
Montana                    16             16             16             16             16             16
Nebraska                   16             16             16             16             16             16
Nevada                     18             18             18             18             17             17
New Hampshire              16             16             16             16             16             16
New Jersey                 16             16             16             16             16             16
New Mexico                 16             16             16             17             17             17
New York                   16             16             16             16             16             16
North Carolina             14             14             14             16             16             16
North Dakota               17             17             17             17             16             16
Ohio                       18             18             18             18             18             18
Oklahoma                   18             18             18             18             18             18
Oregon                     16             18             16             18             18             18
Pennsylvania               16             16             18             17             17             17
Rhode Island               16             16             16             16             16             16
South Carolina             14             14             16             16              0             16
South Dakota               17             17             17             17             16             16
Tennessee                  16             16             16             16             16             17
Texas                      14             14             16             16             16             17
Utah                       18             18             18             18             18             18
Vermont                    16             16             16             16             16             16
Virginia                   14             15             15             16             16             17
Washington                 16             16             16             16             16             16
West Virginia              16             16             16             16             16             16
Wisconsin                  16             16             16             16             16             18
Wyoming                    16             17             17             16             17             17




                                             42
           Appendix Table 2: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on Educational
                                     Attainment

Dependent Variable:             Norway: Education              U.S.: Education           U.S.: Education
                                  Clustering at               Clustering at State          Clustering at
                                Municipality Level                  Level                State-Year Level
                                       (1)                            (2)                        (3)
Dropout Age=16                       .1218                          .4041                     .4041*
                                    (.0217)                        (.2520)                    (.0590)

Dropout Age=17                                                        .4709                    .4709*
                                                                     (.2865)                   (.0696)

Dropout Age=18                                                        .4245                    .4245*
                                                                     (.3045)                   (.0959)

White                                                                .7298*                    .7298*
                                                                     (.0715)                   (.0228)

                                     N=260,641                    N=1,270,753               N=1,270,753
Each column denotes a separate regression. The sample includes women between 22 and 30 years of age.
Also included in the specifications are year-of-birth indicators. The U.S. specifications also include state
dummies; the Norway specifications include municipality indicators. Standard errors are adjusted for
clustering at the state/municipality level in columns (1) and (2). Standard errors are adjusted for clustering
at the state-year level in column (3).
* denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                      43
                          Appendix Table 3:
         Timing of the Implementation of the Reform in Norway

Dependent Variable: Year of Reform

                                                   Coefficient Standard error
County2                                                   -1.95            .65
County3                                                    5.02          5.23
County4                                                     -.64           .70
County5                                                     -.88           .67
County6                                                     -.90           .62
County7                                                   -1.21            .63
County8                                                   -1.90            .64
County9                                                   -1.21            .64
County10                                                  -2.20            .71
County11                                                    -.54           .63
County12                                                    -1.4           .60
County13                                                    -.45           .70
County14                                                   1.23            .59
County15                                                  -1.54            .58
County16                                                     .04           .60
County17                                                  -1.21            .57
County18                                                    -.26           .65
County19                                                  -2.77            .71
Share of Fathers with Some College                           .92         3.88
Share of Mothers with Some College                       12.30           8.31
Father’s Income (mean)                                    -.007          .004
Mother’s Income (mean)                                      -.01           .01
Father’s Age (mean)                                          .11           .16
Mother’s Age (mean)                                         -.12           .19
Size of Municipality/100                                    -.03           .03
Unemployment Rate 1960                                    -6.22         11.63
Share Workers in Manufacturing 1960                        1.15          3.05
Share Workers in Private Services 1960                     5.95          6.23
Share Labour Vote 1961                                     2.34          2.19
Constant term                                         1969.14            6.95

Robust standard errors. All variables are municipality level variables.




                                            44
           Appendix Table 4: Effect of Compulsory Schooling Laws on the Probability of
           Birth Conditional on Not Already Having a Child, Equal Weighting of Cohorts,
                                        United States Data

Dependent                    Birth at            Birth at           Birth at            Birth at            Birth at
Variable                   16/No prior         17/No prior        18/No prior         19/No prior         20/No prior
                              birth               birth              birth               birth               birth

Dropout Age=16                .0000               -.0008              -.0014              -.0030              -.0034
                             (.0007)             (.0015)             (.0015)             (.0021)             (.0025)

Dropout Age=17                -.0013              -.0033             -.0056*             -.0091*            -.0083*
                             (.0010)             (.0019)             (.0022)             (.0038)            (.0030)

Dropout Age=18                .0011              -.0093*              -.0109              -.0120            -.0106*
                             (.0013)             (.0031)             (.0055)             (.0081)            (.0039)

White                        -.0218*             -.0260*             -.0226*             -.0100*              .0040
                             (.0017)             (.0027)             (.0036)             (.0031)             (.0035)

N                           1,572,513           1,545,369          1,493,288           1,414,844           1,311,693
        Estimates are marginal effects from ordered probit estimation. Each column denotes a separate regression.
        The sample includes women between 20 and 30 years of age. Also included in the specifications are year-
        of-birth indicators and state dummies. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state level.
        * denotes statistically significant at the 5% level.




                                                           45
