                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                             FAIR PRICING

                                           Julio J. Rotemberg

                                         Working Paper 10915
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w10915


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2004




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2004 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Fair Pricing
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 10915
November 2004
JEL No. E3, D4, D11, E44

                                             ABSTRACT

I suppose that consumers see a firm as fair if they cannot reject the hypothesis that the firm is
somewhat benevolent towards them. Consumers that can reject this hypothesis become angry, which
is costly to the firm. I show that firms that wish to avoid this anger will keep their prices rigid under
some circumstances when prices would vary under more standard assumptions. The desire to appear
benevolent can also lead firms to practice both third-degree and intertemporal price discrimination.

Thus, the observation of temporary sales is consistent with my model of fair prices. The model can

also explain why prices seem to be more responsive to changes in factor costs than to changes in

demand that have the same effect on marginal cost, why increases in inflation seem to affect mostly

the frequency of price adjustment without having sizeable effects on the size of price increases and

why firms often announce their intent to increase prices in advance of actually doing so.

Julio J. Rotemberg
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu
      This paper proposes a model of what it means for prices to be fair and shows that its
implications are consistent with several pricing practices as well as with many reactions of
consumers both in laboratory settings and in actual markets. The central assumption of
the model is that consumers require that firms demonstrate a minimum level of altruism
towards them. This means that prices must be responsive to consumer preferences in ways
that differ from the usual ones. If, in particular, consumers experience disappointment when
they suddenly face increased prices, firms that act with the required level of benevolence
must keep their prices somewhat rigid.
      A search in Google gives 751000 hits for “fair price” while there are somewhat under
57000 for “equilibrium price”. This fits with the ease that laboratory subjects have in
answering questions about whether particular pricing patterns are fair. Such views have been
elicited in the pioneering study by Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986), and have led to an
extensive literature which is reviewed by Xia, Monroe and Cox (2004). An important finding
of Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986) is that many respondents regard it as unfair for
a firm to raises the price of an item whose demand has suddenly increased as a result of a
change in the weather. By contrast, they generally regard it as fair if a firm increases its
prices when the price of its inputs rise. Interestingly, these notions of fairness appear to be
reflected in actual pricing practices. Firms often do increase their prices when costs rise. On
the other dramatic increases in demand such as those caused by hurricane alerts are often
accompanied by constant prices for emergency supplies, and stores often run out.
      For example, stores in Baton Rouge, Louisiana ran out of generators, duct tape, flash-
lights and batteries on the eve of a hurricane in 2002.1 A remarkable story of constant prices
in response to a hurricane warning is reported in The Washington Post of September 19,
2003.2 It reports that store manager Paul Ginetti, whose store had run out of flashlights
priced at $4.97 each, managed to locate 1000 flashlights from an alternate manufacturer. At
first he sold these for $4.97, but his supervisor made him raise their price to $11.98 when
  1
   “Residents rushing to prepare for Isidore’s visit”, The Baton Rouge Advocate, September 25, 2002.
  2
   The story ran under the heading “A Customer Flood for Home Depot; Va. Store Struggles To Meet
Demand.”


                                                 1
he learned that this was the list price for these flashlights. Some customers complained and,
perhaps in part for this reason, Paul Ginetti later obtained permission from his supervisor
to lower the price of these flashlights back to $4.97. Firms that act differently and do raise
prices after a calamity raises demand, do so at their peril. The L.A. Times of January 30,
1994, for example, reported that irate consumers threatened stores that raised prices after
an earthquake with boycotts.
   Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler’s (1986) theory to explain their findings is that fairness
considerations lead to a “dual entitlement.” As they put it “Transactors have an entitlement
to the terms of the reference transaction and firms are entitled to their reference profit.”
Reference transactions often refer to those that occurred in the recent past and, similarly,
reference profits are those that the firm earned in the past.
   This way of theorizing about fair prices appears to have three advantages. First, it fits
well with the view that ethical behavior involves the heeding of absolute norms, since fairness
in prices is defined by the requirement that firms respect certain rights. Second, it appears
somewhat symmetric since both consumers and firms seem to be entitled to something
they obtained in the past. In practice, however, Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1986) do
not treat these two rights symmetrically: consumers are only entitled to the terms of their
reference transaction when this does not threaten firm profits, otherwise the rights of firms to
change prices take precedence. Third, it seems to account for the unfairness of raising prices
when demand rises due to a change in climactic conditions, since such a price increase would
not only violate the norm against altering the terms of the consumers reference transaction
but would also be unnecessary for protecting the sellers’ profits (since these presumably rise
together with sales even if prices stay constant.)
   Unfortunately, the “dual entitlement” principle poses three types of difficulties. First,
the consumers’ entitlement to the ”terms of the reference transaction” captures quite poorly
what consumers consider fair when demand rises suddenly. Consumers do regard it as fair if
posted prices stay constant in these cases, but they realize perfectly well that this often leads




                                               2
to rationing.3 Rationed consumers do not receive the “terms of the reference transaction”,
indeed they do not even meaningfully face an unchanged price since the effective price at
which they can obtain the item has suddenly become infinite.
       The second problem with the principle is that there are many changes in circumstances
where it is impossible to maintain firm profits, even if the firm were willing to violate the
consumer’s entitlement by changing prices. When there is a real increase in a factor’s price,
for example, even a firm that increases its price optimally will often experience a fall in real
profits since its quantity sold will fall. Thus, in these circumstances, neither entitlement can
be met, and the principle seems to lack any prediction for what price will be regarded as
fair.
       Lastly, the “dual entitlement principle” seems inconsistent with many fairness judgments
in the laboratory. Dickson and Kalapurakal (1994), in particular, show that purchasers do
not regard it as fair for prices to stay constant when costs fall, even though this is consistent
with the principle. Along the same lines, maintaining a constant level of profits when factor
costs rise requires that prices increase by more than marginal cost so that the firm makes
up for its loss in volume. However, Bolton, Warlop and Alba (2003) show that firms that
increase their price by more than the increase in their marginal cost are more likely to be seen
as unfair. Thus the “dual entitlement” principle often fails to provide meaningful guidance
about what prices would be fair and offers a prescription which seems incorrect in other
cases.
       The aim of this paper is to provide an alternative theory for fair prices. This theory seeks
to explain not only the answers people give in the laboratory to questions regarding what
prices they regard as fair but also tries to rationalize actual pricing practices. I focus not
only on the responses to drastic changes in demand like those I just discussed, but also on
four aspects of price rigidity that seem difficult to explain with models where this rigidity is
due only to administrative costs of changing prices. The first of these aspects is that many
   3
    What is more, 76% of Frey and Pommerehne’s (1993) respondents regarded it as fair if 100 available
bottles of water were distributed among 200 thirsty hikers on a first-come first-served basis, while 73%
regarded it as unfair if a higher price was used to allocate the limited supply of water.


                                                   3
stores hold temporary sales where prices fall temporarily only to return to their pre-special
price when the sale is over. The second is that, as emphasized by Bils and Chang (2000)
prices seem to be more responsive to changes in factor cost than to changes in demand that
have the same effect on marginal cost. The third is that increases in inflation seem to be
accompanied mostly by an increase in the frequency of price adjustment, and only marginally
by an increase in the size of the typical price increase. As I discuss below, this is not what the
Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) model predicts for standard specifications of demand. Lastly,
many firms announce their price increases in advance. By contrast, Benabou (1989) shows
that models with only administrative costs of changing prices predict nearly the opposite.
In models of this sort, firms would like to prevent customers from buying goods in advance
of price increases and this leads firms to surprise their customers with unexpected price
increases. Pre-announcing price increases facilitates this customer speculation instead.
      The theory I propose hinges on two key assumptions. The first is that consumers expect
firms to be somewhat altruistic towards them and that they react with anger if firms prove to
be insufficiently altruistic.4 The fear of angry reactions then leads firms to act as if they were
altruists regardless of whether they feel true benevolence towards consumers. The second
key assumption is that consumers experience a loss over and above their loss in real income
when they learn something that makes them wish they had carried out a different set of
transactions at an earlier time. As discussed by Bell (1983), this loss is best thought of as
regret. In my context, consumers experience this regret when they must pay more for an
object that they could easily have obtained at a lower price earlier. In this way, the “terms
of the reference transaction” that play such a central role in Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler
(1986) play an important role here as well.
      However, I suppose that consumers are also upset when they are no longer able to buy a
good that was available earlier, since this ought to generate at least as much regret as having
to pay a higher price for a good. By keeping its price constant, a firm prevents the regret of
  4
    This idea also underlies Rotemberg (2002) whose focus, however, is on short term macroeconomic fluc-
tuations and whose motivation for price rigidity is not based on regret.



                                                   4
customers that obtain the good at the old price at the cost of ensuring the regret of those
who are rationed. As long as the latter are sufficiently less numerous than the former, it
becomes possible for an altruistic firm to prefer to keep its price unchanged.
      There is independent evidence for both the assumptions that consumers care about the
benevolence of firms, and that they wish to avoid regret. According to Connolly and Zee-
lenberg (2002), regret is “the emotion that has received the most attention from decision
theorists.” Much of the empirical research on regret involves asking subjects about the ex-
tent to which they regret various actions and outcomes. For example, Cooke, Meyvis and
Schwartz (2001) demonstrate that subjects taking the role of consumers express regret (and
are unsatisfied) if they pay high prices for a product after the product was available at a
lower price. This regret (and reduction in satisfaction) is larger if consumers are “forced”
to make the purchase because they have “run out of the good”. This displeasure could, by
itself, be interpreted as being simply the result of a loss in real income. There is, however,
evidence that people are willing to pay not to learn what would have happened had they
followed alternate courses of action.5 In the study of Cooke, Meyvis and Schwartz (2001),
subjects have a different reservation price for a good depending on whether they do or do
not subsequently learn the price at which it becomes available later. Since the actual income
of the purchasers is independent of the price they would have paid had they not purchased
(and since subjects are made unhappy by low future prices that indicate, if anything, higher
future income) it seems that subjects suffer a direct loss in utility if they learn they could
have done better through alternate courses of action.
      There is also some evidence that consumers wish firms to be benevolent. First, firms
spend nontrivial resources touting the loftiness of their their goals. Johnson & Johnson, for
example, heavily advertises its 50-year old one-page “corporate credo” which begins with:
“We believe our first responsibility is to the doctors, nurses and patients, to mothers and
fathers and all others who use our products and services. In meeting their needs everything
we do must be of high quality. We must constantly strive to reduce our costs in order to
  5
      This is the essence of Bell’s (1983) model of regret.


                                                        5
maintain reasonable prices.” Shareholders are mentioned last, and the credo ends with the
words “When we operate according to these principles, the stockholders should realize a fair
return.”6 It is conceivable that this firm is just “burning money” through this publicity, but
too much effort is spent emphasizing the content of this message to make this interpretation
plausible.
      Campbell (1999) provides more direct evidence that consumers approve of benevolent
acts by firms. She asked her respondents about the fairness of various mechanisms that a
toy store could use for allocating a single doll that it found in its warehouse just before
Christmas, when the doll was in short supply. As in the studies discussed above, auctioning
the doll to the highest bidder and keeping the proceeds was widely seen as unfair. On the
other hand, auctioning the doll and giving the proceeds to charity was commonly regarded
as fair. This can be interpreted as saying that benevolent firms are seen in a better light
than ones that seeks only to maximize profits. It also fits more generally with firms’ effort
to trumpet their charitable activities.
      A nearly immediate implication of firm benevolence is that firms with market power would
like to charge less to customers whose marginal utility of income is higher. The reason is
that such firms gain less total utility from extracting an additional dollar from someone who
values it highly than they do from extracting an additional dollar from people who value it
less. This desire to treat different customers differently could rationalize temporary sales if
individuals with higher marginal utility of income are more likely to take advantage of these
sales. Surprisingly, temporary sales arise out of firm altruism even if all customers have the
same marginal utility of income and the same elasticity of demand. The reason, as I show,
is that temporary sales can often be a particularly effective way to charge less on average
than a selfish firm would.
      This model obviously does not establish that temporary sales are a manifestation of firm
altruism. However, it does establish that consumers who observe temporary sales should not
necessarily be upset with firms for their lack of benevolence. This is important because the
  6
      See, for example, http://www.jnj.com/our company/our credo history/index.htm.


                                                   6
paper shows that constant prices are often a good policy for firms that want to prove their
altruism, and temporary sales obviously represent a departure from this. One big difference
between this departure and other price variations is that those individuals who do not take
advantage of the sale tend to be those that do not even become aware of its existence. This
lack of awareness leads them not to be disappointed when they purchase at the same regular
price that prevailed the previous time they observed the item’s price.
   Before proceeding, it is worth discussing briefly another alternative to using altruism as
a model for fairness in pricing. Huppertz, Arenson and Evans (1978) define fair prices as
involving an “equitable distribution of the benefits” from the exchange between consumers
and firms. This is similar in spirit to the preferences considered in Fehr and Schmidt (1999)
and Bolton and Ockenfels (2000) where individuals have preferences for relatively equal
outcomes. One bit of evidence against this hypothesis is provided by Huppertz, Arenson
and Evans (1978) themselves. They show that consumers who receive a better deal tend
to see firms as treating more fairly, so that an orientation towards the welfare of customers
seems to be associated with fairness. Second, if this theory were correct, the role of fairness
considerations in pricing would have to be fairly limited because, in practice, the distribution
of “benefits” between customers and firms - where these benefits are admittedly difficult to
define and measure - seems to depend heavily on industry characteristics. Market power, in
particular, plays a large role on the extent to which firms appropriate such benefits.
   Along the same lines, firms that make considerable losses are not always seen as fair.
Even firms in financial trouble are quite likely to be seen as unfair if, as emphasized by
Campbell (1999), their acts are construed as having insufficiently positive intent. Letting
customers focus on a firm’s altruism has the advantage of ensuring that the intent of firms
does indeed play a central role in customer attitudes. Lastly, as shown in Rotemberg (2004),
a focus on altruism by no means precludes obtaining equilibria where outcomes are equal.
Indeed, Rotemberg (2004) shows an altruism-based model quite similar to the one considered
here induces equal splits in ultimatum games with more reasonable parameter values than
those that are necessary to justify such splits if one uses the preferences in Fehr and Schmidt


                                               7
(1999) or those in Bolton and Ockenfels (2000).
    The paper proceeds as follows. The next section introduces my preferences for consumers
and firms and shows that firms that want to appear altruistic will practice third degree price
discrimination. They will, in particular, seek to give price breaks to individuals with a higher
marginal utility of income. Section 2 studies how prices of such firms change when there are
changes in demand and cost conditions that are known sufficiently far in advance that the
firm can change its production volume. I consider changes in demand that are so sudden
that it is difficult to increase quantity supplied in the following section, and this is where
I introduce price rigidity due to consumer regret. Section 4 is devoted to temporary sales.
Section 5 turns its attention to a setting where, in spite of the resulting customer regret,
the firm changes its price regularly because there is constant inflation. This allows me to
contrast the present model of price rigidity with that of Sheshinski and Weiss (1977), which
involves only administrative cost of price changes. I focus particularly on the desirability of
pre-announcing price increases and on the effects of changes in the rate of inflation on the
frequency of price adjustment. Section 6 concludes.


1     Preferences
I suppose that individual preferences are quite similar to those in Rotemberg (2004) so that
the psychological well-being of agent i is given by

                                  Wi = xi + [λi − ξ(λ̂j , λ̄i )]xj                            (1)

where xi is agent i’s “material payoff, i.e. the part of his utility that is independent of the
outcomes for the other agent, λi is the agent’s altruism parameter while the variable λ̂j
represents the beliefs of agent i about λj . The function ξ takes a value ξ¯ which is greater
than λi if agent i can reject the hypothesis that λj ≥ λ̄i and equals zero otherwise. This
means that agent i is willing to incur costs to inflict harm on agent j if he can reject the
hypothesis that the latter’s altruism is at least equal to λ̄i . Otherwise, he feels some altruism
and gains utility when the agent is better off as a result of agent i’s actions.

                                                 8
       My focus is on a firm, which sets a price, and on its consumers, who decide how much
to buy from the firm. I am neglecting other actions by consumers, though angry consumers
are often able to inflict damage on firms in other ways than by stopping their purchases.
Consumers who are upset at firms also complain loudly, and it seems likely that this is
unpleasant for firm owners (either directly or because it leads to unhappy employees that
require some form of compensation). In addition, angry consumers can mobilize politicians
against firms, and it seems likely that this is costly to firms even it does not lead to regulatory
changes.7 The threat of political movements against firms may well have a very different
effect on individual firm behavior than the threat of the cessation of purchases I study here,
because the effect of the former on any individual firm may well be quite unrelated to this
particular firm’s actions.8 In part for this reason, I ignore these other reactions in this paper,
and focus on consumer purchases only. As will become apparent below, a high ξ leads to
a reduction - and even to a complete cessation - in purchases when consumers are angry .
In some cases this is the empirically relevant outcome, particularly when the picketing of a
store by angry consumers drives away other consumers.9 In others, alternate expressions of
anger are more relevant because the good is sufficiently essential to consumers that ξ is not
large enough to lead to a cessation of purchases. The extent to which the costs borne by
firms in these cases resemble those that flow from the cessation of purchases will need to be
studied in further research.
       I suppose that consumer i’s material payoff is V (Ui (qi ) + Ii − pi qi ), where pi and qi are the
price paid and the quantity purchased by i respectively while Ii is his income. The functions
Ui and V are increasing and concave. This formulation has the advantage of leading to simple
demand curves while preserving the idea that different consumers differ in their marginal
   7
      The State of Florida has a statute which imposes penalties on firms that charge “unconscionable” prices
when the Governor declares a state of emergency following a natural disaster. Florida’s law specifies that
prices are unconscionable if they are “grossly” larger than those that were charged earlier and if this increase
is not justifiable by a rise in costs. See http:www.800helpfla.comc̃spdfsstatute price gouging.pdf.
    8
      Any individual landlord, for example, probably has only a very modest influence on the likelihood that
rent control legislation will be passed.
    9
      See “Quick Stop in Waunakee is picketed” Wisconsin State Journal September 13, 2001 for the story
of a consumer who responded to a gas station that raised its prices after the September 11, 2001 attack by
picketing the station and thereby led the station to close.


                                                       9
utility of income as a result of differences in the level of income. In this section, I suppose
that there are two types so that i equals either 1 and 2, and I let Ni denote the number of
consumers of each type. I suppose that these two types are observably different from each
other and cannot resell the product so that the firm can charge them different prices. Thus,
the firm’s total sales Q equal N1 q1 + N2 q2 .
       Letting C(Q) represent the cost of producing Q units, the firm’s material payoffs xf are
a function of its profits π

                                                           X
                              xf = v(π)               π≡         Ni pi qi − C(Q)
                                                             i

where v is either linear or concave. I suppose consumers are identical with respect to their
altruism λc , with respect to the minimal level of altruism λ̄ that they require and with
respect to their beliefs about the firm’s altruism, which I denote by λ̂f .10 Consumer of type
i then maximizes

                    Wic = V (Ui (qi ) + Ii − pi qi ) + λ̃v(π)        λ̃ ≡ [λc − ξ(λ̂f , λ̄)]     (2)

       The consumer’s first order condition for qi is

                              Vi0 (Ui0 − pi ) = −[λc − ξ(λ̂f , λ̄)]v 0 (pi − C 0 )               (3)

where primes denote first derivatives. In the normal case where the price pi is above marginal
cost C 0 , the firm has something to gain from an additional sale. An increase in the altruism
of the consumer towards the firm then induces the consumer to reduce U 0 by increasing
his purchases and thereby reducing the distortion that is due to the excess of price over
marginal cost. By the same token, if ξ is large because the firm is deemed to be insufficiently
altruistic, the consumer reduces his purchases. To simplify the analysis, I suppose that
consumers actually stop buying altogether when they can reject the hypothesis that the
firm’s altruism equals at least λ̄.
  10
    This simplification allows me to avoid modelling the important issue of how consumers communicate
their beliefs about the firm’s altruism to one another.



                                                      10
       I ignore anger from the firm towards its consumers so that I let the firms maximize11
                                                         X
                                 W f = v(π) + λf              Ni V (Ui (qi ) + Ii − pi qi )                (4)
                                                          i

where λf is the firm’s altruism parameter. Supposing that consumers are not angry at the
firm, and assuming an interior solution, the firm’s optimal price for consumer i satisfies

                         Ã                                !                 Ã                          !
                                                    dqi                                          dqi
                    v0       Ni qi + Ni (pi − C 0 )           = λF Ni Vi0       qi − (Ui0 − pi )           (5)
                                                    dpi                                          dpi
where the left hand side is the derivative of profits with respect to price. Using ²i to denote
group i’s demand elasticity, this can be rearranged to yield

                                                      ²i (1 − λf λc )
                                      pi =                                     C0                          (6)
                                             ²i (1 − λf λc ) + λf Vi0 /v 0 − 1
                                                ²i C 0
This reduces to the familiar formula            ²i −1
                                                         when the firm is selfish and λf = 0. An increase in
λf lowers the numerator of (5). It also raises the denominator in the plausible if Vi0 /v 0 > λc
Since we expect the marginal utility of individuals to be no less than that of firms (so that
Vi0 /v 0 ≥ 1) and we expect λc to be considerably smaller than one, prices decline when firm
altruism rises. This makes intuitive sense since it implies that a more altruistic firm charges
lower prices because this increases the happiness of its customers. If λf > 0, prices also
fall when Vi0 /v 0 increases. An altruistic firm is more inclined to cut prices if its customers
have a higher marginal utility of wealth relative to the firm’s own marginal utility of profits
because this implies that the firm obtains more indirect utility when the consumer’s budget
constraint is relaxed by the price reduction.
       Because price is falling in λf , consumers can use the prices charged by the firm as an
indicator of firm altruism. In particular, the requirement that a firm have a minimal level of
altruism translates into the requirement that the firm’s price not be larger than a threshold
price. Consider in particular the prices p̄i that satisfy (6) when λf is replaced by λ̄. These
are the largest prices that are consistent with λ̄ since firms would only charge higher prices if
  11
    In a one-period setting it would be hard to incorporate firm anger since firms set their price first and
consumers purchase afterwards. There is thus nothing for the firm to react to. In a multi-period setting,
angry reactions by the firms are easier to imagine, though I ignore them for simplicity.

                                                              11
they had lower levels of altruism. Thus, firms that charged higher prices would be punished
by consumers.
   The prices p̄i exceed marginal cost C 0 as long as λ̄f Vi0 /v 0 < 1. Firms thus cover their
marginal cost at these prices if the required level of altruism is such that firms prefer a dollar
in their pocket to a dollar in the pocket of their consumers. The observation that firms are
not required to make cash transfers to their consumers suggests that, indeed, the required
level of altruism is lower. What distinguishes a low price from a direct transfer is that the
former costs the firm less. The reason for this is that a price reduction raises sales so that,
when price exceeds marginal cost, price reductions reduce profits by less than they reduce
the payments of consumers on the units that they were already purchasing.
   If marginal cost decreases sufficiently little with the quantity produced, and particularly
if it is nondecreasing, the firm covers all its cost at p̄i . There is then an equilibrium where all
firms whose altruism is lower than or equal to λ̄ charge these prices. Firms whose altruism
parameter is lower than λ̄ would prefer higher prices but are kept in check by customer’s
refusal to buy at prices above p̄i . Firms whose λf > λ̄, by contrast, simply charge the price
given by (6) using their own λf .
   I now consider this equilibrium. If the two groups of consumers have the same ²i , the
group whose income I is lower so that its resulting V 0 is higher pays a lower price. The
model thus rationalizes the existence of lower prices for groups that are generally seen as
poorer, such as students and the elderly. This equilibrium also features higher prices for
groups that have a lower elasticity of demand, just as in the conventional analysis with
selfish firms. However, the requirement that the firm act altruistically mutes the effect of
demand elasticity on price. To see this, note that p̄1 /p̄2 equals

                                p̄1   ²1 ²2 (1 − λ̄λc ) + λ̄V20 /v 0 − 1
                                    =
                                p̄2   ²2 ²1 (1 − λ̄λc ) + λ̄V10 /v 0 − 1

   The derivative of this expression with respect to λ̄ is

                                    ²1 [V20 (²1 − 1) − V1 (²2 − 1)]
                                  ²2 [²1 (1 − λ̄λc ) + λ̄V10 /v 0 − 1]2


                                                   12
       Suppose that price differences are due exclusively to differences in the elasticity of demand
so that V10 = V20 , and that, without loss of generality, ²1 < ²2 so that the firm wishes to charge
a higher price to group 1. Then this expression is negative, meaning that a higher λ̄ shrinks
the ratio of the two prices towards one. Some intuition for this result can be gained by
noting that firms are required to charge a price equal to marginal cost if λ̄V 0 /v 0 is equal to
one. It is thus not surprising that increases in λ̄ make the two prices converge towards one
another.
       This result can to some extent rationalize the anger expressed by consumers when they
concluded that Amazon.com was tailoring its prices to individuals by using its information
about these individuals’ past purchases.12 If setting up a price discrimination mechanism of
this type has a fixed cost, then this price discrimination will not be profitable for altruistic
firms (who do not get to vary their prices by all that much) whereas it will be profitable
for selfish ones. Thus evidence that a firm has set up such a system could be used to infer
that it is insufficiently altruistic. Amazon, for its part, denied any intention to discriminate
among customers who differ in their purchase pattern, and gave refunds to those who had
paid more.
       Complaints are much more muted against the airline industry’s practice of charging
different prices depending on the whether separate flight segments are bought at the same
time and whether the segments are separated by a Saturday night, even though this also
makes prices for individual items depend on other the items bought by the same customer.
One possible reason for this difference in customer reaction is that many discounts do go
to individuals who are arguably less rich. Insofar as leisure travellers are seen as having a
higher V 0 than business travellers, charging less to leisure travellers is consistent with an
equilibrium such as the one where firms charge p̄.
       A similar type of price discrimination is common in electronic goods, where products
with better features are often sold at substantially higher prices even though their costs of
  12
    See “On the Web, Price Tags Blur; What You Pay Could Depend on Who You Are,” Washington Post,
September 27, 2000.



                                                  13
production are not much greater. Indeed, as discussed by Deneckere and McAfee (1996),
the cost of producing the less effective product is often either the same or slightly higher
because the less effective product is an intentionally damaged version of the more effective
one. It is worth studying whether, empirically, buyers of the more effective products tend
to be richer, as would be required for my theory to explain these price differences. Insofar
as more effective products require less time to perform similar functions, one would expect
this to be the case, since people who earn higher wages ought to place a higher opportunity
cost on their time.
   While the equilibrium where firms charge p̄ has many attractive features, it is generally
not the only equilibrium of the model even if all consumers agree on λ̄. To see this consider
a strictly lower set of prices p̃i such that the firm continues to break even. Suppose that
consumers believe that firms with an altruism parameter equal to λ̄ charge these prices and
only less altruistic firms charge higher ones. Firms, even those whose altruism is below λ̄
will then charge p̃i because they know that they would lose all their sales if they charged
more. There is then no reason for consumers not to suspect that any firm that does charge
more is indeed more selfish, so that punishing firms that charge more is consistent with their
utility function (2).
   An unappealing feature of these equilibria with lower prices is that they depend on con-
sumer reactions that seem unreasonable. Actions that an altruistic firm would take in the
absence of fears of punishment ought to be sufficient as indicators of genuine altruism, partic-
ularly in a setting where it is straightforward for all players to know what an unconstrained
altruist would do. A slightly different way of criticizing these equilibria is to note that they
depend heavily on each firm’s willingness to do exactly what it expects other firms to do so
that it can escape being seen as selfish. In a model where there is incomplete information so
that firms are unsure what will trigger punishment, one would expect such equilibria to be
less plausible than equilibria where each firm’s actions are at least somewhat responsive to its
own circumstances. Because the resulting signaling considerations complicate the analysis,
this paper focuses only on actions the firm would take if it had an altruism parameter equal


                                              14
to the minimum altruism demanded by consumers.


2     Changes in Factor Costs and in Planned Demand
I now consider how a firm that acts as if it had an altruism parameter of λ̄ responds to the
factors that affect marginal cost. For simplicity, I set λc = 0 from now on and use λ to
denote the firm’s altruism. In this section, I focus on changes that are known in advance
of the time the firm sets price and hires the factors that are needed to produce Q. This
means that the firm can set this quantity in such a way that demand at the price chosen
by the firm is equal to Q. For simplicity, I suppose that there is only one type of consumer
so that N consumers each buy the quantity q at the price p. I simplify the analysis further
by supposing that the elasticity of demand ² of these customers is constant and by setting
λc = 0, though consumers still insist that firms act as if their altruism parameter is at least
equal to λ̄.
    As before, I imagine that marginal cost depends on Q. In addition, I let C depend on a
parameter ψ that captures the effect of factor costs. Thus, using (6) and remembering that
U 0 = p because consumers are selfish when they are not upset at the firm, the price of a firm
that acts as if its altruism parameter were λ is

                                            ²
                                p=                     C1 (N1 q1 , ψ)                      (7)
                                     ² + λV 0 /v 0 − 1

where C1 represents the derivative of V with respect to its first argument and is thus equal
to marginal cost.
    The two shocks I consider in this section are a change in the number of customers N ,
which is a type of change in demand, and a change in ψ, which can be interpreted as a
change in factor cost. Because I am focusing on a single firm, one can view the change in
the number of customers as a change in the relative demand for different products, with a
firm’s gain in customers matching other firms’ decline. Because I suppose that both C2 and
C12 are positive, changes in ψ are best thought of as changes in the firm’s factor markets.
    It is then straightforward to establish three results.

                                                15
Proposition 1: i) If v 00 = 0, the percentile response of prices to changes in ψ and N is
independent of the altruism parameter λ.
ii) If v 00 < 0 and C11 > 0, increases in N raise prices by strictly less if λ > 0 than if λ = 0.
iii) If v 00 < 0 and C11 > 0, a given increase in marginal cost C1 leads to a smaller increase in
price if this increase is due to a change in N than if it is due to an increase in ψ.
Proof Changes in N and ψ generally induce changes in q, but do so only through the change
in demand induced by the change in p. Thus, the percent change in q equals ² times the
percent change in p. Using this, and the fact that v depends only on π, differentiation of (7)
gives
               µ              ¶
                       QC11       dp   QC11 dN   C12          λV 0 /v 0    v 00 π dπ
                1 + ²1               =         +     dψ +                                      (8)
                        C1        p     C1 N     C1       ² + λV10 /v 0 − 1 v 0 π
   If v 00 were zero, so that v 0 is locally constant, the percent changes in price would obey the
same equation as if the firm acted selfishly (though the level of the price would be different)
and this establishes i) . If, by contrast, v were concave, the last term indicates that increases
in profits would tend to lower the price when the firm acts altruistically. The reason is that,
for a given λ, increases in profits make the marginal utility of customer income loom larger
relative to the marginal utility of firm income.
   Profits are given by pQ − C(Q, ψ) so that
                                                    "          #
                                                 dq dN
                            dπ = Qdp + (p − C1 )   +   − C2 dψ
                                                 q   N

Since q varies only because of the change in p, one can use (5) to obtain

                                                               λV 0 Q
                             dπ = (p1 − C1 )qdN1 − C2 dψ +            dp                       (9)
                                                                v0

If the firm acts selfishly, the last term is zero. Because an altruistic-acting firm lowers its
price below the selfish optimum, it acts in a region where its profits increase with its price.
Using (9) to substitute for dπ in (8), the change in price is given by

                                               dp
                                         Ap       = AN dN + Aψ dψ                              (10)
                                               p
               QC11        (λV 0 /v 0 )2 v 00 pQ          qC11       λV 0 /v 0     v 00 q(P − C1 )
  Ap = 1 + ²          −                             AN  =      +
                C1      ² − 1 + λV 0 /v 0 v 0              C1    ² − 1 + λV 0 /v 0         v0

                                                  16
                  C12       λV 0 /v 0    v 00 C2
           Aψ =       −
                  C1    ² − 1 + λV 0 /v 0 v 0

   These equations allow one to see some of the effects of varying the parameter λ. As long
as v 00 < 0, an increase in λ raises Ap and Aψ while reducing AN . Aψ rises with λ because
an increase in ψ directly lowers profits so that v 0 rises and the firm is more inclined to raise
its price. The same logic explains why Ap rises with λ. Increases in price raise the profits of
a firm that acts altruistically and thereby lower v 0 together with the desirability of raising
prices. Similarly, AN falls with λ because increases in N raise profits. The effects on Ap and
AN , together, imply that price unambiguously rises less with N when λ > 0 than when the
firm acts selfishly and this establishes ii).
   I now demonstrate iii). This result is trivial when AN < 0 since, in this case, an increase
in marginal cost due to an increase in N actually leads to a price reduction. To prove the
result for AN > 0 in a straightforward manner, it is actually easier to consider the reverse
problem and imagine changes in N and ψ that lead to the same price change. This means
that AN dN = Aψ dψ or that
     "                                             #         "                         #
         qC11       λV 0 /v 0     v 00 q(P − C1 )      C12       λV 0 /v 0    v 00 C2
              +                                   dN =     +                          dψ       (11)
          C1    ² − 1 + λV 0 /v 0         v0           C1    ² − 1 + λV 0 /v 0 v 0

   On the other hand, the change in C1 induced by these two changes are
                        (                   )                            (                 )
                             dq dp                                              dq dp
             qC11 dN + N C11       dN                  and       C12 dψ + N C11       dψ
                             dp dN                                              dp dψ

respectively. Because I start with a case where the two price changes are the same, the terms
in curly brackets are identical. Using (11), the difference between the increase in marginal
cost due to dN and that due to dψ is thus

                                           λV 0 /v 0     v 00
                  qC11 dN − C12 dψ = −                        [q(P − C1 )dN + C2 dψ]           (12)
                                       ² − 1 + λV 0 /v 0 v 0

   In the case of a price increase, C2 dψ must be positive, and the same must be true for
dN if AN > 0. The expression in (12) is then positive and increasing in λ, if and only
if λ > 0. Firm altruism thus implies that a given price increase must be associated with


                                                       17
a larger increase in marginal cost when it is a response to an increase in the number of
customers than when it is a response to an increase in factor costs. The reason, once again,
is that profits tend to rise more in the former case, and such profit increases ought to lead
altruistic firms to moderate their prices.
   The reason that factor prices have a larger effect on the prices is that firm profits fall
when factor prices increase. This suggests that prices should be less affected by changes in
opportunity costs that do not have an effect on actual costs. Indeed, a firm that has positive
inventories of an input whose price goes up experiences, if anything, a rise in profits rather
than a fall and it would thus be less acceptable if it increased its price. Vaidyanathan and
Aggarwal (2003) provide questionnaire evidence that people do indeed perceive such price
increases as less fair than price increases that are triggered by increases in costs that firms
must actually pay.
   The result that prices respond more to factor prices than to increases in demand that
increase marginal cost by the same amount fits with evidence presented in Bils and Chang
(2000) as well as with several earlier studies which they discuss. It is not clear that this
result has, by itself, implications for the way that prices respond in general equilibrium to
changes in aggregate demand as opposed to changes in factor costs. As stressed for example
in Rotemberg and Woodford (1991), there are important conceptual differences between
changes in a firm’s individual demand and changes in aggregate demand (or in the demand
for the typical firm).
   In particular, it is difficult to extend the result concerning the number of customers to
an aggregate setting. In such a setting an increase in the average number of customers also
requires an increase in the number of people earning income, for otherwise the new customers
would have no resources to spend, and this would also affect factor markets. More generally,
the aggregate income that individuals have available for spending at any given moment is
closely related to the income they earn from producing, so that it is difficult for people to
spend more (as is required by an increase in aggregate demand) without there also being an
increase in the total quantity of production. This, however, begs the question of how and


                                              18
why output increases in the first place.
      One way that this could occur is if firms increased their demand for labor. Workers would
then have more income to spend and demand for the typical firm would increase. In many
models, increases in the demand for labor are motivated by increases in labor productivity.
In my notation, this would entail changes in ψ, however. The demand for labor would
also rise if firms reduced their markup of price relative to marginal cost, since this would
lead firms to hire additional workers even though this would increase their marginal cost of
production. One simple mechanism that induces this behavior is price rigidity in the face of
increases in nominal marginal cost.
      Like standard models without explicit costs of changing prices, the model in this section
cannot rationalize this behavior. However, altruistic behavior by firms towards consumers
expands the range of reasons for price rigidity. In particular, it implies that any costs that
consumers pay when prices are changed must be taken into account by firms. I show this in
the next section, where I focus on an extreme form of price rigidity that seems difficult to
rationalize with purely administrative costs of changing prices.


3       The Fairness of Raising Prices when Demand Rises
        Suddenly
In this section I consider a continuum of consumers who differ in their valuation for a single
unit of the good at a point in time. The good was previously available at price p0 and I
introduce a psychological cost to consumers when this price changes. In particular, I suppose
that positive departures of the current price p from p0 induces a regret cost of `(p−p0 ) where
`(0) = 0 and `(x) > 0 if x > 0.
      I suppose that the only well functioning market for purchasing the good is at a store that
posts a price p. There is no resale market so that, if the store runs out, consumers who are
turned away from the store cannot obtain it at any price. Such consumers incur the regret
     ¯ 13 The absence of a resale market also means that there is no mechanism that ensures
cost `.
 13
      The complete absence of a resale market is obviously an extreme case. An empirically more appealing


                                                    19
that the limited quantities of the good that are sold at p go to the customers that value it
most highly. Rather, I suppose that purchasers are randomly drawn from the population
that is willing to pay p for the good.
    I let the material payoffs of each potential consumer be given by

                               V ((φ + a − p)x + I) − w0 `(p − p0 ) − w1 `¯                                (13)

In this equation, x equals 1 if the person buys the good and 0 otherwise, φ is a parameter
shifting the demand for all individuals and a is distributed across individuals with pdf F (a)
and support [aL , aH ]. The variable w0 equals 1 if a > p0 − φ so that the individual would
have bought the good if its price continued to equal p0 , and equals 0 otherwise. Lastly, the
variable w1 equals 1 x = 0 even though a > p − φ so that the individual would buy the good
if it were actually available at p. With N representing the total number of consumers, the
number of consumers willing to buy the good at price p is N (1 − F (p − φ)).
    Now consider a firm that has produced Q units in advance, and which cannot increase
its sales volume beyond Q in the short run. Since I am focusing on situations where demand
has increased abruptly, I suppose that demand at price p0 , N (1 − F (p0 − φ)) is larger than
Q. I show that, nonetheless, a firm that acts as if it had an altruism parameter of λ might
decide to keep its price constant. One obvious alternative to keeping the price constant is
to charge the market clearing price p∗ , which satisfies

                                         N (1 − F (p∗ − φ)) = Q.

    Even if the firm chooses not to charge the market clearing price, one might expect it to
prefer a slight price increase to a strictly constant price. Moreover, small price changes are
case would have a limited resale market. One might suppose, for example, that while a fraction g of potential
customers is unable to get the good at price p, a fraction f of these can buy them from the fraction 1 − g
non-rationed consumers. One might further speculate that the fraction f that obtains the good pays a
market clearing price that exceeds the price that would clear the overall market. This would capture the
idea that intermediaries exist that are able to funnel some items from people who bought them at p to people
who are willing to pay considerably more. Popular toys, for example, often appear on Ebay at prices far in
excess of suggested retail prices though producers try to foil these resellers by making only limited quantities
available to any one customer. In other settings, such as snow shovels during snow storms, it seems more
accurate to consider the limiting case where f is zero.

                                                      20
quite common so it may seem peculiar that they are not acceptable when demand increases
a great deal. Nonetheless, Maxwell’s (1995) respondents felt that responding to a blizzard
by raising the price of snow shovels by a small amount was unfair - though less unfair than
increasing these prices a great deal. The conditions under which the firm prefers p0 to a
slightly higher price are thus of interest, and I study them first. I show, in particular,
Proposition 2:Let                 R aH
                                   p−φ [V   (φ + a − p + I)dF (a) − V (I)
                           Ũ =
                                                1 − F (p − φ)
   The firm prefers p0 to a price slightly above p0 if either the function ` is nondifferentiable
at zero with limx→0 > 0 or if

                            ¯ 0 (p − φ) + λN F 0 (p − φ)(Ũ − V (I)) + (v 0 − λV 0 )Q
              Q0 `0 (0) > N `F                                                               (14)

where `0 (0) is the derivative of `(x) at x = 0 and Q0 = N (1 − F (p0 − φ)).
Proof Suppose that the firm charges p < p∗ . Those individuals for whom a < p − φ do not
wish to buy at p so that, leaving aside their regret, their material payoffs equal V (I). The
probability that someone with a higher a obtains the good is Q(1 − F (p − φ)/N . If a person
with such a valuation obtains the good, his material payoffs are given by (13) with w1 = 0,
                                           ¯ Taking expectations over realizations of a, an
otherwise, they equal V (I) − `(p − p0 ) − `.
individual’s expected material payoffs are thus
                                                           µ                  ¶
                              Q                                  Q
                  Ū = V (I) + Ũ − Q0 `(p − p0 )) − F (p − φ) +   − 1 `¯
                              N                                  N

   Recalling that sales stay fixed because the price is below the level that ensures that only
Q is demanded, the derivative of average consumer welfare with respect to p is
                                          aH  R
     dŪ   ¯ 0
                        Ũ F 0 (p − φ) − p−φ  V 0 (φ + a − p + I)dF (a) Q 0
         = `F (p − φ) +                                                − ` (p − p0 )         (15)
     dp                               (1 − F (p − φ))N/Q                N

This expression shows that consumers experience two benefits and two costs from an increase
in price. The first term is the benefit from the reduction in the regret that is due to rationing.
The density of people that stop being rationed, which is the same as that of the people who
stop buying voluntarily, is given by F 0 (p − φ). The second term captures the benefit of

                                                   21
allocating the good to individuals who value it more. A price increase ensures that some
buyers who were just indifferent between buying and not buying the good, are replaced by
buyers whose average valuation is Ũ , which is positive. The density of such replacements is
F 0 (p − φ) as well. The third term captures the income reduction due to the price increase
while the last is the loss from the increase in regret at having to pay a higher price.
   Since Q is fixed, the material payoffs to the firm from selling Q units at price p are pQ.
Thus, an altruistic’s firm’s change in welfare when p changes is

                                                     dŪ
                                         Qv 0 + λN       .
                                                     dp

Suppose for simplicity that all consumers have the same V 0 , which could depend on φ since
devastating weather changes presumably raise the marginal utility of income. This expression
then reduces to
                               0
             ¯ 0 (p − φ) + λQ F (p − φ)(Ũ − V (I)) − λQ0 `0 (p − p0 ) + (v 0 − λV 0 )Q
          N λ`F
                                  1 − F (p − φ)


   The first two terms on the RHS of (14) are clearly positive and capture the allocational
benefits of raising p. One would normally expect the last term to be positive as well since
firms should not typically be expected to have a level of altruism so large that they prefer a
dollar in their customers’ pocket to a dollar in their own. Thus, under normal circumstances,
(v 0 − λV 0 ) is positive. However, these terms could be negative in the aftermath of a natural
disaster, when consumers feel impoverished so that their V 0 ’s are high relative to v 0 . This is
particularly the case for firms supplying goods that are needed in these circumstances, since
one can expect these firm’s sales volume to rise so that their v 0 falls.
   Still, `0 > 0, or a jump in ` at 0, make it considerably easier to justify holding prices
constant rather than raising them slightly. This raises the question of whether having the
function ` jump at zero, or even increase substantially, is reasonable. One reason why
consumers may be averse even to small price changes is that price changes - no matter the size
- require processing effort by consumers that can be avoided if prices remain unchanged. This

                                               22
can be rationalized by supposing that, for many consumers, the effort needed to remember
the price paid in the past is larger than the effort needed to recognize this price when it
is presented to them again. A consumer who fails to recognize the price that is presented
to him must then go through a discrete additional effort to determine whether the price is
reasonable. One bit of evidence that supports some elements of this logic is provided by
Monroe and Lee (1999). They show that the fraction of consumers that correctly recalled a
price that they saw before was significantly smaller than the fraction that could recognize
the correct price from a list.14
       Whether (14) is satisfied or depends not only on `0 and v 0 /V 0 but also on F 0 . If F 0 is low,
the inequality can be satisfied even if `0 is modest. Moreover, it is easy to imagine that F 0
would indeed be low in the neighborhood of p0 after a massive increase in demand. Right
after a blizzard, demand is presumably not affected a great deal by a 10% increase in the
price of snow shovels. Only after the price rises considerably more can one expect demand to
fall to the point where only q is demanded. By contrast, a more modest increase in demand,
seems more likely to lead to a more substantial F 0 at p0 .
       So far I have only considered small price increases. Even in F 0 is modest near p0 after
a massive demand increase, it is presumably more substantial when price increases more.
The problem is that, by the time the price has a substantial effect on demand, its increase
may be so substantial that it generates a great deal of regret. A firm that acts altruistically
would then refrain from large price increases as well. It would then be possible for prices
to be more rigid when demand rises a great deal than when it rises more modestly. I now
construct an example where, indeed, price is more likely to be constant after a big shock to
demand than after a smaller one.
       Suppose that F is uniform between aL and aH . With this distribution of consumer
valuations, all N consumers wish to buy if p is below (φ + aL ), while the quantity demanded
  14
     Because lists have fewer elements than the possible number of prices that might be recalled, the number
of errors would be somewhat smaller when consumers are presented a list that includes the correct price even
if consumers pick their answer randomly. It is notable, however, that consumers also make fewer mistakes
when asked to recognize a price from a list than they do when asked to remember the ranking of prices from
different brands.


                                                    23
equals N (φ + aH − p)/(aH − aL ) for prices above this level. Thus, if Q < N , the market
clearing price is φ + ah − (ah − aL )Q/N . If firms charge this market clearing price, consumer
welfare is
                                     Z aH
                                                           V (I + a − aH + (aH − aL )Q/N )
  V (I)(N − Q) − Q0 `(p − p0 ) + N                                                         da (16)
                                        aH −(aH −aL )Q/N               aH − aL
                                                    N (φ+aH −p)
   For prices below this level, either all N or        aH −aL
                                                                  − Q consumers are rationed. This
means that the probability that a consumer who wants to purchase the good at price p
actually obtains it is
                                            Q(aH − aL )/N
                                   R≡
                                          aH − max(aL , p − φ)
Total consumer welfare is then
                                                         Z aH
                          φ + aH − max(p, φ + aL ) ¯                   V (φ + a − p + I)
V (I)(N −Q)−Q0 `(p−p0 )−N                          `+N R                                 da
                                 aH − aL                  max(aL ,p−φ)      aH − aL

   Assuming that V 0 is constant and setting V (I) = 0 for simplicity, total consumer welfare
when the price clears the market is

                               Q2 V 0 (ah − aL )/2N − Q0 `(p − p0 )                           (17)

Otherwise their welfare is
                    ·               ¸
                        aH + aL
                0
           QV φ − p +              − Q0 `(p − p0 ) − (N − Q)`¯              for    p < φ + aL (18)
       "           #
                            2        Ã                    !
      0 φ − p + aH                     N (φ + aH − p)
   QV                − Q`(p − p0 ) −                   − Q `¯               for    p ≥ φ + aL (19)
             2                            aH − aL

The first of these expressions declines in price more rapidly than the second. The reason
is that, when all consumers are rationed because p < (φ + aL ), price increases do not
(locally) improve the allocation of resources and therefore also fail to reduce the regret costs
of rationing. For higher prices, increases in prices hurt consumers less. In the case where
consumer income has not been massively disrupted so that we would expect (v 0 − λV 0 ) > 0,
we would also expect that
                              Ã                                        !
                          0   V 0 Q0 0                N `¯
                         v −λ    −   ` (p − p0 ) +                         >0
                              2    Q               Q(aH − aL )

                                                 24
since `¯ should be substantial relative to `0 . This means that a firm with altruism parameter
equal to λ prefers local increases in prices once prices start having an effect on consumption.
This condition ensures that, such an altruistic firm prefers the market clearing price to any
price between (φ + aL ) and the market clearing price.
   The question of whether it prefers either p0 or the market clearing price to charging prices
that are strictly between p0 and (φ + aL ) is more complex. One sufficient, though by no
means necessary, condition for this is

                                 Q0 0
                 v 0 − λ(V 0 +     ` (p − p0 )) < 0         for p0 < p < φ + aL           (20)
                                 Q

This condition implies that the firm prefers charging p0 to any price between p0 and φ+aL on
the grounds that price increases in this range cause too much disappointment for consumers.
   If both of these conditions hold, the firm effectively faces the choice between charging
p0 and charging the market clearing price. To see which is better, suppose without loss of
generality that p0 is the market clearing price for the level of demand φ0 and that Q0 = Q.
If, when the level of demand switches to φ, the firm charges the new market clearing price,
its profits are (φ − φ0 )Q larger than if it continues to charge p0 . Consumer welfare with the
new market clearing price is given by (17) with (p − p0 ) replaced by (φ − φ0 ). If the firm
sticks to p0 and φ − φ0 > (aH − aL )(1 − Q/N ), p0 is below φ + aL so that consumer welfare
is given by (18) with p replaced by p0 . If, instead, φ − φ0 > (aH − aL )(1 − Q/N ), consumer
welfare with p0 is given by (19) with p replaced by p0 .
   This means that, for φ − φ0 > (aH − aL )(1 − Q/N ) the loss to consumers from going to
the new market clearing price is
                                     "                              #
                                                             1 − Q/N
               Q`(φ − φ0 ) + qV 0        φ − φ0 − (aH − aL )         − (N − Q)`¯
                                                                 2

whereas this loss equals

                                                                 φ − φ0 ¯
                           Q`(φ − φ0 ) + QV 0 (φ − φ0 )/2 − N           `
                                                                aH − aL

when φ − φ0 < (aH − aL )(1 − Q/N ).

                                                  25
       To gain some insights into the determinants of whether a firm acting as if it had an
altruism parameter of λ would switch over to the new market clearing price, Figures 1 and
2 show consumer losses and profit gains from such a change. Profit gains are deflated by
λ because the firm is supposed to change its price when its profits from doing so exceed λ̄
times the losses to consumers. The figures are drawn for V 0 , v 0 , aH , aL , N and Q equal to 2,
1, 10, 5, 10 and 8 respectively. Both figures include values of λ̄ of both .35 and .45. Using
a V 0 that is larger than one raises the weight put on consumer losses relative to producer
gains for any given λ. The use of a high V 0 /v 0 seems particularly appropriate when a major
disaster has struck that makes consumers feel impoverished. It is less attractive, however,
in the case of demand changes that are not accompanied by changes in the marginal utility
of wealth.
       Figure 1 considers the case where `¯ = 16 while the disappointment losses from high prices
are given by `(x) = min(16, 2x). The Figure shows that an altruistic firm would raise its
price to the market clearing level if φ was not substantially larger than φ0 . Given that (20) is
satisfied for this example, it would otherwise prefer to keep its price constant. It is important
to see that this result hinges both on substantial altruism and substantial disappointment
costs. Consumer disappointment costs without firm altruism lead the firm to always raise
its price, since this increases profits. Similarly, with pure altruism and no disappointment
costs, the firm would always change its price except in when consumers experience so much
hardship that the firm is supposed to care more about a dollar in the consumer’s pocket
than a dollar in its own.15
       One interesting conclusion of this Figure is that increases in altruism imply that the
firm stops changing its price even for lower values of φ. This means that, while firms with
either altruism parameter refrain from ever instituting large price increases (in response
to large shifts in φ), more altruistic firms also refrain from smaller price increases. This
  15
    One might think that even in this extreme case, the firm would prefer to charge the market clearing
price and transfer resources to consumers in other ways. If, however, alternate methods for transferring
resources also yield distortions, as they are likely to, transferring resources via a low price may be the firm’s
best method for accomplishing the transfer.



                                                       26
provides a possible rationalization for Maxwell’s (1999) finding that respondents found large
price increases more unfair (which I would interpret as being associated with lower altruism
parameters) than smaller ones.
   Because the disappointment costs of very small price increases are assumed to be trivial
in the derivation of Figure 1, very small increases in φ do lead to price changes. An obvious
alternative is to suppose that, in addition, there is a discrete increase in disappointment if
the price is at all different from what it was in the past. This is considered in Figure 2, which
is drawn under the assumption that `¯ = 18 while `(x) = min(18, 2(1 + x)). The obvious
effect of adding these fixed disappointment costs is that firms no longer make small price
changes so that the price remains constant when φ differs only slightly from φ0 . The price
changes that do occur, take place for intermediate levels of demand.
   When demand suddenly increases, this model rationalizes consumer anger at price in-
creases, and thus some rigidity in prices, both when consumer’s marginal utility of income
becomes very elevated and when consumers could have bought the good previously so that
they are disappointed to have to pay a higher price. It should be noted, however, that
consumers could also be disappointed if they had previously bought a complementary good
to the one whose price suddenly increases. The model may thus be able to explain the
fascinating case of gasoline rationing in California in 1920 that is discussed in Olmstead and
Rhode (1985). In the period leading up to this rationing, tractor and automobile ownership
expanded dramatically. There were 620,000 cars on the road at the end of 1918 and 906,000
at the end of 1920. The amount of gasoline sold did not keep pace with this increase in
demand and the monopoly seller of gasoline, SOCal, held the line on prices while helping to
institute a complicated rationing scheme. One interpretation of these actions that is con-
sistent with my model is that many consumers might have been upset if their new vehicles
suddenly became expensive to operate. One interesting aspect of this episode is that it is
manifestly inconsistent with the idea that sellers whose customers have search costs keep
prices constant because they are afraid that price increases will lead customers to search for




                                               27
alternative suppliers.16 SOCal had no competitors to worry about and, indeed, prices appear
to have been less rigid in more competitive gasoline markets.
       A further implication of the theory is that there are circumstances where increases in
demand ought not to translate more readily into price increases because there is less reason
to expect anger at such increases. They both involve services, which are often harder to
“store” than goods. Thus, purchasing a service before a price increase frequently fails to
provide a similar utility flow as purchasing it afterwards. This means that the scope for
regret after a price increase is reduced. One example of this is the provision of hotel services
in cities that receive a large influx of visitors during a special event. In practice, hotels often
raise their rates substantially for events such as the Cannes film festival or the Frankfurt
book fair.17
       A second example is the provision of repair services after changes in weather causes
damages to physical property. Any impact of this damage on the marginal utility of income
would have a similar effect on the acceptability of raising prices for these services as on the
acceptability of raising prices for goods. The prices of the latter, however, should also be
restrained by the empathy firms are supposed to feel for those who feel they could have
bought the goods earlier. Thus, evidence on the way that different prices evolve after storms
ought to help disentangle the importance of the regret channel that I have emphasized in
my analysis.


4        Putting items “on special”
As discussed above, one reason to consider a model in which customers want their suppliers
to be altruistic is that it can rationalize price rigidity in some circumstances. In other
circumstances, it turns out, firm altruism can rationalize its opposite, namely price variations
  16
     See Haddock and McChesney (1994) for an explanation of rigid prices along these lines. Stiglitz (1987),
however, shows that this search-theoretic logic actually leads to multiple equilibria rather than to unique
equilibria with rigid prices. The reason is that the belief by customers that other producers have changed
their price then leads each producer to change its own, thereby rationalizing the consumers’ beliefs.
  17
     See, The big squeeze - Unfair fairs, The Economist, October, 18 2003.



                                                    28
in the absence of cost of changes. In this section I focus in particular on the ability of the
model to explain why certain goods price alternate between being on special and being sold
at “regular” prices. One fascinating aspect of this practice is that prices often return to
exactly their pre-special value when the special ends. In other words, “regular” prices are
quite rigid even though the price seems “flexible” in the sense that specials lead it to change
relatively frequently.
   The observation that the regular price returns to its previous value seems inconsistent
with models such as Pesendorfer (2002) and the literature that precedes him, which base
temporary sales only on variations in demand elasticity. The problem for these models is
that the opportunity costs for inputs fluctuate constantly and these fluctuations in input
costs ought to lead firms to charge different prices after specials end than before they begin.
   The basic characteristics of specials also raise two questions for the type of model I con-
sider here. The most general one is why price alternations between “regular” and “special”
prices should be regarded as different from changes in regular prices. The more specific one
is why customers would find it acceptable to have prices vary when items are put on special
but feel betrayed when regular prices change. One key difference between the two is that
disappointment at facing a higher price than was available previously is likely to be much
lower when a customer buys after the special is over. The reason is that customers who
observe the higher price after the special is over fall into two categories: those that observed
that the item was on special previously and those that did not. For those that did not, the
return to the regular price is not seen as a price increase at all, so they have little reason
to be disappointed. Now consider those that did observe the special price. If they were
interested in buying the good, most of these presumably did so at the time since they knew
that the special price would end. By doing so, they avoid paying the higher price and the
attendant disappointment. Thus, the disappointed group, which consists of customers who
saw that the item was on special and nonetheless deferred buying until the price rose again,
ought to be relatively small.
   It might be argued that even those customers who did not see the item on special are


                                              29
somewhat disappointed whenever they pay the regular price for an item that is known to
be on special some of the time. The reason is that, while they do not know when they
should have shopped for the item, they know that doing so at an earlier date might well
have been advantageous. While I do not consider this cost explicitly, its existence implies
that a firm that uses specials must be avoiding the ostracism of its customers through some
other method of proving its altruism. In the setting I consider, what is altruistic about the
firm is that it makes the good available, at least sometimes, at prices so low that the firm
would become bankrupt if it charged these prices at all times. In effect, specials can be a
particularly effective mechanism for lowering prices to customers, and we have already seen
that altruistic firms tend to have lower prices.
       The model I use has many of the elements in Pesendorfer (2002), who in turn builds
on an extensive prior literature that he cites. Like much of this literature, I suppose that
there are two types of customers, and that these differ in their valuation ωi of the goods.
Unlike Pesendorfer (2002), I let the number of individuals with valuation ωi be constant
over time and equal to Ni . This ensures that the elasticity of demand is constant over time.
It thus eliminates the source of “specials” in his model, which is based on the idea that
high valuation consumers exit the market after purchasing goods at high prices and thereby
raise the elasticity of demand in the next period (because the market then includes a higher
fraction of low-valuation consumers).18
       In period t, the firm charges a price pt and sells quantity Qt . Thus, variable profits in
each period are (pt − c)Qt . Because specials last a short time, so that it should be easy for
the firm to borrow and lend across periods, it does not seem appropriate to treat the firm
as having a concave objective function over each period’s profits. It is more appealing to
suppose, instead that the firm’s decision makers have a utility function that is concave in
  18
    Pesendorfer (2002) presents evidence that the number of units sold at low prices is lower if prices in the
previous week were low. This contradicts my model, if it is taken literally so that it requires that demand be
independent of what has taken place in the past. However, what I seek to establish is only that temporary
sales will be regarded as fair, and will thus be instituted by a firm that seeks to look altruistic, even if the
elasticity of demand is constant. The right sort of variation in the elasticity of demand will further encourage
specials, particularly if consumers are willing to see such variations as demonstrating altruism.



                                                      30
the average level of firm profits. This can be rationalized by supposing that managers are
averse to having the firm dissolved and know that consistent losses lead creditors to demand
such an action. By contrast, the extra benefit from having more than is necessary to meet
these creditor obligations might be lower. I thus suppose that the firm’s material payoffs are
given by
                                           v(E((p − c)Q)

where the expectations operator here takes averages over different points in time and v is
increasing and concave once again. If v is sufficiently concave, and the level of altruism λ is
sufficiently high, specials emerge in equilibrium. In particular
Proposition 3: Let Φ be the fraction of the time that the firm charges ω1 and ∆ be given
by
                                    ∆ = (ω2 − ω1 )N2 − (ω1 − c)N1                               (21)

and consider the case where this is positive. If
                                                ³              ´
                                             ∆v 0 (ω2 − c)N2
                                        λ>                                                      (22)
                                               N2 (ω2 − ω1 )

the firm prefers 0 < Φ < 1 to setting Φ equal to either zero or one if Uf00 is sufficiently low.
Proof: By charging a price ω1 a fraction Φ of the time, the altruistic firm’s total payoff is
                               ³                     ´
                             v (ω2 − c)N2 − Φ∆ + ΦN2 λ(ω2 − ω1 )

     If there were an interior solution for Φ, the first order necessary condition for this variable
would be
                                ³                    ´
                          −∆v 0 (ω2 − c)N2 − Φ∆ + λN2 (ω2 − ω1 ) = 0                            (23)

     Because v is concave, the derivative of the LHS with respect to Φ is negative. Inequality
(22) ensures that the LHS of this equation is positive for Φ = 0 so that the firm prefers a
strictly higher level of Φ. If v 0 rises sufficiently as the firm’s material payoffs decline,
                                   ³                 ´
                           −∆v 0 (ω2 − c)N2 − ∆ + λN2 (ω2 − ω1 ) < 0


                                                    31
in spite of (22). This means that the firm prefers a Φ strictly smaller than one and that the
optimum Φ is indeed interior and satisfies (23).
The advantage of charging the high price is that N2 customers pay more while the disad-
vantage is that the firm foregoes the profit ω1 − c on the N1 low-valuation customers. My
assumption that ∆ > 0 ensures that a selfish firm would always charge the high price ω2 . In
each period that the firm charges ω2 , its customers obtain a surplus of zero. On the other
hand, whenever it charges ω1 , the high valuation customers gain ω2 − ω1 , which yields the
firm λ(ω2 − ω1 )N2 in additional utility. When the firm’s profits are high, and its marginal
utility of income is low, these indirect benefits from its altruism loom large so that it wants
to lower its price some of the time. If, instead, the firm is always charging low prices then
its marginal utility of income is high, and it wants to reduce the fraction of the time that it
sells also to the low valuation consumers.
   Note that specials are much better for a partially altruistic firm than simply handing
money to its customers. When a firm hands over money, its material losses are the same
as the customers material gains. By putting a good on special, the firm loses ∆ but, in the
case where ω1 > c, this is less than the gain to the high valuation customers because the
firm makes some profits from the low-valuation ones.
   Before closing this section, it is worth noting that the concavity of v is necessary for the
result given the other assumptions in the model. The reasons is that, because I consider a
model with static demand curves, a linear v would imply a constant policy in equilibrium
rather than one where prices alternate. Interestingly, the concavity of v does not induce
alternating prices in the pure profit maximization case since the firms would then pursue
the policy that maximizes profits each period rather than trading off profits in some periods
for the welfare of the consumers with lower willingness to pay. Thus, this is a setting where
altruism alone is responsible for temporary sales.
   This raises the question of why altruism can lead to an optimum where the price varies
over time even though one can always find a single price that maximizes v + λV at a single
point in time. One important aspect of the example I presented is that the price that


                                              32
maximizes v + λV is quite different for high λ than it is for a selfish firm because the
elasticity of demand becomes large at a price below the profit maximizing one. The result is
that, for moderate λ, the firm prefers to alternate between the price that is optimal for high
λ and the selfish optimum rather than choose a single price that is close to either.


5     Price Rigidity in the Face of Steady Inflation
Having shown that the avoidance of customer regret can explain both the return to the pre-
special price and the absence of price changes when demand changes without a corresponding
change in the quantity supplied, I now turn to a simple setting where the firm must cause
this regret because it must change its prices. The reason it must do so is that its costs
rise constantly so that it would ultimately make huge losses if it kept its price constant.
I suppose in particular that is in an environment of constant inflation at the rate µ. The
model I consider mimics closely that of Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) so that it is easy to see
the similarities and differences between the administrative costs of changing prices that they
explore and the consumer disappointment costs that I emphasize. I thus suppose that time
is continuous and that, in addition to suffering a loss `(pt , pt− ) at each date t where the price
is changed from pt− to pt , each consumer has a utility function given by
                                     Z ∞
                                           e−rt (U (qt ) + zt )dt
                                      0

where qt represents their rate of consumption of the good in question and zt represents
the consumption of a numeraire good. I consider this numeraire only because it allows me
to isolate what occurs in a single market; a more complete model would treat all goods
symmetrically instead. The price of this numeraire good, pzt grows at the rate µ, and
consumers have access to an asset with an instantaneous rate of interest of i. Letting A
denote the consumers’ assets and Ȧ their time derivative, it follows that

                                   Ȧ = iA − pt qt − pzt zt + It

where It represents non-asset income. It follows that, unless i = r + µ individuals will not
consume z smoothly over time. If this condition is satisfied, by contrast, individuals are

                                                 33
indifferent as to when they consumes z. Each individual’s utility is thus the same as if he
reduced his consumption of zt by one unit every time his consumption of qt rose by pzt /pt
units, since this response ensures that his budget constraint remains satisfied. This means
that total utility is equal to
                                     Z ∞             Ã                      !
                                               −rt                 p t qt
                                           e             U (qt ) −        + It dt                                           (24)
                                      0                            pzt

where It is independent of prices. Moreover, each individual’s demand for q satisfies u0 (qt ) =
                                                                                                                            0
pt /pzt . With a mass N of consumers, total demand is given by Qt = d(pt /pzt ) with d = N u −1 .
    As before, consumers also experience a disappointment loss at t of `(pt , pt− ) if the price is
changed at t from pt− ro pt . Crucially, I suppose that the function ` has a positive limit as pt
goes to pt− from above, even though `(x, x) = 0. Just as Sheshinski and Weiss (1977) suppose
that there is a fixed administrative costs of changing prices, I suppose that there is a fixed
psychological cost of observing a price increase. In addition to the psychological reasons given
above, this fixed psychological cost might exist because consumers are disappointed whenever
they would have benefited from stockpiling the product just before the price increase took
effect.
    The instantaneous cost of producing the good is cpzt so that this cost rises at the general
rate of inflation µ. This means that instantaneous profits at t in terms of the numeraire
good equal d(pt /pzt )[(pt /pzt ) − c]. A firm that acts as if it had an altruism parameter of λ
thus maximizes
     Z ∞          ( Ã      !"                        #             Ã Ã      !!)
                     pt                   pt               pt                                X
           e−rt    d            (1 − λN )     − c + λN U d                          dt + λ       e−rt̂i `(pt̂i , pt̂i − )
      0              pzt                  pzt              pzt                               i


where t̂i represent the dates where the firm changes its prices.
    The discreteness of the costs of changing prices ensures that firms do not change their
prices at every instant. To make the problem completely stationary, I suppose that ` depends
on the percent change in the price, which is proportional to (pt − pt− )/pt− . The stationarity
of the problem then implies that the firm keeps its price unchanged for intervals of length τ
and that this interval length remains constant over time. Each time it picks a new price, it

                                                             34
chooses the same real price s = pt /pzt and it does so by changing its price by 100(eµτ − 1)
percent. Let the function W (y) be given by d(y)((1 − λN )y − c) + λN U (d(y)). Then the
variables s and τ are chosen to maximize
                                 Z τ
                           1
                             −rτ
                                     e−rt W (se−µt )dt + λe−rτ `(se−µτ − 1)
                         1−e      0

   The first order condition of this maximization problem with respect to s is
                                      Z τ
                                            W 0 (se−µt )e−(r+µ)t dt = 0                                        (25)
                                       0

while that for τ is
                         (                      R τ −rt                                       )
                e−rτ            −µτ         r    0 e    W (se−µt )dt + r`λ       0      −µτ
                           W (se      )−                                     − λ` µse             =0           (26)
              1 − e−rτ                                 1 − e−rτ
              R τ −rt
Integrating    0 e    W (se−µt )dt by parts and using (25), (26) implies

                         rλ` − λµse−µτ (1 − e−rτ )`0 = W (s) − W (se−µτ )                                      (27)

   In the case where `0 = 0, this equation is identical to the equation in Sheshinski and
Weiss (1977) which states that the difference between firm welfare at the reset price and
firm welfare at the terminal price equals the interest rate times the cost of price adjustment
(which would be λ` in the case where `0 = 0). This equation is worth recalling because it
plays a large role in the interpretation of my results concerning pre-announcements of price
increases.
   Before discussing this issue, however, I wish to focus on the implications of this model
for the connection between the inflation rate µ and the time between price increases τ . To
                                                                                                       ²−1
                                                                                                   ²
do so, it is helpful to concentrate on the special case where U (q) is given by                   ²−1
                                                                                                      q ²    so that
                                                                                              ²+λ−1 1−²
the demand curve d has constant elasticity ². The function W (y) is then                       ²−1
                                                                                                   y         − cy −²
and the first order condition (25) implies that
                               ²c                          e(µ²−r)τ − 1 µ(² − 1) − r
                      s=           φ0             φ0 ≡                                                         (28)
                             ²+λ−1                       e(µ(²−1)−r)τ − 1 µ² − r
   This implies that, for any given τ and µ the price set by the firm is lower by the factor
 ²−1
λ+²−1
        when the firm has an altruism parameter of λ than when it is selfish. With these

                                                         35
preferences, the first order condition (26) becomes

                     ² + λ − 1 1−²                 λ`r
                              s φ1 − cs−² φ2 = −          + λ`0 µse−µτ
                       ²−1                       1 − e−rτ

where

                                                            e((²−1)µ−r)τ − 1
                              φ1 ≡ e(²−1)µτ − r
                                                       (1 − e−rτ )((² − 1)µ − r)
                                                       e(²µ−r)τ − 1
                              φ2 ≡ e²µτ          −r
                                                    (1 − e−rτ )(²µ − r)

Using (28), this implies that, in the case where ` is a constant so that `0 = 0,
                                                                            Ã         !²
                                             h                      i         ²+λ−1
                        1−²        −rτ
                    c         (1 − e     )   φ2 φ−²
                                                 0    −   φ1 φ1−²
                                                              0         = λ`r
                                                                               ²−1

   Differences in the altruism parameter λ obviously require different levels ` to justify a
given τ , with lower levels of altruism necessitating larger disappointment costs if the firm
is to keep its prices constant for the same amount of time. If, however, ` is adjusted to
rationalize a particular τ for a given inflation rate µ, this equation implies that changes in
inflation have the same effect on τ independently of λ. This can be seen by noting that
the right hand side of this equation is independent of µ and τ , while the left hand side is
independent of λ and `.
   Thus, when `0 = 0, altruism cannot help rationalize the connection between changes in the
size of price increases and changes in inflation rates. This is worth emphasizing because the
empirical connection between these magnitudes is not easy to rationalize with the Sheshinski
and Weiss (1977) model. Cecchetti’s (1986) data shows that the average price increase for
his sample of magazines rose from 23.5 percent in the 1960’s to 25.3 percent in the 1970’s
when the average yearly CPI inflation rose from 2.4 percent to 7.1 percent. Similarly, Lach
and Tsiddon (1992) report that the average price increase for their sample of Israeli goods
rose from 12.3 percent in the period 1978-1979:6 to 12.9 percent in 1982, while the overall
monthly inflation rate rose from 3.9 percent to 7.3 percent from the first to the second
period. Thus, in both cases, the average price increase rose only very marginally even as
inflation rose substantially. This is not completely inconsistent with the idea that there are

                                                          36
administrative costs of changing prices. If, for example, all consumers have exactly the same
reservation price p̄ for the product, then firms raise their price to p̄ whenever they raise their
price, and this implies that the percent price increase is the same regardless of the inflation
rate.
   For more standard demand curves, however, the size of the typical price increase ought
to rise more with inflation. To see this, it is worth starting with the combination of λ and
` which ensures that prices rise by 12.3 percent when the inflation rate is 3.9 percent per
month, as in the early sample of Lach and Tsiddon (1992). With r = .0025 (so that the real
interest rate is about 3 percent per year), an increase in inflation to 7.3 percent implies that
prices should rise by about 15.4 percent when they are changed for any constant elasticity of
demand curve whose ² is greater than 1.5 and below 5. For more elastic demand curves, the
price increase should rise somewhat more, but the effect of varying ² is modest. Similarly, if
fixed costs are set so that prices rise by 23.5 percent with a 2.4 percent annual inflation rate,
as in Cecchetti’s (1986) observations for the 1960’s, these parameters imply that an increase
in annual inflation to 7.1 percent ought to raise the size of price increases to over 35 percent.
   If the costs of changing prices were purely administrative, there is little reason to suppose
that the real costs of changing prices would rise with the inflation itself. By contrast, it makes
sense for disappointment costs to rise when the size of price increases rises. This means that
`0 > 0 and I consider the case where ` is given by the simple form

                                      ` = `0 + `1 (eµτ − 1)

   It is then possible to rationalize the findings of Cecchetti (1986) and Lach and Tsiddon
(1992) with very small values of `1 . Suppose in particular that λ = .1, ² = 2 and `1 = 0.00035.
The value `0 = .0029 the rationalizes a price change of 12.3 percent when inflation is 3.9
percent per month. A rise in monthly inflation to 7.3 percent, then implies that the size of
price increases rises to 12.9 percent as in the data of Lach and Tsiddon (1992). Even though
the size of price increases rises by nearly 5 percent, the disappointment costs rise by less
than 1 percent.


                                               37
   Similarly, with λ = .1, ² = 2 and `1 = .023, a value of `0 equal to .26 is sufficient to
rationalize the rather substantial 23.5 percent increase in magazine prices when the annual
inflation rate is only 2.4 percent. With these parameters, an increase in annual inflation to
7.3% correctly predicts that the size of price increases rises only to 25.3%. While the size of
price increases is now rising by 7.7%, the size of disappointment costs goes up only by 1.5%
so that, by this metric, `1 is modest once again.
   A positive value for `1 leads an altruistic firm to feel that reductions in the period over
which prices are constant are advantageous to its customers because they reduce the size of
disappointment costs. The usual benefit of lengthening this period is that the cost of price
increases is postponed, and has value because the future is discounted at r. As the rate of
inflation rises postponing a price increase by a given amount of time requires larger jumps
in prices. With a positive `1 , postponing price increases by one unit of time thus becomes
less attractive when inflation rises, and this is the reason why `1 is so useful for rationalizing
the empirical findings.
   An alternative mechanism that might be able to rationalize the finding that the size of
price jumps does not rise significantly when inflation rises is that firms are worried about
speculation on the part of consumers. As in the analysis of Benabou (1989), this speculation
becomes more severe when expected price increases are larger and this might limit the extent
to which firms let price jumps increase as inflation rises. A more straightforward implication
of Benabou’s (1989) analysis is that firms that sell storable goods often should use mixed
strategies if they have administrative costs of changing prices. By making the timing of
their price changes random, such firms make it harder for consumers to profit from their
speculation (since consumers who buy and store the good will then sometimes incur storage
costs needlessly).
   In an environment with other sources of uncertainty, even a deterministic relation between
prices and costs may make it difficult for consumers to time their purchases to take advantage
of impending price increases, so purposeful obfuscation may be less necessary to prevent this
speculation. On the other hand, if the environment is random, the firm can also take positive


                                               38
steps if it wants to do the opposite, i.e. if it wants to facilitate consumer speculation. To do
so, it can announce its price increases in advance. In a model where firms are selfish and
where there are purely administrative costs of changing prices this would seem unwise since
consumer that take advantage of temporarily low prices clearly lower firm profits.
       Interestingly, many firms avail themselves of this opportunity and business newswires
contain many price announcements of this sort. To gain some perspective on how common
this is, I searched for “price increases,” “announced” and “effective” in a publication that
regularly carries such notices, namely Business Wire. Confining myself to the period 10/02 to
10/04 and ignoring the stories that matched my search criteria but were actually concerned
with other issues, I found 44 stories pertaining to companies who made announcements of
price increases. Of these, 14 (32%) announced price increases over one month in advance,
25 (57%) announced them less than one month in advance but over 10 days in advance and
only 5 announced that these would affect shipments that would take place in the next ten
days. Some of these pre-announcements specify that the new prices will apply to shipments
beyond a certain date, so it is not entirely clear to what extent they allow consumers to
speculate by buying goods before the planned price increase. Other stories are very specific
on this point, however.
       When Maxell, a large supplier of devices that store information on magnetic media,
announced on December 2, 2003 that the price of its main products would rise by about
10% in February 2004, it explicitly said it was giving advanced warning so that Maxell
customers would have “sufficient time to incorporate the pricing change into their future
business planning.” Similarly, the September 15, 2004 announcement by GrafTech that it
was increasing electrode prices explicitly stated this price increase would only apply to orders
received after October 1. More generally, announcements made with a large degree of advance
notice such as Kimberly-Clark’s announcement in March 2004 that it would increase its
Kleenex prices by midsummer give customers the capacity to respond.19
  19
     While the intertemporal substitutability of the purchase of prepared coffee might be subject to question,
it is interesting that Starbucks gave about 10 days notice before raising its prices in September 2004.



                                                     39
    I now consider a simple variant of the model I have developed in this section and show
that, under plausible circumstances, firms that act altruistically would indeed avail them-
selves of the opportunity to preannounce price increases. The analysis proceeds in several
steps. First, I set up a discrete time version of the model and continue to let the firm
optimize over the timing of its price changes. I use this model to compute the size of the
disappointment costs that are needed to rationalize a particular length of constant prices
for a given inflation rate. Then, I suppose that (at least some) consumers are able to buy
the good one period in advance if the firm preannounces its price increase. I then study nu-
merically whether, for the disappointment costs I computed in the first step, the firm would
prefer to avoid this consumer disappointment by letting consumers know its price change in
advance. If the firm does so, I have found parameters for which the firm is unwilling to stick
with an equilibrium where it does not pre-announce its price increases.
    To begin with, I suppose that periods have discrete length and that production and
consumption decisions get made once per period. I let i denote the one period interest rate
and let ρ be the rate at which consumers discount the future. Thus consumer lifetime utility
at t is
                                    ∞
                                    X         µ                      ¶
                                                   ²    ²−1
                                         ρj           qt+j
                                                         ²
                                                            + zt+j
                                   j=0            ²−1
while consumer assets at t, At equal

                            At = (1 + i)At−1 − pt (qt + q̂t+1 ) − pzt zt

where q̂t are purchases of goods at t − 1 for use at t. I set these equal to zero for the moment,
though I relax this assumption when I consider preannouncements below. For consumers
not to strictly prefer a zero consumption of zt in any period, it must be that

                                         ρ(1 + i) = (1 + µ)                                 (29)

where µ is the rate of growth of pzt , and I assume this from now on. This condition ensures
that consumers are indifferent as to when they consumer the good z. This utility function
implies also that consumer demand for qt , d(p/pz ) is given by (p/pz )−² and that total utility

                                                     40
from having access to this good at price p/pzt equals (p/pz )−² /(² − 1). An altruistic firm’s
welfare at t equals its profits in terms of good z at t plus λ times this consumer gain.
Supposing that marginal cost is constant in terms of good z so that it equals cpzt , an
altruistic firm’s instantaneous welfare is thus W (pt /pzt ) where

                                         ²+λ−1
                        W (pt /pzt ) =         (pt /pzt )1−² − c(pt /pzt )−²
                                          ²−1

   If the firm keeps its price fixed for J periods and chooses the same real price s = pt /pzt
each time it changes its price, its total welfare is
                                PJ−1 j             j
                                 j=0 ρ W (s/(1 + µ) )           λ`
                                                          −                                  (30)
                                           1−   ρJ            1 − ρJ

   The firm then sets s to maximize the first term, which gives
                                             J−1 j   P    ²j
                                     ²       j=0 ρ (1 + µ)
                              s=          PJ−1 j
                                 ² + λ − 1 j=0 ρ (1 + µ)(²−1)j

   To simplify the analysis I focus on the case where ` is independent of the size of the price
change and thus of J. For a given λ` and for the value of s given above, the expression in
(30) reaches a maximum for at most two values of J. The reason is that this expression is
rising in J for low values of J (because the second term rises rapidly when J is low) and
falling in J when J is high (because the first term declines rapidly while the second term
rises more slowly). As λ` rises, the second term becomes more important, so the optimal J
tends to rise. However, there is a range for β`, which I denote by [rJ− , rj+ ] such that the firm
gains nothing by using a duration different from J. For β` at the boundaries of this interval,
the firm is indifferent between this J and either the J that stands immediately below it (in
the case of rJ− ) or the one that stands immediately above it (in the case of rJ+ ).
   Since prices increase by a factor (1 + µ)J when they increase, we can easily deduce J from
observing the size of price increases. If we know the parameters of the model, we can then
also compute the range in which β` must fall. The question is then whether, for this range
of β`’s the firm is better off preannouncing the price increase. This presumably depends
on the precise effects of this preannouncement. Here, I consider a simple setting and show

                                                     41
numerically that such a preannouncement can indeed increase an altruistic firm’s welfare
even though it lowers profits.
   The particular example I have in mind is one where customers who are told of the period
t price increase at t − 1 can purchase both qt−1 and qt at t − 1. Consumers buy each of these
units at a real price in terms of zt−1 of s/(1 + µ)J−1 , which given (29) is equivalent to a real
price in terms of zt of s/(ρ(1 + µ)J−1 ). Thus, the quantity q̂t of these pre-purchases equals
(s/(ρ(1 + µ)J−1 ))−² and the time t utility from having access to these pre-purchases is
                                           Ã                  !−²
                                     1              s
                                    ²−1        ρ(1 + µ)J−1

Note that, if the firm raises its price to s at t, consumers who have pre-purchased make no
further purchases as long as ρ(1 + µ)J−1 is larger than one. If ρ(1 + µ)J−1 < 1 instead, the
discount rate is sufficiently high that the consumer makes no pre-purchases. I thus consider
the case where inflation is large enough that ρ(1 + µ)J−1 > 1.
   From the firm’s point of view, each unit sold of q̂t delivers real revenues in terms of
zt of s/(ρ(1 + µ)J−1 ) and has real costs in terms of zt of c/ρ. Thus, an altruistic firm’s
instantaneous welfare from its sales of q̂t in terms of zt equal
                                   Ã                  !1−²         Ã                 !−²
                        ²+λ−1               s                  c            s
                   Ŵ =                                      −
                         ²−1           ρ(1 + µ)J−1             ρ       ρ(1 + µ)J−1

If, the firm did not preannounce its price increase, its instantaneous welfare from its sales at
t would be
                                          ² + λ − 1 1−²
                                  W =              s − cs−²
                                            ²−1
   If the firm did pre-announce, it would not necessarily set the same price s for t as if it did
not. However, to demonstrate that the firm prefers preannouncing, it is sufficient to show
that it would have this preference even if it had to set the same price, and even if it could
never preannounce again in the future. The gain from this one time preannouncement would
then equal
                                          Ŵ − W + λ`


                                                 42
    Take first the 1960’s period studied by Cecchetti (1986). Supposing magazines keep their
prices constant for 107 periods of one month each, which I infer from the fact that they raise
their prices by 23.5% and the yearly inflation is 2.4%, β` must equal between .239 and .246
if ² = 2, λ = .1 and ρ = .9975. The difference between W and Ŵ is only .0032 for these
parameters, so that preannouncements are clearly beneficial to such an altruistic firm. This
might, of course, induce even selfish firm to make these announcements so that they keep
their customers. Some intuition for this result, and its possible generality, can be gained by
noting that Ŵ is nearly equal to the firm’s instantaneous welfare in the last period in which
it charges any given price. Thus, W − Ŵ is close to the increase in instantaneous welfare
that accrues in the period that the firm raises its price. In continuous time, (27) ensures that
this difference equals the interest rate times the cost of changing prices λ`. With discrete
time, this is not exactly right, but should be close if periods are short relative to the length
of time that prices remain fixed. Preannouncements, on the other hand, are worthwhile if
this difference in one-period gain equals the level of λ`, which is of course much larger than
the real interest rate times λ`. Thus, if periods are short relative to the length of time that
price remains constant, preannouncements are attractive. The firm only loses the sales for
a brief period and avoids a great deal of consumer disappointment.
    With the same ², ρ and λ, and continuing to use monthly periods, but using the inflation
rates and implied duration of constant prices of Cecchetti’s (1986) magazines for the 1970’s,
pre-announcement remains worthwhile for the entire range of possible λ`’s. This is also
true in the case of the inflation and implied duration of constant prices in the early period
studied by Lach and Tsiddon (1992). In their latter period, however, inflation runs at 7.3%
per month and prices of the typical product change by 12.9% so that prices remain constant
for less than 2 months. Using periods of one month, preannouncements cease to be attractive
for the lower values of λ` that are consistent with keeping prices constant for 2 months -
though they remain attractive for the higher values of λ` that lead to this degree of price
rigidity.




                                              43
6     Conclusions
If one is to have a “behavioral” theory of consumption, it seems important to sort out what
makes customers see a price as “fair,” since lack of fairness in prices elicits strong reactions
by consumers. A perhaps equally important reason for seeking to model what consumers
regard as fair is that the effort to appear fair may explain a number of observations about
prices. Here I focused in particular on observation having to do with price rigidity and
price variability. I have, in particular, tried to rationalize simultaneously the existence
of “specials” where prices fall temporarily from their “regular” level, with the remarkable
rigidity of regular prices. I have argued at the same time that fairness considerations might
explain why prices seem more responsive to “costs” than to changes in marginal cost induced
by changes in demand. Lastly, I have used the same fairness-based logic to explain why prices
do not change in the face of certain natural disasters that increase demand, and to explain
some aspects of price rigidity that do not seem to fit well with a model where the only costs
of changing prices are administrative ones.
    Because this is an initial effort at understanding the effects of a particular model of fair
prices, I have considered models without explicit uncertainty and with symmetric informa-
tion on the part of firms and consumers. Both of these assumptions need to be relaxed
for the model to be more realistic. First, it is obvious that consumers have only imperfect
information about firms’ costs. Second, as I discussed above, firms sometimes generate sub-
stantial animosity with their prices. Given that negative consumer reactions often lead firms
to make changes, it would seem that firms are also imperfectly informed about consumer’s
trigger points. What remains as an open question is whether a model with uncertainty of
this type can explain one of the puzzling features of pricing found by Carlton (1986) and
Kashyap (1995). They found that firms sometimes institute large price increases while they
institute small ones at other times. Models with administrative costs of price adjustment do
not tend to predict this heterogeneity. If, on the other hand, price rigidity is due to fears of
reactions by consumers, it would seem reasonable to suppose that the information available



                                               44
to firms about these reactions affects the size of their price increases.


7     References

    Bell, David E., “Risk Premiums for Decision Regret, Management Science, 29, October
          1983, 1156-66.

    Benabou, Roland, “Optimal Price Dynamics and Speculation with a Storable Good,”
         Econometrica, 57, January 1989, 41-80.

    Bils, Mark and Yongsung Chang, “Understanding the Response of Prices to Cost and
          Demand Factors,” Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, 52, June 2000, 33-
          77.

    Bolton, Lisa E., Luk Warlop and Jospeh W. Alba, “Consumer Perception of Price
         (Un)Fairness,” Journal of Consumer Research, 29, March 2003, 474-91.

    Campbell, Margaret C., “Perceptions of Price Unfairness: Antecedents and Consequences,”
        Journal of Marketing Research,, 36, May 1999, 187-99.

    Carlton, Dennis W., “The Rigidity of Prices,” American Economic Review, 76, September
          1986, pp. 637-658.

    Cecchetti, Stephen G., “The Frequency of price Adjustment, A Study of Newsstand
         Prices of Magazines,” Journal of Econometrics, 31, 1986, 255-74.

    Connolly, Terry and Marcel Zeelenberg, “Regret in decision making,” Current Directions
         in Psychological Science, 11, December 2002, 212-6.

    Cooke, Alan D. J., Tom Meyvis and Alan Schwartz, “Avoiding future regret in purchase-
         timing decisions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 27 March 2001, 447-59.

    Deneckere, Raymond J. and R. Preston McAfee, “Damaged Goods,” Journal of Eco-
         nomics & Management Strategy, 5, Summer 1996, 149-74.

    Dickson, Peter R. and Rosemary Kalapurakal, “The use and perceived fairness of price-
         setting rules in the bulk electricity market,” Journal of Economic Psychology, 15,
         1994, 427-448.

    Fehr, Ernst and Klaus M. Schmidt, “A Theory of Fairness, Competition and Coopera-
          tion,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 817-68.



                                               45
Frey, Bruno S. and Werner W. Pommerehne, “On the fairness of pricing - An empirical
      survey among the general population,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organi-
      zation, 20, 1993, 295-307.

Haddock, David D. and Fred S. McChesney, “Why do Firms Contrive Shortages? The
    Economics of Intentional Mispricing,” Economic Inquiry, 32, October 1994, 562-81.

Huppertz, John W., Sidney J. Arenson and Richard H. Evans, “An application of equity
    theory to buyer-seller exchange situations,” Journal of Marketing Research, 15,
    May 1978; 15, 250-60.

Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch and Richard Thaler, “Fairness as a Constraint on Profit:
    Seeking Entitlements in the Market,” American Economic Review, 76, September
    1986, 728-41.

Kashyap, Anil K.,“Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogues,” Quarterly Jour-
     nal of Economics, 1995, 245-74.

Lach, Saul and Daniel Tsiddon, “The Behavior of Prices and Inflation: An Empirical
     Analysis of Disaggregated Price Data,” Journal of Political Economy, 100, April
     1992, 349-89.

Maxwell, Sarah, “What makes a price increase seem ‘fair’ ?” Pricing Strategy & Practice,
    3, 1995, 21-27.

Monroe, Kent B. and Angela Y. Lee, “Remembering versus Knowing: Issues in Buy-
    ers’ Processing of Price Information,” Academy of Marketing Science Journal, 27,
    Spring 1999, 207-25.

Pesendorfer, Martin, “Retail Sales: A Study of Pricing Behavior in Supermarkets,” Jour-
     nal of Business, 75, 2002, 33-66.

Rotemberg, Julio J., “Customer Anger at Price Increases, Changes in the Frequency of
     Price Adjustment and Monetary Policy” NBER Working Paper 9320, November
     2002.

— “Minimally Acceptable Altruism and the Ultimatum Game.” Harvard Business School
    Working Paper Series, No. 05-008, 2004.

— and Michael Woodford, “Markups and the Business Cycle,” NBER Macroeconomics
    Annual 1991, 63-129.

Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, “Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment,” Review
     of Economic Studies, 44, 1977, 287-303.


                                         46
Stiglitz, Joseph E., “Competition and the Number of Firms in a Market: Are Duopolies
       More Competitive than Atomistic Markets?,” Journal of Political Economy, 95,
       October 1987, 1041-61.

Xia, Lan, Kent B. Monroe and Jennifer L. Cox, “The Price is Unfair! A Conceptual
      Framework of Price Fairness Perceptions,” Journal of Marketing,, 68, October 2004.

Vaidyanathan, Rajiv and Praveen Aggarwal,“Who Is the Fairest of Them All? An At-
     tributional Approach to Price Fairness Perceptions,” Journal of Business Research,
     56, 2003 453-63.




                                         47
Figure 1: Costs and Benefits of Shifting from One Market Clearing Price to Another




                       250




                       200




                       150
    Gains and losses




                       100                                                  Producer gain/λ, λ=.45

                                 Producer gain/λ, λ=.35

                       50




                        0
                                            Consumer Loss




                       -50
                             0          1         2         3   4     5     6        7        8      9   10
                                                                     φ-φ0




                                                                    48
Figure 2: Costs and Benefits of Shifting from One Market Clearing Price to Another: The
Case where Even Small Price Changes Cause a Discrete Increase in Disappointment




                         300




                         250




                         200
      Gains and losses




                         150
                                                                                Producer gain/λ, λ=.35

                                           Consumer Loss

                         100




                         50                        Producer gain/λ, λ=.45




                          0
                               0   1   2       3        4        5          6        7         8         9   10
                                                                φ-φ0




                                                              49
